<doc id="444222" wikidata="Q1058" url="?curid=444222" title="Narendra Modi">
<text>Narendra Damodardas Modi (born 17 September 1950) is an Indian politician who has served as the prime minister of India since 2014. Modi was the chief minister of Gujarat from 2001 to 2014 and is the member of parliament (MP) for Varanasi. He is a member of the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and of the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS), a right-wing Hindu nationalist paramilitary volunteer organisation. He is the longest-serving prime minister outside the Indian National Congress.

Modi was born and raised in Vadnagar in northeastern Gujarat, where he completed his secondary education. He was introduced to the RSS at the age of eight. At the age of 18, he was married to Jashodaben Modi, whom he abandoned soon after, only publicly acknowledging her four decades later when legally required to do so. Modi became a full-time worker for the RSS in Gujarat in 1971. The RSS assigned him to the BJP in 1985 and he rose through the party hierarchy, becoming general secretary in 1998. In 2001, Modi was appointed chief minister of Gujarat and elected to the legislative assembly soon after. His administration is considered complicit in the 2002 Gujarat riots, and has been criticised for its management of the crisis. According to official records, a little over 1,000 people were killed, three-quarters of whom were Muslim; independent sources estimated 2,000 deaths, mostly Muslim. A Special Investigation Team appointed by the Supreme Court of India in 2012 found no evidence to initiate prosecution proceedings against him. While his policies as chief minister were credited for encouraging economic growth, his administration was criticised for failing to significantly improve health, poverty and education indices in the state.

In the 2014 Indian general election, Modi led the BJP to a parliamentary majority, the first for a party since 1984. His administration increased direct foreign investment, and reduced spending on healthcare, education, and social-welfare programmes. Modi began a high-profile sanitation campaign, and weakened or abolished environmental and labour laws. His demonetisation of banknotes in 2016 and introduction of the Goods and Services Tax in 2017 sparked controversy. Modi&#x27;s administration launched the 2019 Balakot airstrike against an alleged terrorist training camp in Pakistan. The airstrike failed, but the action had nationalist appeal. Modi&#x27;s party won the 2019 general election which followed. In its second term, his administration revoked the special status of Jammu and Kashmir, and introduced the Citizenship Amendment Act, prompting widespread protests, and spurring the 2020 Delhi riots in which Muslims were brutalised and killed by Hindu mobs. Three controversial farm laws led to sit-ins by farmers across the country, eventually causing their formal repeal. Modi oversaw India&#x27;s response to the COVID-19 pandemic, during which, according to the World Health Organization&#x27;s estimates, 4.7 million Indians died. In the 2024 general election, Modi&#x27;s party lost its majority in the lower house of Parliament and formed a government leading the National Democratic Alliance coalition.

Under Modi&#x27;s tenure, India has experienced democratic backsliding, or the weakening of democratic institutions, individual rights, and freedom of expression. As prime minister, he has received consistently high approval ratings. Modi has been described as engineering a political realignment towards right-wing politics. He remains a controversial figure domestically and internationally, over his Hindu nationalist beliefs and handling of the Gujarat riots, which have been cited as evidence of a majoritarian and exclusionary social agenda.

== Early life and education ==
Narendra Damodardas Modi was born on 17 September 1950 to a Gujarati Hindu family of Other Backward Class (OBC) background in Vadnagar, Mehsana district, Bombay State (present-day Gujarat). He was the third of six children born to Damodardas Mulchand Modi () and Hiraben Modi (1923–2022).

Modi had infrequently worked as a child in his father&#x27;s tea business on the Vadnagar railway station platform, according to Modi and his neighbours.

Modi completed his higher secondary education in Vadnagar in 1967; his teachers described him as an average student and a keen, gifted debater with an interest in theatre. He preferred playing larger-than-life characters in theatrical productions, which has influenced his political image.

When Modi was eight years old, he was introduced to the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) and began attending its local &quot;shakhas&quot; (training sessions). There, he met Lakshmanrao Inamdar, who inducted Modi as a &quot;balswayamsevak&quot; (junior cadet) in the RSS and became his political mentor. While Modi was training with the RSS, he also met Vasant Gajendragadkar and Nathalal Jaghda, Bharatiya Jana Sangh leaders who in 1980 helped found the BJP&#x27;s Gujarat unit. As a teenager, he was enrolled in the National Cadet Corps.

In a custom traditional to Narendra Modi&#x27;s caste, his family arranged a betrothal to Jashodaben Chimanlal Modi, leading to their marriage when she was 17 and he was 18. Soon afterwards, he abandoned his wife, and left home. The couple never divorced but the marriage was not in his public pronouncements for many decades. In April 2014, shortly before the national election in which he gained power, Modi publicly affirmed he was married and that his spouse was Jashodaben. A Modi biographer wrote that Modi kept the marriage a secret because he would not have been able to become a &quot;pracharak&quot; in the RSS, for which celibacy had once been a requirement.

Modi spent the following two years travelling across northern and north-eastern India. In interviews, he has described visiting Hindu ashrams founded by Swami Vivekananda: the Belur Math near Kolkata, the Advaita Ashrama in Almora and the Ramakrishna Mission in Rajkot. His stays at each ashram were brief because he lacked the required college education. Vivekananda has had a large influence in Modi&#x27;s life.

In mid 1968, Modi reached Belur Math but was turned away, after which he visited Calcutta, West Bengal and Assam, stopping in Siliguri and Guwahati. He then went to the Ramakrishna Ashram in Almora, where he was again rejected, before returning to Gujarat via Delhi and Rajasthan in 1968 to 1969. In either late 1969 or early 1970, he returned to Vadnagar for a brief visit before leaving again for Ahmedabad, where he lived with his uncle and worked in his uncle&#x27;s canteen at Gujarat State Road Transport Corporation.

In Ahmedabad, Modi renewed his acquaintance with Inamdar, who was based at the Hedgewar Bhavan (RSS headquarters) in the city. Modi&#x27;s first-known political activity as an adult was in 1971 when he joined a Jana Sangh Satyagraha in Delhi led by Atal Bihari Vajpayee to enlist to fight in the Bangladesh Liberation War. The Indira Gandhi-led central government prohibited open support for the Mukti Bahini; according to Modi, he was briefly held in Tihar Jail. After the Indo-Pakistani War of 1971, Modi left his uncle&#x27;s employment and became a full-time &quot;pracharak&quot; (campaigner) for the RSS, working under Inamdar. Shortly before the war, Modi took part in a non-violent protest in New Delhi against the Indian government, for which he was arrested; because of this arrest, Inamdar decided to mentor Modi. According to Modi, he was part of a Satyagraha that led to a political war.

In 1978, Modi received a Bachelor of Arts (BA) degree in political science from the School of Open Learning at the Delhi University. In 1983, he received a Master of Arts (MA) degree in political science from Gujarat University, graduating with a first class as an external distance learning student. There is a controversy surrounding the authenticity of his BA and MA degrees.

== Early political career ==
In June 1975, Prime Minister Indira Gandhi declared a state of emergency in India that lasted until 1977. During this period, known as &quot;the Emergency&quot;, many of her political opponents were jailed and opposition groups were banned. Modi was appointed general secretary of the &quot;Gujarat Lok Sangharsh Samiti&quot;, an RSS committee coordinating opposition to the Emergency in Gujarat. Shortly afterwards, the RSS was banned. Modi was forced to go underground in Gujarat and frequently travelled in disguise to avoid arrest, once dressing as a monk and once as a Sikh. He became involved in the printing of pamphlets opposing the government, sending them to Delhi and organising demonstrations. He was also involved with creating a network of safe houses for individuals who were wanted by the government, and in raising funds for political refugees and activists. During this period, Modi wrote a Gujarati-language book titled &quot;Sangharsh Ma Gujarat&quot; (&quot;In the Struggles of Gujarat&quot;), which describes events during the Emergency. While in this role, Modi met trade unionist and socialist activist George Fernandes and several other national political figures.

Modi became an RSS &quot;sambhag pracharak&quot; (regional organiser) in 1978, overseeing activities in Surat and Vadodara, and in 1979, he went to work for the RSS in Delhi, where he researched and wrote the RSS&#x27;s history of the Emergency. Shortly after, he returned to Gujarat and in 1985, the RSS assigned him to the BJP. In 1987, Modi helped organise the BJP&#x27;s campaign in the Ahmedabad municipal election, which the party won comfortably; according to biographers, Modi&#x27;s planning was responsible for the win. After L. K. Advani became president of the BJP in 1986, the RSS decided to place its members in important positions within the party; Modi&#x27;s work during the Ahmedabad election led to his selection for this role. Modi was elected organising secretary of the BJP&#x27;s Gujarat unit later in 1987.

Modi rose within the party and was named a member of its National Election Committee in 1990, helping organise Advani&#x27;s Ram Rath Yatra in 1990 and Murli Manohar Joshi&#x27;s 1991–1992 &quot;Ekta Yatra&quot; (Journey for Unity). Modi took a brief break from politics in 1992 to establish a school in Ahmedabad, and due to friction with Shankersinh Vaghela, a BJP MP from Gujarat. Modi returned to electoral politics in 1994, partly at the insistence of Advani; as party secretary, Modi&#x27;s electoral strategy was considered central to the BJP victory in the 1995 state assembly election. In November of that year, Modi was appointed BJP national secretary and transferred to New Delhi, where he assumed responsibility for party activities in Haryana and Himachal Pradesh. The following year, Shankersinh Vaghela, a prominent BJP leader from Gujarat, defected to the Indian National Congress after losing his parliamentary seat in the Lok Sabha election. Modi, who was on the selection committee for the 1998 Gujarat Legislative Assembly election, favoured supporters of BJP leader Keshubhai Patel over those supporting Vaghela to end factional division in the party. His strategy was credited as central to the BJP winning an overall majority in the 1998 election, and Modi was promoted to BJP general secretary (organisation) in May of that year.

== Chief Minister of Gujarat (2001–2014) ==
=== Taking office ===
In 2001, Keshubhai Patel&#x27;s health was failing, and the BJP lost a few state assembly seats in by-elections. Allegations of abuse of power, corruption and poor administration were made, and Patel&#x27;s standing had been damaged by his administration&#x27;s handling of the earthquake in Bhuj in 2001. The BJP national leadership sought a new candidate for the chief ministership, and Modi, who had expressed misgivings about Patel&#x27;s administration, was chosen as a replacement. Advani did not want to ostracise Patel and was concerned about Modi&#x27;s lack of experience in government. Modi declined an offer to become Patel&#x27;s deputy chief minister, telling Advani and Atal Bihari Vajpayee he was &quot;going to be fully responsible for Gujarat or not at all&quot;. On 3 October 2001, Modi replaced Patel as Chief Minister of Gujarat with the responsibility of preparing the BJP for the upcoming December 2002 election. On 7 October, Modi was sworn in and he entered the Gujarat state legislature on 24 February 2002 after winning a by-election in Rajkot II constituency, defeating Ashwin Mehta of the INC.

=== 2002 Gujarat riots ===
On 27 February 2002, a train with several hundred passengers burned near Godhra, killing approximately 60 people. The train carried a large number of Hindu pilgrims who were returning from Ayodhya after a religious ceremony at the site of the demolished Babri Masjid. In a public statement, Modi said local Muslims were responsible for the incident. The next day, the Vishwa Hindu Parishad called for a &quot;bandh&quot; (general strike) across the state. Riots began during the &quot;bandh&quot; and anti-Muslim violence spread through Gujarat. The government&#x27;s decision to move the bodies of the train victims from Godhra to Ahmedabad further inflamed the violence. The state government later stated 790 Muslims and 254 Hindus were killed during the riots; independent sources put the death toll at over 2,000, the vast majority of them Muslims. Approximately 150,000 people were driven to refugee camps. Numerous women and children were among the victims; the violence included mass rapes and mutilation of women.

Scholars consider the Government of Gujarat to have been complicit in the riots, and it has received much criticism for its handling of the situation; some scholars explicitly blame Modi. The Modi government imposed a curfew in 26 major cities, issued shoot-at-sight orders and called for the army to patrol the streets; these measures failed to prevent the violence from escalating. The president of the state unit of the BJP expressed support for the &quot;bandh&quot; despite such actions being illegal at the time. State officials later prevented riot victims from leaving the refugee camps, which were often unable to meet the needs of those living there. Muslim victims of the riots were subjected to further discrimination when the state government announced their compensation would be half that offered to Hindu victims; this decision was later reversed after the issue was taken to court. During the riots, police officers often did not intervene in situations where they were able. Several scholars have described the violence as a pogrom and others have called it an example of state terrorism. According to Martha Nussbaum, &quot;There is by now a broad consensus that the Gujarat violence was a form of ethnic cleansing, that in many ways it was premeditated, and that it was carried out with the complicity of the state government and officers of the law&quot;.

Modi&#x27;s personal involvement in the 2002 events has continued to be debated. During the riots, he said, &quot;What is happening is a chain of action and reaction&quot;. Later in 2002, Modi said the way in which he had handled the media was his only regret regarding the episode. In March 2008, the Supreme Court of India reopened several cases related to the riots, including that of the Gulbarg Society massacre, and established a Special Investigation Team (SIT) to look into the issue. In response to a petition from Zakia Jafri, the widow of Ehsan Jafri, who was killed in the Gulbarg Society massacre, in April 2009, the court also asked the SIT to investigate Modi&#x27;s complicity in the killings. The SIT questioned Modi in March 2010; in May, it presented to the court a report finding no evidence against him. In July 2011, the court-appointed &quot;amicus curiae&quot; Raju Ramachandran submitted his final report to the court. Contrary to the SIT&#x27;s position, Ramachandran said Modi could be prosecuted based on the available evidence. The Supreme Court sent the matter to the magistrate&#x27;s court. The SIT examined Ramachandran&#x27;s report, and in March 2012 submitted its final report, asking for the case to be closed. Zakia Jafri filed a protest petition in response. In December 2013, the magistrate&#x27;s court rejected the protest petition, accepting the SIT&#x27;s finding there was no evidence against Modi. In 2022, the Supreme Court dismissed a petition by Zakia Jafri in which she challenged the clean chit given to Modi in the riots by the SIT, and upheld previous rulings that no evidence against him was found.

=== Later terms as Chief Minister ===
Following the violence, calls for Modi to resign as chief minister were made from politicians within and outside the state, including leaders of Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam and the Telugu Desam Party—partners in the BJP-led National Democratic Alliance coalition—and opposition parties stalled Parliament over the issue. Modi submitted his resignation at the April 2002 BJP national executive meeting in Goa but it was not accepted. Despite opposition from the election commissioner, who said a number of voters were still displaced, Modi succeeded in advancing the election to December 2002. In the election, the BJP won 127 seats in the 182-member assembly. Modi made significant use of anti-Muslim rhetoric during his campaign, and the BJP profited from religious polarisation among voters. Modi framed the criticism of his government for human rights violations as an attack upon Gujarati pride, a strategy that led to the BJP winning 127 of the 182 seats—a two-thirds majority—in the state assembly. He won Maninagar constituency, defeating Congress candidate Yatin Oza. On 22 December 2002, Modi was sworn in for a second term.

During Modi&#x27;s second term, the government&#x27;s rhetoric shifted from Hindutva to Gujarat&#x27;s economic development. He curtailed the influence of Sangh Parivar organisations such as Bharatiya Kisan Sangh (BKS) and Vishva Hindu Parishad (VHP). When the BKS staged a farmers&#x27; demonstration, Modi ordered the BKS&#x27;s eviction from state-provided houses, and his decision to demolish 200 illegal temples in Gandhinagar deepened the rift with the VHP. Modi retained connections with some Hindu nationalists. He wrote a foreword to a 2014 textbook by Dinanath Batra, which made the unscientific claim that ancient India possessed technologies including test-tube babies.

Modi&#x27;s relationship with Muslims continued to attract criticism. Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee distanced himself, reaching out to North Indian Muslims before the 2004 Indian general election, following which, Vajpayee called the violence in Gujarat a reason for the BJP&#x27;s electoral defeat and said it had been a mistake to leave Modi in office after the riots. Western nations also raised questions about Modi&#x27;s relationship with Muslims: the US State Department barred him from entering the United States in accordance with the recommendations of that country&#x27;s Commission on International Religious Freedom, the only person to be denied a US visa under this law. The UK and the European Union (EU) refused to admit Modi because of what they saw as his role in the riots. As Modi rose to prominence in India, the UK and the EU lifted their bans in October 2012 and March 2013, respectively, and after his election as prime minister in 2014, the US lifted its ban and invited him to Washington, D.C.

During the run-up to the 2007 Gujarat Legislative Assembly election and the 2009 Indian general election, the BJP intensified its rhetoric on terrorism. Modi criticised Prime Minister Manmohan Singh &quot;for his reluctance to revive anti-terror legislation&quot; such as the 2002 Prevention of Terrorism Act. In 2007, Modi wrote &quot;Karmayog&quot;, a 101-page booklet discussing manual scavenging. In it, he said scavenging is a &quot;spiritual experience&quot; for Valmiks, a sub-caste of Dalits. The book was not circulated at that time because of the election code of conduct. After the November 2008 Mumbai attacks, the Gujarat government authorised the deployment of 30 high-speed boats for coastal surveillance. In July 2007, Modi completed 2,063 consecutive days as chief minister of Gujarat, making him the longest-serving holder of that post. The BJP won 122 of 182 state-assembly seats in that year&#x27;s election.

Despite the BJP&#x27;s shift away from explicit Hindutva, Modi&#x27;s campaigns in 2007 and 2012 Gujarat Legislative Assembly elections contained elements of Hindu nationalism. He attended only Hindu religious ceremonies and had prominent associations with Hindu religious leaders. During his 2012 campaign, Modi twice refused to wear skullcap gifted by Muslim leaders. He did, however, maintain relations with Dawoodi Bohra. Modi&#x27;s 2012 campaign included references to issues known to cause religious polarisation, including Afzal Guru and the death of Sohrabuddin Sheikh. The BJP did not nominate any Muslim candidates for the 2012 assembly election. During the 2012 campaign, Modi attempted to identify himself with the state of Gujarat, a strategy similar to that used by Indira Gandhi during the Emergency, and projected himself as protecting Gujarat against persecution by the rest of India. While campaigning for the 2012 Gujarat Legislative Assembly election, Modi made extensive use of holograms and other technologies, allowing him to reach a large number of people, something he repeated in the 2014 general election. Modi won the constituency of Maninagar, defeating Shweta Bhatt of the INC. The BJP won 115 of the 182 seats, continuing its majority during his tenure. After his election as Prime Minister of India, Modi resigned as the Gujarat chief minister and as MLA for Maninagar. Anandiben Patel succeeded Modi as chief minister.

=== Development projects ===
As chief minister, Modi favoured privatisation and small government, which was at odds with the philosophy of the RSS, which is usually described as anti-privatisation and anti-globalisation. Modi&#x27;s policies during his second term have been credited with reducing corruption in Gujarat. He established financial and technology parks in the state and during the 2007 Vibrant Gujarat summit, real-estate investment deals worth were signed.

The governments led by Patel and Modi supported NGOs and communities in the creation of groundwater-conservation projects. By December 2008, 500,000 structures had been built, of which 113,738 were check dams, which helped recharge the aquifers beneath them. Sixty of the 112 tehsils which had depleted the water table in 2004 had regained their normal groundwater levels by 2010. As a result, the state&#x27;s production of genetically modified cotton increased to become the largest in India. The boom in cotton production and its semi-arid land use led to Gujarat&#x27;s agricultural sector growing at an average rate of 9.6 per cent from 2001 to 2007. Public irrigation measures in central and southern Gujarat, such as the Sardar Sarovar Dam, were less successful. The Sardar Sarovar project irrigated only 4–6% of the area intended. In 2008, Modi offered land in Gujarat to Tata Motors to set up a plant manufacturing the Nano car after popular agitation had forced the company to move out of West Bengal. Following Tata, several other companies relocated to Gujarat.

The Modi government finished the process of taking electricity to every village in Gujarat its predecessor had almost completed. Modi significantly changed the state&#x27;s system of power distribution, greatly impacting farmers. Gujarat expanded the Jyotigram Yojana scheme, in which agricultural electricity was separated from other rural electricity; the agricultural electricity was rationed to fit scheduled irrigation demands, reducing its cost. Early protests by farmers ended when those who benefitted found their electricity supply had stabilised but, according to an assessment study, corporations and large farmers benefited from the policy at the expense of small farmers and labourers.

=== Development debate ===
A contentious debate surrounds the assessment of Gujarat&#x27;s economic development during Modi&#x27;s tenure as chief minister. The state&#x27;s Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth rate averaged 10% during his tenure, a rate similar to those of other highly industrialised states, and above that of India as a whole. Gujarat also had a high rate of economic growth in the 1990s, before Modi took office; some scholars have stated growth did not much accelerate during his tenure. Under Modi, Gujarat topped the World Bank&#x27;s &quot;ease of doing business&quot; rankings among Indian states for two consecutive years. In 2013, a report measuring governance, growth, citizens&#x27; rights, and labour and business regulation among the country&#x27;s 20 largest states, ranked Gujarat first among Indian states for &quot;economic freedom&quot;. In the later years of Modi&#x27;s government, Gujarat&#x27;s economic growth was frequently used as an argument to counter allegations of communalism. Tax breaks and land for businesses were easier to obtain in Gujarat than in other states. Modi&#x27;s policies of making Gujarat attractive for investment included the creation of Special Economic Zones in which labour laws were greatly weakened.

Despite its growth rate, Gujarat had a relatively poor record on human development, poverty relief, nutrition and education during Modi&#x27;s tenure. In 2013, Gujarat ranked 13th in India with respect to rates of poverty, and 21st in education. Nearly 45 per cent of children under five were underweight and 23 per cent were undernourished, putting the state in the &quot;alarming&quot; category on the India State Hunger Index. A study by UNICEF and the Indian government found Gujarat under Modi had a poor record in immunisation of children.

From 2001 to 2011, Gujarat did not change its position relative to the rest of the country with respect to poverty and female literacy, remaining near the median of the 29 Indian states. It showed a marginal improvement in rates of infant mortality and its position with respect to individual consumption declined. The quality of education in government schools in Gujarat ranked below that of many Indian states. The state government&#x27;s social policies generally did not benefit Muslims, Dalits and Adivasis, and generally increased social inequalities. Development in Gujarat was generally limited to the urban middle class, and citizens in rural areas and those from lower castes were increasingly marginalised. In 2013, the state ranked 10th of 21 Indian states in the Human Development Index. Under Modi, the state government spent less than the national average on education and healthcare.

=== Allegations of bribery ===

During its raids in 2013 and 2014, the CBI seized some diaries from two big Indian companies, Sahara Group and Aditya Birla Group. These diaries contained references of alleged payments made to leaders belonging to as many as 18 political parties including BJP, Congress, JDU, BJD etc. Among these were some entries mentioning &quot;Gujarat CM&quot; and &quot;Ahmadabad Modiji&quot;. Citing these entries, on 21 December 2016, the opposition leader Rahul Gandhi alleged that Modi received cash bribes worth from Sahara Group and Aditya Birla Group when he was the Chief Minister of Gujarat. In November 2016, advocate Prashant Bhushan had filed a plea in the Supreme Court of India asking for investigation of the alleged bribe payments made to some senior public servants including Modi. A Supreme Court bench headed by Justice Arun Kumar Mishra dismissed the plea in January 2017 stating that the evidence provided was insufficient. Later on, Justice Mishra was criticised by a section of advocates and activists for siding with the Modi government in multiple judgements during his tenure at the Supreme Court. &quot;The Wire&quot; questioned the manner in which the Supreme Court buried the Sahara-Birla diaries&#x27; investigation.

== Premiership campaigns ==
=== 2014 Indian general election ===


In September 2013, Modi was named the BJP&#x27;s candidate for prime minister ahead of the 2014 Lok Sabha election. Several BJP leaders, including BJP founding member L. K. Advani who cited concern with leaders who were &quot;concerned with their personal agendas&quot;, expressed opposition to Modi&#x27;s candidature. Modi played a dominant role in the BJP&#x27;s 2009 general election campaign. Several people who voted for the BJP stated they would have voted for another party if Modi had not been the prime-ministerial candidate. The focus on Modi as an individual was unusual for a BJP election campaign. The election was described as a referendum on Narendra Modi.

During the campaign, Modi focused on corruption scandals under the previous Congress government, and played on his image as a politician who had created a high rate of GDP growth in Gujarat. He projected himself as a person who could bring about &quot;development&quot; without focusing on specific policies. His message found support among young and middle-class people. The BJP under Modi was able to downplay concerns about the protection of religious minorities and Modi&#x27;s commitment to secularism, areas in which he had previously received criticism. Prior to the election, Modi&#x27;s media image had centred around his role in the 2002 Gujarat riots but during the campaign, the BJP focused on Modi&#x27;s neoliberal ideology and the Gujarat model of development. The BJP sought to identify itself with political leaders who publicly opposed Hindu nationalism, including B. R. Ambedkar, Subhas Chandra Bose and Ram Manohar Lohia. Hindutva remained a part of the campaign; BJP leaders used Hindutva-based rhetoric in several states. Communal tensions were played upon, especially in Uttar Pradesh and Northeast India. A proposal for the controversial Uniform Civil Code was a part of the BJP&#x27;s election manifesto.
The BJP&#x27;s campaign was assisted by its wide influence in the media. Modi&#x27;s campaign blitz cost around and the BJP received extensive financial support from corporate donors. In addition to more-conventional campaign methods, Modi made extensive use of social media and addressed more than 1,000 rallies via hologram appearances.

The BJP won 31 per cent of the vote, and more-than-doubled its number of seats in the Lok Sabha to 282, becoming the first party to win a majority of seats on its own since 1984. Voter dissatisfaction with the Congress and with regional parties in North India, and support from the RSS were reasons for the BJP&#x27;s success. In states such as Uttar Pradesh, where the BJP performed well, it drew exceptionally high support from upper-caste Hindus, and its Muslim vote increased to 10 per cent. The BJP performed particularly well in parts of the country that had recently experienced violence between Hindus and Muslims. The magnitude of the BJP&#x27;s victory led many commentators to say the election constituted a political realignment away from progressive parties towards the right-wing. Modi&#x27;s tweet announcing his victory was described as being emblematic of the political realignment away from a secular, socialist state towards capitalism and Hindu cultural nationalism.

Modi was a candidate for the Lok Sabha constituencies Varanasi and Vadodara. He won in both constituencies, defeating Aam Aadmi Party leader Arvind Kejriwal in Varanasi by 371,784 votes and Madhusudan Mistry of the Congress in Vadodara by 570,128 votes. India&#x27;s president appointed Modi, who was unanimously elected leader of the BJP, Prime Minister of India. To comply with the law prohibiting MPs from representing more than one constituency, he vacated the Vadodara seat.

=== 2019 Indian general election ===

On 13 October 2018, Modi was named the BJP candidate for prime minister in the 2019 general election. The BJP&#x27;s chief campaigner was its president Amit Shah. Modi launched the party&#x27;s &quot;Main Bhi Chowkidar&quot; (&quot;I too am a watchman&quot;) campaign ahead of the general election, against the INC&#x27;s campaign slogan &quot;Chowkidar Chor Hai&quot; (&quot;The watchman is a thief&quot;). In 2018, the Telugu Desam Party split from the NDA over the campaign for special status for Andhra Pradesh.

Amit Shah launched the BJP&#x27;s election campaign on 8 April 2019. In the campaign, the opposition targeted Modi on allegations of corruption over the Rafale deal with the Government of France, highlighting the controversy surrounding the deal. Modi&#x27;s campaign focused on defence and national security, especially after the Pulwama attack and the retaliatory Balakot airstrike, which was counted as an achievement of his administration. Other topics in the campaign were development and good foreign relations in the first premiership.

Modi contested the Lok Sabha election as a candidate for Varanasi; he won the seat by a margin of 479,505 votes, defeating Shalini Yadav of the Samajwadi Party (SP), who stood as a candidate for the SP-BSP alliance. Modi was unanimously appointed prime minister for a second time by the National Democratic Alliance after the alliance won the election for the second time with 353 seats in the Lok Sabha; the BJP alone won 303 seats.

=== 2024 Indian general election ===
In November 2023, Modi was named the BJP candidate for prime minister in the 2024 general election. The BJP&#x27;s chief campaigner was its home minister Amit Shah and President J. P. Nadda. Modi launched the party&#x27;s &quot;Modi Ki Guarantee&quot; (&quot;Modi&#x27;s assurance&quot;) campaign ahead of the general election, against the INC&#x27;s guarantees campaigns, that led to the party&#x27;s enormous victories in the assembly elections of Karnataka and Telangana.

Modi contested the Lok Sabha election as a candidate for Varanasi for the third consecutive time; he won the seat by a margin of 152,513 votes, defeating Ajay Rai of the Indian National Congress (INC), who contested as a candidate for the SP-INC alliance. His victory margin was the second lowest ever (in percentage points) for a sitting Prime Minister in India. The National Democratic Alliance secured a total of 292 seats, 20 seats ahead of simple majority, and the BJP solely winning 240 seats. Modi thanked the voters for reposing faith in his government for the 3rd consecutive time.

== Prime Minister of India (2014–present) ==

After the Bharatiya Janata Party-led National Democratic Alliance (NDA) won a landslide in the 2014 Lok Sabha election, Modi was sworn in as Prime Minister of India on 26 May 2014, becoming the first Indian PM to be born after the country&#x27;s independence from the British Empire in 1947. Modi&#x27;s second term as PM began in 2019 following the NDA&#x27;s 2019 Lok Sabha election win. On 6 December 2020, he became the fourth-longest-serving Prime Minister of India and the longest-serving non-Congress prime minister.

=== Governance and other initiatives ===

Modi&#x27;s first year as PM saw significant centralisation of power. Modi, who initially lacked a majority in the Rajya Sabha, the upper house of Indian Parliament, passed a number of ordinances to enact his policies, leading to further centralisation of power. His administration enacted a bill to increase its control over the appointment of judges and reducing that of the judiciary. In December 2014, he abolished the Planning Commission, replacing it with the National Institution for Transforming India (NITI Aayog), concentrating the power previously with the planning commission in the person of the PM. The Planning Commission had in previous years been criticised for creating inefficiency in the government and of not fulfilling its role of improving social welfare but since the economic liberalisation of the 1990s, it had been the major government body responsible for measures related to social justice.
In its first year of administration, the Modi government launched investigations through the Intelligence Bureau into numerous civil society organisations and foreign non-governmental organisations (NGOs) on the grounds these organisations were slowing economic growth. The investigations were criticised as a witch hunt. International humanitarian aid organisation Medecins Sans Frontieres, and environmental nonprofit organisation Sierra Club and Avaaz were among the groups that were investigated. Cases of sedition and terrorism laws were filed against individuals who criticised the government. This led to discontent within the BJP about his style of functioning and drew comparisons to the governing style of Indira Gandhi.

Modi repealed 1,200 obsolete laws in first three years as prime minister; 1,301 such laws had been repealed by previous governments in the previous 64 years. Modi launched the Digital India programme with the goal of ensuring government services are available electronically, build infrastructure to provide high-speed Internet access to rural areas, boost manufacturing of electronic goods in the country, and promote digital literacy.

In 2019, a law to reserve 10 per cent of educational admission and government jobs for economically disadvantaged individuals was passed. In 2016, Modi&#x27;s administration launched the Ujjwala scheme to provide free liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) connections to rural households. The scheme led to an additional 24% of Indian households having access to LPG in 2019 as compared to 2014. In 2022, the government eliminated LPG subsidies for all citizens except those covered by the Ujjwala program.

In 2023, the Modi administration issued a notification constituting a high-level committee on One Nation, One Election, a proposal aimed to synchronise all elections in the country either on a single day or within a specific time frame. In September 2024, the bill for One Nation, One Election was approved by the Modi Cabinet.

Since May 2023, ethnic tensions between some groups have resulted in violent clashes in Manipur. After 1 month of the violence, nearly 100 were killed and more than 36,000 people were displaced. Modi has been criticised for his lack of reaction towards the violence.

=== Hindutva ===

The activities of a number of Hindu nationalist organisations increased in scope after Modi&#x27;s appointment as prime minister, sometimes with the government&#x27;s support. These activities included a Hindu religious conversion programme, a campaign against the supposed Islamic practice of &quot;Love Jihad&quot; (an Islamophobic conspiracy theory) and attempts to celebrate Nathuram Godse, the assassin of Mahatma Gandhi, by members of the right-wing organisation Hindu Mahasabha. Government officials, including the Home Minister, defended the conversion programmes.

Links between the BJP and the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) grew stronger under Modi. The RSS provided organisational support to the BJP&#x27;s electoral campaigns while the Modi administration appointed RSS-affiliated individuals to prominent government positions. In 2014, Yellapragada Sudershan Rao, who had previously been associated with the RSS, became the chairperson of the Indian Council of Historical Research (ICHR). Historians and former members of the ICHR, including those sympathetic to the BJP, questioned Rao&#x27;s credentials as a historian and stated the appointment was part of an agenda of cultural nationalism. During its first term, the Modi administration appointed other RSS members to lead universities and research institutions, and recruitment of faculty members favouring the RSS increased. According to scholars Nandini Sundar and Kiran Bhatty, many of these appointees did not possess the qualifications for their positions. The Modi administration also made numerous changes in government-approved history textbooks that de-emphasised the role of Jawaharlal Nehru and glorified that of Modi while also portraying Indian society as harmonious, and without conflict and inequity.

In 2019, the Modi administration passed a citizenship law that provides a route to Indian citizenship for persecuted religious minorities from Afghanistan, Bangladesh and Pakistan who are Hindus, Sikhs, Buddhists, Jains, Parsis or Christians, but does not grant eligibility to Muslims. This was first time religion had been overtly used as a criterion for citizenship under Indian law; it attracted global criticism and prompted widespread protests that were halted by the COVID-19 pandemic. Counter-demonstrations against the protests developed into the 2020 Delhi riots, caused chiefly by Hindu mobs attacking Muslims. Fifty-three people were killed in the protests, two-thirds of whom were Muslim. On 5 August 2020, Modi visited Ayodhya after the Supreme Court in 2019 ordered contested land in Ayodhya to be handed to a trust to build a Hindu temple and ordered the government to give alternative of land to the Sunni Waqf Board for the purpose of building a mosque. Modi became the first PM to visit temples at Ram Janmabhoomi and Hanuman Garhi.

Soon after Modi returned to power in 2019, he took three actions the RSS had long called for. The practice of Triple Talaq was made illegal and became a punishable act from 1 August 2019. The administration repealed Article 370 of the Indian constitution that granted autonomy to Jammu and Kashmir, and also abrogated its statehood, reorganising it into the union territories Jammu and Kashmir, and Ladakh. The region was placed under a lockdown and internet services were suspended and were not completely restored until February 2021. Thousands of people, including hundreds of political leaders, were detained. The Supreme Court of India did not hear constitutional challenges to the reorganisation or the Citizenship Amendment Act. According to Bhatty and Sundar, this is an example of the subversion of the Supreme Court and other major institutions, which were filled with appointees favouring the BJP.

During his campaign for 2024 Indian general election, Modi referred to Muslims as infiltrators with many children who would take India&#x27;s wealth, if his political opponents gained power. In a later interview, Modi said that regardless of the social class, there are more children in neighbourhoods plagued by poverty. He said he made no mention of Muslim or Hindu in his campaign speech. However, factcheckers have refuted this claim of Modi and found numerous instances across his election campaign where he communally targeted the Muslims.

=== Economy ===
The Modi government&#x27;s economic policies focused on privatisation and liberalisation of the economy, and were based on a neoliberal framework. Modi liberalised India&#x27;s foreign direct investment policies, allowing more foreign investment in several industries, including defence and railways. Other proposed reforms included making the forming of unions more difficult for workers, and making recruitment and dismissal easier for employers; some of these proposals were abandoned after protests. The reforms drew strong opposition from unions: on 2 September 2015, eleven of the country&#x27;s largest unions—including one affiliated with the BJP—struck. The Bharatiya Mazdoor Sangh (Indian Workers Union), a constituent of the Sangh Parivar (Family of the RSS), stated the underlying motivation of labour reforms favoured corporations over labourers.

The funds dedicated to poverty-reduction programmes and social welfare measures were greatly reduced by Modi&#x27;s administration. The money spent on social programmes declined from 14.6 per cent of GDP during the previous Congress government to 12.6 per cent during Modi&#x27;s first year in office, and spending on health and family welfare declined by 15 per cent. The government lowered corporate taxes, abolished the wealth tax, increased sales taxes, and reduced customs duties on gold and jewellery. In October 2014, the Modi government deregulated diesel prices. During Modi&#x27;s first term, his government reduced spending on education as share of the budget: over five years, education spending dropped from 0.7 per cent of GDP to 0.5 per cent. The percentage of the budget spent on children&#x27;s nutrition, education, health, and associated programmes was almost halved between 2014 and 2022. Capital expenditure on transport infrastructure significantly rose, increasing from less than 0.4 per cent of GDP in 2014 to 1.7 per cent in 2023.

In September 2014, Modi introduced the Make in India initiative to encourage foreign companies to manufacture products in India with the goal of turning the country into a global manufacturing hub. Supporters of economic liberalisation supported the initiative but critics said it would allow foreign corporations to capture a greater share of the Indian market. Modi&#x27;s administration passed a land-reform bill that allowed it to acquire private agricultural land without conducting a social impact assessment, and without the consent of the farmers who owned it. The bill was passed via an executive order after it faced opposition in Parliament but was eventually allowed to lapse. Modi&#x27;s government passed the Goods and Services Tax, the biggest tax reform in the country since independence, subsuming around 17 taxes and became effective on 1 July 2017.

In his first cabinet decision, Modi set up a team to investigate black money. On 9 November 2016, the government demonetised ₹500 and ₹1000 banknotes with the intention of curbing corruption, black money, terrorism and the use of counterfeit currency. The move led to severe cash shortages, and a steep decline in the Indian stock indices BSE SENSEX and NIFTY 50, and sparked widespread protests throughout the country. It is estimated 1.5 million jobs were lost and that one per cent of the country&#x27;s GDP was wiped out. Several deaths were linked to the rush to exchange cash. In the subsequent year, the number of income tax returns filed for individuals rose by 25 per cent and the number of digital transactions steeply increased.

Modi&#x27;s administration has observed a decline in GDP growth and increasing joblessness compared to the previous administration under Manmohan Singh. During the first eight years of Modi&#x27;s premiership, India&#x27;s GDP grew at an average rate of 5.5% per cent compared to the rate of 7.03 per cent under the previous government. Income inequality increased. An internal government report said in 2017, unemployment increased to its highest level in 45 years. The loss of jobs was attributed to the 2016 banknote demonetisation, and the effects of the Goods and Services Tax. GDP growth was 6.12 per cent in the 2018–19 financial year, with an inflation rate of 3.4 per cent. In the year 2019–20, the GDP growth rate slowed to 4.18 per cent, while inflation increased to 4.7 per cent. The Indian economy shrunk by 6.6 per cent during the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020–21, and was estimated to grow at 8.2 per cent the following financial year.

=== Health and sanitation ===
In his first year as prime minister, Modi reduced the central government&#x27;s healthcare spending. In January 2015, the Modi government launched its New Health Policy (NHP), which did not increase the government&#x27;s spending on healthcare but emphasised the role of private healthcare organisations. This represented a shift away from the policy of the previous Congress government, which had supported programmes to assist public health goals, including a reduction in child and maternal mortality rates. The National Health Mission, which included public health programmes targeted at these indices, received nearly 20 per cent less funding in 2015 than in the previous year. The Modi administration reduced the healthcare budget by a further 15% in its second year. The healthcare budget for the following year rose by 19%; private insurance providers positively viewed the budget but public health experts criticised its emphasis on the role of private healthcare providers and said it represented a shift away from public health facilities. The healthcare budget rose by 11.5% in 2018; the change included an allocation of for a government-funded health insurance program and a decrease in the budget of the National Health Mission.

Modi emphasised his government&#x27;s efforts at sanitation as a means of ensuring good health. On 2 October 2014, Modi launched the Swachh Bharat Mission (&quot;Clean India&quot;) campaign. The campaign&#x27;s stated goals included the elimination of open defecation and manual scavenging within five years. As part of the programme, the Indian government began constructing millions of toilets in rural areas and encouraging people to use them. The government also announced plans to build new sewage treatment plants, and planned to construct 60 million toilets by 2019. The construction projects faced allegations of corruption and severe difficulty in getting people to use the newly constructed toilets. Sanitation cover in India increased from 38.7% in October 2014 to 84.1% in May 2018 but use of the new sanitary facilities was lower than the government&#x27;s targets. In 2018, the World Health Organization (WHO) stated at least 180,000 diarrhoeal deaths in rural India were averted after the launch of the sanitation effort.

In March 2020, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Modi administration invoked the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897 and Disaster Management Act, 2005. The same month, all commercial domestic and international flights were suspended. Modi announced a 14-hour curfew on 22 March, and followed with a three-week &quot;total lockdown&quot; two days later. Restrictions were gradually lifted beginning in April, and were completely revoked in November 2020. A second wave of the pandemic that began in March 2021 was significantly more devastating than the first; some parts of India experienced shortages of vaccines, hospital beds, oxygen cylinders and other medical supplies. In late April India reported over 400,000 cases in a 24-hour period, the first country to do so. India began its vaccination programme in January 2021; in January 2022, India announced it had administered about 1.7 billion doses of vaccines and that more than 720 million people were fully vaccinated. In May 2022, the WHO estimated 4.7 million people had died of COVID-19 in India, mostly during the second wave in mid 2021—almost 10 times the Indian government&#x27;s estimate. The Modi administration rejected the WHO&#x27;s estimate.

=== Foreign policy ===

Foreign policy played a small role in Modi&#x27;s election campaign and did not feature prominently in the BJP&#x27;s election manifesto. Modi&#x27;s foreign policy, similarly to that of the preceding Congress government, focused on improving economic ties, security and regional relations. Modi continued Manmohan Singh&#x27;s policy of &quot;multi-alignment&quot;. The Modi administration tried to attract foreign investment in the Indian economy from several sources, especially East Asia, with the use of slogans such as &quot;Make in India&quot; and &quot;Digital India&quot;. The government also tried to improve relations with Islamic nations in the Middle East, such as Bahrain, Iran, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates, as well as with Israel.

India&#x27;s relationship with the United States improved after Narendra Modi became PM. During the run-up to the general election, there was wide-ranging scepticism about future of the strategic bilateral relationship under Modi&#x27;s premiership; in 2005, while Chief Minister of Gujarat, Modi was denied a US visa during the presidency of George W. Bush for his poor human-rights record. Sensing Modi&#x27;s victory well before the election, US Ambassador to India Nancy Powell contacted Modi as part of greater &quot;rapprochement&quot; from the West. Following Modi&#x27;s 2014 appointment as India&#x27;s PM, President Obama congratulated him over the telephone and invited Modi to visit the US. The Modi government enjoyed a positive relationship with the US during the presidencies of Barack Obama and his successor Donald Trump.

During the first few months after his appointment as PM, Modi visited a number of countries in support of his policy, and attended the BRICS, ASEAN and G20 summits. One of Modi&#x27;s first visits as PM was to Nepal, during which he promised one billion US dollars in aid. Modi also made several visits to the US; this was described as an unexpected development because of the US&#x27;s earlier denial of a US travel visa to Modi over his role in the 2002 Gujarat riots. The visits were expected to strengthen diplomatic and trade relations between the two countries.

In 2015, the Indian parliament ratified a land-exchange deal with Bangladesh in the India–Bangladesh enclaves, which the government of Manmohan Singh had initiated. Modi&#x27;s administration brought renewed attention to India&#x27;s &quot;Look East Policy&quot;, which was instituted in 1991. The policy, which was renamed the &quot;Act East Policy&quot;, involved directing Indian foreign policy towards East Asia and Southeast Asia. The government signed agreements to improve land connectivity with Myanmar through the Indian state of Manipur; this represented a break with India&#x27;s historic engagement with Myanmar, which prioritised border security over trade. China–India relations rapidly deteriorated following the 2020 China–India skirmishes. Modi pledged aid of $900 million to Afghanistan, which he visited twice and was honoured with Afghanistan&#x27;s highest civilian honour in 2016. In September 2022, Modi appeared to have developed a strong personal relationship with Russia&#x27;s President Vladimir Putin.

==== G20 Presidency ====
India hosted the 2023 G20 New Delhi summit, during which the African Union joined the G20 as a permanent member. In an interview on 26 August 2023, Prime Minister Modi expressed optimism about the G20 countries&#x27; evolving agenda under India&#x27;s presidency, shifting toward a human-centric development approach that aligns with the concerns of the Global South, including addressing climate change, debt restructuring through the G20&#x27;s Common Framework for Debt, and a strategy for regulation of global cryptocurrencies. Modi&#x27;s government faced scrutiny in the lead-up to the G20 meeting as multiple news sources reported that Indian authorities demolished slum neighbourhoods in New Delhi, displacing marginalised residents.

=== Defence ===
India&#x27;s nominal military spending steadily increased under Modi. During Modi&#x27;s tenure, the military budget declined, both as a fraction of GDP and when adjusted for inflation. A substantial portion of the military budget was devoted to personnel costs commentators wrote the budget was constraining Indian military modernisation.

Under Modi, India launched military modernisation initiative aimed at strengthening defence preparedness and streamlining defence acquisition. Modi launched new policies under the &quot;Aatmanirbhar Bharat&quot; campaign, promoting indigenous defence manufacturing with policies to procure key weapon systems domestically. The government has implemented several of the recommendations from the Shekatkar Committee to streamline defence procurement and rationalise spending. Efforts have been made to establish Integrated Theatre Commands (ITCs) to enhance jointness among the services, although challenges persist in their full operationalisation.

Modi promised to be &quot;tough on Pakistan&quot; during his election campaign and repeatedly called Pakistan an exporter of terrorism. On 29 September 2016, the Modi administration said Indian Army had conducted a surgical strike on terror launch pads in Azad Kashmir; the Indian media said up to 50 terrorists and Pakistani soldiers had been killed in the strike. Independent analysts said India&#x27;s statement about the scope of the strike and the number of casualties had been exaggerated. Pakistan denied any surgical strikes to have taken place. In February 2019, India carried out airstrikes against a supposed terrorist camp in Pakistan; open source satellite imagery suggested no targets of significance were hit. Further military skirmishes, including cross-border shelling and the loss of an Indian aircraft, occurred. Eight months after the incident, the Modi administration admitted that six Indian military personnel had been killed by friendly fire.

In May 2020, Chinese and Indian troops engaged in aggressive skirmishes along the Sino-Indian border, including near the disputed Pangong Lake, Ladakh, and the Tibet Autonomous Region and near the border between Sikkim and the Tibet Autonomous Region. Additional clashes took place in eastern Ladakh along the Line of Actual Control (LAC). In 2020, skirmishes between the nations led to many border clashes, responses and reactions from both sides. A series of talks between India and China were held, using military and diplomatic means for peace. The first border clash reported in 2021 was on 20 January; this was referred to as a minor border clash in Sikkim. Modi has been criticised for maintaining silence over ceding about 2,000 sq km land to China since June 2020.

In December 2021, Modi signed an agreement with Russian President Vladimir Putin to extend military technical cooperation. The Modi government bought the S-400 missile system, an anti-missile striking system, strengthening the relationship between the two nations. India refused to condemn the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine and stayed neutral. The Indian government&#x27;s Operation Ganga initiative sought to return Indians stranded in Ukraine during the war. More than 19,000 Indian nationals were evacuated, including some from neighbouring countries.

=== Environment ===
While naming his cabinet, Modi renamed the Ministry of Environment and Forests the &quot;Ministry of Environment, Forests, and Climate Change&quot;, and reduced its budget allocation by more than half in his administration&#x27;s first budget. The new ministry removed or diluted a number of laws related to environmental protection, and others related to industrial activity. The government also tried to reconstitute the National Board for Wildlife so it would no longer have representatives from NGOs but the Supreme Court of India blocked this move. Other changes included a reduction of ministry oversight on small mining projects and ending the requirement for approval from tribal councils for projects inside forested areas. Modi also lifted a moratorium on new industrial activity in India&#x27;s most-polluted areas. The changes were welcomed by businesspeople but criticised by environmentalists.
Speaking with Assamese students in 2014, Modi downplayed climate change, saying, &quot;Climate has not changed. We have changed. Our habits have changed. Our habits have got spoiled. Due to that, we have destroyed our entire environment.&quot; Later in his administration, however, he has called for climate action, especially with the proliferation of clean energy. In 2015, Modi proposed the International Solar Alliance initiative to encourage investment in solar energy. Holding developed countries responsible, Modi and his government have said India has had a negligible historical role in climate change. At the COP26 conference, Modi announced India would target carbon neutrality by 2070 and expand its renewable energy capacity. Indian environmentalists and economists applauded the decision, describing it as bold climate action. India has become the only major economy to be on track to meet its Paris Agreement goals. It has achieved 10 per cent of ethanol blending five months ahead of schedule.

=== Democratic backsliding ===
Under Modi&#x27;s tenure, India has experienced democratic backsliding. According to one study, &quot;The BJP government incrementally but systemically attacked nearly all existing mechanisms that are in place to hold the political executive to account, either by ensuring that these mechanisms became subservient to the political executive or were captured by party loyalists&quot;. The Modi government has used state power to intimidate and stifle critics in the media and academia, undermining freedom of expression and alternative sources of information. His administration has been criticised for using a democratic mandate to undermine democratic processes, including focusing on Hindu-nationalist priorities rather than economic development. Modi&#x27;s second term as PM, in particular, saw the erosion of civil rights and press freedom.

== Public perception and image ==

Narendra Modi has received consistently high approval ratings during his premiership.

=== Image ===
Modi is a vegetarian and teetotaller, who has a frugal lifestyle, and is a workaholic and has been described as an introvert. On 31 August 2012, he posted on Google Hangouts, becoming the first Indian politician to interact with citizens on a live chat. Modi has been called a fashion icon for his signature crisply ironed, half-sleeved &quot;kurta&quot;, and for a suit with his name repeatedly embroidered in the pinstripes, which he wore during a state visit by US President Barack Obama, which drew public and media attention, and criticism. Scholars and biographers have described Modi&#x27;s personality as energetic, eccentric, arrogant and charismatic.

The nomination of Modi for the prime-ministership drew attention to his reputation as &quot;one of contemporary India&#x27;s most controversial and divisive politicians&quot;. During the 2014 election campaign, the BJP projected an image of Modi as a strong, masculine leader who would be able to take difficult decisions. Campaigns in which he has participated have focused on Modi as an individual, an unusual tactic for the BJP and RSS. Modi has relied upon his reputation as a politician able to bring about economic growth and development. Modi&#x27;s role in the 2002 Gujarat riots continues to attract criticism and controversy. Modi&#x27;s hardline Hindutva philosophy and the policies adopted by his government also continue to draw criticism, and have been seen as evidence of a majoritarian and exclusionary social agenda.

=== Approval ratings ===

During his premiership, Modi has received consistently high approval ratings; at the end of his first year in office, he received an overall approval rating of 87% in a Pew Research poll, with 68% of respondents rating him &quot;very favourably&quot; and 93% approving of his government. Modi&#x27;s approval rating remained largely consistent at around 74% during his second year in office, according to a nationwide poll conducted by instaVaani. At the end of his second year in office, an updated Pew Research poll showed Modi continued to receive high overall approval ratings of 81%, with 57% of those polled rating him &quot;very favourably&quot;. At the end of his third year in office, a further Pew Research poll showed Modi with an overall approval rating of 88%, his highest yet, with 69% of people polled rating him &quot;very favourably&quot;. A poll conducted by &quot;The Times of India&quot; in May 2017 showed 77% of respondents rated Modi as &quot;very good&quot; and &quot;good&quot;. In early 2017, a survey by Pew Research Center showed Modi to be the most popular figure in Indian politics. In a weekly analysis by Morning Consult called the Global Leader Approval Rating Tracker, Modi had the highest net approval rating as of 22 December 2020 of all government leaders in the 13 countries being tracked.

=== In popular culture ===
&quot;Modi Kaka Ka Gaon&quot; (Modi uncle&#x27;s town), a 2017 Indian Hindi-language drama film by Tushar Amrish Goel, is the first biopic about Modi. It stars Vikas Mahante in the titular role. &quot;PM Narendra Modi&quot;, a 2019 Hindi-language biographical drama film by Omung Kumar, stars Vivek Oberoi in the titular role and covers Modi&#x27;s rise to the premiership. An Indian web series called &quot;&quot;, which is based on the same premise, was released in May 2019 on the video streaming platform Eros Now with Ashish Sharma portraying Modi.

&quot;7 RCR&quot; (&quot;7, Race Course Road&quot;), a 2014 Indian docudrama political television series which charts the political careers of prominent Indian politicians, covered Modi&#x27;s rise to the PM&#x27;s office in the episodes &quot;Story of Narendra Modi from 1950 to 2001&quot;, &quot;Story of Narendra Modi in Controversial Years from 2001 to 2013&quot;, &quot;Truth Behind Brand Modi&quot;, &quot;Election Journey of Narendra Modi to 7 RCR&quot;, and &quot;Masterplan of Narendra Modi&#x27;s NDA Govt&quot;, with Sangam Rai in the role of Modi. , a 2023 BBC documentary, examines Modi&#x27;s role in the 2002 Gujarat riots and his record as Prime Minister of India. The Indian government banned the documentary, drawing widespread criticism.

Other portrayals of Modi include those by Rajit Kapur in the film &quot;&quot; (2019) and Vikram Gokhale in the web-television series &quot;&quot; (2020), both of which are based on the 2016 Uri attack and the subsequent Indian surgical strikes. Gokhale reprised the role in the sequel &quot;&quot; (2022)&quot;,&quot; which is based on the 2016 Indian banknote demonetisation. Pratap Singh played a character based on Modi in &quot;Chand Bujh Gaya&quot; (2005) which is set against the backdrop of the Gujarat riots.

Modi appeared in an episode of Discovery Channel&#x27;s show &quot;Man vs. Wild&quot; with the host Bear Grylls in July 2019, becoming the second world leader after Barack Obama to appear in the reality show. In the show, Modi treks through jungles, and talks about nature and wildlife conservation with Grylls. The episode was recorded in Jim Corbett National Park, Uttarakhand, and was broadcast in India and 180 other countries. Modi hosts &quot;Mann Ki Baat&quot;, a monthly radio programme on All India Radio, and has conducted the competition &quot;Pariksha Pe Charcha&quot;, and discussions for students and the issues they face in examinations.

== Awards and recognition ==

In March 2012 and June 2014, Narendra Modi appeared on the cover of the Asian edition of &quot;Time Magazine&quot;, becoming one of the few Indian politicians to have done so. In 2014, &quot;CNN-News18&quot; (formally &quot;CNN-IBN&quot;) news network awarded Modi Indian of the Year. In June 2015, Modi was featured on the cover of Time Magazine. In 2014, 2015, 2017, 2020 and 2021, he was named one of Time magazine&#x27;s 100 Most Influential People in the World. &quot;Forbes Magazine&quot; ranked him the 15th Most Powerful Person in the World in 2014 and the 9th Most Powerful Person in the World in 2015, 2016 and 2018. In 2015, Modi was ranked the 13th Most Influential Person in the World by &quot;Bloomberg Markets Magazine&quot;. In 2021, &quot;Time&quot; called Modi the third &quot;pivotal leader&quot; of independent India after Jawaharlal Nehru and Indira Gandhi, who &quot;dominated the country&#x27;s politics like no one since them&quot;. Modi was ranked fifth on &quot;Fortune Magazine&quot;″s first annual list of the &quot;World&#x27;s Greatest Leaders&quot; in 2015. In 2017, Gallup International Association (GIA) conducted a poll and ranked Modi third-top leader of the world. In 2016, a wax statue of Modi was unveiled at Madame Tussauds wax museum in London.

In 2015, Modi was named one of &quot;Time&quot;″s &quot;30 Most Influential People on the Internet&quot; because he was the second-most-followed politician on Twitter and Facebook. In 2018, he was the third-most-followed world leader on Twitter and the most-followed world leader on Instagram and Facebook. In October 2018, Modi received United Nations&#x27; highest environmental award, the Champions of the Earth, for policy leadership by &quot;pioneering work in championing&quot; the International Solar Alliance and &quot;new areas of levels of cooperation on environmental action&quot;. Modi was conferred the 2018 Seoul Peace Prize.

Following his second oath of office ceremony as Prime Minister of India, a picture of Modi was displayed on the facade of the Abu Dhabi National Oil Company (ADNOC) building in Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. The Texas India Forum hosted a community event, &quot;Howdy Modi&quot;, in honour of Modi on 22 September 2019 at NRG Stadium in Houston, Texas. The event was attended by over 50,000 people and several American politicians, including President Donald Trump, making it the largest gathering for an invited foreign leader visiting the United States other than the Pope. At the event, Modi was presented with the Key to the City of Houston by Mayor Sylvester Turner. The Bill &amp; Melinda Gates Foundation awarded Modi the Global Goalkeeper Award on 24 September 2019 in New York City, in recognition of the Swachh Bharat Mission and &quot;the progress India has made in providing safe sanitation under his leadership&quot;.

In 2020, Modi was among eight world leaders who were awarded the parody Ig Nobel Prize in Medical Education &quot;for using the COVID-19 viral pandemic to teach the world that politicians can have a more immediate effect on life and death than scientists and doctors can&quot;. On 21 December 2020, US President Donald Trump awarded Modi the Legion of Merit for improving India–United States relations. On 24 February 2021, Gujarat Cricket Association controversially renamed Motera Stadium in Ahmedabad—the largest cricket stadium in the world—Narendra Modi Stadium.

In July 2024, during a visit to Russia, Modi was awarded the Order of St. Andrew, Russia&#x27;s highest civilian award, for his effort in the development of the bilateral ties between India and Russia. Later in November 2024, during a diplomatic visit to Nigeria, Modi was conferred the Grand Commander of the Order of the Niger (GCON) by the Nigerian President. This is one of the country&#x27;s highest honours, making him the second foreign dignitary to receive the award, after Queen Elizabeth II in 1969. President Bola Tinubu stated that the award was presented in recognition of Nigeria&#x27;s appreciation for the growing partnership between the two countries. Upon his arrival, Modi was presented with the symbolic &quot;Key to the City&quot; of Abuja by Minister Nyesom Wike, a gesture symbolising trust and honour from the people of Nigeria. In December 2024, Modi was conferred the Order of Mubarak the Great, the highest national honor of Kuwait.

== Electoral history ==

^ = February 2002 by-poll

== Writing career ==

In 2008, Modi published a Gujarati book titled &quot;Jyotipunj&quot;, which contains profiles of RSS leaders. The longest was of M. S. Golwalkar, under whose leadership the RSS expanded and whom Modi refers to as &quot;Pujniya Shri Guruji&quot; (&quot;Guru worthy of worship&quot;). According to &quot;The Economic Times&quot;, Modi&#x27;s intention was to explain the workings of the RSS to his readers, and to reassure RSS members he remained ideologically aligned with them.

After becoming the Prime Minister he also authored a book called Exam Warriors, a guide for children to commendably face exams. Modi has written eight other books, mostly containing short stories for children. Modi has penned the lyrics of two Gujarati garba songs; &quot;Garbo&quot;, sung by Dhvani Bhanushali and composed by Tanishk Bagchi, and &quot;Maadi&quot;, sung by Divya Kumar and composed by Meet Bros. The songs were released on the occasion of autumn Navratri in 2023.
&quot;Abundance in Millets&quot;, a song by Falu and Gaurav Shah that featured a speech given by Modi for the promotion of millet, received a nomination in the Best Global Music Performance category for the 2024 Grammy Awards.

== Bibliography ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

== See also ==
* List of prime ministers of India
* Opinion polling on the Narendra Modi premiership

== References ==
=== Notes ===
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
== Further reading ==
* 
* Hall, Ian. &quot;Modi and the reinvention of Indian foreign policy&quot; (Bristol University Press, 2019) 221pp.
* Jaffrelot, Christophe. &quot;Narendra Modi between Hindutva and subnationalism: the Gujarati asmita of a Hindu Hriday Samrat.&quot; &quot;India Review&quot; 15.2 (2016): 196–217.
* Jaffrelot, Christophe. &quot;Modi&#x27;s India: Hindu nationalism and the rise of ethnic democracy&quot; (Princeton University Press, 2019)
* 
* Kaul, Nitasha. &quot;Rise of the political right in India: Hindutva-development mix, Modi myth, and dualities.&quot; &quot;Journal of Labor and Society&quot; 20.4 (2017): 523-548. online
* Mahurkar, Uday. &quot;Centrestage: inside the Narendra Modi model of governance&quot; (Random House India, 2014).
* 
* Price, Lance. &quot;The Modi Effect – Inside Narendra Modi&#x27;s Campaign To Transform India&quot; (2015)
* Sardesai, Rajdeep, et al. &quot;2019: How Modi Won India&quot; (2019)
* 
* Waikar, Prashant. &quot;Reading Islamophobia in Hindutva: an analysis of Narendra Modi&#x27;s political discourse.&quot; &quot;Islamophobia Studies&quot; Journal (2018).
== External links ==
* 
* 
* 
* 


|-




|-





|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1058" start="0" end="24" title="Narendra Modi" label="Narendra Damodardas Modi"/>
<link wikidata="Q192711" start="96" end="119" title="Prime Minister of India" label="prime minister of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511734" start="145" end="170" title="chief minister of Gujarat" label="chief minister of Gujarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q16556694" start="200" end="220" title="Member of Parliament, Lok Sabha" label="member of parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630705" start="230" end="238" title="Varanasi (Lok Sabha constituency)" label="Varanasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q10230" start="262" end="284" title="Bharatiya Janata Party" label="Bharatiya Janata Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296075" start="302" end="329" title="Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh" label="Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh"/>
<link wikidata="Q76074" start="339" end="349" title="right-wing" label="right-wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q281347" start="350" end="367" title="Hindutva" label="Hindu nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q207320" start="368" end="380" title="paramilitary" label="paramilitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q10225" start="458" end="482" title="Indian National Congress" label="Indian National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2570726" start="513" end="521" title="Vadnagar" label="Vadnagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061" start="538" end="545" title="Gujarat" label="Gujarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q16947607" start="677" end="692" title="Jashodaben Modi" label="Jashodaben Modi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747156" start="1143" end="1161" title="2002 Gujarat riots" label="2002 Gujarat riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q213380" start="1433" end="1455" title="Supreme Court of India" label="Supreme Court of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q3587169" start="1746" end="1774" title="2014 Indian general election" label="2014 Indian general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q230003" start="1798" end="1811" title="Lok Sabha" label="parliamentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532183" start="1850" end="1854" title="1984 Indian general election" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q490513" start="1885" end="1910" title="Foreign direct investment" label="direct foreign investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q18175130" start="2003" end="2035" title="Swachh Bharat Mission" label="high-profile sanitation campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q27794967" start="2098" end="2133" title="2016 Indian banknote demonetisation" label="demonetisation of banknotes in 2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q27679782" start="2158" end="2180" title="Goods and Services Tax (India)" label="Goods and Services Tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q61881326" start="2250" end="2272" title="2019 Balakot airstrike" label="2019 Balakot airstrike"/>
<link wikidata="Q28164181" start="2416" end="2437" title="2019 Indian general election" label="2019 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q66323076" start="2493" end="2540" title="Revocation of the special status of Jammu and Kashmir" label="revoked the special status of Jammu and Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q61066827" start="2561" end="2586" title="Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2019" label="Citizenship Amendment Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q78455589" start="2598" end="2617" title="Citizenship Amendment Act protests" label="widespread protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q86347874" start="2636" end="2652" title="2020 Delhi riots" label="2020 Delhi riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q104502300" start="2732" end="2741" title="2020 Indian agriculture acts" label="farm laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q102439127" start="2749" end="2756" title="2020–2021 Indian farmers&amp;#x27; protest" label="sit-ins"/>
<link wikidata="Q84055514" start="2870" end="2887" title="COVID-19 pandemic in India" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="2920" end="2945" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q65042773" start="2997" end="3018" title="2024 Indian general election" label="2024 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q129815" start="3125" end="3153" title="National Democratic Alliance" label="National Democratic Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q30676252" start="3214" end="3236" title="democratic backsliding" label="democratic backsliding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661649" start="3283" end="3300" title="individual rights" label="individual rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="3306" end="3327" title="freedom of expression" label="freedom of expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q48733137" start="3364" end="3398" title="Opinion polling on the Narendra Modi premiership" label="consistently high approval ratings"/>
<link wikidata="Q76074" start="3471" end="3490" title="right-wing politics" label="right-wing politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747156" start="3615" end="3628" title="2002 Gujarat riots" label="Gujarat riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282294" start="3806" end="3814" title="Gujarati people" label="Gujarati"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="3815" end="3820" title="Hindu" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108582" start="3831" end="3851" title="Other Backward Class" label="Other Backward Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q2570726" start="3872" end="3880" title="Vadnagar" label="Vadnagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019694" start="3882" end="3898" title="Mehsana district" label="Mehsana district"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627082" start="3900" end="3912" title="Bombay State" label="Bombay State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061" start="3926" end="3933" title="Gujarat" label="Gujarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q24948516" start="4117" end="4141" title="Vadnagar railway station" label="Vadnagar railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5758250" start="4210" end="4236" title="Higher Secondary Examination" label="higher secondary education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296075" start="4538" end="4565" title="Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh" label="Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh"/>
<link wikidata="Q24907049" start="4657" end="4676" title="Lakshmanrao Inamdar" label="Lakshmanrao Inamdar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296075" start="4707" end="4721" title="Swayamsevak (RSS)" label="balswayamsevak"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245961" start="4880" end="4900" title="Bharatiya Jana Sangh" label="Bharatiya Jana Sangh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536466" start="5001" end="5021" title="National Cadet Corps (India)" label="National Cadet Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q16947607" start="5114" end="5139" title="Jashodaben Chimanlal Modi" label="Jashodaben Chimanlal Modi"/>
<link wikidata="Q47478" start="5848" end="5865" title="Swami Vivekananda" label="Swami Vivekananda"/>
<link wikidata="Q816234" start="5871" end="5881" title="Belur Math" label="Belur Math"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="5887" end="5894" title="Kolkata" label="Kolkata"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349281" start="5900" end="5915" title="Advaita Ashrama" label="Advaita Ashrama"/>
<link wikidata="Q588817" start="5919" end="5925" title="Almora" label="Almora"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311277" start="5934" end="5953" title="Ramakrishna Mission" label="Ramakrishna Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q11854" start="5957" end="5963" title="Rajkot" label="Rajkot"/>
<link wikidata="Q816234" start="6137" end="6147" title="Belur Math" label="Belur Math"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="6192" end="6200" title="Calcutta" label="Calcutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356" start="6202" end="6213" title="West Bengal" label="West Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164" start="6218" end="6223" title="Assam" label="Assam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087" start="6237" end="6245" title="Siliguri" label="Siliguri"/>
<link wikidata="Q199605" start="6250" end="6258" title="Guwahati" label="Guwahati"/>
<link wikidata="Q7288800" start="6280" end="6298" title="Ramakrishna Ashram Marg metro station" label="Ramakrishna Ashram"/>
<link wikidata="Q588817" start="6302" end="6308" title="Almora" label="Almora"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061" start="6359" end="6366" title="Gujarat" label="Gujarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353" start="6371" end="6376" title="Delhi" label="Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437" start="6381" end="6390" title="Rajasthan" label="Rajasthan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2570726" start="6458" end="6466" title="Vadnagar" label="Vadnagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070" start="6510" end="6519" title="Ahmedabad" label="Ahmedabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463304" start="6582" end="6589" title="Cafeteria" label="canteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732127" start="6593" end="6633" title="Gujarat State Road Transport Corporation" label="Gujarat State Road Transport Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245961" start="6847" end="6857" title="Jana Sangh" label="Jana Sangh"/>
<link wikidata="Q233289" start="6885" end="6905" title="Atal Bihari Vajpayee" label="Atal Bihari Vajpayee"/>
<link wikidata="Q371394" start="6932" end="6957" title="Bangladesh Liberation War" label="Bangladesh Liberation War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149" start="6963" end="6976" title="Indira Gandhi" label="Indira Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428759" start="7032" end="7044" title="Mukti Bahini" label="Mukti Bahini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1593538" start="7088" end="7098" title="Tihar Jail" label="Tihar Jail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922071" start="7110" end="7136" title="Indo-Pakistani War of 1971" label="Indo-Pakistani War of 1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296075" start="7205" end="7214" title="pracharak" label="pracharak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="7563" end="7579" title="Bachelor of Arts" label="Bachelor of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432526" start="7622" end="7645" title="School of Open Learning" label="School of Open Learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q665105" start="7653" end="7669" title="Delhi University" label="Delhi University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091008" start="7694" end="7708" title="Master of Arts" label="Master of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q507349" start="7747" end="7765" title="Gujarat University" label="Gujarat University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4671227" start="7785" end="7796" title="Academic grading in India" label="first class"/>
<link wikidata="Q159595" start="7812" end="7829" title="Distance education" label="distance learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149" start="7976" end="7989" title="Indira Gandhi" label="Indira Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2726232" start="8001" end="8019" title="The Emergency (India)" label="state of emergency"/>
<link wikidata="Q582779" start="8521" end="8525" title="Sikh" label="Sikh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137" start="8856" end="8873" title="Gujarati language" label="Gujarati-language"/>
<link wikidata="Q3056379" start="9074" end="9090" title="George Fernandes" label="George Fernandes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4629" start="9242" end="9247" title="Surat" label="Surat"/>
<link wikidata="Q11909" start="9252" end="9260" title="Vadodara" label="Vadodara"/>
<link wikidata="Q468324" start="9674" end="9686" title="L. K. Advani" label="L. K. Advani"/>
<link wikidata="Q13109875" start="10095" end="10109" title="Ram Rath Yatra" label="Ram Rath Yatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604936" start="10122" end="10141" title="Murli Manohar Joshi" label="Murli Manohar Joshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5350603" start="10165" end="10175" title="Ekta Yatra" label="Ekta Yatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6221027" start="10310" end="10329" title="Shankersinh Vaghela" label="Shankersinh Vaghela"/>
<link wikidata="Q104835742" start="10535" end="10563" title="1995 Gujarat Legislative Assembly election" label="1995 state assembly election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174" start="10719" end="10726" title="Haryana" label="Haryana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177" start="10731" end="10747" title="Himachal Pradesh" label="Himachal Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q10225" start="10843" end="10867" title="Indian National Congress" label="Indian National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q104835758" start="10980" end="11022" title="1998 Gujarat Legislative Assembly election" label="1998 Gujarat Legislative Assembly election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723680" start="11058" end="11073" title="Keshubhai Patel" label="Keshubhai Patel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723680" start="11401" end="11416" title="Keshubhai Patel" label="Keshubhai Patel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057954" start="11491" end="11502" title="by-election" label="by-election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441400" start="11670" end="11696" title="2001 Gujarat earthquake" label="earthquake in Bhuj in 2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q60742766" start="12035" end="12056" title="List of deputy chief ministers of Gujarat" label="deputy chief minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q233289" start="12077" end="12097" title="Atal Bihari Vajpayee" label="Atal Bihari Vajpayee"/>
<link wikidata="Q17199169" start="12456" end="12465" title="Rajkot West" label="Rajkot II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535523" start="12604" end="12622" title="Godhra train burning" label="burned near Godhra"/>
<link wikidata="Q186040" start="12732" end="12739" title="Ayodhya" label="Ayodhya"/>
<link wikidata="Q656765" start="12797" end="12809" title="Babri Masjid" label="Babri Masjid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528383" start="12911" end="12932" title="Vishwa Hindu Parishad" label="Vishwa Hindu Parishad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993014" start="12952" end="12957" title="bandh" label="bandh"/>
<link wikidata="Q14766991" start="13044" end="13064" title="Anti-Muslim violence in India" label="anti-Muslim violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732132" start="13588" end="13609" title="Government of Gujarat" label="Government of Gujarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q177716" start="14609" end="14615" title="pogrom" label="pogrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q623179" start="14656" end="14671" title="state terrorism" label="state terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q235470" start="14686" end="14701" title="Martha Nussbaum" label="Martha Nussbaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q213380" start="15246" end="15268" title="Supreme Court of India" label="Supreme Court of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q5617260" start="15336" end="15360" title="Gulbarg Society massacre" label="Gulbarg Society massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q109297373" start="15380" end="15406" title="Special Investigation Team (India)" label="Special Investigation Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q132021189" start="15468" end="15479" title="Zakia Jafri" label="Zakia Jafri"/>
<link wikidata="Q5348650" start="15494" end="15505" title="Ehsan Jafri" label="Ehsan Jafri"/>
<link wikidata="Q46350" start="15809" end="15822" title="amicus curiae" label="amicus curiae"/>
<link wikidata="Q16186434" start="15829" end="15846" title="Raju Ramachandran" label="Raju Ramachandran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255973" start="16781" end="16806" title="Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam" label="Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279320" start="16815" end="16833" title="Telugu Desam Party" label="Telugu Desam Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q129815" start="16858" end="16886" title="National Democratic Alliance" label="National Democratic Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q486296" start="17323" end="17343" title="anti-Muslim rhetoric" label="anti-Muslim rhetoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q17071864" start="17646" end="17668" title="Maninagar Assembly constituency" label="Maninagar constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q281347" start="17845" end="17853" title="Hindutva" label="Hindutva"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918074" start="17924" end="17937" title="Sangh Parivar" label="Sangh Parivar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4901234" start="17960" end="17981" title="Bharatiya Kisan Sangh" label="Bharatiya Kisan Sangh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528383" start="17992" end="18013" title="Vishva Hindu Parishad" label="Vishva Hindu Parishad"/>
<link wikidata="Q11910" start="18189" end="18200" title="Gandhinagar" label="Gandhinagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q16934966" start="18331" end="18345" title="Dinanath Batra" label="Dinanath Batra"/>
<link wikidata="Q200117" start="18433" end="18449" title="test-tube babies" label="test-tube babies"/>
<link wikidata="Q233289" start="18537" end="18557" title="Atal Bihari Vajpayee" label="Atal Bihari Vajpayee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523023" start="18625" end="18653" title="2004 Indian general election" label="2004 Indian general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="18919" end="18935" title="United States Department of State" label="State Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889635" start="19041" end="19086" title="United States Commission on International Religious Freedom" label="Commission on International Religious Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6632150" start="19110" end="19126" title="List of people banned from entering the United States" label="denied a US visa"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="19158" end="19172" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="19461" end="19477" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q16251961" start="19504" end="19546" title="2007 Gujarat Legislative Assembly election" label="2007 Gujarat Legislative Assembly election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134751" start="19555" end="19583" title="2009 Indian general election" label="2009 Indian general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q41914" start="19663" end="19677" title="Manmohan Singh" label="Manmohan Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532861" start="19760" end="19787" title="Prevention of Terrorism Act, 2002" label="Prevention of Terrorism Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q4901014" start="19948" end="19955" title="Valmiki caste" label="Valmiks"/>
<link wikidata="Q219517" start="19972" end="19977" title="Dalit" label="Dalit"/>
<link wikidata="Q16246256" start="20036" end="20060" title="Model Code of Conduct" label="election code of conduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q76421" start="20081" end="20100" title="2008 Mumbai attacks" label="2008 Mumbai attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q16251961" start="20492" end="20496" title="2007 Gujarat Legislative Assembly election" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q482791" start="20501" end="20505" title="2012 Gujarat Legislative Assembly election" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303744" start="20744" end="20752" title="Taqiyah (cap)" label="skullcap"/>
<link wikidata="Q653227" start="20820" end="20833" title="Dawoodi Bohra" label="Dawoodi Bohra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530243" start="20940" end="20950" title="Afzal Guru" label="Afzal Guru"/>
<link wikidata="Q7554824" start="20959" end="20986" title="death of Sohrabuddin Sheikh" label="death of Sohrabuddin Sheikh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3587169" start="21701" end="21740" title="2014 Indian general election" label="his election as Prime Minister of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q4751365" start="21812" end="21827" title="Anandiben Patel" label="Anandiben Patel"/>
<link wikidata="Q853562" start="21943" end="21959" title="small government" label="small government"/>
<link wikidata="Q7924630" start="22263" end="22278" title="Vibrant Gujarat" label="Vibrant Gujarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052083" start="22534" end="22543" title="check dam" label="check dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q817477" start="22612" end="22618" title="tehsil" label="tehsil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3342272" start="22643" end="22654" title="water table" label="water table"/>
<link wikidata="Q14319351" start="22761" end="22788" title="Bt cotton" label="genetically modified cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120392" start="23064" end="23082" title="Sardar Sarovar Dam" label="Sardar Sarovar Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q188514" start="23216" end="23227" title="Tata Motors" label="Tata Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q152238" start="23264" end="23268" title="Nano (car)" label="Nano"/>
<link wikidata="Q7524288" start="23312" end="23346" title="Tata Nano Singur controversy" label="company to move out of West Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q17060819" start="23662" end="23678" title="Jyotigram Yojana" label="Jyotigram Yojana"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="24285" end="24307" title="Gross Domestic Product" label="Gross Domestic Product"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="24651" end="24661" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q494978" start="25316" end="25338" title="Special Economic Zones" label="Special Economic Zones"/>
<link wikidata="Q16740191" start="25788" end="25812" title="India State Hunger Index" label="India State Hunger Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q740308" start="25825" end="25831" title="UNICEF" label="UNICEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415366" start="25904" end="25916" title="immunisation" label="immunisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q219517" start="26424" end="26429" title="Dalit" label="Dalit"/>
<link wikidata="Q357670" start="26435" end="26442" title="Adivasi" label="Adivasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q38994" start="26708" end="26731" title="Human Development Index" label="Human Development Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053734" start="26904" end="26907" title="Central Bureau of Investigation" label="CBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637622" start="26959" end="26971" title="Sahara Group" label="Sahara Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q357600" start="26976" end="26994" title="Aditya Birla Group" label="Aditya Birla Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q10218" start="27314" end="27326" title="Rahul Gandhi" label="Rahul Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520886" start="27483" end="27499" title="Prashant Bhushan" label="Prashant Bhushan"/>
<link wikidata="Q213380" start="27524" end="27546" title="Supreme Court of India" label="Supreme Court of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q4802109" start="27694" end="27711" title="Arun Kumar Mishra" label="Arun Kumar Mishra"/>
<link wikidata="Q39070361" start="27985" end="27993" title="The Wire (India)" label="The Wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q126325721" start="28198" end="28247" title="Prime ministerial candidacy of Narendra Modi" label="named the BJP&amp;#x27;s candidate for prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q3587169" start="28261" end="28284" title="2014 Lok Sabha election" label="2014 Lok Sabha election"/>
<link wikidata="Q162719" start="29562" end="29572" title="neoliberalism" label="neoliberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307223" start="29698" end="29715" title="Hindu nationalism" label="Hindu nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q231690" start="29727" end="29741" title="B. R. Ambedkar" label="B. R. Ambedkar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2153" start="29743" end="29762" title="Subhas Chandra Bose" label="Subhas Chandra Bose"/>
<link wikidata="Q2759530" start="29767" end="29784" title="Ram Manohar Lohia" label="Ram Manohar Lohia"/>
<link wikidata="Q863038" start="29956" end="29971" title="Northeast India" label="Northeast India"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722672" start="30006" end="30024" title="Uniform Civil Code" label="Uniform Civil Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532183" start="30587" end="30591" title="1984 Indian general election" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q821102" start="31165" end="31184" title="progressivism" label="progressive parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630705" start="31456" end="31464" title="Varanasi Lok Sabha constituency" label="Varanasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7908337" start="31469" end="31477" title="Vadodara (Lok Sabha constituency)" label="Vadodara"/>
<link wikidata="Q129844" start="31520" end="31535" title="Aam Aadmi Party" label="Aam Aadmi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q59155" start="31543" end="31558" title="Arvind Kejriwal" label="Arvind Kejriwal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6727558" start="31592" end="31609" title="Madhusudan Mistry" label="Madhusudan Mistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q28164181" start="32000" end="32021" title="2019 Indian general election" label="2019 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4746875" start="32073" end="32082" title="Amit Shah" label="Amit Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q65083891" start="32121" end="32139" title="Main Bhi Chowkidar" label="Main Bhi Chowkidar"/>
<link wikidata="Q65083889" start="32265" end="32283" title="Chowkidar Chor Hai" label="Chowkidar Chor Hai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279320" start="32342" end="32360" title="Telugu Desam Party" label="Telugu Desam Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159" start="32421" end="32435" title="Andhra Pradesh" label="Andhra Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4746875" start="32438" end="32447" title="Amit Shah" label="Amit Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q929596" start="32591" end="32602" title="Rafale deal" label="Rafale deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450662" start="32612" end="32632" title="Government of France" label="Government of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q56716520" start="32651" end="32683" title="Rafale deal controversy" label="controversy surrounding the deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q61732241" start="32769" end="32783" title="2019 Pulwama attack" label="Pulwama attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q61881326" start="32804" end="32821" title="2019 Balakot airstrike" label="Balakot airstrike"/>
<link wikidata="Q17495714" start="32932" end="32954" title="Foreign policy of the Narendra Modi government" label="good foreign relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630705" start="33039" end="33047" title="Varanasi (Lok Sabha constituency)" label="Varanasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546941" start="33126" end="33141" title="Samajwadi Party" label="Samajwadi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q803681" start="33184" end="33187" title="Bahujan Samaj Party" label="BSP"/>
<link wikidata="Q129815" start="33269" end="33297" title="National Democratic Alliance" label="National Democratic Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q65042773" start="33531" end="33552" title="2024 Indian general election" label="2024 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4746875" start="33608" end="33617" title="Amit Shah" label="Amit Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q16193764" start="33632" end="33643" title="J. P. Nadda" label="J. P. Nadda"/>
<link wikidata="Q106816679" start="33904" end="33913" title="2023 Karnataka Legislative Assembly election" label="Karnataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q107016831" start="33918" end="33927" title="2023 Telangana Legislative Assembly election" label="Telangana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630705" start="33987" end="33995" title="Varanasi (Lok Sabha constituency)" label="Varanasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16734869" start="34084" end="34092" title="Ajay Rai" label="Ajay Rai"/>
<link wikidata="Q10225" start="34100" end="34124" title="Indian National Congress" label="Indian National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q129815" start="34298" end="34326" title="National Democratic Alliance" label="National Democratic Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q10230" start="34578" end="34600" title="Bharatiya Janata Party" label="Bharatiya Janata Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q129815" start="34605" end="34633" title="National Democratic Alliance" label="National Democratic Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3587169" start="34663" end="34686" title="2014 Indian general election" label="2014 Lok Sabha election"/>
<link wikidata="Q16946970" start="34697" end="34732" title="First oath of office ceremony of Narendra Modi" label="sworn in as Prime Minister of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q56106" start="34795" end="34826" title="Independence Day (India)" label="the country&amp;#x27;s independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="34836" end="34850" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q28164181" start="34929" end="34956" title="2019 Indian general election" label="2019 Lok Sabha election win"/>
<link wikidata="Q10225" start="35067" end="35075" title="Indian National Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q244730" start="35250" end="35261" title="Rajya Sabha" label="Rajya Sabha"/>
<link wikidata="Q6303107" start="35512" end="35521" title="Judiciary of India" label="judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641081" start="35558" end="35577" title="Planning Commission (India)" label="Planning Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q18704255" start="35601" end="35644" title="NITI Aayog" label="National Institution for Transforming India"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333520" start="35927" end="35963" title="Economic liberalisation in India" label="economic liberalisation of the 1990s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426814" start="36148" end="36167" title="Intelligence Bureau (India)" label="Intelligence Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q188494" start="36365" end="36375" title="witch hunt" label="witch hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q49330" start="36421" end="36445" title="Medecins Sans Frontieres" label="Medecins Sans Frontieres"/>
<link wikidata="Q508775" start="36488" end="36499" title="Sierra Club" label="Sierra Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q790055" start="36504" end="36509" title="Avaaz" label="Avaaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q18124504" start="36963" end="36976" title="Digital India" label="Digital India"/>
<link wikidata="Q242069" start="37206" end="37222" title="digital literacy" label="digital literacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q24908602" start="37412" end="37426" title="Ujjwala scheme" label="Ujjwala scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q351609" start="37443" end="37466" title="liquefied petroleum gas" label="liquefied petroleum gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q28171818" start="37819" end="37843" title="One Nation, One Election" label="One Nation, One Election"/>
<link wikidata="Q118146729" start="38123" end="38138" title="2023 Manipur violence" label="violent clashes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193" start="38142" end="38149" title="Manipur" label="Manipur"/>
<link wikidata="Q19361957" start="38544" end="38580" title="Ghar Wapsi" label="Hindu religious conversion programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595597" start="38640" end="38650" title="Love Jihad" label="Love Jihad"/>
<link wikidata="Q486296" start="38661" end="38673" title="Islamophobic" label="Islamophobic"/>
<link wikidata="Q159535" start="38674" end="38691" title="conspiracy theory" label="conspiracy theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q312553" start="38719" end="38733" title="Nathuram Godse" label="Nathuram Godse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001" start="38751" end="38765" title="Mahatma Gandhi" label="Mahatma Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418473" start="38809" end="38824" title="Hindu Mahasabha" label="Hindu Mahasabha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296075" start="38944" end="38971" title="Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh" label="Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh"/>
<link wikidata="Q17612780" start="39193" end="39219" title="Yellapragada Sudershan Rao" label="Yellapragada Sudershan Rao"/>
<link wikidata="Q13422553" start="39300" end="39337" title="Indian Council of Historical Research" label="Indian Council of Historical Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q27889087" start="39761" end="39775" title="Nandini Sundar" label="Nandini Sundar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047" start="39998" end="40014" title="Jawaharlal Nehru" label="Jawaharlal Nehru"/>
<link wikidata="Q61066827" start="40172" end="40187" title="Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2019" label="citizenship law"/>
<link wikidata="Q78455589" start="40570" end="40578" title="Citizenship Amendment Act protests" label="protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q84055514" start="40603" end="40620" title="COVID-19 pandemic in India" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q86347874" start="40685" end="40701" title="2020 Delhi riots" label="2020 Delhi riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q186040" start="40862" end="40869" title="Ayodhya" label="Ayodhya"/>
<link wikidata="Q74332303" start="40880" end="40901" title="2019 Supreme Court verdict on Ayodhya dispute" label="Supreme Court in 2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522690" start="40910" end="40935" title="Ayodhya dispute" label="contested land in Ayodhya"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062005" start="41046" end="41062" title="Sunni Waqf Board" label="Sunni Waqf Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939912" start="41146" end="41161" title="Ram Janmabhoomi" label="Ram Janmabhoomi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5651372" start="41166" end="41179" title="Hanuman Garhi" label="Hanuman Garhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q29467997" start="41292" end="41304" title="Triple talaq in India" label="Triple Talaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q15543855" start="41398" end="41409" title="Article 370" label="Article 370"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180" start="41462" end="41479" title="Jammu and Kashmir (state)" label="Jammu and Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q66240948" start="41490" end="41513" title="The Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Act, 2019" label="abrogated its statehood"/>
<link wikidata="Q467745" start="41540" end="41557" title="union territory" label="union territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q66278313" start="41558" end="41575" title="Jammu and Kashmir (union territory)" label="Jammu and Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q200667" start="41581" end="41587" title="Ladakh" label="Ladakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q83178980" start="41617" end="41627" title="2019–2021 Jammu and Kashmir lockdown" label="a lockdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q65042773" start="42116" end="42144" title="2024 Indian general election" label="2024 Indian general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145265" start="42163" end="42170" title="Indian Muslims" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q162719" start="42780" end="42790" title="neoliberal" label="neoliberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q490513" start="42832" end="42857" title="foreign direct investment" label="foreign direct investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595127" start="43322" end="43345" title="Bharatiya Mazdoor Sangh" label="Bharatiya Mazdoor Sangh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918074" start="43391" end="43404" title="Sangh Parivar" label="Sangh Parivar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7978024" start="43939" end="43949" title="Wealth Tax Act, 1957" label="wealth tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q18201621" start="44612" end="44625" title="Make in India" label="Make in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q27679782" start="45296" end="45318" title="Goods and Services Tax (India)" label="Goods and Services Tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q50851" start="45507" end="45518" title="black money" label="black money"/>
<link wikidata="Q27794967" start="45555" end="45591" title="2016 Indian banknote demonetisation" label="demonetised ₹500 and ₹1000 banknotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q796994" start="45781" end="45791" title="BSE SENSEX" label="BSE SENSEX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853402" start="45796" end="45804" title="NIFTY 50" label="NIFTY 50"/>
<link wikidata="Q41914" start="46320" end="46334" title="Manmohan Singh" label="Manmohan Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q27679782" start="46742" end="46764" title="Goods and Services Tax (India)" label="Goods and Services Tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q191891" start="46810" end="46824" title="financial year" label="financial year"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="46891" end="46894" title="GDP" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978212" start="47676" end="47699" title="National Health Mission" label="National Health Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q55604588" start="48300" end="48342" title="Ayushman Bharat Yojana" label="government-funded health insurance program"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978212" start="48379" end="48402" title="National Health Mission" label="National Health Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q18175130" start="48538" end="48559" title="Swachh Bharat Mission" label="Swachh Bharat Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q17072861" start="48657" end="48672" title="open defecation" label="open defecation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6752326" start="48677" end="48694" title="manual scavenging" label="manual scavenging"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="49297" end="49322" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q84055514" start="49477" end="49494" title="COVID-19 pandemic in India" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q88736064" start="49532" end="49559" title="Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897" label="Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897"/>
<link wikidata="Q16257348" start="49564" end="49593" title="Disaster Management Act, 2005" label="Disaster Management Act, 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q774332" start="50073" end="50089" title="Gas cylinder" label="oxygen cylinders"/>
<link wikidata="Q104865302" start="50231" end="50252" title="COVID-19 vaccination in India" label="vaccination programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q18201621" start="51212" end="51225" title="Make in India" label="Make in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q18124504" start="51242" end="51255" title="Digital India" label="Digital India"/>
<link wikidata="Q19891518" start="51315" end="51349" title="Middle Eastern foreign policy of the Narendra Modi government" label="Islamic nations in the Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q4842819" start="51359" end="51366" title="Bahrain–India relations" label="Bahrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424113" start="51368" end="51372" title="India–Iran relations" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q6024311" start="51374" end="51386" title="India–Saudi Arabia relations" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6024350" start="51395" end="51415" title="United Arab Emirates India relations" label="United Arab Emirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902811" start="51433" end="51439" title="India–Israel relations" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7480405" start="51442" end="51490" title="India-USA relations" label="India&amp;#x27;s relationship with the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511734" start="51707" end="51732" title="Chief Minister of Gujarat" label="Chief Minister of Gujarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719918" start="51771" end="51799" title="presidency of George W. Bush" label="presidency of George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837650" start="51888" end="51901" title="United States Ambassador to India" label="US Ambassador"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523180" start="51911" end="51923" title="Nancy Powell" label="Nancy Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q987363" start="51964" end="51977" title="rapprochement" label="rapprochement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379733" start="52058" end="52073" title="Presidency of Barack Obama" label="President Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="52267" end="52279" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q243630" start="52417" end="52422" title="BRICS" label="BRICS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768" start="52424" end="52429" title="ASEAN" label="ASEAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q19771" start="52434" end="52437" title="G20" label="G20"/>
<link wikidata="Q645659" start="52935" end="52960" title="India–Bangladesh enclaves" label="India–Bangladesh enclaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="53271" end="53285" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="53354" end="53361" title="Myanmar" label="Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193" start="53390" end="53397" title="Manipur" label="Manipur"/>
<link wikidata="Q995884" start="53522" end="53543" title="China–India relations" label="China–India relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q93879586" start="53579" end="53606" title="2020 China–India skirmishes" label="2020 China–India skirmishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747" start="53865" end="53879" title="Vladimir Putin" label="Vladimir Putin"/>
<link wikidata="Q115133886" start="53924" end="53949" title="2023 G20 New Delhi summit" label="2023 G20 New Delhi summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="53968" end="53981" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203182" start="54261" end="54273" title="Global South" label="Global South"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="54296" end="54310" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364290" start="54312" end="54330" title="debt restructuring" label="debt restructuring"/>
<link wikidata="Q13479982" start="54421" end="54437" title="cryptocurrencies" label="cryptocurrencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q201759" start="54580" end="54584" title="slum" label="slum"/>
<link wikidata="Q987" start="54603" end="54612" title="New Delhi" label="New Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q96372747" start="55193" end="55212" title="Atmanirbhar Bharat" label="Aatmanirbhar Bharat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7125743" start="55769" end="55790" title="Pakistan and state-sponsored terrorism" label="exporter of terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q54866668" start="55871" end="55886" title="2016 Indian Line of Control strike" label="surgical strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353183" start="55897" end="55907" title="launch pad" label="launch pad"/>
<link wikidata="Q200130" start="55912" end="55924" title="Azad Kashmir" label="Azad Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q61881326" start="56246" end="56256" title="2019 Balakot airstrike" label="airstrikes"/>
<link wikidata="Q61896704" start="56381" end="56408" title="India–Pakistan border skirmishes (2019)" label="Further military skirmishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303061" start="56608" end="56621" title="friendly fire" label="friendly fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1826411" start="56706" end="56724" title="Sino-Indian border" label="Sino-Indian border"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032254" start="56754" end="56766" title="Pangong Lake" label="Pangong Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q200667" start="56768" end="56774" title="Ladakh" label="Ladakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q17269" start="56784" end="56807" title="Tibet Autonomous Region" label="Tibet Autonomous Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505" start="56836" end="56842" title="Sikkim" label="Sikkim"/>
<link wikidata="Q17269" start="56851" end="56874" title="Tibet Autonomous Region" label="Tibet Autonomous Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1826411" start="56934" end="56956" title="Line of Actual Control" label="Line of Actual Control"/>
<link wikidata="Q93879586" start="56973" end="56983" title="2020 India-China skirmishes" label="skirmishes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57342" end="57348" title="2020–2021 China–India skirmishes#India&amp;#x27;s territorial loss" label="ceding"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747" start="57465" end="57479" title="Vladimir Putin" label="Vladimir Putin"/>
<link wikidata="Q861006" start="57553" end="57573" title="S-400 missile system" label="S-400 missile system"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="57693" end="57725" title="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q111045834" start="57775" end="57790" title="Operation Ganga" label="Operation Ganga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749442" start="58067" end="58119" title="Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change" label="Ministry of Environment, Forests, and Climate Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381344" start="58401" end="58428" title="National Board for Wildlife" label="National Board for Wildlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q213380" start="58490" end="58512" title="Supreme Court of India" label="Supreme Court of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287940" start="58900" end="58908" title="Assamese people" label="Assamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="58943" end="58957" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q22661680" start="59186" end="59200" title="climate action" label="climate action"/>
<link wikidata="Q1962383" start="59239" end="59251" title="clean energy" label="clean energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q21594952" start="59280" end="59308" title="International Solar Alliance" label="International Solar Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q68580968" start="59505" end="59510" title="COP26" label="COP26"/>
<link wikidata="Q121734997" start="59557" end="59574" title="carbon neutrality" label="carbon neutrality"/>
<link wikidata="Q21707860" start="59794" end="59809" title="Paris Agreement" label="Paris Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q30676252" start="59976" end="59998" title="democratic backsliding" label="democratic backsliding"/>
<link wikidata="Q97357347" start="60759" end="60772" title="Freedom of the press in India" label="press freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q48733137" start="60837" end="60871" title="Opinion polling on the Narendra Modi premiership" label="consistently high approval ratings"/>
<link wikidata="Q83364" start="60921" end="60931" title="Vegetarianism" label="vegetarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q15131448" start="60936" end="60947" title="teetotaller" label="teetotaller"/>
<link wikidata="Q629149" start="60986" end="60996" title="workaholic" label="workaholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q127588" start="61026" end="61035" title="introversion" label="introvert"/>
<link wikidata="Q13231451" start="61069" end="61084" title="Google Hangouts" label="Google Hangouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q855915" start="61254" end="61259" title="kurta" label="kurta"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="61389" end="61401" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635722" start="62603" end="62615" title="Pew Research" label="Pew Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q46807" start="63317" end="63335" title="The Times of India" label="The Times of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q28401695" start="63571" end="63586" title="Morning Consult" label="Morning Consult"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568" start="63860" end="63865" title="Hindi" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q645928" start="63922" end="63928" title="biopic" label="biopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q62233423" start="63991" end="64007" title="PM Narendra Modi" label="PM Narendra Modi"/>
<link wikidata="Q21062591" start="64064" end="64075" title="Omung Kumar" label="Omung Kumar"/>
<link wikidata="Q731854" start="64083" end="64095" title="Vivek Oberoi" label="Vivek Oberoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q723685" start="64274" end="64289" title="video streaming" label="video streaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q25021952" start="64299" end="64307" title="Eros Now" label="Eros Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q15605756" start="64313" end="64326" title="Ashish Sharma" label="Ashish Sharma"/>
<link wikidata="Q16057725" start="64345" end="64362" title="7 RCR (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;7 RCR&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030145" start="64370" end="64389" title="7, Race Course Road" label="7, Race Course Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q622370" start="64412" end="64421" title="docudrama" label="docudrama"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="64914" end="64917" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7286172" start="65145" end="65156" title="Rajit Kapur" label="Rajit Kapur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3633308" start="65193" end="65207" title="Vikram Gokhale" label="Vikram Gokhale"/>
<link wikidata="Q26929436" start="65289" end="65304" title="2016 Uri attack" label="2016 Uri attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q54866668" start="65313" end="65347" title="2016 Indian Line of Control strike" label="subsequent Indian surgical strikes"/>
<link wikidata="Q27794967" start="65444" end="65479" title="2016 Indian banknote demonetisation" label="2016 Indian banknote demonetisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q96374744" start="65536" end="65551" title="Chand Bujh Gaya" label="Chand Bujh Gaya"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="65639" end="65649" title="Man vs. Wild#Special India episodes" label="an episode"/>
<link wikidata="Q48723742" start="65653" end="65670" title="Discovery Channel India" label="Discovery Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q216867" start="65689" end="65701" title="Man vs. Wild" label="Man vs. Wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q485365" start="65722" end="65733" title="Bear Grylls" label="Bear Grylls"/>
<link wikidata="Q949297" start="65962" end="65987" title="Jim Corbett National Park" label="Jim Corbett National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499" start="65989" end="66000" title="Uttarakhand" label="Uttarakhand"/>
<link wikidata="Q12445223" start="66071" end="66083" title="Mann Ki Baat" label="Mann Ki Baat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321122" start="66120" end="66135" title="All India Radio" label="All India Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q85792228" start="66177" end="66196" title="Pariksha Pe Charcha" label="Pariksha Pe Charcha"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="66401" end="66414" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023924" start="66497" end="66507" title="CNN-News18" label="CNN-News18"/>
<link wikidata="Q5013123" start="66571" end="66589" title="CNN–News18 Indian of the Year" label="Indian of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q6633151" start="66630" end="66652" title="List of covers of Time magazine (2010s)" label="cover of Time Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q604370" start="66731" end="66771" title="Time 100" label="100 Most Influential People in the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="66779" end="66794" title="Forbes Magazine" label="Forbes Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027574" start="66871" end="66908" title="Forbes list of the World&amp;#x27;s Most Powerful People" label="9th Most Powerful Person in the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q4639873" start="66962" end="67003" title="50 Most Influential (Bloomberg Markets ranking)" label="13th Most Influential Person in the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q721648" start="67013" end="67030" title="Bloomberg Markets" label="Bloomberg Markets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047" start="67149" end="67165" title="Jawaharlal Nehru" label="Jawaharlal Nehru"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149" start="67170" end="67183" title="Indira Gandhi" label="Indira Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q372989" start="67294" end="67310" title="Fortune (magazine)" label="Fortune Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572899" start="67404" end="67436" title="Gallup International Association" label="Gallup International Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q186309" start="67553" end="67568" title="Madame Tussauds" label="Madame Tussauds"/>
<link wikidata="Q667018" start="67569" end="67579" title="wax museum" label="wax museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="67583" end="67589" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q28135974" start="67716" end="67747" title="List of most-followed Twitter accounts" label="second-most-followed politician"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="67751" end="67758" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="67763" end="67771" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q27663139" start="67845" end="67871" title="List of most-followed Instagram accounts" label="most-followed world leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q209330" start="67875" end="67884" title="Instagram" label="Instagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061450" start="67984" end="68006" title="Champions of the Earth" label="Champions of the Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q21594952" start="68080" end="68108" title="International Solar Alliance" label="International Solar Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q24096" start="68213" end="68230" title="Seoul Peace Prize" label="Seoul Peace Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q65042025" start="68247" end="68277" title="Second oath of office ceremony of Narendra Modi" label="second oath of office ceremony"/>
<link wikidata="Q166729" start="68359" end="68389" title="Abu Dhabi National Oil Company" label="Abu Dhabi National Oil Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519" start="68410" end="68441" title="Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates" label="Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q98960237" start="68497" end="68507" title="Howdy Modi" label="Howdy Modi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058864" start="68557" end="68568" title="NRG Stadium" label="NRG Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="68572" end="68586" title="Houston, Texas" label="Houston, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="68687" end="68699" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q18678399" start="68748" end="68789" title="List of diplomatic visits to the United States" label="foreign leader visiting the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="68805" end="68809" title="Pope" label="Pope"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="68853" end="68868" title="List of Keys to the City in the United States#Texas" label="Key to the City"/>
<link wikidata="Q16751186" start="68889" end="68905" title="Sylvester Turner" label="Sylvester Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q655286" start="68911" end="68946" title="Bill &amp;amp; Melinda Gates Foundation" label="Bill &amp;amp; Melinda Gates Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q65062758" start="68964" end="68987" title="Goalkeepers (Gates Foundation)" label="Global Goalkeeper Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q18175130" start="69049" end="69070" title="Swachh Bharat Mission" label="Swachh Bharat Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q184253" start="69239" end="69253" title="Ig Nobel Prize" label="Ig Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q84055514" start="69295" end="69318" title="COVID-19 pandemic in India" label="COVID-19 viral pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q724443" start="69509" end="69524" title="Legion of Merit" label="Legion of Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7480405" start="69539" end="69568" title="India–United States relations" label="India–United States relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5616982" start="69591" end="69618" title="Gujarat Cricket Association" label="Gujarat Cricket Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070" start="69661" end="69670" title="Ahmedabad" label="Ahmedabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q6614573" start="69671" end="69711" title="List of cricket grounds by capacity" label="the largest cricket stadium in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q3531421" start="69712" end="69733" title="Narendra Modi Stadium" label="Narendra Modi Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126563" start="69797" end="69816" title="Order of St. Andrew" label="Order of St. Andrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q2612174" start="70023" end="70064" title="Grand Commander of the Order of the Niger" label="Grand Commander of the Order of the Niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="70218" end="70236" title="Queen Elizabeth II" label="Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510872" start="70256" end="70267" title="Bola Tinubu" label="Bola Tinubu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3787" start="70491" end="70496" title="Abuja" label="Abuja"/>
<link wikidata="Q18354468" start="70509" end="70520" title="Nyesom Wike" label="Nyesom Wike"/>
<link wikidata="Q864037" start="70630" end="70656" title="Order of Mubarak the Great" label="Order of Mubarak the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="70688" end="70694" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982419" start="70900" end="70915" title="M. S. Golwalkar" label="M. S. Golwalkar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1954757" start="71073" end="71091" title="The Economic Times" label="The Economic Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q49621806" start="71315" end="71328" title="Exam Warriors" label="Exam Warriors"/>
<link wikidata="Q882985" start="71503" end="71508" title="Garba (dance)" label="garba"/>
<link wikidata="Q61896827" start="71543" end="71560" title="Dhvani Bhanushali" label="Dhvani Bhanushali"/>
<link wikidata="Q28675855" start="71577" end="71591" title="Tanishk Bagchi" label="Tanishk Bagchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q19665341" start="71624" end="71635" title="Divya Kumar (singer)" label="Divya Kumar"/>
<link wikidata="Q16732422" start="71652" end="71661" title="Meet Bros" label="Meet Bros"/>
<link wikidata="Q10269" start="71713" end="71721" title="Navratri" label="Navratri"/>
<link wikidata="Q124504427" start="71737" end="71757" title="Abundance in Millets" label="Abundance in Millets"/>
<link wikidata="Q5432823" start="71775" end="71779" title="Falu" label="Falu"/>
<link wikidata="Q259438" start="71854" end="71860" title="millet" label="millet"/>
<link wikidata="Q107175615" start="71891" end="71920" title="Grammy Award for Best Global Music Performance" label="Best Global Music Performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q119580062" start="71938" end="71956" title="66th Annual Grammy Awards" label="2024 Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q492746" start="72014" end="72046" title="List of prime ministers of India" label="List of prime ministers of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q48733137" start="72049" end="72097" title="Opinion polling on the Narendra Modi premiership" label="Opinion polling on the Narendra Modi premiership"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="444224" wikidata="Q2375229" url="?curid=444224" title="Piecewise linear function">
<text>In mathematics, a piecewise linear or segmented function is a real-valued function of a real variable, whose graph is composed of straight-line segments.

==Definition==
A piecewise linear function is a function defined on a (possibly unbounded) interval of real numbers, such that there is a collection of intervals on each of which the function is an affine function. (Thus &quot;piecewise linear&quot; is actually defined to mean &quot;piecewise affine&quot;.) If the domain of the function is compact, there needs to be a finite collection of such intervals; if the domain is not compact, it may either be required to be finite or to be locally finite in the reals.

==Examples==

The function defined by
: formula_1
is piecewise linear with four pieces. The graph of this function is shown to the right. Since the graph of an affine(*) function is a line, the graph of a piecewise linear function consists of line segments and rays. The &quot;x&quot; values (in the above example −3, 0, and 3) where the slope changes are typically called breakpoints, changepoints, threshold values or knots. As in many applications, this function is also continuous. The graph of a continuous piecewise linear function on a compact interval is a polygonal chain.

(*) A linear function satisfies by definition formula_2 and therefore in particular formula_3; functions whose graph is a straight line are &quot;affine&quot; rather than &quot;linear&quot;.

There are other examples of piecewise linear functions:
* Absolute value
* Sawtooth function
* Floor function
* Step function, a function composed of constant sub-functions, so also called a piecewise constant function
** Boxcar function,
** Heaviside step function
** Sign function
* Triangular function

==Fitting to a curve==
An approximation to a known curve can be found by sampling the curve and interpolating linearly between the points. An algorithm for computing the most significant points subject to a given error tolerance has been published.

==Fitting to data==

If partitions, and then breakpoints, are already known, linear regression can be performed independently on these partitions. 
However, continuity is not preserved in that case, and also there is no unique reference model underlying the observed data. A stable algorithm with this case has been derived.

If partitions are not known, the residual sum of squares can be used to choose optimal separation points. However efficient computation and joint estimation of all model parameters (including the breakpoints) may be obtained by an iterative procedure currently implemented in the package codice_1 for the R language. 

A variant of decision tree learning called model trees learns piecewise linear functions.

==Generalizations==
The notion of a piecewise linear function makes sense in several different contexts. Piecewise linear functions may be defined on &quot;n&quot;-dimensional Euclidean space, or more generally any vector space or affine space, as well as on piecewise linear manifolds and simplicial complexes (see simplicial map). In each case, the function may be real-valued, or it may take values from a vector space, an affine space, a piecewise linear manifold, or a simplicial complex. (In these contexts, the term “linear” does not refer solely to linear transformations, but to more general affine linear functions.)

In dimensions higher than one, it is common to require the domain of each piece to be a polygon or polytope. This guarantees that the graph of the function will be composed of polygonal or polytopal pieces.

Splines generalize piecewise linear functions to higher-order polynomials, which are in turn contained in the category of piecewise-differentiable functions, PDIFF.

==Specializations==

Important sub-classes of piecewise linear functions include the continuous piecewise linear functions and the convex piecewise linear functions.
In general, for every &quot;n&quot;-dimensional continuous piecewise linear function formula_4, there is a 
: formula_5

such that
: formula_6

If formula_7 is convex and continuous, then there is a 
: formula_8

such that
: formula_9

== Applications ==


In agriculture piecewise regression analysis of measured data is used to detect the range over which growth factors affect the yield and the range over which the crop is not sensitive to changes in these factors.

The image on the left shows that at shallow watertables the yield declines, whereas at deeper (&gt; 7 dm) watertables the yield is unaffected. The graph is made using the method of least squares to find the two segments with the best fit.

The graph on the right reveals that crop yields tolerate a soil salinity up to ECe = 8 dS/m (ECe is the electric conductivity of an extract of a saturated soil sample), while beyond that value the crop production reduces. The graph is made with the method of partial regression to find the longest range of &quot;no effect&quot;, i.e. where the line is horizontal. The two segments need not join at the same point. Only for the second segment method of least squares is used.
== See also ==
* Linear interpolation
* Spline interpolation
* Tropical geometry
* Polygonal chain

== Further reading ==
* Apps, P., Long, N., &amp; Rees, R. (2014). Optimal piecewise linear income taxation. &quot;Journal of Public Economic Theory&quot;, 16(4), 523–545.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2375229" start="18" end="34" title="Piecewise linear function" label="piecewise linear"/>
<link wikidata="Q2375229" start="38" end="56" title="Piecewise linear function" label="segmented function"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189500" start="62" end="82" title="real-valued function" label="real-valued function"/>
<link wikidata="Q182598" start="109" end="114" title="graph of a function" label="graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q166154" start="139" end="151" title="line segment" label="line segment"/>
<link wikidata="Q185148" start="246" end="254" title="Interval (mathematics)" label="interval"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="258" end="269" title="real number" label="real number"/>
<link wikidata="Q382497" start="353" end="368" title="affine transformation" label="affine function"/>
<link wikidata="Q382497" start="449" end="455" title="affine function" label="affine"/>
<link wikidata="Q381892" start="497" end="504" title="compact space" label="compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q643300" start="641" end="655" title="Locally finite collection" label="locally finite"/>
<link wikidata="Q37105" start="855" end="859" title="line (geometry)" label="line"/>
<link wikidata="Q166154" start="914" end="926" title="line segment" label="line segment"/>
<link wikidata="Q37105" start="932" end="936" title="ray (mathematics)" label="rays"/>
<link wikidata="Q633674" start="1236" end="1251" title="polygonal chain" label="polygonal chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q207643" start="1260" end="1275" title="linear map" label="linear function"/>
<link wikidata="Q382497" start="1400" end="1406" title="affine function" label="affine"/>
<link wikidata="Q120812" start="1504" end="1518" title="Absolute value" label="Absolute value"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742397" start="1521" end="1538" title="sawtooth wave" label="Sawtooth function"/>
<link wikidata="Q215193" start="1541" end="1555" title="Floor function" label="Floor function"/>
<link wikidata="Q917657" start="1558" end="1571" title="Step function" label="Step function"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951651" start="1668" end="1683" title="Boxcar function" label="Boxcar function"/>
<link wikidata="Q322339" start="1688" end="1711" title="Heaviside step function" label="Heaviside step function"/>
<link wikidata="Q236813" start="1715" end="1728" title="Sign function" label="Sign function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257483" start="1731" end="1750" title="Triangular function" label="Triangular function"/>
<link wikidata="Q10861030" start="2079" end="2096" title="linear regression" label="linear regression"/>
<link wikidata="Q15096882" start="2361" end="2384" title="residual sum of squares" label="residual sum of squares"/>
<link wikidata="Q206904" start="2633" end="2643" title="R (programming language)" label="R language"/>
<link wikidata="Q16766476" start="2660" end="2682" title="decision tree learning" label="decision tree learning"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2690" end="2700" title="model tree" label="model tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q4440864" start="2888" end="2913" title="dimension" label="&amp;quot;n&amp;quot;-dimensional"/>
<link wikidata="Q17295" start="2914" end="2929" title="Euclidean space" label="Euclidean space"/>
<link wikidata="Q125977" start="2953" end="2965" title="vector space" label="vector space"/>
<link wikidata="Q382698" start="2969" end="2981" title="affine space" label="affine space"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191425" start="2997" end="3022" title="piecewise linear manifold" label="piecewise linear manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q994399" start="3028" end="3046" title="simplicial complex" label="simplicial complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q17057096" start="3054" end="3068" title="simplicial map" label="simplicial map"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="3105" end="3109" title="real number" label="real"/>
<link wikidata="Q207643" start="3295" end="3317" title="linear map" label="linear transformations"/>
<link wikidata="Q382497" start="3339" end="3352" title="affine transformation" label="affine linear"/>
<link wikidata="Q37555" start="3454" end="3461" title="polygon" label="polygon"/>
<link wikidata="Q747980" start="3465" end="3473" title="polytope" label="polytope"/>
<link wikidata="Q735256" start="3574" end="3581" title="Spline (mathematics)" label="Splines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7118822" start="3732" end="3737" title="PDIFF" label="PDIFF"/>
<link wikidata="Q170058" start="3825" end="3835" title="continuous function" label="continuous"/>
<link wikidata="Q319913" start="3871" end="3877" title="Convex function" label="convex"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="4166" end="4177" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q208042" start="4188" end="4207" title="regression analysis" label="regression analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3342272" start="4421" end="4431" title="watertable" label="watertable"/>
<link wikidata="Q74304" start="4558" end="4571" title="least squares" label="least squares"/>
<link wikidata="Q603159" start="4606" end="4614" title="best fit" label="best fit"/>
<link wikidata="Q30693614" start="4665" end="4673" title="salt tolerance of crops" label="tolerate"/>
<link wikidata="Q754836" start="4676" end="4689" title="soil salinity" label="soil salinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266329" start="5110" end="5130" title="Linear interpolation" label="Linear interpolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q545002" start="5133" end="5153" title="Spline interpolation" label="Spline interpolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982669" start="5156" end="5173" title="Tropical geometry" label="Tropical geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q633674" start="5176" end="5191" title="Polygonal chain" label="Polygonal chain"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="444233" wikidata="Q741866" url="?curid=444233" title="Inter-Asterisk eXchange">
<text>Inter-Asterisk eXchange (IAX) is a communications protocol native to the Asterisk private branch exchange (PBX) software, and is supported by a few other softswitches, PBX systems, and softphones. It is used for transporting voice over IP telephony sessions between servers and to terminal devices.

The original IAX protocol is deprecated and has been superseded by a second version, commonly called IAX2. The IAX2 protocol was published as an informational (non-standards-track) RFC 5456 by discretion of the RFC Editor in February 2010.

==Basic properties==
IAX is a binary-encoded voice over Internet protocol (VoIP) that is used for streaming media, but is primarily designed for IP voice calls.

IAX uses a single User Datagram Protocol (UDP) data stream and port number, by default 4569, between endpoints for both session signaling and media payloads. This feature provides benefits for traversing network address translators at network boundaries, as it simplifies firewall configuration. Other VoIP protocols typically use independent channels for signaling and media, such as the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP), H.323, and the Media Gateway Control Protocol (MGCP), which carry media with the Real-time Transport Protocol (RTP).

IAX supports trunking, multiplexing channels over a single link. When trunking, data from multiple sessions are merged into a single stream of packets between two endpoints, reducing the IP overhead. This is advantageous in VoIP transmissions, in which IP headers use a large fraction of bandwidth.

IAX2 supports native encryption of both control and media streams using AES-128.

==Origin==
Both versions of the IAX protocol were created by Mark Spencer and much of the development was carried out in the Asterisk open-source community.

==Goals==
The primary goals for IAX are to minimize bandwidth used in media transmissions, and to provide native network address translation (NAT) transparency. It was intended to be easy to use behind firewalls.

==Drawbacks==
* Awkward extensibility: Due to the lack of a generic extension mechanism, new features have to be added in the protocol specification, which makes the protocol less flexible than H.323, SIP, and MGCP.
* Vulnerability: Older implementations of IAX2 were vulnerable to resource exhaustion DoS attack methods that are available to the public. While no solutions existed for these issues, the best practices included limiting UDP port access to specific trusted IP addresses. Internet-facing IAX2 ports are considered vulnerable and should be monitored closely. The fuzzer used to detect these application vulnerabilities was posted on milw0rm. and is included in the &quot;VoIPer&quot; development tree. These issues were briefly mentioned in the IAX RFC 5456 on page 94. This flaw does not exist in up-to-date installations.

==References==
==External links==
* IAX: Inter-Asterisk eXchange Version 2
* IANA Registration for Enumservice &#x27;iax&#x27;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q741866" start="0" end="23" title="Inter-Asterisk eXchange" label="Inter-Asterisk eXchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q741866" start="25" end="28" title="Inter-Asterisk eXchange" label="IAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q132364" start="35" end="58" title="communications protocol" label="communications protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q622754" start="73" end="81" title="Asterisk (PBX)" label="Asterisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q204896" start="82" end="105" title="private branch exchange" label="private branch exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q533360" start="154" end="164" title="softswitch" label="softswitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q635540" start="185" end="194" title="softphone" label="softphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q81945" start="225" end="238" title="voice over IP" label="voice over IP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274117" start="258" end="273" title="inter-server" label="between servers"/>
<link wikidata="Q280943" start="329" end="339" title="deprecated" label="deprecated"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="445" end="458" title="Request for Comments#Status &amp;quot;informational&amp;quot;" label="informational"/>
<link wikidata="Q81945" start="586" end="614" title="voice over Internet protocol" label="voice over Internet protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q11163" start="721" end="743" title="User Datagram Protocol" label="User Datagram Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q858321" start="766" end="777" title="port number" label="port number"/>
<link wikidata="Q174984" start="831" end="840" title="signal (information theory)" label="signaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q11182" start="907" end="933" title="network address translator" label="network address translator"/>
<link wikidata="Q80998" start="975" end="983" title="firewall (networking)" label="firewall"/>
<link wikidata="Q191018" start="1092" end="1119" title="Session Initiation Protocol" label="Session Initiation Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128649" start="1127" end="1132" title="H.323" label="H.323"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483431" start="1142" end="1172" title="Media Gateway Control Protocol" label="Media Gateway Control Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q321213" start="1208" end="1236" title="Real-time Transport Protocol" label="Real-time Transport Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020782" start="1258" end="1266" title="trunking" label="trunking"/>
<link wikidata="Q222903" start="1268" end="1280" title="multiplexing" label="multiplexing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020782" start="1315" end="1323" title="trunking" label="trunking"/>
<link wikidata="Q214111" start="1388" end="1394" title="packet (information technology)" label="packet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576430" start="1533" end="1542" title="Bandwidth (computing)" label="bandwidth"/>
<link wikidata="Q190746" start="1617" end="1624" title="AES-128" label="AES-128"/>
<link wikidata="Q93144" start="1688" end="1700" title="Mark Spencer (computer engineer)" label="Mark Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11182" start="1898" end="1925" title="network address translation" label="network address translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q80998" start="1987" end="1996" title="Firewall (networking)" label="firewalls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128649" start="2193" end="2198" title="H.323" label="H.323"/>
<link wikidata="Q191018" start="2200" end="2203" title="Session Initiation Protocol" label="SIP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483431" start="2209" end="2213" title="Media Gateway Control Protocol" label="MGCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189053" start="2576" end="2582" title="fuzzer" label="fuzzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6861631" start="2646" end="2653" title="milw0rm" label="milw0rm"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="444239" wikidata="Q4609747" url="?curid=444239" title="2007 in India">
<text>Events in the year 2007 in the Republic of India.

==Incumbents==
* President of India: A. P. J. Abdul Kalam to 25 July Pratibha Patil
* Vice President of India –
** Bhairon Singh Shekhawat(till 21 July) 
** Mohammad Hamid Ansari(from 11 August) 
* Prime Minister of India: Dr. Manmohan Singh 
* Chief Justice of India – Yogesh Kumar Sabharwal until 13 January, K. G. Balakrishnan

===Governors===
* Andhra Pradesh – Rameshwar Thakur (until 22 August), N. D. Tiwari (starting 22 August)
* Arunachal Pradesh – ** until 23 January: Shilendra Kumar Singh 
** 23 January-6 April: M. M. Jacob
** 6 April-14 April: K. Sankaranarayanan
** 15 April-3 September: Shilendra Kumar Singh
** starting 3 September: K. Sankaranarayanan
* Assam – Ajai Singh
* Bihar – Buta Singh
* Chhattisgarh – Krishna Mohan Seth (until 25 January), E. S. L. Narasimhan (starting 25 January)
* Goa – S. C. Jamir
* Gujarat – Nawal Kishore Sharma
* Haryana – Akhlaqur Rahman Kidwai
* Himachal Pradesh – Vishnu Sadashiv Kokje 
* Jammu and Kashmir – Syed Sibtey Razi
* Jharkhand – S. K. Sinha 
* Karnataka – T. N. Chaturvedi (until 20 August), Rameshwar Thakur (starting 20 August)
* Kerala – R. L. Bhatia
* Madhya Pradesh – Balram Jakhar
* Maharashtra – S.M. Krishna
* Manipur – Shivinder Singh Sidhu
* Meghalaya – 
** until 11 April: M.M. Jacob 
** 11 April-28 October: Banwari Lal Joshi
** starting 28 October: Shivinder Singh Sidhu
* Mizoram – M. M. Lakhera 
* Nagaland – Shyamal Datta (until 2 February), K. Sankaranarayanan (starting 2 February)
* Odisha – Rameshwar Thakur
* Punjab – Sunith Francis Rodrigues
* Rajasthan – 
** until 21 June: Pratibha Patil
** 21 June-6 September: Akhlaqur Rahman Kidwai
** starting 6 September: S. K. Singh
* Sikkim – V. Rama Rao (until 25 October), Sudarshan Agarwal (starting 25 October)
* Tamil Nadu – Surjit Singh Barnala
* Tripura – Dinesh Nandan Sahay
* Uttar Pradesh – T. V. Rajeswar
* Uttarakhand – Sudarshan Agarwal (until 28 October), Banwari Lal Joshi (starting 28 October)
* West Bengal – Gopalkrishna Gandhi

==Events==

* National income - 48,986,621 million
* January–November – Nandigram violence – Clashes between opposition parties, the governing Communist Party of India (Marxist) and police in Nandigram, West Bengal. On 14 March, 14 villagers were killed in police firing.
* 10 January – India launches four satellites at a time with their PSLV -C7 rocket, including the SRE-1 test article, which will return to Earth in a test for a future Indian human spaceflight program.
* 17 January – Protests occur in India and the United Kingdom against the British series of &quot;Celebrity Big Brother&quot; after Jade Goody, Danielle Lloyd and Jo O&#x27;Meara were alleged to have been racially abusive towards Bollywood star Shilpa Shetty.
* 22 January – Indian spacecraft SRE 1 successfully completes a twelve-day orbital test flight, making India one of the few nations to return a craft from orbit.
* 24 January – India and Russia agree to jointly develop fifth-generation stealth fighter jets.
* 18 February – 2007 Samjhauta Express bombings: Hindutva militants from the Abhinav Bharat organization set off a bomb on the Samjhauta Express, a twice-weekly train service connecting Delhi, India, and Lahore, Pakistan. Bombs were set off in two carriages, both filled with passengers, just after the train passed Diwana station near the Indian city of Panipat, north of New Delhi. 68 people were killed in the ensuing fire and dozens more were injured.
* 20 February – A river boat carrying children on a school trip on the Periyar River in southern India capsizes, killing at least 18 students and four teachers.
* 4 March – Sunil Kumar Mahato, an Indian member of parliament from the Jharkhand Mukti Morcha, is killed by suspected Maoist rebels while he was attending a local football match in Jharkhand organised to mark the Hindu festival of Holi.
* 15 March – Naxalite rebels attack a police outpost in the Bijapur district of Chhattisgarh, India, killing at least 49 officers and looting their weapons.
* 16 April – At least 11 people die in southern India as a passenger train runs into a minibus carrying local officials near the village of Thirumatpur in Tamil Nadu.
* 18 May – 18 May 2007 Hyderabad Bombing: 9 people are killed in a bomb blast at the Mecca Masjid mosque in the Indian city of Hyderabad, India.
* 19 July – Pratibha Patil is elected as the first female President of India.
* 25 August – Forty-four people are dead after two bombs explode in Hyderabad.
* August – India and the United States release the text of 123 agreement. This has been very controversial in the Indian political environment with both Left and NDA opposing the UPA over the issue.
* 24 September – India won the ICC t20 world cup 2007 by beating their rivals Pakistan in the final
* 11 November – Miss India-Earth Pooja Chitgopekar won in Miss Earth 2007 beauty pageant as Miss Earth-Air (1st-runner up) held in Manila, Philippines.
* 21 November – Calcutta – Protests over Bangladeshi feminist writer Taslima Nasreen turn into deadly riots; troops are deployed.
* 22 December – Narendra Modi led government in Gujarat completes its term.
* 29 December - Sunil Joshi, a Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh functionary shot dead in Madhya Pradesh allegedly by proponents of Saffron terror.

==Deaths==

* 27 January – Kamleshwar, writer, screenwriter, critic and essayist (b. 1932).
* 28 January – O. P. Nayyar, film music director and composer (b. 1926).
* 2 February – Vijay Arora, actor (b. 1946).
* 4 March – Sunil Kumar Mahato, politician, assassinated (b. 1966).
* 1 April – Laurie Baker, English-born architect (b. 1917)
* 5 April – Leela Majumdar, writer (b. 1908).
* 5 April – Poornachandra Tejaswi, writer and novelist (b. 1938).
* 13 April – Dhulipala Seetharama Sastry, actor (b. 1921).
* 27 May – Ibrahim Saeed, journalist, editor and scholar (b. 1945).
* 13 June – Ramchandra Gandhi, philosopher, grandson of Mahatma Gandhi (b. 1937).
* 2 July – Dilip Sardesai, cricketer (b. 1940).
* 8 July – Chandra Shekhar, politician, 11th Prime Minister of India (b. 1927).
* 21 August – Qurratulain Hyder, novelist and short story writer, academic and journalist (b. 1926).
* 10 October – S. R. Bommai, politician and Chief Minister of Karnataka (b. 1924).
* 11 October – Sri Chinmoy, spiritual teacher and philosopher (b. 1931).
* 27 October – Satyen Kappu, actor (b. 1931).
* 21 December – Teji Bachchan, wife of poet Harivansh Rai Bachchan and mother of actor, Amitabh Bachchan.
* 25 December – G. P. Sippy, film producer and director (b. 1914).

== See also ==

* Bollywood films of 2007

==References==
==External links==
* CII India Trade Fair
*Trade Fair of India</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4609747" start="19" end="48" title="2007 in India" label="2007 in the Republic of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q313383" start="68" end="86" title="President of India" label="President of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q9513" start="88" end="108" title="A. P. J. Abdul Kalam" label="A. P. J. Abdul Kalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q47854" start="120" end="134" title="Pratibha Patil" label="Pratibha Patil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641162" start="137" end="160" title="Vice President of India" label="Vice President of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q469919" start="166" end="189" title="Bhairon Singh Shekhawat" label="Bhairon Singh Shekhawat"/>
<link wikidata="Q370773" start="208" end="229" title="Mohammad Hamid Ansari" label="Mohammad Hamid Ansari"/>
<link wikidata="Q192711" start="249" end="272" title="Prime Minister of India" label="Prime Minister of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q41914" start="274" end="292" title="Dr. Manmohan Singh" label="Dr. Manmohan Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243690" start="296" end="318" title="Chief Justice of India" label="Chief Justice of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054380" start="321" end="343" title="Yogesh Kumar Sabharwal" label="Yogesh Kumar Sabharwal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595282" start="362" end="380" title="K. G. Balakrishnan" label="K. G. Balakrishnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282296" start="400" end="414" title="List of governors of Andhra Pradesh" label="Andhra Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7289466" start="417" end="433" title="Rameshwar Thakur" label="Rameshwar Thakur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520007" start="453" end="465" title="N. D. Tiwari" label="N. D. Tiwari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103705" start="489" end="506" title="List of governors of Arunachal Pradesh" label="Arunachal Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276467" start="530" end="551" title="Shilendra Kumar Singh" label="Shilendra Kumar Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625143" start="576" end="587" title="M. M. Jacob" label="M. M. Jacob"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898192" start="609" end="628" title="K. Sankaranarayanan" label="K. Sankaranarayanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276467" start="654" end="675" title="Shilendra Kumar Singh" label="Shilendra Kumar Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898192" start="701" end="720" title="K. Sankaranarayanan" label="K. Sankaranarayanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642489" start="723" end="728" title="List of governors of Assam" label="Assam"/>
<link wikidata="Q4699512" start="731" end="741" title="Ajai Singh" label="Ajai Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q154099" start="744" end="749" title="List of governors of Bihar" label="Bihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7423687" start="752" end="762" title="Buta Singh" label="Buta Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q391034" start="765" end="777" title="List of governors of Chhattisgarh" label="Chhattisgarh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6437456" start="780" end="798" title="Krishna Mohan Seth" label="Krishna Mohan Seth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1895619" start="819" end="838" title="E. S. L. Narasimhan" label="E. S. L. Narasimhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801838" start="863" end="866" title="List of governors of Goa" label="Goa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532549" start="869" end="880" title="S. C. Jamir" label="S. C. Jamir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635856" start="883" end="890" title="List of governors of Gujarat" label="Gujarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723451" start="893" end="913" title="Nawal Kishore Sharma" label="Nawal Kishore Sharma"/>
<link wikidata="Q390967" start="916" end="923" title="List of governors of Haryana" label="Haryana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3633158" start="926" end="948" title="Akhlaqur Rahman Kidwai" label="Akhlaqur Rahman Kidwai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079195" start="951" end="967" title="List of governors of Himachal Pradesh" label="Himachal Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7935979" start="970" end="991" title="Vishnu Sadashiv Kokje" label="Vishnu Sadashiv Kokje"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641511" start="995" end="1012" title="List of governors of Jammu and Kashmir" label="Jammu and Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q3633497" start="1015" end="1031" title="Syed Sibtey Razi" label="Syed Sibtey Razi"/>
<link wikidata="Q337023" start="1034" end="1043" title="List of governors of Jharkhand" label="Jharkhand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7586449" start="1046" end="1057" title="Srinivas Kumar Sinha" label="S. K. Sinha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276082" start="1061" end="1070" title="List of governors of Karnataka" label="Karnataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3633081" start="1073" end="1089" title="T. N. Chaturvedi" label="T. N. Chaturvedi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7289466" start="1109" end="1125" title="Rameshwar Thakur" label="Rameshwar Thakur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360332" start="1149" end="1155" title="List of governors of Kerala" label="Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357649" start="1158" end="1170" title="R. L. Bhatia" label="R. L. Bhatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q32737" start="1173" end="1187" title="List of governors of Madhya Pradesh" label="Madhya Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497331" start="1190" end="1203" title="Balram Jakhar" label="Balram Jakhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583996" start="1206" end="1217" title="List of governors of Maharashtra" label="Maharashtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q58292" start="1220" end="1232" title="S.M. Krishna" label="S.M. Krishna"/>
<link wikidata="Q74593" start="1235" end="1242" title="List of governors of Manipur" label="Manipur"/>
<link wikidata="Q7499406" start="1245" end="1266" title="Shivinder Singh Sidhu" label="Shivinder Singh Sidhu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1840537" start="1269" end="1278" title="List of governors of Meghalaya" label="Meghalaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625143" start="1301" end="1311" title="M.M. Jacob" label="M.M. Jacob"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898542" start="1337" end="1354" title="Banwari Lal Joshi" label="Banwari Lal Joshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7499406" start="1379" end="1400" title="Shivinder Singh Sidhu" label="Shivinder Singh Sidhu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3021955" start="1403" end="1410" title="List of governors of Mizoram" label="Mizoram"/>
<link wikidata="Q6726424" start="1413" end="1426" title="M. M. Lakhera" label="M. M. Lakhera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2947771" start="1430" end="1438" title="List of governors of Nagaland" label="Nagaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7505959" start="1441" end="1454" title="Shyamal Datta" label="Shyamal Datta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898192" start="1475" end="1494" title="K. Sankaranarayanan" label="K. Sankaranarayanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q138219" start="1519" end="1525" title="List of governors of Odisha" label="Odisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q7289466" start="1528" end="1544" title="Rameshwar Thakur" label="Rameshwar Thakur"/>
<link wikidata="Q111810" start="1547" end="1553" title="List of governors of Punjab, India" label="Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q304000" start="1556" end="1580" title="Sunith Francis Rodrigues" label="Sunith Francis Rodrigues"/>
<link wikidata="Q799553" start="1583" end="1592" title="List of governors of Rajasthan" label="Rajasthan"/>
<link wikidata="Q47854" start="1614" end="1628" title="Pratibha Patil" label="Pratibha Patil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3633158" start="1653" end="1675" title="Akhlaqur Rahman Kidwai" label="Akhlaqur Rahman Kidwai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276467" start="1701" end="1712" title="Shilendra Kumar Singh" label="S. K. Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q43339" start="1715" end="1721" title="List of governors of Sikkim" label="Sikkim"/>
<link wikidata="Q7906200" start="1724" end="1735" title="V. Rama Rao" label="V. Rama Rao"/>
<link wikidata="Q7633453" start="1756" end="1773" title="Sudarshan Agarwal" label="Sudarshan Agarwal"/>
<link wikidata="Q328586" start="1798" end="1808" title="List of governors of Tamil Nadu" label="Tamil Nadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3534319" start="1811" end="1831" title="Surjit Singh Barnala" label="Surjit Singh Barnala"/>
<link wikidata="Q64777" start="1834" end="1841" title="List of governors of Tripura" label="Tripura"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630251" start="1844" end="1863" title="Dinesh Nandan Sahay" label="Dinesh Nandan Sahay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1840560" start="1866" end="1879" title="List of governors of Uttar Pradesh" label="Uttar Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6061749" start="1882" end="1896" title="T. V. Rajeswar" label="T. V. Rajeswar"/>
<link wikidata="Q43415" start="1899" end="1910" title="List of governors of Uttarakhand" label="Uttarakhand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7633453" start="1913" end="1930" title="Sudarshan Agarwal" label="Sudarshan Agarwal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898542" start="1951" end="1968" title="Banwari Lal Joshi" label="Banwari Lal Joshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q17495646" start="1993" end="2004" title="List of governors of West Bengal" label="West Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3347330" start="2007" end="2026" title="Gopalkrishna Gandhi" label="Gopalkrishna Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6963310" start="2100" end="2118" title="Nandigram violence" label="Nandigram violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q234277" start="2171" end="2205" title="Communist Party of India (Marxist)" label="Communist Party of India (Marxist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595727" start="2220" end="2229" title="Nandigram" label="Nandigram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356" start="2231" end="2242" title="West Bengal" label="West Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q41291" start="2321" end="2327" title="Rocket launch" label="launch"/>
<link wikidata="Q26540" start="2335" end="2345" title="satellites" label="satellites"/>
<link wikidata="Q221654" start="2367" end="2371" title="PSLV" label="PSLV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3057342" start="2398" end="2403" title="Space Capsule Recovery Experiment" label="SRE-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q752783" start="2475" end="2492" title="human spaceflight" label="human spaceflight"/>
<link wikidata="Q5057698" start="2594" end="2627" title="Celebrity Big Brother 5 (UK)" label="&amp;quot;Celebrity Big Brother&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q264740" start="2634" end="2644" title="Jade Goody" label="Jade Goody"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429311" start="2646" end="2660" title="Danielle Lloyd" label="Danielle Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q166568" start="2665" end="2680" title="Jo O&amp;#x27;Meara" label="Jo O&amp;#x27;Meara"/>
<link wikidata="Q93196" start="2732" end="2741" title="Bollywood" label="Bollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q270665" start="2747" end="2760" title="Shilpa Shetty" label="Shilpa Shetty"/>
<link wikidata="Q229058" start="2777" end="2794" title="Indian Space Research Organisation" label="Indian spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q3057342" start="2795" end="2800" title="Space Capsule Recovery Experiment" label="SRE 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q4130" start="2837" end="2842" title="orbit" label="orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q531716" start="2897" end="2922" title="atmospheric reentry" label="return a craft from orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="2949" end="2955" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q560406" start="2981" end="3018" title="Fifth generation jet fighter" label="fifth-generation stealth fighter jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q945668" start="3036" end="3067" title="2007 Samjhauta Express bombings" label="2007 Samjhauta Express bombings"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350717" start="3097" end="3111" title="Abhinav Bharat" label="Abhinav Bharat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719724" start="3147" end="3164" title="Samjhauta Express" label="Samjhauta Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353" start="3206" end="3211" title="Delhi" label="Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11739" start="3224" end="3230" title="Lahore" label="Lahore"/>
<link wikidata="Q139706" start="3375" end="3382" title="Panipat" label="Panipat"/>
<link wikidata="Q987" start="3393" end="3402" title="New Delhi" label="New Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634049" start="3547" end="3560" title="Periyar River" label="Periyar River"/>
<link wikidata="Q10374818" start="3649" end="3667" title="Sunil Kumar Mahato" label="Sunil Kumar Mahato"/>
<link wikidata="Q230003" start="3689" end="3699" title="Lok Sabha" label="parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273397" start="3709" end="3731" title="Jharkhand Mukti Morcha" label="Jharkhand Mukti Morcha"/>
<link wikidata="Q912158" start="3756" end="3769" title="Naxalite" label="Maoist rebels"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="3801" end="3809" title="association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184" start="3819" end="3828" title="Jharkhand" label="Jharkhand"/>
<link wikidata="Q10259" start="3869" end="3873" title="Holi" label="Holi"/>
<link wikidata="Q912158" start="3888" end="3896" title="Naxalite" label="Naxalite"/>
<link wikidata="Q35535" start="3913" end="3919" title="police" label="police"/>
<link wikidata="Q100164" start="3935" end="3951" title="Bijapur district, Chhattisgarh" label="Bijapur district"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168" start="3955" end="3967" title="Chhattisgarh" label="Chhattisgarh"/>
<link wikidata="Q542146" start="4071" end="4085" title="southern India" label="southern India"/>
<link wikidata="Q870" start="4101" end="4106" title="train" label="train"/>
<link wikidata="Q946479" start="4119" end="4126" title="minibus" label="minibus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4172" end="4183" title="Thirumatpur" label="Thirumatpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445" start="4187" end="4197" title="Tamil Nadu" label="Tamil Nadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q11049638" start="4210" end="4239" title="18 May 2007 Hyderabad Bombing" label="18 May 2007 Hyderabad Bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q536288" start="4284" end="4296" title="Mecca Masjid" label="Mecca Masjid"/>
<link wikidata="Q32815" start="4297" end="4303" title="mosque" label="mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361" start="4326" end="4342" title="Hyderabad, India" label="Hyderabad, India"/>
<link wikidata="Q47854" start="4356" end="4370" title="Pratibha Patil" label="Pratibha Patil"/>
<link wikidata="Q313383" start="4402" end="4420" title="President of India" label="President of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q3764785" start="4436" end="4486" title="25 August 2007 Hyderabad bombings" label="Forty-four people are dead after two bombs explode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361" start="4490" end="4499" title="Hyderabad, India" label="Hyderabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="4717" end="4722" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="4778" end="4786" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7228524" start="4833" end="4850" title="Pooja Chitgopekar" label="Pooja Chitgopekar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003418" start="4858" end="4873" title="Miss Earth 2007" label="Miss Earth 2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461" start="4931" end="4950" title="Manila, Philippines" label="Manila, Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="4968" end="4976" title="Calcutta" label="Calcutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058" start="5098" end="5111" title="Narendra Modi" label="Narendra Modi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061" start="5130" end="5137" title="Gujarat" label="Gujarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296075" start="5189" end="5216" title="Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh" label="Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188" start="5242" end="5256" title="Madhya Pradesh" label="Madhya Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7398748" start="5284" end="5298" title="Saffron terror" label="Saffron terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630389" start="5328" end="5338" title="Kamleshwar (writer)" label="Kamleshwar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397628" start="5408" end="5420" title="O. P. Nayyar" label="O. P. Nayyar"/>
<link wikidata="Q725062" start="5481" end="5492" title="Vijay Arora" label="Vijay Arora"/>
<link wikidata="Q10374818" start="5523" end="5541" title="Sunil Kumar Mahato" label="Sunil Kumar Mahato"/>
<link wikidata="Q1380014" start="5591" end="5603" title="Laurie Baker" label="Laurie Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q432714" start="5650" end="5664" title="Leela Majumdar" label="Leela Majumdar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7228864" start="5696" end="5717" title="Poornachandra Tejaswi" label="Poornachandra Tejaswi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5269869" start="5763" end="5790" title="Dhulipala Seetharama Sastry" label="Dhulipala Seetharama Sastry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5984709" start="5820" end="5833" title="Ibrahim Saeed" label="Ibrahim Saeed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1595192" start="5889" end="5906" title="Ramchandra Gandhi" label="Ramchandra Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001" start="5933" end="5947" title="Mahatma Gandhi" label="Mahatma Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027985" start="5970" end="5984" title="Dilip Sardesai" label="Dilip Sardesai"/>
<link wikidata="Q334279" start="6018" end="6033" title="Chandra Shekhar" label="Chandra Shekhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q192711" start="6052" end="6075" title="Prime Minister of India" label="Prime Minister of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q61555" start="6101" end="6118" title="Qurratulain Hyder" label="Qurratulain Hyder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7387781" start="6203" end="6215" title="S. R. Bommai" label="S. R. Bommai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837947" start="6232" end="6259" title="Chief Ministers of Karnataka" label="Chief Minister of Karnataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q319578" start="6286" end="6297" title="Sri Chinmoy" label="Sri Chinmoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q266137" start="6359" end="6371" title="Satyen Kappu" label="Satyen Kappu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723530" start="6406" end="6419" title="Teji Bachchan" label="Teji Bachchan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9575" start="6434" end="6456" title="Harivansh Rai Bachchan" label="Harivansh Rai Bachchan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9570" start="6478" end="6494" title="Amitabh Bachchan" label="Amitabh Bachchan"/>
<link wikidata="Q355899" start="6512" end="6523" title="G. P. Sippy" label="G. P. Sippy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6564336" start="6582" end="6605" title="Bollywood films of 2007" label="Bollywood films of 2007"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="444244" wikidata="Q936933" url="?curid=444244" title="Reda, Poland">
<text>Reda (; ; formerly ) is a town on the Reda River in northern Poland, in the Kashubia region in Pomerania, with some 26,011 inhabitants. It is part of Wejherowo County, Pomeranian Voivodeship.

It is part of the Little Kashubian Tricity urban area, along with Wejherowo (which it borders in the west), and Rumia (which it borders in the south). The urban area is adjacent to the Tricity, which along with other surrounding areas form an agglomeration home to over 1 million residents on the Baltic coast of Gdańsk Bay. Well-developed railways and highways connect Reda to the Tricity.

== Population ==
==History==

Slavic Lechitic settlements were established in present-day districts of Ciechocino and Pieleszewo in the Early Middle Ages. The territory of Gdańsk Pomerania formed part of Poland since the establishment of the state in the 10th century. A wooden church existed at the site since the 12th century. In 1309 the area was annexed by the State of the Teutonic Order. It was first mentioned in documents in 1357. The area was re-incorporated to the Kingdom of Poland in 1454 by King Casimir IV Jagiellon, and after the subsequent Thirteen Years&#x27; War the Teutonic Knights renounced any claims in 1466. Reda and present-day districts Ciechocino and Pieleszewo were royal villages of the Polish Crown, administratively located in the Puck County in the Pomeranian Voivodeship in the province of Royal Prussia in the Greater Poland Province. In 1768 Ernest Konopacki obtained permission from the King of Poland Stanisław August Poniatowski to build a brass products factory.

Reda was lost to Prussia for nearly 150 years through the First Partition of Poland of 1772, and from 1871 to 1920 it was also part of Germany. In the late 19th century the local populace was still predominantly Polish, and Catholic in confession. Following World War I, in November 1918 Poland regained independence, and local Poles began preparations to rejoin Poland. A Polish council was established and a Polish rally took place on December 26, 1918. Germany responded with repressions of Poles, however in January 1920 Reda was successfully restored to Poland.

During the invasion of Poland, which started World War II, the Germans captured Reda on September 9, 1939. It was annexed from Poland by Germany into the latter&#x27;s newly established Danzig-West Prussia province. Reda was liberated by Polish troops on March 12, 1945. After the war, the town was again returned to Poland. In 1967, when Reda was inhabited by 5,400 people, it was granted town rights, and after growth began to accelerate in 1982, its population had more than tripled to above 17,000 residents by 1999. It was administratively part of the Gdańsk Voivodeship from 1975 to 1998.

==Transport==

The Reda, Reda Pieleszewo, Reda Rekowo railway stations are located in Reda.

==Sports==
The local football team is . It competes in the lower leagues.

==See also==
*Reda River

==References==
==External links==

* Reda&#x27;s official web site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q936933" start="0" end="4" title="Reda, Poland" label="Reda"/>
<link wikidata="Q4977535" start="38" end="48" title="Reda (river)" label="Reda River"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="61" end="67" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q147804" start="76" end="84" title="Kashubia" label="Kashubia"/>
<link wikidata="Q104520" start="95" end="104" title="Pomerania" label="Pomerania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138182" start="150" end="166" title="Wejherowo County" label="Wejherowo County"/>
<link wikidata="Q54180" start="168" end="190" title="Pomeranian Voivodeship" label="Pomeranian Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q925971" start="211" end="235" title="Little Kashubian Tricity" label="Little Kashubian Tricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q672949" start="259" end="268" title="Wejherowo" label="Wejherowo"/>
<link wikidata="Q78712" start="305" end="310" title="Rumia" label="Rumia"/>
<link wikidata="Q732001" start="378" end="385" title="Tricity, Poland" label="Tricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="490" end="496" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic"/>
<link wikidata="Q213367" start="506" end="516" title="Gdańsk Bay" label="Gdańsk Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q732001" start="575" end="582" title="Tricity, Poland" label="Tricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q840454" start="615" end="621" title="West Slavs" label="Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446303" start="622" end="630" title="Lechites" label="Lechitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q202763" start="721" end="738" title="Early Middle Ages" label="Early Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060302" start="757" end="773" title="Gdańsk Pomerania" label="Gdańsk Pomerania"/>
<link wikidata="Q156020" start="950" end="977" title="State of the Teutonic Order" label="State of the Teutonic Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q171348" start="1060" end="1077" title="Crown of the Kingdom of Poland" label="Kingdom of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q53459" start="1094" end="1114" title="Casimir IV Jagiellon" label="Casimir IV Jagiellon"/>
<link wikidata="Q315921" start="1141" end="1165" title="Thirteen Years&amp;#x27; War (1454–1466)" label="Thirteen Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048909" start="1366" end="1388" title="Pomeranian Voivodeship (1466–1772)" label="Pomeranian Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q589662" start="1408" end="1421" title="Royal Prussia" label="Royal Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500794" start="1429" end="1452" title="Greater Poland Province, Crown of the Kingdom of Poland" label="Greater Poland Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q54019" start="1523" end="1551" title="Stanisław August Poniatowski" label="Stanisław August Poniatowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="1605" end="1612" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q597506" start="1646" end="1671" title="First Partition of Poland" label="First Partition of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="1723" end="1730" title="German Empire" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026" start="1800" end="1806" title="Polish people" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1812" end="1820" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1846" end="1857" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="2167" end="2185" title="invasion of Poland" label="invasion of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2201" end="2213" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="2293" end="2300" title="Nazi Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q510368" start="2342" end="2361" title="Reichsgau Danzig-West Prussia" label="Danzig-West Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28942" start="2546" end="2557" title="town rights" label="town rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1222000" start="2713" end="2731" title="Gdańsk Voivodeship (1975–1998)" label="Gdańsk Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964593" start="2771" end="2775" title="Reda railway station" label="Reda"/>
<link wikidata="Q666185" start="2777" end="2792" title="Reda Pieleszewo railway station" label="Reda Pieleszewo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2431364" start="2794" end="2805" title="Reda Rekowo railway station" label="Reda Rekowo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="2866" end="2874" title="Association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q4977535" start="2934" end="2944" title="Reda River" label="Reda River"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="444245" wikidata="Q978974" url="?curid=444245" title="Hoffa (film)">
<text>Hoffa is a 1992 American biographical crime drama film directed by Danny DeVito and written by David Mamet, based on the life of Teamsters leader Jimmy Hoffa. Most of the story is told in flashbacks before ending with Hoffa&#x27;s mysterious disappearance. The story makes no claim to be historically accurate, and in fact is largely fictional. Jack Nicholson plays Hoffa, and DeVito plays Robert Ciaro, an amalgamation of several Hoffa associates over the years. The film features John C. Reilly, Robert Prosky, Kevin Anderson, Armand Assante, and J. T. Walsh in supporting roles. The original music score was composed by David Newman. The film was distributed by 20th Century Fox and released on December 25, 1992.

The film received predominantly mixed reviews and grossed just $29 million against its $35 million budget, with critics being polarized over Nicholson&#x27;s performance and criticizing the film&#x27;s story.

==Plot==
On July 30, 1975, Jimmy Hoffa and his longtime friend Bobby Ciaro are impatiently waiting in the parking lot of a roadhouse diner. Moving in vignettes from when he was an International Brotherhood of Teamsters union organizer working the various trucking firms and laundries around Detroit, Hoffa&#x27;s life over the four preceding decades gradually unfolds. In 1935, Hoffa boards a parked truck where he meets driver Bobby Ciaro. Hoffa pitches the benefits of joining the Teamsters and gives Ciaro a business card, on which he has written: &quot;Give this man whatever he needs&quot;. A few days later, Ciaro reports to work to find Hoffa attempting to persuade his fellow drivers to unionize. Hoffa blurts out that he already spoke to Ciaro, getting him fired. He later accosts Hoffa with a knife, but Hoffa&#x27;s longtime bodyguard Billy Flynn forces him to drop it at gunpoint. Ciaro assists Hoffa and Flynn in the arson of a laundry whose owner refuses to cooperate with the Teamsters. Flynn accidentally sets himself on fire and dies of his injuries. Ciaro then becomes Hoffa&#x27;s new bodyguard and assistant.

During a Teamsters strike that quickly turns into a street brawl with non-union workers, Hoffa is taken to see Detroit Mafia&#x27;s top boss, Carl D&#x27;Allesandro, with the Italian-American Ciaro acting as interpreter. A partnership is soon formed between the Teamsters and the Mafia, and Hoffa makes several illegal loans to the mob using union funds. At a Congressional hearing, Hoffa is questioned by Robert F. Kennedy over allegations that the Teamsters are controlled by organized crime. When Hoffa becomes president of the Teamsters in 1957, Kennedy and Hoffa engage in a loud and bitter feud, especially after John F. Kennedy is elected President in 1960 and Bobby becomes Attorney General.

During a hunting trip, D&#x27;Allesandro and Hoffa discuss an embezzlement scheme involving the Teamsters pension fund. Having no paper with them, the plans are sketched on the back of a hunting license. Hoffa is then betrayed by Teamsters official Peter Connelly, who not only testifies at Hoffa&#x27;s trial for labor racketeering but also provides the prosecution with a crucial piece of evidence: the license. Hoffa surrenders to federal officials and receives a long sentence while Connelly&#x27;s uncle, Frank Fitzsimmons, assumes control of the Teamsters. Ciaro is also convicted but on lesser charges, and quickly obtains early release from prison. D&#x27;Allesandro advises him to have the Teamsters endorse Richard M. Nixon for president in 1968 in exchange for Hoffa receiving a presidential pardon.

Hoffa is pardoned by the Nixon administration but learns that one of the conditions of his release is that he cannot have any involvement with the Teamsters for at least ten years. Hoffa becomes furious and meets with D&#x27;Allesandro, asking him to have Fitzsimmons killed, resulting in a failed attempt to assassinate him with a car bomb. D&#x27;Allesandro believes that Hoffa has become &quot;too hot&quot; with his public antics and declines to help him any further. In response, Hoffa has Ciaro deliver a message to D&#x27;Allesandro that unless Fitzsimmons is dealt with, Hoffa will go to the press. D&#x27;Allesandro replies that he will meet with Hoffa at a nearby diner the next day to work out a plan.

Hoffa and Ciaro spend several hours waiting in the diner&#x27;s parking lot, but D&#x27;Allesandro does not come. A union driver has been waiting for hours in the dining room, allegedly for a part for his truck. He and Ciaro start talking, and Ciaro lets him take some coffee to Hoffa, who is waiting in the car. The &quot;driver&quot; pulls out a silenced pistol and kills Hoffa and Ciaro. He is immediately driven off in a car that pulls up; at the same time, men emerge from the truck, drive Hoffa&#x27;s car with both bodies into it, and drive off.

==Cast==
== Production ==
In 1982, George Barrie hired Robin Moore to write a screenplay for a biopic called &quot;The Jimmy Hoffa Story&quot; for GB Pictures International, with Hoffa&#x27;s attorney Frank Ragnaro serving as a script consultant. The screenplay was later retitled &quot;Hoffa&quot; and filming was originally projected to commence in the spring of 1984, but no progress occurred. In 1989 Joe Isgro, Edward R. Pressman, and Chaldecot Chubb purchased the rights to Moore&#x27;s screenplay and hired David Mamet to rewrite it for $1 million. Pressman considered Barry Levinson, Oliver Stone, and John McTiernan to direct the film. Levinson was the frontrunner but chose to decline after Mamet refused to make script changes. Pressman hired Danny DeVito to direct in April 1990. Jack Nicholson was hired to play Hoffa after Kevin Spacey, Al Pacino, and Robert De Niro also auditioned. Both Pacino and De Niro would star in the 2019 Martin Scorsese film &quot;The Irishman&quot;, with the former playing Hoffa. DeVito secured a $50 million budget for the film by forgoing his salary and signing as co-guarantor for the film. Production was originally set to begin in Washington D.C. in January 1992 but was delayed because of Nicholson and DeVito&#x27;s commitments to other films. It would ultimately last between February and June 1992 in Pittsburgh, Detroit, Chicago, and soundstages in Los Angeles. Carnegie Mellon University, Cobo Arena, the Detroit Produce Terminal, the Detroit Public Library, the &quot;Detroit News&quot; staff room, the Ambassador Hotel, and the Spiegel Office Building were used as shooting locations.

The film sparked controversy before its release, when DeVito made a statement that he saw Hoffa as a hero. The film was made without the Hoffa&#x27;s family permission. Hoffa&#x27;s son, James P. Hoffa, despite praising the film for its heroic portrayal of his father, was critical of his portrayal as &quot;an angry bear.&quot; The film&#x27;s portrayal of Hoffa&#x27;s disappearance bears little resemblance to the actual events of July 30, 1975. Rather than traveling to an isolated diner with a bodyguard as shown in the movie, Hoffa&#x27;s last known sighting was at the Machus Red Fox, an upscale restaurant next to a shopping center in the affluent Detroit, Michigan suburb of Bloomfield Hills, where he had arranged a meeting with Tony Provenzano and Tony Giacalone. The location of the murder is unknown, but any violence in the parking lot would have attracted attention from potential witnesses and left evidence that could have been used by police. Hoffa&#x27;s car was also found abandoned at the restaurant after his disappearance.

==Reception==
===Box office===
The film premiered at the Samuel Goldwyn Theater in Beverly Hills on December 11, 1992. It received a wider release on Christmas Day 1992, in 1,066 theaters. It debuted at no. 5 at the US box office. making $6.4 million in its opening weekend. In its second weekend, it dropped at #6 and grossed $4.8 million. It went on to gross $24.2 million in the U.S. and $5 million internationally, for a worldwide total of $29.3 million. Jack Nicholson blamed the film&#x27;s poor performance on Columbia Pictures&#x27;s decision to move his other film &quot;A Few Good Men&quot; to the same release date.

===Critical response===
The film received mixed reviews, with criticism being directed at for historical inaccuracies and its depiction of Hoffa in a heroic, even sympathetic light. Sean Wilentz, writing in the New Republic, accused the film of having been conceived, originated, and outlined by organized crime figures. On Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 52% based on 25 reviews, with an average rating of 5.46/10. The website&#x27;s critical consensus reads, &quot;Jack Nicholson embodies &quot;Hoffa&quot; with malevolent relish, but a dearth of meaningful insight knocks this crime epic off the mark by a nose.&quot; On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 50 out of 100, based on 15 critics, indicating &quot;mixed or average reviews&quot;. Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of &quot;B&quot; on an A+ to F scale.

Roger Ebert gave the film 3.5/4 stars and wrote, &quot;Here is a movie that finds the right look and tone for its material. Not many directors would have been confident enough to simply show us Jimmy Hoffa instead of telling us all about him. This is a movie that makes its points between the lines, in what is not said. It&#x27;s not so much about what happened to Jimmy Hoffa, as about the fact that something eventually would.&quot; Peter Travers of &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; also gave the film 3.5/4 stars and said, &quot;In the more ambitious &quot;Hoffa&quot;, Nicholson plays the Detroit street fighter who rose from the ranks of trucker and labor organizer to build the Teamsters into the nation&#x27;s most powerful union. The boldness of director Danny DeVito&#x27;s violent epic is matched by Nicholson&#x27;s astonishing physical and vocal transformation into Jimmy Hoffa. The changeover might constrict another actor. Not Nicholson.&quot; Vincent Canby of &quot;The New York Times&quot; wrote: &quot;&quot;Hoffa&quot; is an original work of fiction, based on fact, conceived with imagination and a consistent point of view.&quot; Canby notes that the film has &quot;a bitterly skeptical edge that is rare in American movies. It forces viewers to make up their own minds, something that can be immensely disorienting as well as rewarding.&quot; Kenneth Turan of the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; wrote: &quot;It is a laconic, enigmatic piece of work, displaying the grace with spoken language that marked &quot;Glengarry Glen Ross&quot; but troublesome in terms of structure and character development.&quot;

Alex von Tunzelmann of &quot;The Guardian&quot; gave the film a grade of C−, saying: &quot;The film attempts a cautious middle route between celebrating Hoffa as a working-class hero and condemning him as a gangster. But despite a watchable performance from Nicholson, after more than two hours of screentime, Jimmy Hoffa remains an enigma.&quot;

David Thomson states that the film was terribly neglected, since Nicholson portrayed one of his best screen characters, someone who is &quot;snarly, dumb, smart, noble, rascally—all the parts of &#x27;Jack&#x27;&quot;.

===Accolades===
&quot;Hoffa&quot; earned two Oscar nominations for Cinematography and Makeup, losing to &quot;A River Runs Through It&quot; and &quot;Bram Stoker&#x27;s Dracula&quot;. Nicholson&#x27;s performance sharply divided critics, with the actor receiving both a Golden Globe nomination for Best Actor and a Razzie nomination for Worst Actor. DeVito also received a Razzie nomination for Worst Director. The film was also nominated for the Golden Bear at the 43rd Berlin International Film Festival.

The film is recognized by American Film Institute in these lists:
* 2005: AFI&#x27;s 100 Years of Film Scores – Nominated

==See also==
* Robert F. Kennedy in media

==References==
==External links==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q36279" start="25" end="37" title="biographical" label="biographical"/>
<link wikidata="Q959790" start="38" end="49" title="crime drama" label="crime drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q26806" start="67" end="79" title="Danny DeVito" label="Danny DeVito"/>
<link wikidata="Q269927" start="95" end="106" title="David Mamet" label="David Mamet"/>
<link wikidata="Q655029" start="129" end="138" title="Teamsters" label="Teamsters"/>
<link wikidata="Q317638" start="146" end="157" title="Jimmy Hoffa" label="Jimmy Hoffa"/>
<link wikidata="Q473432" start="188" end="198" title="flashback (literary technique)" label="flashbacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q39792" start="345" end="359" title="Jack Nicholson" label="Jack Nicholson"/>
<link wikidata="Q223110" start="482" end="496" title="John C. Reilly" label="John C. Reilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312282" start="498" end="511" title="Robert Prosky" label="Robert Prosky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740075" start="513" end="527" title="Kevin Anderson (actor)" label="Kevin Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q310511" start="529" end="543" title="Armand Assante" label="Armand Assante"/>
<link wikidata="Q502128" start="549" end="560" title="J. T. Walsh" label="J. T. Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q952428" start="623" end="635" title="David Newman (composer)" label="David Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q434841" start="665" end="681" title="20th Century Fox" label="20th Century Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q655029" start="1108" end="1146" title="International Brotherhood of Teamsters" label="International Brotherhood of Teamsters"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="1219" end="1226" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q655029" start="1411" end="1420" title="Teamsters" label="Teamsters"/>
<link wikidata="Q613855" start="2169" end="2189" title="Detroit Partnership" label="Detroit Mafia&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q974693" start="2233" end="2249" title="Italian Americans" label="Italian-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q25310" start="2464" end="2481" title="Robert F. Kennedy" label="Robert F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="2677" end="2692" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="2704" end="2713" title="President of the United States" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q699590" start="2717" end="2721" title="1960 United States presidential election" label="1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q636207" start="2740" end="2756" title="United States Attorney General" label="Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q182103" start="2865" end="2877" title="pension fund" label="pension fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443258" start="3269" end="3286" title="Frank Fitzsimmons" label="Frank Fitzsimmons"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="3476" end="3492" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard M. Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q693742" start="3510" end="3514" title="1968 United States presidential election" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q17197559" start="4602" end="4620" title="hit man" label="&amp;quot;driver&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5536752" start="4874" end="4887" title="George Barrie" label="George Barrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q921925" start="4894" end="4905" title="Robin Moore" label="Robin Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q6210480" start="5244" end="5253" title="Joe Isgro" label="Joe Isgro"/>
<link wikidata="Q357726" start="5255" end="5273" title="Edward R. Pressman" label="Edward R. Pressman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5018980" start="5279" end="5294" title="Caldecot Chubb" label="Chaldecot Chubb"/>
<link wikidata="Q269927" start="5353" end="5364" title="David Mamet" label="David Mamet"/>
<link wikidata="Q269692" start="5415" end="5429" title="Barry Levinson" label="Barry Levinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q179497" start="5431" end="5443" title="Oliver Stone" label="Oliver Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q270639" start="5449" end="5463" title="John McTiernan" label="John McTiernan"/>
<link wikidata="Q26806" start="5593" end="5605" title="Danny DeVito" label="Danny DeVito"/>
<link wikidata="Q39792" start="5631" end="5645" title="Jack Nicholson" label="Jack Nicholson"/>
<link wikidata="Q25144" start="5676" end="5688" title="Kevin Spacey" label="Kevin Spacey"/>
<link wikidata="Q41163" start="5690" end="5699" title="Al Pacino" label="Al Pacino"/>
<link wikidata="Q36949" start="5705" end="5719" title="Robert De Niro" label="Robert De Niro"/>
<link wikidata="Q41148" start="5784" end="5799" title="Martin Scorsese" label="Martin Scorsese"/>
<link wikidata="Q29057443" start="5811" end="5823" title="The Irishman" label="The Irishman"/>
<link wikidata="Q748845" start="5949" end="5961" title="Guarantor" label="co-guarantor"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="6018" end="6033" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="6192" end="6202" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="6204" end="6211" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="6213" end="6220" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="6241" end="6252" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q190080" start="6254" end="6280" title="Carnegie Mellon University" label="Carnegie Mellon University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104711" start="6282" end="6292" title="TCF Center" label="Cobo Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q5265986" start="6328" end="6350" title="Detroit Public Library" label="Detroit Public Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703792" start="6362" end="6374" title="The Detroit News" label="Detroit News"/>
<link wikidata="Q456685" start="6397" end="6413" title="Ambassador Hotel (Los Angeles)" label="Ambassador Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q65504955" start="6423" end="6446" title="Spiegel Office Building" label="Spiegel Office Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q711662" start="6668" end="6682" title="James P. Hoffa" label="James P. Hoffa"/>
<link wikidata="Q317638" start="7057" end="7071" title="Machus Red Fox" label="Machus Red Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="7137" end="7154" title="Detroit, Michigan" label="Detroit, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q885355" start="7165" end="7181" title="Bloomfield Hills, Michigan" label="Bloomfield Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773306" start="7220" end="7235" title="Anthony Provenzano" label="Tony Provenzano"/>
<link wikidata="Q4772582" start="7240" end="7254" title="Anthony Giacalone" label="Tony Giacalone"/>
<link wikidata="Q240970" start="7585" end="7607" title="Samuel Goldwyn Theater" label="Samuel Goldwyn Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q127856" start="7611" end="7624" title="Beverly Hills, California" label="Beverly Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q186941" start="8045" end="8062" title="Columbia Pictures" label="Columbia Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q108946" start="8108" end="8122" title="A Few Good Men" label="A Few Good Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="8480" end="8495" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q150248" start="8802" end="8812" title="Metacritic" label="Metacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2972775" start="8960" end="8971" title="CinemaScore" label="CinemaScore"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="9042" end="9053" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q890207" start="9478" end="9491" title="Peter Travers" label="Peter Travers"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="9501" end="9514" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="10017" end="10035" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="10426" end="10443" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q844068" start="10565" end="10584" title="Glengarry Glen Ross (film)" label="Glengarry Glen Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="10692" end="10704" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="11276" end="11281" title="Academy Award" label="Oscar"/>
<link wikidata="Q131520" start="11298" end="11312" title="Academy Award for Best Cinematography" label="Cinematography"/>
<link wikidata="Q487136" start="11317" end="11323" title="Academy Award for Best Makeup and Hairstyling" label="Makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q581906" start="11341" end="11364" title="A River Runs Through It (film)" label="A River Runs Through It"/>
<link wikidata="Q107325" start="11381" end="11407" title="Bram Stoker&amp;#x27;s Dracula (1992 film)" label="Bram Stoker&amp;#x27;s Dracula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="11501" end="11513" title="Golden Globe Award" label="Golden Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q593098" start="11529" end="11539" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Drama" label="Best Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q40237" start="11546" end="11552" title="Golden Raspberry Award" label="Razzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q602299" start="11568" end="11579" title="Golden Raspberry Award for Worst Actor" label="Worst Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238714" start="11626" end="11640" title="Golden Raspberry Award for Worst Director" label="Worst Director"/>
<link wikidata="Q154590" start="11678" end="11689" title="Golden Bear" label="Golden Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q541600" start="11697" end="11736" title="43rd Berlin International Film Festival" label="43rd Berlin International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q207460" start="11765" end="11788" title="American Film Institute" label="American Film Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454952" start="11813" end="11848" title="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years of Film Scores" label="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years of Film Scores"/>
<link wikidata="Q42377140" start="11877" end="11903" title="Robert F. Kennedy in media" label="Robert F. Kennedy in media"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="444250" wikidata="Q1663788" url="?curid=444250" title="List of numerical analysis topics">
<text>This is a list of [[numerical analysis]] topics.

==General==
*Validated numerics
*Iterative method
*Rate of convergence — the speed at which a convergent sequence approaches its limit
**Order of accuracy — rate at which numerical solution of differential equation converges to exact solution
*Series acceleration — methods to accelerate the speed of convergence of a series
**Aitken&#x27;s delta-squared process — most useful for linearly converging sequences
**Minimum polynomial extrapolation — for vector sequences
**Richardson extrapolation
**Shanks transformation — similar to Aitken&#x27;s delta-squared process, but applied to the partial sums
**Van Wijngaarden transformation — for accelerating the convergence of an alternating series
*Abramowitz and Stegun — book containing formulas and tables of many special functions
**Digital Library of Mathematical Functions — successor of book by Abramowitz and Stegun
*Curse of dimensionality
*Local convergence and global convergence — whether you need a good initial guess to get convergence
*Superconvergence
*Discretization
*Difference quotient
*Complexity:
**Computational complexity of mathematical operations
**Smoothed analysis — measuring the expected performance of algorithms under slight random perturbations of worst-case inputs
*Symbolic-numeric computation — combination of symbolic and numeric methods
*Cultural and historical aspects:
**History of numerical solution of differential equations using computers
**Hundred-dollar, Hundred-digit Challenge problems — list of ten problems proposed by Nick Trefethen in 2002
**International Workshops on Lattice QCD and Numerical Analysis
**Timeline of numerical analysis after 1945
*General classes of methods:
**Collocation method — discretizes a continuous equation by requiring it only to hold at certain points
**Level-set method
***Level set (data structures) — data structures for representing level sets
**Sinc numerical methods — methods based on the sinc function, sinc(&quot;x&quot;) = sin(&quot;x&quot;) / &quot;x&quot;
**ABS methods

==Error==
Error analysis (mathematics)
*Approximation
*Approximation error
*Catastrophic cancellation
*Condition number
*Discretization error
*Floating point number
**Guard digit — extra precision introduced during a computation to reduce round-off error
**Truncation — rounding a floating-point number by discarding all digits after a certain digit
**Round-off error
***Numeric precision in Microsoft Excel
**Arbitrary-precision arithmetic
*Interval arithmetic — represent every number by two floating-point numbers guaranteed to have the unknown number between them
**Interval contractor — maps interval to subinterval which still contains the unknown exact answer
**Interval propagation — contracting interval domains without removing any value consistent with the constraints
***See also: Interval boundary element method, Interval finite element
*Loss of significance
*Numerical error
*Numerical stability
*Error propagation:
**Propagation of uncertainty
**Residual (numerical analysis)
*Relative change and difference — the relative difference between &quot;x&quot; and &quot;y&quot; is |&quot;x&quot; − &quot;y&quot;| / max(|&quot;x&quot;|, |&quot;y&quot;|)
*Significant figures
**Artificial precision — when a numerical value or semantic is expressed with more precision than was initially provided from measurement or user input
**False precision — giving more significant figures than appropriate
*Sterbenz lemma
*Truncation error — error committed by doing only a finite numbers of steps
*Well-posed problem
*Affine arithmetic

==Elementary and special functions==
*Unrestricted algorithm
*Summation:
**Kahan summation algorithm
**Pairwise summation — slightly worse than Kahan summation but cheaper
**Binary splitting
**2Sum
*Multiplication:
**Multiplication algorithm — general discussion, simple methods
**Karatsuba algorithm — the first algorithm which is faster than straightforward multiplication
**Toom–Cook multiplication — generalization of Karatsuba multiplication
**Schönhage–Strassen algorithm — based on Fourier transform, asymptotically very fast
**Fürer&#x27;s algorithm — asymptotically slightly faster than Schönhage–Strassen
*Division algorithm — for computing quotient and/or remainder of two numbers
**Long division
**Restoring division
**Non-restoring division
**SRT division
**Newton–Raphson division: uses Newton&#x27;s method to find the reciprocal of D, and multiply that reciprocal by N to find the final quotient Q.
**Goldschmidt division
*Exponentiation:
**Exponentiation by squaring
**Addition-chain exponentiation
*Multiplicative inverse Algorithms: for computing a number&#x27;s multiplicative inverse (reciprocal).
**Newton&#x27;s method
*Polynomials:
**Horner&#x27;s method
**Estrin&#x27;s scheme — modification of the Horner scheme with more possibilities for parallelization
**Clenshaw algorithm
**De Casteljau&#x27;s algorithm
*Square roots and other roots:
**Integer square root
**Methods of computing square roots
**&quot;n&quot;th root algorithm
**hypot — the function (&quot;x&quot;2 + &quot;y&quot;2)1/2
**Alpha max plus beta min algorithm — approximates hypot(x,y)
**Fast inverse square root — calculates 1 / using details of the IEEE floating-point system
*Elementary functions (exponential, logarithm, trigonometric functions):
**Trigonometric tables — different methods for generating them
**CORDIC — shift-and-add algorithm using a table of arc tangents
**BKM algorithm — shift-and-add algorithm using a table of logarithms and complex numbers
*Gamma function:
**Lanczos approximation
**Spouge&#x27;s approximation — modification of Stirling&#x27;s approximation; easier to apply than Lanczos
*AGM method — computes arithmetic–geometric mean; related methods compute special functions
*FEE method (Fast E-function Evaluation) — fast summation of series like the power series for e&quot;x&quot;
*Gal&#x27;s accurate tables — table of function values with unequal spacing to reduce round-off error
*Spigot algorithm — algorithms that can compute individual digits of a real number
*Approximations of:
**Liu Hui&#x27;s π algorithm — first algorithm that can compute π to arbitrary precision
**Leibniz formula for π — alternating series with very slow convergence
**Wallis product — infinite product converging slowly to π/2
**Viète&#x27;s formula — more complicated infinite product which converges faster
**Gauss–Legendre algorithm — iteration which converges quadratically to π, based on arithmetic–geometric mean
**Borwein&#x27;s algorithm — iteration which converges quartically to 1/π, and other algorithms
**Chudnovsky algorithm — fast algorithm that calculates a hypergeometric series
**Bailey–Borwein–Plouffe formula — can be used to compute individual hexadecimal digits of π
**Bellard&#x27;s formula — faster version of Bailey–Borwein–Plouffe formula
**List of formulae involving π

==Numerical linear algebra==
Numerical linear algebra — study of numerical algorithms for linear algebra problems

===Basic concepts===
*Types of matrices appearing in numerical analysis:
**Sparse matrix
***Band matrix
***Bidiagonal matrix
***Tridiagonal matrix
***Pentadiagonal matrix
***Skyline matrix
**Circulant matrix
**Triangular matrix
**Diagonally dominant matrix
**Block matrix — matrix composed of smaller matrices
**Stieltjes matrix — symmetric positive definite with non-positive off-diagonal entries
**Hilbert matrix — example of a matrix which is extremely ill-conditioned (and thus difficult to handle)
**Wilkinson matrix — example of a symmetric tridiagonal matrix with pairs of nearly, but not exactly, equal eigenvalues
**Convergent matrix — square matrix whose successive powers approach the zero matrix
*Algorithms for matrix multiplication:
**Strassen algorithm
**Coppersmith–Winograd algorithm
**Cannon&#x27;s algorithm — a distributed algorithm, especially suitable for processors laid out in a 2d grid
**Freivalds&#x27; algorithm — a randomized algorithm for checking the result of a multiplication
*Matrix decompositions:
**LU decomposition — lower triangular times upper triangular
**QR decomposition — orthogonal matrix times triangular matrix
***RRQR factorization — rank-revealing QR factorization, can be used to compute rank of a matrix 
**Polar decomposition — unitary matrix times positive-semidefinite Hermitian matrix
**Decompositions by similarity:
***Eigendecomposition — decomposition in terms of eigenvectors and eigenvalues
***Jordan normal form — bidiagonal matrix of a certain form; generalizes the eigendecomposition
****Weyr canonical form — permutation of Jordan normal form
***Jordan–Chevalley decomposition — sum of commuting nilpotent matrix and diagonalizable matrix
***Schur decomposition — similarity transform bringing the matrix to a triangular matrix
**Singular value decomposition — unitary matrix times diagonal matrix times unitary matrix
*Matrix splitting — expressing a given matrix as a sum or difference of matrices

===Solving systems of linear equations===
*Gaussian elimination
**Row echelon form — matrix in which all entries below a nonzero entry are zero
**Bareiss algorithm — variant which ensures that all entries remain integers if the initial matrix has integer entries
**Tridiagonal matrix algorithm — simplified form of Gaussian elimination for tridiagonal matrices
*LU decomposition — write a matrix as a product of an upper- and a lower-triangular matrix
**Crout matrix decomposition
**LU reduction — a special parallelized version of a LU decomposition algorithm
*Block LU decomposition
*Cholesky decomposition — for solving a system with a positive definite matrix
**Minimum degree algorithm
**Symbolic Cholesky decomposition
*Iterative refinement — procedure to turn an inaccurate solution in a more accurate one
*Direct methods for sparse matrices:
**Frontal solver — used in finite element methods
**Nested dissection — for symmetric matrices, based on graph partitioning
*Levinson recursion — for Toeplitz matrices
*SPIKE algorithm — hybrid parallel solver for narrow-banded matrices
*Cyclic reduction — eliminate even or odd rows or columns, repeat
*Iterative methods:
**Jacobi method
**Gauss–Seidel method
***Successive over-relaxation (SOR) — a technique to accelerate the Gauss–Seidel method
****Symmetric successive over-relaxation (SSOR) — variant of SOR for symmetric matrices
***Backfitting algorithm — iterative procedure used to fit a generalized additive model, often equivalent to Gauss–Seidel
**Modified Richardson iteration
**Conjugate gradient method (CG) — assumes that the matrix is positive definite
***Derivation of the conjugate gradient method
***Nonlinear conjugate gradient method — generalization for nonlinear optimization problems
**Biconjugate gradient method (BiCG)
***Biconjugate gradient stabilized method (BiCGSTAB) — variant of BiCG with better convergence 
**Conjugate residual method — similar to CG but only assumed that the matrix is symmetric
**Generalized minimal residual method (GMRES) — based on the Arnoldi iteration
**Chebyshev iteration — avoids inner products but needs bounds on the spectrum
**Stone&#x27;s method (SIP — Strongly Implicit Procedure) — uses an incomplete LU decomposition
**Kaczmarz method
**Preconditioner
***Incomplete Cholesky factorization — sparse approximation to the Cholesky factorization
***Incomplete LU factorization — sparse approximation to the LU factorization
**Uzawa iteration — for saddle node problems
*Underdetermined and overdetermined systems (systems that have no or more than one solution):
**Numerical computation of null space — find all solutions of an underdetermined system
**Moore–Penrose pseudoinverse — for finding solution with smallest 2-norm (for underdetermined systems) or smallest residual
**Sparse approximation — for finding the sparsest solution (i.e., the solution with as many zeros as possible)

===Eigenvalue algorithms===
Eigenvalue algorithm — a numerical algorithm for locating the eigenvalues of a matrix
*Power iteration
*Inverse iteration
*Rayleigh quotient iteration
*Arnoldi iteration — based on Krylov subspaces
*Lanczos algorithm — Arnoldi, specialized for positive-definite matrices
**Block Lanczos algorithm — for when matrix is over a finite field
*QR algorithm
*Jacobi eigenvalue algorithm — select a small submatrix which can be diagonalized exactly, and repeat
**Jacobi rotation — the building block, almost a Givens rotation
**Jacobi method for complex Hermitian matrices
*Divide-and-conquer eigenvalue algorithm
*Folded spectrum method
*LOBPCG — Locally Optimal Block Preconditioned Conjugate Gradient Method
*Eigenvalue perturbation — stability of eigenvalues under perturbations of the matrix

===Other concepts and algorithms===
*Orthogonalization algorithms:
**Gram–Schmidt process
**Householder transformation
***Householder operator — analogue of Householder transformation for general inner product spaces
**Givens rotation
*Krylov subspace
*Block matrix pseudoinverse
*Bidiagonalization
*Cuthill–McKee algorithm — permutes rows/columns in sparse matrix to yield a narrow band matrix
*In-place matrix transposition — computing the transpose of a matrix without using much additional storage
*Pivot element — entry in a matrix on which the algorithm concentrates
*Matrix-free methods — methods that only access the matrix by evaluating matrix-vector products

==Interpolation and approximation==
Interpolation — construct a function going through some given data points
*Nearest-neighbor interpolation — takes the value of the nearest neighbor

===Polynomial interpolation===
Polynomial interpolation — interpolation by polynomials
*Linear interpolation
*Runge&#x27;s phenomenon
*Vandermonde matrix
*Chebyshev polynomials
*Chebyshev nodes
*Lebesgue constants
*Different forms for the interpolant:
**Newton polynomial
***Divided differences
***Neville&#x27;s algorithm — for evaluating the interpolant; based on the Newton form
**Lagrange polynomial
**Bernstein polynomial — especially useful for approximation
**Brahmagupta&#x27;s interpolation formula — seventh-century formula for quadratic interpolation
*Extensions to multiple dimensions:
**Bilinear interpolation
**Trilinear interpolation
**Bicubic interpolation
**Tricubic interpolation
**Padua points — set of points in R2 with unique polynomial interpolant and minimal growth of Lebesgue constant
*Hermite interpolation
*Birkhoff interpolation
*Abel–Goncharov interpolation

===Spline interpolation===
Spline interpolation — interpolation by piecewise polynomials
*Spline (mathematics) — the piecewise polynomials used as interpolants
*Perfect spline — polynomial spline of degree &quot;m&quot; whose &quot;m&quot;th derivate is ±1
*Cubic Hermite spline
**Centripetal Catmull–Rom spline — special case of cubic Hermite splines without self-intersections or cusps
*Monotone cubic interpolation
*Hermite spline
*Bézier curve
**De Casteljau&#x27;s algorithm
**composite Bézier curve
**Generalizations to more dimensions:
***Bézier triangle — maps a triangle to R3
***Bézier surface — maps a square to R3
*B-spline
**Box spline — multivariate generalization of B-splines
**Truncated power function
**De Boor&#x27;s algorithm — generalizes De Casteljau&#x27;s algorithm
*Non-uniform rational B-spline (NURBS)
**T-spline — can be thought of as a NURBS surface for which a row of control points is allowed to terminate
*Kochanek–Bartels spline
*Coons patch — type of manifold parametrization used to smoothly join other surfaces together
*M-spline — a non-negative spline
*I-spline — a monotone spline, defined in terms of M-splines
*Smoothing spline — a spline fitted smoothly to noisy data
*Blossom (functional) — a unique, affine, symmetric map associated to a polynomial or spline
*See also: List of numerical computational geometry topics

===Trigonometric interpolation===
Trigonometric interpolation — interpolation by trigonometric polynomials
*Discrete Fourier transform — can be viewed as trigonometric interpolation at equidistant points
**Relations between Fourier transforms and Fourier series
*Fast Fourier transform (FFT) — a fast method for computing the discrete Fourier transform
**Bluestein&#x27;s FFT algorithm
**Bruun&#x27;s FFT algorithm
**Cooley–Tukey FFT algorithm
**Split-radix FFT algorithm — variant of Cooley–Tukey that uses a blend of radices 2 and 4
**Goertzel algorithm
**Prime-factor FFT algorithm
**Rader&#x27;s FFT algorithm
**Bit-reversal permutation — particular permutation of vectors with 2&quot;m&quot; entries used in many FFTs.
**Butterfly diagram
**Twiddle factor — the trigonometric constant coefficients that are multiplied by the data
**Cyclotomic fast Fourier transform — for FFT over finite fields
**Methods for computing discrete convolutions with finite impulse response filters using the FFT:
***Overlap–add method
***Overlap–save method
*Sigma approximation
*Dirichlet kernel — convolving any function with the Dirichlet kernel yields its trigonometric interpolant
*Gibbs phenomenon

===Other interpolants===
*Simple rational approximation
**Polynomial and rational function modeling — comparison of polynomial and rational interpolation
*Wavelet
**Continuous wavelet
**Transfer matrix
**See also: List of functional analysis topics, List of wavelet-related transforms
*Inverse distance weighting
*Radial basis function (RBF) — a function of the form ƒ(&quot;x&quot;) = &quot;φ&quot;(|&quot;x&quot;−&quot;x&quot;0|)
**Polyharmonic spline — a commonly used radial basis function
**Thin plate spline — a specific polyharmonic spline: &quot;r&quot;2 log &quot;r&quot;
**Hierarchical RBF
*Subdivision surface — constructed by recursively subdividing a piecewise linear interpolant
**Catmull–Clark subdivision surface
**Doo–Sabin subdivision surface
**Loop subdivision surface
*Slerp (spherical linear interpolation) — interpolation between two points on a sphere 
**Generalized quaternion interpolation — generalizes slerp for interpolation between more than two quaternions
*Irrational base discrete weighted transform
*Nevanlinna–Pick interpolation — interpolation by analytic functions in the unit disc subject to a bound
**Pick matrix — the Nevanlinna–Pick interpolation has a solution if this matrix is positive semi-definite
*Multivariate interpolation — the function being interpolated depends on more than one variable
**Barnes interpolation — method for two-dimensional functions using Gaussians common in meteorology
**Coons surface — combination of linear interpolation and bilinear interpolation
**Lanczos resampling — based on convolution with a sinc function
**Natural neighbor interpolation
**PDE surface
**Transfinite interpolation — constructs function on planar domain given its values on the boundary
**Trend surface analysis — based on low-order polynomials of spatial coordinates; uses scattered observations
**Method based on polynomials are listed under &quot;Polynomial interpolation&quot;

===Approximation theory===
Approximation theory
*Orders of approximation
*Lebesgue&#x27;s lemma
*Curve fitting
**Vector field reconstruction
*Modulus of continuity — measures smoothness of a function
*Least squares (function approximation) — minimizes the error in the L2-norm
*Minimax approximation algorithm — minimizes the maximum error over an interval (the L∞-norm)
**Equioscillation theorem — characterizes the best approximation in the L∞-norm
*Unisolvent point set — function from given function space is determined uniquely by values on such a set of points
*Stone–Weierstrass theorem — continuous functions can be approximated uniformly by polynomials, or certain other function spaces
*Approximation by polynomials:
**Linear approximation
**Bernstein polynomial — basis of polynomials useful for approximating a function
**Bernstein&#x27;s constant — error when approximating |&quot;x&quot;| by a polynomial
**Remez algorithm — for constructing the best polynomial approximation in the L∞-norm
**Bernstein&#x27;s inequality (mathematical analysis) — bound on maximum of derivative of polynomial in unit disk
**Mergelyan&#x27;s theorem — generalization of Stone–Weierstrass theorem for polynomials
**Müntz–Szász theorem — variant of Stone–Weierstrass theorem for polynomials if some coefficients have to be zero
**Bramble–Hilbert lemma — upper bound on Lp error of polynomial approximation in multiple dimensions
**Discrete Chebyshev polynomials — polynomials orthogonal with respect to a discrete measure
**Favard&#x27;s theorem — polynomials satisfying suitable 3-term recurrence relations are orthogonal polynomials
*Approximation by Fourier series / trigonometric polynomials:
**Jackson&#x27;s inequality — upper bound for best approximation by a trigonometric polynomial
***Bernstein&#x27;s theorem (approximation theory) — a converse to Jackson&#x27;s inequality
**Fejér&#x27;s theorem — Cesàro means of partial sums of Fourier series converge uniformly for continuous periodic functions
**Erdős–Turán inequality — bounds distance between probability and Lebesgue measure in terms of Fourier coefficients
*Different approximations:
**Moving least squares
**Padé approximant
***Padé table — table of Padé approximants
**Hartogs–Rosenthal theorem — continuous functions can be approximated uniformly by rational functions on a set of Lebesgue measure zero
**Szász–Mirakyan operator — approximation by e−&quot;n&quot; &quot;x&quot;&quot;k&quot; on a semi-infinite interval
**Szász–Mirakjan–Kantorovich operator
**Baskakov operator — generalize Bernstein polynomials, Szász–Mirakyan operators, and Lupas operators
**Favard operator — approximation by sums of Gaussians
*Surrogate model — application: replacing a function that is hard to evaluate by a simpler function
*Constructive function theory — field that studies connection between degree of approximation and smoothness
*Universal differential equation — differential–algebraic equation whose solutions can approximate any continuous function
*Fekete problem — find &quot;N&quot; points on a sphere that minimize some kind of energy
*Carleman&#x27;s condition — condition guaranteeing that a measure is uniquely determined by its moments
*Krein&#x27;s condition — condition that exponential sums are dense in weighted L2 space
*Lethargy theorem — about distance of points in a metric space from members of a sequence of subspaces
*Wirtinger&#x27;s representation and projection theorem
*Journals:
**Constructive Approximation
**Journal of Approximation Theory

===Miscellaneous===
*Extrapolation
**Linear predictive analysis — linear extrapolation
*Unisolvent functions — functions for which the interpolation problem has a unique solution
*Regression analysis
**Isotonic regression
*Curve-fitting compaction
*Interpolation (computer graphics)

==Finding roots of nonlinear equations==
:&quot;See #Numerical linear algebra for linear equations&quot;

Root-finding algorithm — algorithms for solving the equation &quot;f&quot;(&quot;x&quot;) = 0
*General methods:
**Bisection method — simple and robust; linear convergence
***Lehmer–Schur algorithm — variant for complex functions
**Fixed-point iteration
**Newton&#x27;s method — based on linear approximation around the current iterate; quadratic convergence
***Kantorovich theorem — gives a region around solution such that Newton&#x27;s method converges
***Newton fractal — indicates which initial condition converges to which root under Newton iteration
***Quasi-Newton method — uses an approximation of the Jacobian:
****Broyden&#x27;s method — uses a rank-one update for the Jacobian
****Symmetric rank-one — a symmetric (but not necessarily positive definite) rank-one update of the Jacobian
****Davidon–Fletcher–Powell formula — update of the Jacobian in which the matrix remains positive definite
****Broyden–Fletcher–Goldfarb–Shanno algorithm — rank-two update of the Jacobian in which the matrix remains positive definite
****Limited-memory BFGS method — truncated, matrix-free variant of BFGS method suitable for large problems
***Steffensen&#x27;s method — uses divided differences instead of the derivative
**Secant method — based on linear interpolation at last two iterates
**False position method — secant method with ideas from the bisection method
**Muller&#x27;s method — based on quadratic interpolation at last three iterates
**Sidi&#x27;s generalized secant method — higher-order variants of secant method
**Inverse quadratic interpolation — similar to Muller&#x27;s method, but interpolates the inverse
**Brent&#x27;s method — combines bisection method, secant method and inverse quadratic interpolation
**Ridders&#x27; method — fits a linear function times an exponential to last two iterates and their midpoint
**Halley&#x27;s method — uses &quot;f&quot;, &quot;f&quot;&#x27; and &quot;f&quot;&quot;; achieves the cubic convergence
**Householder&#x27;s method — uses first &quot;d&quot; derivatives to achieve order &quot;d&quot; + 1; generalizes Newton&#x27;s and Halley&#x27;s method
*Methods for polynomials:
**Aberth method
**Bairstow&#x27;s method
**Durand–Kerner method
**Graeffe&#x27;s method
**Jenkins–Traub algorithm — fast, reliable, and widely used
**Laguerre&#x27;s method
**Splitting circle method
*Analysis:
**Wilkinson&#x27;s polynomial
*Numerical continuation — tracking a root as one parameter in the equation changes
**Piecewise linear continuation

==Optimization==
Mathematical optimization — algorithm for finding maxima or minima of a given function

===Basic concepts===
*Active set
*Candidate solution
*Constraint (mathematics)
**Constrained optimization — studies optimization problems with constraints
**Binary constraint — a constraint that involves exactly two variables
*Corner solution
*Feasible region — contains all solutions that satisfy the constraints but may not be optimal
*Global optimum and Local optimum
*Maxima and minima
*Slack variable
*Continuous optimization
*Discrete optimization

===Linear programming===
Linear programming (also treats &quot;integer programming&quot;) — objective function and constraints are linear
* Algorithms for linear programming:
**Simplex algorithm
***Bland&#x27;s rule — rule to avoid cycling in the simplex method
***Klee–Minty cube — perturbed (hyper)cube; simplex method has exponential complexity on such a domain
***Criss-cross algorithm — similar to the simplex algorithm
***Big M method — variation of simplex algorithm for problems with both &quot;less than&quot; and &quot;greater than&quot; constraints
**Interior point method
***Ellipsoid method
***Karmarkar&#x27;s algorithm
***Mehrotra predictor–corrector method
**Column generation
**k-approximation of k-hitting set — algorithm for specific LP problems (to find a weighted hitting set)
*Linear complementarity problem
*Decompositions:
**Benders&#x27; decomposition
**Dantzig–Wolfe decomposition
**Theory of two-level planning
**Variable splitting
*Basic solution (linear programming) — solution at vertex of feasible region
*Fourier–Motzkin elimination
*Hilbert basis (linear programming) — set of integer vectors in a convex cone which generate all integer vectors in the cone
*LP-type problem
*Linear inequality
*Vertex enumeration problem — list all vertices of the feasible set

===Convex optimization===
Convex optimization
*Quadratic programming
**Linear least squares (mathematics)
**Total least squares
**Frank–Wolfe algorithm
**Sequential minimal optimization — breaks up large QP problems into a series of smallest possible QP problems
**Bilinear program
*Basis pursuit — minimize L1-norm of vector subject to linear constraints
**Basis pursuit denoising (BPDN) — regularized version of basis pursuit
***In-crowd algorithm — algorithm for solving basis pursuit denoising
*Linear matrix inequality
*Conic optimization
**Semidefinite programming
**Second-order cone programming
**Sum-of-squares optimization
**Quadratic programming (see above)
*Bregman method — row-action method for strictly convex optimization problems
*Proximal gradient method — use splitting of objective function in sum of possible non-differentiable pieces
*Subgradient method — extension of steepest descent for problems with a non-differentiable objective function
*Biconvex optimization — generalization where objective function and constraint set can be biconvex

===Nonlinear programming===
Nonlinear programming — the most general optimization problem in the usual framework
*Special cases of nonlinear programming:
**See &quot;Linear programming&quot; and &quot;Convex optimization&quot; above
**Geometric programming — problems involving signomials or posynomials
***Signomial — similar to polynomials, but exponents need not be integers
***Posynomial — a signomial with positive coefficients
**Quadratically constrained quadratic program
**Linear-fractional programming — objective is ratio of linear functions, constraints are linear
***Fractional programming — objective is ratio of nonlinear functions, constraints are linear
**Nonlinear complementarity problem (NCP) — find &quot;x&quot; such that &quot;x&quot; ≥ 0, &quot;f&quot;(&quot;x&quot;) ≥ 0 and &quot;x&quot;T &quot;f&quot;(&quot;x&quot;) = 0
**Least squares — the objective function is a sum of squares
***Non-linear least squares
***Gauss–Newton algorithm
****BHHH algorithm — variant of Gauss–Newton in econometrics
****Generalized Gauss–Newton method — for constrained nonlinear least-squares problems
***Levenberg–Marquardt algorithm
***Iteratively reweighted least squares (IRLS) — solves a weighted least-squares problem at every iteration
***Partial least squares — statistical techniques similar to principal components analysis
****Non-linear iterative partial least squares (NIPLS)
**Mathematical programming with equilibrium constraints — constraints include variational inequalities or complementarities
**Univariate optimization:
***Golden section search
***Successive parabolic interpolation — based on quadratic interpolation through the last three iterates
*General algorithms:
**Concepts:
***Descent direction
***Guess value — the initial guess for a solution with which an algorithm starts
***Line search
****Backtracking line search
****Wolfe conditions
**Gradient method — method that uses the gradient as the search direction
***Gradient descent
****Stochastic gradient descent
***Landweber iteration — mainly used for ill-posed problems
**Successive linear programming (SLP) — replace problem by a linear programming problem, solve that, and repeat
**Sequential quadratic programming (SQP) — replace problem by a quadratic programming problem, solve that, and repeat
**Newton&#x27;s method in optimization
***See also under &quot;Newton algorithm&quot; in the section &quot;Finding roots of nonlinear equations&quot;
**Nonlinear conjugate gradient method
**Derivative-free methods
***Coordinate descent — move in one of the coordinate directions
****Adaptive coordinate descent — adapt coordinate directions to objective function
****Random coordinate descent — randomized version
***Nelder–Mead method
***Pattern search (optimization)
***Powell&#x27;s method — based on conjugate gradient descent
***Rosenbrock methods — derivative-free method, similar to Nelder–Mead but with guaranteed convergence
**Augmented Lagrangian method — replaces constrained problems by unconstrained problems with a term added to the objective function
**Ternary search
**Tabu search
**Guided Local Search — modification of search algorithms which builds up penalties during a search
**Reactive search optimization (RSO) — the algorithm adapts its parameters automatically
**MM algorithm — majorize-minimization, a wide framework of methods
**Least absolute deviations
***Expectation–maximization algorithm
****Ordered subset expectation maximization
**Nearest neighbor search
**Space mapping — uses &quot;coarse&quot; (ideal or low-fidelity) and &quot;fine&quot; (practical or high-fidelity) models

===Optimal control and infinite-dimensional optimization===
Optimal control
*Pontryagin&#x27;s minimum principle — infinite-dimensional version of Lagrange multipliers
**Costate equations — equation for the &quot;Lagrange multipliers&quot; in Pontryagin&#x27;s minimum principle
**Hamiltonian (control theory) — minimum principle says that this function should be minimized
*Types of problems:
**Linear-quadratic regulator — system dynamics is a linear differential equation, objective is quadratic
**Linear-quadratic-Gaussian control (LQG) — system dynamics is a linear SDE with additive noise, objective is quadratic
***Optimal projection equations — method for reducing dimension of LQG control problem
*Algebraic Riccati equation — matrix equation occurring in many optimal control problems
*Bang–bang control — control that switches abruptly between two states
*Covector mapping principle
*Differential dynamic programming — uses locally-quadratic models of the dynamics and cost functions
*DNSS point — initial state for certain optimal control problems with multiple optimal solutions
*Legendre–Clebsch condition — second-order condition for solution of optimal control problem
*Pseudospectral optimal control
**Bellman pseudospectral method — based on Bellman&#x27;s principle of optimality
**Chebyshev pseudospectral method — uses Chebyshev polynomials (of the first kind)
**Flat pseudospectral method — combines Ross–Fahroo pseudospectral method with differential flatness
**Gauss pseudospectral method — uses collocation at the Legendre–Gauss points
**Legendre pseudospectral method — uses Legendre polynomials
**Pseudospectral knotting method — generalization of pseudospectral methods in optimal control
**Ross–Fahroo pseudospectral method — class of pseudospectral method including Chebyshev, Legendre and knotting
*Ross–Fahroo lemma — condition to make discretization and duality operations commute
*Ross&#x27; π lemma — there is fundamental time constant within which a control solution must be computed for controllability and stability
*Sethi model — optimal control problem modelling advertising

Infinite-dimensional optimization
*Semi-infinite programming — infinite number of variables and finite number of constraints, or other way around
*Shape optimization, Topology optimization — optimization over a set of regions
**Topological derivative — derivative with respect to changing in the shape
*Generalized semi-infinite programming — finite number of variables, infinite number of constraints

===Uncertainty and randomness===
*Approaches to deal with uncertainty:
**Markov decision process
**Partially observable Markov decision process
**Robust optimization
***Wald&#x27;s maximin model
**Scenario optimization — constraints are uncertain
**Stochastic approximation
**Stochastic optimization
**Stochastic programming
**Stochastic gradient descent
*Random optimization algorithms:
**Random search — choose a point randomly in ball around current iterate
**Simulated annealing
***Adaptive simulated annealing — variant in which the algorithm parameters are adjusted during the computation.
***Great Deluge algorithm
***Mean field annealing — deterministic variant of simulated annealing
**Bayesian optimization — treats objective function as a random function and places a prior over it
**Evolutionary algorithm
***Differential evolution
***Evolutionary programming
***Genetic algorithm, Genetic programming
****Genetic algorithms in economics
***MCACEA (Multiple Coordinated Agents Coevolution Evolutionary Algorithm) — uses an evolutionary algorithm for every agent
***Simultaneous perturbation stochastic approximation (SPSA)
**Luus–Jaakola
**Particle swarm optimization
**Stochastic tunneling
**Harmony search — mimicks the improvisation process of musicians
**see also the section &quot;Monte Carlo method&quot;

===Theoretical aspects===
*Convex analysis — function &quot;f&quot; such that &quot;f&quot;(&quot;tx&quot; + (1 − &quot;t&quot;)&quot;y&quot;) ≥ &quot;tf&quot;(&quot;x&quot;) + (1 − &quot;t&quot;)&quot;f&quot;(&quot;y&quot;) for &quot;t&quot; ∈ [0,1]
**Pseudoconvex function — function &quot;f&quot; such that ∇&quot;f&quot; · (&quot;y&quot; − &quot;x&quot;) ≥ 0 implies &quot;f&quot;(&quot;y&quot;) ≥ &quot;f&quot;(&quot;x&quot;)
**Quasiconvex function — function &quot;f&quot; such that &quot;f&quot;(&quot;tx&quot; + (1 − &quot;t&quot;)&quot;y&quot;) ≤ max(&quot;f&quot;(&quot;x&quot;), &quot;f&quot;(&quot;y&quot;)) for &quot;t&quot; ∈ [0,1]
**Subderivative
**Geodesic convexity — convexity for functions defined on a Riemannian manifold
*Duality (optimization)
**Weak duality — dual solution gives a bound on the primal solution
**Strong duality — primal and dual solutions are equivalent
**Shadow price
**Dual cone and polar cone
**Duality gap — difference between primal and dual solution
**Fenchel&#x27;s duality theorem — relates minimization problems with maximization problems of convex conjugates
**Perturbation function — any function which relates to primal and dual problems
**Slater&#x27;s condition — sufficient condition for strong duality to hold in a convex optimization problem
**Total dual integrality — concept of duality for integer linear programming
**Wolfe duality — for when objective function and constraints are differentiable
*Farkas&#x27; lemma
*Karush–Kuhn–Tucker conditions (KKT) — sufficient conditions for a solution to be optimal
**Fritz John conditions — variant of KKT conditions
*Lagrange multiplier
**Lagrange multipliers on Banach spaces
*Semi-continuity
*Complementarity theory — study of problems with constraints of the form 〈&quot;u&quot;, &quot;v&quot;〉 = 0
**Mixed complementarity problem
***Mixed linear complementarity problem
***Lemke&#x27;s algorithm — method for solving (mixed) linear complementarity problems
*Danskin&#x27;s theorem — used in the analysis of minimax problems
*Maximum theorem — the maximum and maximizer are continuous as function of parameters, under some conditions
*No free lunch in search and optimization
*Relaxation (approximation) — approximating a given problem by an easier problem by relaxing some constraints
**Lagrangian relaxation
**Linear programming relaxation — ignoring the integrality constraints in a linear programming problem
*Self-concordant function
*Reduced cost — cost for increasing a variable by a small amount
*Hardness of approximation — computational complexity of getting an approximate solution

===Applications===
*In geometry:
**Geometric median — the point minimizing the sum of distances to a given set of points
**Chebyshev center — the centre of the smallest ball containing a given set of points
*In statistics:
**Iterated conditional modes — maximizing joint probability of Markov random field
**Response surface methodology — used in the design of experiments
*Automatic label placement
*Compressed sensing — reconstruct a signal from knowledge that it is sparse or compressible
*Cutting stock problem
*Demand optimization
*Destination dispatch — an optimization technique for dispatching elevators
*Energy minimization
*Entropy maximization
*Highly optimized tolerance
*Hyperparameter optimization
*Inventory control problem
**Newsvendor model
**Extended newsvendor model
**Assemble-to-order system
*Linear programming decoding
*Linear search problem — find a point on a line by moving along the line
*Low-rank approximation — find best approximation, constraint is that rank of some matrix is smaller than a given number
*Meta-optimization — optimization of the parameters in an optimization method
*Multidisciplinary design optimization
*Optimal computing budget allocation — maximize the overall simulation efficiency for finding an optimal decision
*Paper bag problem
*Process optimization
*Recursive economics — individuals make a series of two-period optimization decisions over time.
*Stigler diet
*Space allocation problem
*Stress majorization
*Trajectory optimization
*Transportation theory
*Wing-shape optimization

===Miscellaneous===
*Combinatorial optimization
*Dynamic programming
**Bellman equation
**Hamilton–Jacobi–Bellman equation — continuous-time analogue of Bellman equation
**Backward induction — solving dynamic programming problems by reasoning backwards in time
**Optimal stopping — choosing the optimal time to take a particular action
***Odds algorithm
***Robbins&#x27; problem
*Global optimization:
**BRST algorithm
**MCS algorithm
*Multi-objective optimization — there are multiple conflicting objectives
**Benson&#x27;s algorithm — for linear vector optimization problems
*Bilevel optimization — studies problems in which one problem is embedded in another
*Optimal substructure
*Dykstra&#x27;s projection algorithm — finds a point in intersection of two convex sets
*Algorithmic concepts:
**Barrier function
**Penalty method
**Trust region
*Test functions for optimization:
**Rosenbrock function — two-dimensional function with a banana-shaped valley
**Himmelblau&#x27;s function — two-dimensional with four local minima, defined by formula_1
**Rastrigin function — two-dimensional function with many local minima
**Shekel function — multimodal and multidimensional
*Mathematical Optimization Society

==Numerical quadrature (integration)==
Numerical integration — the numerical evaluation of an integral
*Rectangle method — first-order method, based on (piecewise) constant approximation
*Trapezoidal rule — second-order method, based on (piecewise) linear approximation
*Simpson&#x27;s rule — fourth-order method, based on (piecewise) quadratic approximation
**Adaptive Simpson&#x27;s method
*Boole&#x27;s rule — sixth-order method, based on the values at five equidistant points
*Newton–Cotes formulas — generalizes the above methods
*Romberg&#x27;s method — Richardson extrapolation applied to trapezium rule
*Gaussian quadrature — highest possible degree with given number of points
**Chebyshev–Gauss quadrature — extension of Gaussian quadrature for integrals with weight on [−1, 1]
**Gauss–Hermite quadrature — extension of Gaussian quadrature for integrals with weight exp(−&quot;x&quot;2) on [−∞, ∞]
**Gauss–Jacobi quadrature — extension of Gaussian quadrature for integrals with weight (1 − &quot;x&quot;)&quot;α&quot; (1 + &quot;x&quot;)&quot;β&quot; on [−1, 1]
**Gauss–Laguerre quadrature — extension of Gaussian quadrature for integrals with weight exp(−&quot;x&quot;) on [0, ∞]
**Gauss–Kronrod quadrature formula — nested rule based on Gaussian quadrature
**Gauss–Kronrod rules
*Tanh-sinh quadrature — variant of Gaussian quadrature which works well with singularities at the end points
*Clenshaw–Curtis quadrature — based on expanding the integrand in terms of Chebyshev polynomials
*Adaptive quadrature — adapting the subintervals in which the integration interval is divided depending on the integrand
*Monte Carlo integration — takes random samples of the integrand
**&quot;See also #Monte Carlo method&quot;
*Quantized state systems method (QSS) — based on the idea of state quantization
*Lebedev quadrature — uses a grid on a sphere with octahedral symmetry
*Sparse grid
*Coopmans approximation
*Numerical differentiation — for fractional-order integrals
**Numerical smoothing and differentiation
**Adjoint state method — approximates gradient of a function in an optimization problem
*Euler–Maclaurin formula

==Numerical methods for ordinary differential equations==
Numerical methods for ordinary differential equations — the numerical solution of ordinary differential equations (ODEs)
*Euler method — the most basic method for solving an ODE
*Explicit and implicit methods — implicit methods need to solve an equation at every step
*Backward Euler method — implicit variant of the Euler method
*Trapezoidal rule — second-order implicit method
*Runge–Kutta methods — one of the two main classes of methods for initial-value problems
**Midpoint method — a second-order method with two stages
**Heun&#x27;s method — either a second-order method with two stages, or a third-order method with three stages
**Bogacki–Shampine method — a third-order method with four stages (FSAL) and an embedded fourth-order method
**Cash–Karp method — a fifth-order method with six stages and an embedded fourth-order method
**Dormand–Prince method — a fifth-order method with seven stages (FSAL) and an embedded fourth-order method
**Runge–Kutta–Fehlberg method — a fifth-order method with six stages and an embedded fourth-order method
**Gauss–Legendre method — family of A-stable method with optimal order based on Gaussian quadrature
**Butcher group — algebraic formalism involving rooted trees for analysing Runge–Kutta methods
**List of Runge–Kutta methods
*Linear multistep method — the other main class of methods for initial-value problems
**Backward differentiation formula — implicit methods of order 2 to 6; especially suitable for stiff equations
**Numerov&#x27;s method — fourth-order method for equations of the form formula_2
**Predictor–corrector method — uses one method to approximate solution and another one to increase accuracy
*General linear methods — a class of methods encapsulating linear multistep and Runge-Kutta methods
*Bulirsch–Stoer algorithm — combines the midpoint method with Richardson extrapolation to attain arbitrary order
*Exponential integrator — based on splitting ODE in a linear part, which is solved exactly, and a nonlinear part
*Methods designed for the solution of ODEs from classical physics:
**Newmark-beta method — based on the extended mean-value theorem
**Verlet integration — a popular second-order method
**Leapfrog integration — another name for Verlet integration
**Beeman&#x27;s algorithm — a two-step method extending the Verlet method
**Dynamic relaxation
*Geometric integrator — a method that preserves some geometric structure of the equation
**Symplectic integrator — a method for the solution of Hamilton&#x27;s equations that preserves the symplectic structure
***Variational integrator — symplectic integrators derived using the underlying variational principle
***Semi-implicit Euler method — variant of Euler method which is symplectic when applied to separable Hamiltonians
**Energy drift — phenomenon that energy, which should be conserved, drifts away due to numerical errors
*Other methods for initial value problems (IVPs):
**Bi-directional delay line
**Partial element equivalent circuit
*Methods for solving two-point boundary value problems (BVPs):
**Shooting method
**Direct multiple shooting method — divides interval in several subintervals and applies the shooting method on each subinterval
*Methods for solving differential-algebraic equations (DAEs), i.e., ODEs with constraints:
**Constraint algorithm — for solving Newton&#x27;s equations with constraints
**Pantelides algorithm — for reducing the index of a DEA
*Methods for solving stochastic differential equations (SDEs):
**Euler–Maruyama method — generalization of the Euler method for SDEs
**Milstein method — a method with strong order one
**Runge–Kutta method (SDE) — generalization of the family of Runge–Kutta methods for SDEs
*Methods for solving integral equations:
**Nyström method — replaces the integral with a quadrature rule
*Analysis:
**Truncation error (numerical integration) — local and global truncation errors, and their relationships
***Lady Windermere&#x27;s Fan (mathematics) — telescopic identity relating local and global truncation errors
*Stiff equation — roughly, an ODE for which unstable methods need a very short step size, but stable methods do not
**L-stability — method is A-stable and stability function vanishes at infinity
*Adaptive stepsize — automatically changing the step size when that seems advantageous
*Parareal -- a parallel-in-time integration algorithm

==Numerical methods for partial differential equations==
Numerical partial differential equations — the numerical solution of partial differential equations (PDEs)

===Finite difference methods===
Finite difference method — based on approximating differential operators with difference operators
*Finite difference — the discrete analogue of a differential operator
**Finite difference coefficient — table of coefficients of finite-difference approximations to derivatives
**Discrete Laplace operator — finite-difference approximation of the Laplace operator
***Eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the second derivative — includes eigenvalues of discrete Laplace operator
***Kronecker sum of discrete Laplacians — used for Laplace operator in multiple dimensions
**Discrete Poisson equation — discrete analogue of the Poisson equation using the discrete Laplace operator
*Stencil (numerical analysis) — the geometric arrangements of grid points affected by a basic step of the algorithm
**Compact stencil — stencil which only uses a few grid points, usually only the immediate and diagonal neighbours
***Higher-order compact finite difference scheme
**Non-compact stencil — any stencil that is not compact
**Five-point stencil — two-dimensional stencil consisting of a point and its four immediate neighbours on a rectangular grid
*Finite difference methods for heat equation and related PDEs:
**FTCS scheme (forward-time central-space) — first-order explicit
**Crank–Nicolson method — second-order implicit
*Finite difference methods for hyperbolic PDEs like the wave equation:
**Lax–Friedrichs method — first-order explicit
**Lax–Wendroff method — second-order explicit
**MacCormack method — second-order explicit
**Upwind scheme
***Upwind differencing scheme for convection — first-order scheme for convection–diffusion problems
**Lax–Wendroff theorem — conservative scheme for hyperbolic system of conservation laws converges to the weak solution
*Alternating direction implicit method (ADI) — update using the flow in &quot;x&quot;-direction and then using flow in &quot;y&quot;-direction
*Nonstandard finite difference scheme
*Specific applications:
**Finite difference methods for option pricing
**Finite-difference time-domain method — a finite-difference method for electrodynamics

===Finite element methods, gradient discretisation methods===
Finite element method — based on a discretization of the space of solutions
gradient discretisation method — based on both the discretization of the solution and of its gradient
*Finite element method in structural mechanics — a physical approach to finite element methods
*Galerkin method — a finite element method in which the residual is orthogonal to the finite element space
**Discontinuous Galerkin method — a Galerkin method in which the approximate solution is not continuous
*Rayleigh–Ritz method — a finite element method based on variational principles
*Spectral element method — high-order finite element methods
*hp-FEM — variant in which both the size and the order of the elements are automatically adapted
*Examples of finite elements:
**Bilinear quadrilateral element — also known as the Q4 element
**Constant strain triangle element (CST) — also known as the T3 element
**Quadratic quadrilateral element — also known as the Q8 element
**Barsoum elements
*Direct stiffness method — a particular implementation of the finite element method, often used in structural analysis
*Trefftz method
*Finite element updating
*Extended finite element method — puts functions tailored to the problem in the approximation space
*Functionally graded elements — elements for describing functionally graded materials
*Superelement — particular grouping of finite elements, employed as a single element
*Interval finite element method — combination of finite elements with interval arithmetic
*Discrete exterior calculus — discrete form of the exterior calculus of differential geometry
*Modal analysis using FEM — solution of eigenvalue problems to find natural vibrations
*Céa&#x27;s lemma — solution in the finite-element space is an almost best approximation in that space of the true solution
*Patch test (finite elements) — simple test for the quality of a finite element
*MAFELAP (MAthematics of Finite ELements and APplications) — international conference held at Brunel University 
*NAFEMS — not-for-profit organisation that sets and maintains standards in computer-aided engineering analysis
*Multiphase topology optimisation — technique based on finite elements for determining optimal composition of a mixture
*Interval finite element
*Applied element method — for simulation of cracks and structural collapse
*Wood–Armer method — structural analysis method based on finite elements used to design reinforcement for concrete slabs
*Isogeometric analysis — integrates finite elements into conventional NURBS-based CAD design tools
*Loubignac iteration
*Stiffness matrix — finite-dimensional analogue of differential operator
*Combination with meshfree methods:
**Weakened weak form — form of a PDE that is weaker than the standard weak form
**G space — functional space used in formulating the weakened weak form
**Smoothed finite element method
*Variational multiscale method
*List of finite element software packages

===Other methods===
*Spectral method — based on the Fourier transformation
**Pseudo-spectral method
*Method of lines — reduces the PDE to a large system of ordinary differential equations
*Boundary element method (BEM) — based on transforming the PDE to an integral equation on the boundary of the domain
**Interval boundary element method — a version using interval arithmetics
*Analytic element method — similar to the boundary element method, but the integral equation is evaluated analytically
*Finite volume method — based on dividing the domain in many small domains; popular in computational fluid dynamics
**Godunov&#x27;s scheme — first-order conservative scheme for fluid flow, based on piecewise constant approximation
**MUSCL scheme — second-order variant of Godunov&#x27;s scheme
**AUSM — advection upstream splitting method
**Flux limiter — limits spatial derivatives (fluxes) in order to avoid spurious oscillations
**Riemann solver — a solver for Riemann problems (a conservation law with piecewise constant data)
**Properties of discretization schemes — finite volume methods can be conservative, bounded, etc.
*Discrete element method — a method in which the elements can move freely relative to each other
**Extended discrete element method — adds properties such as strain to each particle
**Movable cellular automaton — combination of cellular automata with discrete elements
*Meshfree methods — does not use a mesh, but uses a particle view of the field
**Discrete least squares meshless method — based on minimization of weighted summation of the squared residual
**Diffuse element method
**Finite pointset method — represent continuum by a point cloud
**Moving Particle Semi-implicit Method
**Method of fundamental solutions (MFS) — represents solution as linear combination of fundamental solutions
**Variants of MFS with source points on the physical boundary:
***Boundary knot method (BKM)
***Boundary particle method (BPM)
***Regularized meshless method (RMM)
***Singular boundary method (SBM)
*Methods designed for problems from electromagnetics:
**Finite-difference time-domain method — a finite-difference method
**Rigorous coupled-wave analysis — semi-analytical Fourier-space method based on Floquet&#x27;s theorem 
**Transmission-line matrix method (TLM) — based on analogy between electromagnetic field and mesh of transmission lines
**Uniform theory of diffraction — specifically designed for scattering problems
*Particle-in-cell — used especially in fluid dynamics
**Multiphase particle-in-cell method — considers solid particles as both numerical particles and fluid
*High-resolution scheme
*Shock capturing method
*Vorticity confinement — for vortex-dominated flows in fluid dynamics, similar to shock capturing
*Split-step method
*Fast marching method
*Orthogonal collocation
*Lattice Boltzmann methods — for the solution of the Navier-Stokes equations
*Roe solver — for the solution of the Euler equation
*Relaxation (iterative method) — a method for solving elliptic PDEs by converting them to evolution equations
*Broad classes of methods:
**Mimetic methods — methods that respect in some sense the structure of the original problem
**Multiphysics — models consisting of various submodels with different physics
**Immersed boundary method — for simulating elastic structures immersed within fluids
*Multisymplectic integrator — extension of symplectic integrators, which are for ODEs
*Stretched grid method — for problems solution that can be related to an elastic grid behavior.

===Techniques for improving these methods===
*Multigrid method — uses a hierarchy of nested meshes to speed up the methods
*Domain decomposition methods — divides the domain in a few subdomains and solves the PDE on these subdomains
**Additive Schwarz method
**Abstract additive Schwarz method — abstract version of additive Schwarz without reference to geometric information
**Balancing domain decomposition method (BDD) — preconditioner for symmetric positive definite matrices
**Balancing domain decomposition by constraints (BDDC) — further development of BDD
**Finite element tearing and interconnect (FETI)
**FETI-DP — further development of FETI
**Fictitious domain method — preconditioner constructed with a structured mesh on a fictitious domain of simple shape
**Mortar methods — meshes on subdomain do not mesh
**Neumann–Dirichlet method — combines Neumann problem on one subdomain with Dirichlet problem on other subdomain
**Neumann–Neumann methods — domain decomposition methods that use Neumann problems on the subdomains
**Poincaré–Steklov operator — maps tangential electric field onto the equivalent electric current
**Schur complement method — early and basic method on subdomains that do not overlap
**Schwarz alternating method — early and basic method on subdomains that overlap
*Coarse space — variant of the problem which uses a discretization with fewer degrees of freedom
*Adaptive mesh refinement — uses the computed solution to refine the mesh only where necessary
*Fast multipole method — hierarchical method for evaluating particle-particle interactions
*Perfectly matched layer — artificial absorbing layer for wave equations, used to implement absorbing boundary conditions

===Grids and meshes===
*Grid classification / Types of mesh:
**Polygon mesh — consists of polygons in 2D or 3D
**Triangle mesh — consists of triangles in 2D or 3D
***Triangulation (geometry) — subdivision of given region in triangles, or higher-dimensional analogue
***Nonobtuse mesh — mesh in which all angles are less than or equal to 90°
***Point-set triangulation — triangle mesh such that given set of point are all a vertex of a triangle
***Polygon triangulation — triangle mesh inside a polygon
***Delaunay triangulation — triangulation such that no vertex is inside the circumcentre of a triangle
***Constrained Delaunay triangulation — generalization of the Delaunay triangulation that forces certain required segments into the triangulation
***Pitteway triangulation — for any point, triangle containing it has nearest neighbour of the point as a vertex
***Minimum-weight triangulation — triangulation of minimum total edge length
***Kinetic triangulation — a triangulation that moves over time
***Triangulated irregular network
***Quasi-triangulation — subdivision into simplices, where vertices are not points but arbitrary sloped line segments
**Volume mesh — consists of three-dimensional shapes
**Regular grid — consists of congruent parallelograms, or higher-dimensional analogue
**Unstructured grid
**Geodesic grid — isotropic grid on a sphere
*Mesh generation
**Image-based meshing — automatic procedure of generating meshes from 3D image data
**Marching cubes — extracts a polygon mesh from a scalar field
**Parallel mesh generation
**Ruppert&#x27;s algorithm — creates quality Delauney triangularization from piecewise linear data
*Subdivisions:
*Apollonian network — undirected graph formed by recursively subdividing a triangle 
*Barycentric subdivision — standard way of dividing arbitrary convex polygons into triangles, or the higher-dimensional analogue
*Improving an existing mesh:
**Chew&#x27;s second algorithm — improves Delauney triangularization by refining poor-quality triangles
**Laplacian smoothing — improves polynomial meshes by moving the vertices
*Jump-and-Walk algorithm — for finding triangle in a mesh containing a given point
*Spatial twist continuum — dual representation of a mesh consisting of hexahedra
*Pseudotriangle — simply connected region between any three mutually tangent convex sets
*Simplicial complex — all vertices, line segments, triangles, tetrahedra, ..., making up a mesh

===Analysis===
*Lax equivalence theorem — a consistent method is convergent if and only if it is stable
*Courant–Friedrichs–Lewy condition — stability condition for hyperbolic PDEs
*Von Neumann stability analysis — all Fourier components of the error should be stable
*Numerical diffusion — diffusion introduced by the numerical method, above to that which is naturally present
**False diffusion
*Numerical dispersion
*Numerical resistivity — the same, with resistivity instead of diffusion
*Weak formulation — a functional-analytic reformulation of the PDE necessary for some methods
*Total variation diminishing — property of schemes that do not introduce spurious oscillations
*Godunov&#x27;s theorem — linear monotone schemes can only be of first order
*Motz&#x27;s problem — benchmark problem for singularity problems

==Monte Carlo method==
*Variants of the Monte Carlo method:
**Direct simulation Monte Carlo
**Quasi-Monte Carlo method
**Markov chain Monte Carlo
***Metropolis–Hastings algorithm
****Multiple-try Metropolis — modification which allows larger step sizes
****Wang and Landau algorithm — extension of Metropolis Monte Carlo
****Equation of State Calculations by Fast Computing Machines — 1953 article proposing the Metropolis Monte Carlo algorithm
****Multicanonical ensemble — sampling technique that uses Metropolis–Hastings to compute integrals
***Gibbs sampling
***Coupling from the past
***Reversible-jump Markov chain Monte Carlo
**Dynamic Monte Carlo method
***Kinetic Monte Carlo
***Gillespie algorithm
**Particle filter
***Auxiliary particle filter
**Reverse Monte Carlo
**Demon algorithm
*Pseudo-random number sampling
**Inverse transform sampling — general and straightforward method but computationally expensive
**Rejection sampling — sample from a simpler distribution but reject some of the samples
***Ziggurat algorithm — uses a pre-computed table covering the probability distribution with rectangular segments
**For sampling from a normal distribution:
***Box–Muller transform
***Marsaglia polar method
**Convolution random number generator — generates a random variable as a sum of other random variables
**Indexed search
*Variance reduction techniques:
**Antithetic variates
**Control variates
**Importance sampling
**Stratified sampling
**VEGAS algorithm
*Low-discrepancy sequence
**Constructions of low-discrepancy sequences
*Event generator
*Parallel tempering
*Umbrella sampling — improves sampling in physical systems with significant energy barriers
*Hybrid Monte Carlo
*Ensemble Kalman filter — recursive filter suitable for problems with a large number of variables
*Transition path sampling
*Walk-on-spheres method — to generate exit-points of Brownian motion from bounded domains 
*Applications:
**Ensemble forecasting — produce multiple numerical predictions from slightly initial conditions or parameters
**Bond fluctuation model — for simulating the conformation and dynamics of polymer systems
**Iterated filtering
**Metropolis light transport
**Monte Carlo localization — estimates the position and orientation of a robot
**Monte Carlo methods for electron transport
**Monte Carlo method for photon transport
**Monte Carlo methods in finance
***Monte Carlo methods for option pricing
***Quasi-Monte Carlo methods in finance
**Monte Carlo molecular modeling
***Path integral molecular dynamics — incorporates Feynman path integrals
**Quantum Monte Carlo
***Diffusion Monte Carlo — uses a Green function to solve the Schrödinger equation
***Gaussian quantum Monte Carlo
***Path integral Monte Carlo
***Reptation Monte Carlo
***Variational Monte Carlo
**Methods for simulating the Ising model:
***Swendsen–Wang algorithm — entire sample is divided into equal-spin clusters
***Wolff algorithm — improvement of the Swendsen–Wang algorithm
***Metropolis–Hastings algorithm
**Auxiliary field Monte Carlo — computes averages of operators in many-body quantum mechanical problems
**Cross-entropy method — for multi-extremal optimization and importance sampling
*Also see the list of statistics topics

==Applications==
*Computational physics
**Computational electromagnetics
**Computational fluid dynamics (CFD)
***Numerical methods in fluid mechanics
***Large eddy simulation
***Smoothed-particle hydrodynamics
***Aeroacoustic analogy — used in numerical aeroacoustics to reduce sound sources to simple emitter types
***Stochastic Eulerian Lagrangian method — uses Eulerian description for fluids and Lagrangian for structures
***Explicit algebraic stress model
**Computational magnetohydrodynamics (CMHD) — studies electrically conducting fluids
**Climate model
**Numerical weather prediction
***Geodesic grid
**Celestial mechanics
***Numerical model of the Solar System
**Quantum jump method — used for simulating open quantum systems, operates on wave function
**Dynamic design analysis method (DDAM) — for evaluating effect of underwater explosions on equipment
*Computational chemistry
**Cell lists
**Coupled cluster
**Density functional theory
**DIIS — direct inversion in (or of) the iterative subspace
*Computational sociology
*Computational statistics

==Software==
For a large list of software, see the list of numerical-analysis software.

==Journals==
*Acta Numerica
*Mathematics of Computation (published by the American Mathematical Society)
*Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics
*BIT Numerical Mathematics
*Numerische Mathematik
*Journals from the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics
**SIAM Journal on Numerical Analysis
**SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing

==Researchers==
*Cleve Moler
*Gene H. Golub
*James H. Wilkinson
*Margaret H. Wright
*Nicholas J. Higham
*Nick Trefethen
*Peter Lax
*Richard S. Varga
*Ulrich W. Kulisch
*Vladik Kreinovich
*Chi-Wang Shu

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1663788" start="10" end="47" title="List of numerical analysis topics" label="list of [[numerical analysis]] topics"/>
<link wikidata="Q63307393" start="63" end="81" title="Validated numerics" label="Validated numerics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321565" start="83" end="99" title="Iterative method" label="Iterative method"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783502" start="101" end="120" title="Rate of convergence" label="Rate of convergence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100567" start="187" end="204" title="Order of accuracy" label="Order of accuracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783478" start="294" end="313" title="Series acceleration" label="Series acceleration"/>
<link wikidata="Q492177" start="377" end="412" title="Aitken&amp;#x27;s delta-squared process" label="Aitken&amp;#x27;s delta-squared process"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865482" start="463" end="495" title="Minimum polynomial extrapolation" label="Minimum polynomial extrapolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063089" start="521" end="545" title="Richardson extrapolation" label="Richardson extrapolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3537519" start="548" end="569" title="Shanks transformation" label="Shanks transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913772" start="654" end="684" title="Van Wijngaarden transformation" label="Van Wijngaarden transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q24555" start="746" end="767" title="Abramowitz and Stegun" label="Abramowitz and Stegun"/>
<link wikidata="Q24534" start="834" end="875" title="Digital Library of Mathematical Functions" label="Digital Library of Mathematical Functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430460" start="922" end="945" title="Curse of dimensionality" label="Curse of dimensionality"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664310" start="947" end="964" title="Local convergence" label="Local convergence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7643190" start="1048" end="1064" title="Superconvergence" label="Superconvergence"/>
<link wikidata="Q17007827" start="1066" end="1080" title="Discretization" label="Discretization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224446" start="1082" end="1101" title="Difference quotient" label="Difference quotient"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157305" start="1117" end="1168" title="Computational complexity of mathematical operations" label="Computational complexity of mathematical operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7546449" start="1171" end="1188" title="Smoothed analysis" label="Smoothed analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12207781" start="1296" end="1324" title="Symbolic-numeric computation" label="Symbolic-numeric computation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5868297" start="1407" end="1478" title="History of numerical solution of differential equations using computers" label="History of numerical solution of differential equations using computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5942174" start="1481" end="1529" title="Hundred-dollar, Hundred-digit Challenge problems" label="Hundred-dollar, Hundred-digit Challenge problems"/>
<link wikidata="Q4505456" start="1565" end="1579" title="Nick Trefethen" label="Nick Trefethen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1590" end="1651" title="International Workshops on Lattice QCD and Numerical Analysis" label="International Workshops on Lattice QCD and Numerical Analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806132" start="1654" end="1695" title="Timeline of numerical analysis after 1945" label="Timeline of numerical analysis after 1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779479" start="1727" end="1745" title="Collocation method" label="Collocation method"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751397" start="1831" end="1847" title="Level-set method" label="Level-set method"/>
<link wikidata="Q6535093" start="1851" end="1878" title="Level set (data structures)" label="Level set (data structures)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7521883" start="1927" end="1949" title="Sinc numerical methods" label="Sinc numerical methods"/>
<link wikidata="Q3855613" start="2047" end="2058" title="ABS methods" label="ABS methods"/>
<link wikidata="Q25340358" start="2070" end="2098" title="Error analysis (mathematics)" label="Error analysis (mathematics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q27058" start="2100" end="2113" title="Approximation" label="Approximation"/>
<link wikidata="Q865920" start="2115" end="2134" title="Approximation error" label="Approximation error"/>
<link wikidata="Q104589774" start="2136" end="2161" title="Catastrophic cancellation" label="Catastrophic cancellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147936" start="2163" end="2179" title="Condition number" label="Condition number"/>
<link wikidata="Q3890355" start="2181" end="2201" title="Discretization error" label="Discretization error"/>
<link wikidata="Q117879" start="2203" end="2217" title="Floating point" label="Floating point"/>
<link wikidata="Q5613979" start="2227" end="2238" title="Guard digit" label="Guard digit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080547" start="2317" end="2327" title="Truncation" label="Truncation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145211" start="2412" end="2427" title="Round-off error" label="Round-off error"/>
<link wikidata="Q7069647" start="2431" end="2467" title="Numeric precision in Microsoft Excel" label="Numeric precision in Microsoft Excel"/>
<link wikidata="Q527381" start="2470" end="2500" title="Arbitrary-precision arithmetic" label="Arbitrary-precision arithmetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671453" start="2502" end="2521" title="Interval arithmetic" label="Interval arithmetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q17086191" start="2630" end="2649" title="Interval contractor" label="Interval contractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q17092627" start="2729" end="2749" title="Interval propagation" label="Interval propagation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6057267" start="2853" end="2885" title="Interval boundary element method" label="Interval boundary element method"/>
<link wikidata="Q6057275" start="2887" end="2910" title="Interval finite element" label="Interval finite element"/>
<link wikidata="Q104589774" start="2912" end="2932" title="Loss of significance" label="Loss of significance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7069656" start="2934" end="2949" title="Numerical error" label="Numerical error"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430640" start="2951" end="2970" title="Numerical stability" label="Numerical stability"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364905" start="2993" end="3019" title="Propagation of uncertainty" label="Propagation of uncertainty"/>
<link wikidata="Q287450" start="3022" end="3051" title="Residual (numerical analysis)" label="Residual (numerical analysis)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4339852" start="3053" end="3083" title="Relative change and difference" label="Relative change and difference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056761" start="3226" end="3245" title="Significant figures" label="Significant figures"/>
<link wikidata="Q16834082" start="3248" end="3268" title="Artificial precision" label="Artificial precision"/>
<link wikidata="Q3467464" start="3400" end="3415" title="False precision" label="False precision"/>
<link wikidata="Q104601992" start="3468" end="3482" title="Sterbenz lemma" label="Sterbenz lemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434686" start="3484" end="3500" title="Truncation error" label="Truncation error"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455898" start="3560" end="3578" title="Well-posed problem" label="Well-posed problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3622729" start="3580" end="3597" title="Affine arithmetic" label="Affine arithmetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q30674308" start="3637" end="3659" title="Unrestricted algorithm" label="Unrestricted algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982293" start="3674" end="3699" title="Kahan summation algorithm" label="Kahan summation algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q17104961" start="3702" end="3720" title="Pairwise summation" label="Pairwise summation"/>
<link wikidata="Q584783" start="3773" end="3789" title="Binary splitting" label="Binary splitting"/>
<link wikidata="Q104858020" start="3792" end="3796" title="2Sum" label="2Sum"/>
<link wikidata="Q130762" start="3816" end="3840" title="Multiplication algorithm" label="Multiplication algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q629940" start="3880" end="3899" title="Karatsuba algorithm" label="Karatsuba algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522355" start="3976" end="4000" title="Toom–Cook multiplication" label="Toom–Cook multiplication"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938391" start="4048" end="4076" title="Schönhage–Strassen algorithm" label="Schönhage–Strassen algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q130762" start="4134" end="4156" title="Fürer&amp;#x27;s algorithm" label="Fürer&amp;#x27;s algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526714" start="4215" end="4233" title="Division algorithm" label="Division algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854385" start="4293" end="4306" title="Long division" label="Long division"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526714" start="4309" end="4327" title="Restoring division" label="Restoring division"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526714" start="4330" end="4352" title="Non-restoring division" label="Non-restoring division"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526714" start="4355" end="4367" title="SRT division" label="SRT division"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526714" start="4370" end="4393" title="Newton–Raphson division" label="Newton–Raphson division"/>
<link wikidata="Q374195" start="4400" end="4420" title="Newton&amp;#x27;s method" label="Newton&amp;#x27;s method"/>
<link wikidata="Q216906" start="4433" end="4443" title="Multiplicative inverse" label="reciprocal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526714" start="4516" end="4536" title="Goldschmidt division" label="Goldschmidt division"/>
<link wikidata="Q864127" start="4556" end="4582" title="Exponentiation by squaring" label="Exponentiation by squaring"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681307" start="4585" end="4614" title="Addition-chain exponentiation" label="Addition-chain exponentiation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4616" end="4649" title="Multiplicative inverse#Algorithms" label="Multiplicative inverse Algorithms"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4720" end="4740" title="Newton&amp;#x27;s_method#Multiplicative_inverses_of_numbers_and_power_series" label="Newton&amp;#x27;s method"/>
<link wikidata="Q944658" start="4757" end="4777" title="Horner&amp;#x27;s method" label="Horner&amp;#x27;s method"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401838" start="4780" end="4800" title="Estrin&amp;#x27;s scheme" label="Estrin&amp;#x27;s scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067155" start="4883" end="4901" title="Clenshaw algorithm" label="Clenshaw algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179419" start="4904" end="4933" title="De Casteljau&amp;#x27;s algorithm" label="De Casteljau&amp;#x27;s algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3416230" start="4967" end="4986" title="Integer square root" label="Integer square root"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197114" start="4989" end="5022" title="Methods of computing square roots" label="Methods of computing square roots"/>
<link wikidata="Q601053" start="5025" end="5055" title="Nth root algorithm" label="&amp;quot;n&amp;quot;th root algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7263846" start="5058" end="5063" title="hypot" label="hypot"/>
<link wikidata="Q4735165" start="5118" end="5151" title="Alpha max plus beta min algorithm" label="Alpha max plus beta min algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q32980" start="5180" end="5204" title="Fast inverse square root" label="Fast inverse square root"/>
<link wikidata="Q787322" start="5345" end="5365" title="Trigonometric tables" label="Trigonometric tables"/>
<link wikidata="Q116076" start="5408" end="5414" title="CORDIC" label="CORDIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q556818" start="5473" end="5486" title="BKM algorithm" label="BKM algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483801" start="5580" end="5601" title="Lanczos approximation" label="Lanczos approximation"/>
<link wikidata="Q935210" start="5604" end="5631" title="Spouge&amp;#x27;s approximation" label="Spouge&amp;#x27;s approximation"/>
<link wikidata="Q476167" start="5711" end="5721" title="AGM method" label="AGM method"/>
<link wikidata="Q4291816" start="5803" end="5813" title="FEE method" label="FEE method"/>
<link wikidata="Q206925" start="5879" end="5891" title="power series" label="power series"/>
<link wikidata="Q5517721" start="5912" end="5938" title="Gal&amp;#x27;s accurate tables" label="Gal&amp;#x27;s accurate tables"/>
<link wikidata="Q11254140" start="6014" end="6030" title="Spigot algorithm" label="Spigot algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130396" start="6097" end="6114" title="Approximations of π" label="Approximations of"/>
<link wikidata="Q10899270" start="6118" end="6144" title="Liu Hui&amp;#x27;s π algorithm" label="Liu Hui&amp;#x27;s π algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q97226587" start="6207" end="6228" title="Leibniz formula for π" label="Leibniz formula for π"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501324" start="6279" end="6293" title="Wallis product" label="Wallis product"/>
<link wikidata="Q949597" start="6340" end="6360" title="Viète&amp;#x27;s formula" label="Viète&amp;#x27;s formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448949" start="6422" end="6446" title="Gauss–Legendre algorithm" label="Gauss–Legendre algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3751018" start="6532" end="6556" title="Borwein&amp;#x27;s algorithm" label="Borwein&amp;#x27;s algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2208385" start="6628" end="6648" title="Chudnovsky algorithm" label="Chudnovsky algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q803807" start="6708" end="6738" title="Bailey–Borwein–Plouffe formula" label="Bailey–Borwein–Plouffe formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108664" start="6801" end="6823" title="Bellard&amp;#x27;s formula" label="Bellard&amp;#x27;s formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q5238024" start="6877" end="6905" title="List of formulae involving π" label="List of formulae involving π"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004891" start="6936" end="6960" title="Numerical linear algebra" label="Numerical linear algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050404" start="7097" end="7110" title="Sparse matrix" label="Sparse matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q806350" start="7114" end="7125" title="Band matrix" label="Band matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q856952" start="7129" end="7146" title="Bidiagonal matrix" label="Bidiagonal matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755277" start="7150" end="7168" title="Tridiagonal matrix" label="Tridiagonal matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q806350" start="7172" end="7192" title="Pentadiagonal matrix" label="Pentadiagonal matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q7537931" start="7196" end="7210" title="Skyline matrix" label="Skyline matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q245457" start="7213" end="7229" title="Circulant matrix" label="Circulant matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q506265" start="7232" end="7249" title="Triangular matrix" label="Triangular matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q952222" start="7252" end="7278" title="Diagonally dominant matrix" label="Diagonally dominant matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q884772" start="7281" end="7293" title="Block matrix" label="Block matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q7616382" start="7334" end="7350" title="Stieltjes matrix" label="Stieltjes matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q612991" start="7422" end="7436" title="Hilbert matrix" label="Hilbert matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q8002551" start="7527" end="7543" title="Wilkinson matrix" label="Wilkinson matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166397" start="7647" end="7664" title="Convergent matrix" label="Convergent matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q728507" start="7771" end="7789" title="Strassen algorithm" label="Strassen algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q17082383" start="7792" end="7822" title="Coppersmith–Winograd algorithm" label="Coppersmith–Winograd algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2835781" start="7825" end="7848" title="Cannon&amp;#x27;s algorithm" label="Cannon&amp;#x27;s algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q6522941" start="7935" end="7960" title="Freivalds&amp;#x27; algorithm" label="Freivalds&amp;#x27; algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361088" start="8031" end="8051" title="Matrix decomposition" label="Matrix decomposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q833089" start="8056" end="8072" title="LU decomposition" label="LU decomposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q653242" start="8117" end="8133" title="QR decomposition" label="QR decomposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7277657" start="8181" end="8199" title="RRQR factorization" label="RRQR factorization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101158" start="8278" end="8297" title="Polar decomposition" label="Polar decomposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q194919" start="8395" end="8413" title="Eigendecomposition of a matrix" label="Eigendecomposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q838495" start="8474" end="8492" title="Jordan normal form" label="Jordan normal form"/>
<link wikidata="Q15984843" start="8571" end="8590" title="Weyr canonical form" label="Weyr canonical form"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631086" start="8630" end="8660" title="Jordan–Chevalley decomposition" label="Jordan–Chevalley decomposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064218" start="8726" end="8745" title="Schur decomposition" label="Schur decomposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q420904" start="8814" end="8842" title="Singular value decomposition" label="Singular value decomposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q6787891" start="8904" end="8920" title="Matrix splitting" label="Matrix splitting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658" start="9028" end="9048" title="Gaussian elimination" label="Gaussian elimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091296" start="9051" end="9067" title="Row echelon form" label="Row echelon form"/>
<link wikidata="Q4860404" start="9131" end="9148" title="Bareiss algorithm" label="Bareiss algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1819156" start="9250" end="9278" title="Tridiagonal matrix algorithm" label="Tridiagonal matrix algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q833089" start="9347" end="9363" title="LU decomposition" label="LU decomposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q15924432" start="9439" end="9465" title="Crout matrix decomposition" label="Crout matrix decomposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q6460288" start="9468" end="9480" title="LU reduction" label="LU reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q4927151" start="9547" end="9569" title="Block LU decomposition" label="Block LU decomposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q515375" start="9571" end="9593" title="Cholesky decomposition" label="Cholesky decomposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q17098969" start="9651" end="9675" title="Minimum degree algorithm" label="Minimum degree algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7661162" start="9678" end="9709" title="Symbolic Cholesky decomposition" label="Symbolic Cholesky decomposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q6094420" start="9711" end="9731" title="Iterative refinement" label="Iterative refinement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505913" start="9837" end="9851" title="Frontal solver" label="Frontal solver"/>
<link wikidata="Q6997812" start="9887" end="9904" title="Nested dissection" label="Nested dissection"/>
<link wikidata="Q11679774" start="9960" end="9978" title="Levinson recursion" label="Levinson recursion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7392567" start="10004" end="10019" title="SPIKE algorithm" label="SPIKE algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q16235112" start="10073" end="10089" title="Cyclic reduction" label="Cyclic reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481893" start="10160" end="10173" title="Jacobi method" label="Jacobi method"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069090" start="10176" end="10195" title="Gauss–Seidel method" label="Gauss–Seidel method"/>
<link wikidata="Q1561270" start="10199" end="10225" title="Successive over-relaxation" label="Successive over-relaxation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16937163" start="10288" end="10324" title="Symmetric successive over-relaxation" label="Symmetric successive over-relaxation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839620" start="10375" end="10396" title="Backfitting algorithm" label="Backfitting algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375161" start="10496" end="10525" title="Modified Richardson iteration" label="Modified Richardson iteration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191895" start="10528" end="10553" title="Conjugate gradient method" label="Conjugate gradient method"/>
<link wikidata="Q5262612" start="10609" end="10652" title="Derivation of the conjugate gradient method" label="Derivation of the conjugate gradient method"/>
<link wikidata="Q17086453" start="10656" end="10691" title="Nonlinear conjugate gradient method" label="Nonlinear conjugate gradient method"/>
<link wikidata="Q855169" start="10747" end="10774" title="Biconjugate gradient method" label="Biconjugate gradient method"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903720" start="10785" end="10823" title="Biconjugate gradient stabilized method" label="Biconjugate gradient stabilized method"/>
<link wikidata="Q5161159" start="10880" end="10905" title="Conjugate residual method" label="Conjugate residual method"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432976" start="10970" end="11005" title="Generalized minimal residual method" label="Generalized minimal residual method"/>
<link wikidata="Q2457511" start="11049" end="11068" title="Chebyshev iteration" label="Chebyshev iteration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7619072" start="11128" end="11147" title="Stone&amp;#x27;s method" label="Stone&amp;#x27;s method"/>
<link wikidata="Q288600" start="11224" end="11239" title="Kaczmarz method" label="Kaczmarz method"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754327" start="11242" end="11256" title="Preconditioner" label="Preconditioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6015160" start="11260" end="11293" title="Incomplete Cholesky factorization" label="Incomplete Cholesky factorization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654069" start="11350" end="11377" title="Incomplete LU factorization" label="Incomplete LU factorization"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144437" start="11427" end="11442" title="Uzawa iteration" label="Uzawa iteration"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11566" end="11601" title="Kernel (matrix)#Numerical computation of null space" label="Numerical computation of null space"/>
<link wikidata="Q43219517" start="11654" end="11681" title="Moore–Penrose pseudoinverse" label="Moore–Penrose pseudoinverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q28684319" start="11779" end="11799" title="Sparse approximation" label="Sparse approximation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766437" start="11917" end="11937" title="Eigenvalue algorithm" label="Eigenvalue algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426504" start="12004" end="12019" title="Power iteration" label="Power iteration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671724" start="12021" end="12038" title="Inverse iteration" label="Inverse iteration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7298489" start="12040" end="12067" title="Rayleigh quotient iteration" label="Rayleigh quotient iteration"/>
<link wikidata="Q696822" start="12069" end="12086" title="Arnoldi iteration" label="Arnoldi iteration"/>
<link wikidata="Q366640" start="12116" end="12133" title="Lanczos algorithm" label="Lanczos algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4927153" start="12190" end="12213" title="Block Lanczos algorithm" label="Block Lanczos algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q453132" start="12256" end="12268" title="QR algorithm" label="QR algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677726" start="12270" end="12297" title="Jacobi eigenvalue algorithm" label="Jacobi eigenvalue algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q6119655" start="12373" end="12388" title="Jacobi rotation" label="Jacobi rotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6119642" start="12438" end="12482" title="Jacobi method for complex Hermitian matrices" label="Jacobi method for complex Hermitian matrices"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283998" start="12484" end="12523" title="Divide-and-conquer eigenvalue algorithm" label="Divide-and-conquer eigenvalue algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404195" start="12525" end="12547" title="Folded spectrum method" label="Folded spectrum method"/>
<link wikidata="Q6459462" start="12549" end="12555" title="LOBPCG" label="LOBPCG"/>
<link wikidata="Q5348914" start="12622" end="12645" title="Eigenvalue perturbation" label="Eigenvalue perturbation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702189" start="12745" end="12762" title="Orthogonalization" label="Orthogonalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q475239" start="12777" end="12797" title="Gram–Schmidt process" label="Gram–Schmidt process"/>
<link wikidata="Q304490" start="12800" end="12826" title="Householder transformation" label="Householder transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5915856" start="12830" end="12850" title="Householder operator" label="Householder operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367799" start="12927" end="12942" title="Givens rotation" label="Givens rotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757151" start="12944" end="12959" title="Krylov subspace" label="Krylov subspace"/>
<link wikidata="Q4927198" start="12961" end="12987" title="Block matrix pseudoinverse" label="Block matrix pseudoinverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q4904167" start="12989" end="13006" title="Bidiagonalization" label="Bidiagonalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146458" start="13008" end="13031" title="Cuthill–McKee algorithm" label="Cuthill–McKee algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q17092365" start="13104" end="13133" title="In-place matrix transposition" label="In-place matrix transposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425280" start="13211" end="13224" title="Pivot element" label="Pivot element"/>
<link wikidata="Q4080929" start="13282" end="13301" title="Matrix-free methods" label="Matrix-free methods"/>
<link wikidata="Q187631" start="13414" end="13427" title="Interpolation" label="Interpolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202129" start="13489" end="13519" title="Nearest-neighbor interpolation" label="Nearest-neighbor interpolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q637347" start="13594" end="13618" title="Polynomial interpolation" label="Polynomial interpolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266329" start="13651" end="13671" title="Linear interpolation" label="Linear interpolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990319" start="13673" end="13696" title="Runge&amp;#x27;s phenomenon" label="Runge&amp;#x27;s phenomenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q579544" start="13698" end="13716" title="Vandermonde matrix" label="Vandermonde matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q619511" start="13718" end="13739" title="Chebyshev polynomials" label="Chebyshev polynomials"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052508" start="13741" end="13756" title="Chebyshev nodes" label="Chebyshev nodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6511317" start="13758" end="13775" title="Lebesgue constant" label="Lebesgue constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746387" start="13817" end="13834" title="Newton polynomial" label="Newton polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993265" start="13838" end="13857" title="Divided differences" label="Divided differences"/>
<link wikidata="Q7884545" start="13861" end="13885" title="Neville&amp;#x27;s algorithm" label="Neville&amp;#x27;s algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q861606" start="13947" end="13966" title="Lagrange polynomial" label="Lagrange polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q826841" start="13969" end="13989" title="Bernstein polynomial" label="Bernstein polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q17003778" start="14030" end="14070" title="Brahmagupta&amp;#x27;s interpolation formula" label="Brahmagupta&amp;#x27;s interpolation formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q612143" start="14163" end="14185" title="Bilinear interpolation" label="Bilinear interpolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q861176" start="14188" end="14211" title="Trilinear interpolation" label="Trilinear interpolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q611705" start="14214" end="14235" title="Bicubic interpolation" label="Bicubic interpolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7841314" start="14238" end="14260" title="Tricubic interpolation" label="Tricubic interpolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7123977" start="14263" end="14275" title="Padua points" label="Padua points"/>
<link wikidata="Q44451" start="14374" end="14395" title="Hermite interpolation" label="Hermite interpolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3800523" start="14397" end="14419" title="Birkhoff interpolation" label="Birkhoff interpolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4666728" start="14421" end="14449" title="Abel–Goncharov interpolation" label="Abel–Goncharov interpolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q545002" start="14478" end="14498" title="Spline interpolation" label="Spline interpolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q735256" start="14541" end="14561" title="Spline (mathematics)" label="Spline (mathematics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4426180" start="14612" end="14626" title="Perfect spline" label="Perfect spline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537263" start="14709" end="14729" title="Cubic Hermite spline" label="Cubic Hermite spline"/>
<link wikidata="Q17006390" start="14732" end="14762" title="Centripetal Catmull–Rom spline" label="Centripetal Catmull–Rom spline"/>
<link wikidata="Q4044484" start="14840" end="14868" title="Monotone cubic interpolation" label="Monotone cubic interpolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5741918" start="14870" end="14884" title="Hermite spline" label="Hermite spline"/>
<link wikidata="Q214728" start="14886" end="14898" title="Bézier curve" label="Bézier curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179419" start="14901" end="14930" title="De Casteljau&amp;#x27;s algorithm" label="De Casteljau&amp;#x27;s algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5005075" start="14933" end="14955" title="composite Bézier curve" label="composite Bézier curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q612409" start="14997" end="15012" title="Bézier triangle" label="Bézier triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q926066" start="15040" end="15054" title="Bézier surface" label="Bézier surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083109" start="15078" end="15086" title="B-spline" label="B-spline"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951620" start="15089" end="15099" title="Box spline" label="Box spline"/>
<link wikidata="Q7847909" start="15145" end="15169" title="Truncated power function" label="Truncated power function"/>
<link wikidata="Q5244271" start="15172" end="15196" title="De Boor&amp;#x27;s algorithm" label="De Boor&amp;#x27;s algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q734737" start="15242" end="15271" title="Non-uniform rational B-spline" label="Non-uniform rational B-spline"/>
<link wikidata="Q7667854" start="15282" end="15290" title="T-spline" label="T-spline"/>
<link wikidata="Q3966931" start="15389" end="15412" title="Kochanek–Bartels spline" label="Kochanek–Bartels spline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444718" start="15414" end="15425" title="Coons patch" label="Coons patch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6712116" start="15508" end="15516" title="M-spline" label="M-spline"/>
<link wikidata="Q5967762" start="15542" end="15550" title="I-spline" label="I-spline"/>
<link wikidata="Q7546460" start="15603" end="15619" title="Smoothing spline" label="Smoothing spline"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928429" start="15662" end="15682" title="Blossom (functional)" label="Blossom (functional)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977698" start="15765" end="15812" title="List of numerical computational geometry topics" label="List of numerical computational geometry topics"/>
<link wikidata="Q464356" start="15848" end="15875" title="Trigonometric interpolation" label="Trigonometric interpolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878" start="15922" end="15948" title="Discrete Fourier transform" label="Discrete Fourier transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365258" start="16020" end="16075" title="Relations between Fourier transforms and Fourier series" label="Relations between Fourier transforms and Fourier series"/>
<link wikidata="Q623950" start="16077" end="16099" title="Fast Fourier transform" label="Fast Fourier transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q886077" start="16169" end="16199" title="Bluestein&amp;#x27;s FFT algorithm" label="Bluestein&amp;#x27;s FFT algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4979897" start="16202" end="16228" title="Bruun&amp;#x27;s FFT algorithm" label="Bruun&amp;#x27;s FFT algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167446" start="16231" end="16257" title="Cooley–Tukey FFT algorithm" label="Cooley–Tukey FFT algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q17103599" start="16260" end="16285" title="Split-radix FFT algorithm" label="Split-radix FFT algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472192" start="16351" end="16369" title="Goertzel algorithm" label="Goertzel algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243214" start="16372" end="16398" title="Prime-factor FFT algorithm" label="Prime-factor FFT algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280126" start="16401" end="16427" title="Rader&amp;#x27;s FFT algorithm" label="Rader&amp;#x27;s FFT algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918660" start="16430" end="16454" title="Bit-reversal permutation" label="Bit-reversal permutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529451" start="16540" end="16557" title="Butterfly diagram" label="Butterfly diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q7857913" start="16560" end="16574" title="Twiddle factor" label="Twiddle factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q17006372" start="16651" end="16684" title="Cyclotomic fast Fourier transform" label="Cyclotomic fast Fourier transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1611641" start="16815" end="16833" title="Overlap–add method" label="Overlap–add method"/>
<link wikidata="Q1791834" start="16837" end="16856" title="Overlap–save method" label="Overlap–save method"/>
<link wikidata="Q2858951" start="16858" end="16877" title="Sigma approximation" label="Sigma approximation"/>
<link wikidata="Q906024" start="16879" end="16895" title="Dirichlet kernel" label="Dirichlet kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5374" start="16986" end="17002" title="Gibbs phenomenon" label="Gibbs phenomenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7520822" start="17030" end="17059" title="Simple rational approximation" label="Simple rational approximation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7226633" start="17062" end="17103" title="Polynomial and rational function modeling" label="Polynomial and rational function modeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q831390" start="17159" end="17166" title="Wavelet" label="Wavelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165530" start="17169" end="17187" title="Continuous wavelet" label="Continuous wavelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834016" start="17190" end="17205" title="Transfer matrix" label="Transfer matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q6621417" start="17218" end="17252" title="List of functional analysis topics" label="List of functional analysis topics"/>
<link wikidata="Q17008768" start="17254" end="17288" title="List of wavelet-related transforms" label="List of wavelet-related transforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430701" start="17290" end="17316" title="Inverse distance weighting" label="Inverse distance weighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588488" start="17318" end="17339" title="Radial basis function" label="Radial basis function"/>
<link wikidata="Q7226491" start="17438" end="17457" title="Polyharmonic spline" label="Polyharmonic spline"/>
<link wikidata="Q7784288" start="17500" end="17517" title="Thin plate spline" label="Thin plate spline"/>
<link wikidata="Q17029399" start="17587" end="17603" title="Hierarchical RBF" label="Hierarchical RBF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529124" start="17605" end="17624" title="Subdivision surface" label="Subdivision surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051211" start="17699" end="17732" title="Catmull–Clark subdivision surface" label="Catmull–Clark subdivision surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584302" start="17735" end="17764" title="Doo–Sabin subdivision surface" label="Doo–Sabin subdivision surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q729249" start="17767" end="17791" title="Loop subdivision surface" label="Loop subdivision surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q7540145" start="17793" end="17798" title="Slerp" label="Slerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q6073530" start="17992" end="18035" title="Irrational base discrete weighted transform" label="Irrational base discrete weighted transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q7190737" start="18037" end="18066" title="Nevanlinna–Pick interpolation" label="Nevanlinna–Pick interpolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7190737" start="18143" end="18154" title="Pick matrix" label="Pick matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q6334079" start="18248" end="18274" title="Multivariate interpolation" label="Multivariate interpolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4861558" start="18345" end="18365" title="Barnes interpolation" label="Barnes interpolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444718" start="18445" end="18458" title="Coons surface" label="Coons surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q913012" start="18526" end="18544" title="Lanczos resampling" label="Lanczos resampling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2534253" start="18591" end="18621" title="Natural neighbor interpolation" label="Natural neighbor interpolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7118801" start="18624" end="18635" title="PDE surface" label="PDE surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834059" start="18638" end="18663" title="Transfinite interpolation" label="Transfinite interpolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817734" start="18738" end="18760" title="Trend surface analysis" label="Trend surface analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q774123" start="18958" end="18978" title="Approximation theory" label="Approximation theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100757" start="18980" end="19003" title="Orders of approximation" label="Orders of approximation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3229342" start="19005" end="19026" title="Lebesgue&amp;#x27;s lemma" label="Lebesgue&amp;#x27;s lemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q603159" start="19028" end="19041" title="Curve fitting" label="Curve fitting"/>
<link wikidata="Q7917823" start="19044" end="19071" title="Vector field reconstruction" label="Vector field reconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144872" start="19073" end="19094" title="Modulus of continuity" label="Modulus of continuity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6510405" start="19132" end="19170" title="Least squares (function approximation)" label="Least squares (function approximation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865376" start="19209" end="19240" title="Minimax approximation algorithm" label="Minimax approximation algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384549" start="19304" end="19327" title="Equioscillation theorem" label="Equioscillation theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q16956925" start="19383" end="19403" title="Unisolvent point set" label="Unisolvent point set"/>
<link wikidata="Q939927" start="19499" end="19524" title="Stone–Weierstrass theorem" label="Stone–Weierstrass theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071054" start="19660" end="19680" title="Linear approximation" label="Linear approximation"/>
<link wikidata="Q826841" start="19683" end="19703" title="Bernstein polynomial" label="Bernstein polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2782386" start="19765" end="19790" title="Bernstein&amp;#x27;s constant" label="Bernstein&amp;#x27;s constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2835816" start="19852" end="19867" title="Remez algorithm" label="Remez algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q25345912" start="19938" end="19989" title="Bernstein&amp;#x27;s inequality (mathematical analysis)" label="Bernstein&amp;#x27;s inequality (mathematical analysis)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964537" start="20052" end="20076" title="Mergelyan&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Mergelyan&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527129" start="20141" end="20160" title="Müntz–Szász theorem" label="Müntz–Szász theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816909" start="20255" end="20276" title="Bramble–Hilbert lemma" label="Bramble–Hilbert lemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282034" start="20356" end="20386" title="Discrete Chebyshev polynomials" label="Discrete Chebyshev polynomials"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438430" start="20449" end="20470" title="Favard&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Favard&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q4317418" start="20624" end="20649" title="Jackson&amp;#x27;s inequality" label="Jackson&amp;#x27;s inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q4894565" start="20720" end="20767" title="Bernstein&amp;#x27;s theorem (approximation theory)" label="Bernstein&amp;#x27;s theorem (approximation theory)"/>
<link wikidata="Q571154" start="20812" end="20832" title="Fejér&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Fejér&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5385327" start="20937" end="20959" title="Erdős–Turán inequality" label="Erdős–Turán inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q6927143" start="21081" end="21101" title="Moving least squares" label="Moving least squares"/>
<link wikidata="Q2452504" start="21104" end="21120" title="Padé approximant" label="Padé approximant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7124033" start="21124" end="21134" title="Padé table" label="Padé table"/>
<link wikidata="Q5675112" start="21166" end="21191" title="Hartogs–Rosenthal theorem" label="Hartogs–Rosenthal theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7665169" start="21303" end="21326" title="Szász–Mirakyan operator" label="Szász–Mirakyan operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7665168" start="21419" end="21454" title="Szász–Mirakjan–Kantorovich operator" label="Szász–Mirakjan–Kantorovich operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867603" start="21457" end="21474" title="Baskakov operator" label="Baskakov operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438432" start="21559" end="21574" title="Favard operator" label="Favard operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7646884" start="21613" end="21628" title="Surrogate model" label="Surrogate model"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164492" start="21713" end="21741" title="Constructive function theory" label="Constructive function theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894123" start="21822" end="21853" title="Universal differential equation" label="Universal differential equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5441610" start="21945" end="21959" title="Fekete problem" label="Fekete problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5041151" start="22035" end="22060" title="Carleman&amp;#x27;s condition" label="Carleman&amp;#x27;s condition"/>
<link wikidata="Q6436610" start="22140" end="22162" title="Krein&amp;#x27;s condition" label="Krein&amp;#x27;s condition"/>
<link wikidata="Q6533272" start="22229" end="22245" title="Lethargy theorem" label="Lethargy theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027028" start="22332" end="22386" title="Wirtinger&amp;#x27;s representation and projection theorem" label="Wirtinger&amp;#x27;s representation and projection theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164484" start="22400" end="22426" title="Constructive Approximation" label="Constructive Approximation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294795" start="22429" end="22460" title="Journal of Approximation Theory" label="Journal of Approximation Theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q744069" start="22483" end="22496" title="Extrapolation" label="Extrapolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6553483" start="22499" end="22525" title="Linear predictive analysis" label="Linear predictive analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887012" start="22550" end="22570" title="Unisolvent functions" label="Unisolvent functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q208042" start="22642" end="22661" title="Regression analysis" label="Regression analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3455874" start="22664" end="22683" title="Isotonic regression" label="Isotonic regression"/>
<link wikidata="Q5196058" start="22685" end="22709" title="Curve-fitting compaction" label="Curve-fitting compaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q11713455" start="22711" end="22744" title="Interpolation (computer graphics)" label="Interpolation (computer graphics)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22798" end="22823" title="#Numerical linear algebra" label="#Numerical linear algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085860" start="22852" end="22874" title="Root-finding algorithm" label="Root-finding algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q866300" start="22966" end="22982" title="Bisection method" label="Bisection method"/>
<link wikidata="Q6518935" start="23026" end="23048" title="Lehmer–Schur algorithm" label="Lehmer–Schur algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030759" start="23083" end="23104" title="Fixed-point iteration" label="Fixed-point iteration"/>
<link wikidata="Q374195" start="23107" end="23127" title="Newton&amp;#x27;s method" label="Newton&amp;#x27;s method"/>
<link wikidata="Q2226698" start="23213" end="23232" title="Kantorovich theorem" label="Kantorovich theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151001" start="23310" end="23324" title="Newton fractal" label="Newton fractal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476018" start="23411" end="23430" title="Quasi-Newton method" label="Quasi-Newton method"/>
<link wikidata="Q761993" start="23476" end="23497" title="Broyden&amp;#x27;s method" label="Broyden&amp;#x27;s method"/>
<link wikidata="Q7661313" start="23544" end="23562" title="Symmetric rank-one" label="Symmetric rank-one"/>
<link wikidata="Q17006685" start="23653" end="23684" title="Davidon–Fletcher–Powell formula" label="Davidon–Fletcher–Powell formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2877013" start="23760" end="23802" title="Broyden–Fletcher–Goldfarb–Shanno algorithm" label="Broyden–Fletcher–Goldfarb–Shanno algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q6549489" start="23887" end="23906" title="Limited-memory BFGS" label="Limited-memory BFGS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7606635" start="23993" end="24017" title="Steffensen&amp;#x27;s method" label="Steffensen&amp;#x27;s method"/>
<link wikidata="Q14915286" start="24073" end="24086" title="Secant method" label="Secant method"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476057" start="24142" end="24163" title="False position method" label="False position method"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090477" start="24219" end="24239" title="Muller&amp;#x27;s method" label="Muller&amp;#x27;s method"/>
<link wikidata="Q14920680" start="24300" end="24337" title="Sidi&amp;#x27;s generalized secant method" label="Sidi&amp;#x27;s generalized secant method"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153554" start="24381" end="24412" title="Inverse quadratic interpolation" label="Inverse quadratic interpolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q905988" start="24479" end="24498" title="Brent&amp;#x27;s method" label="Brent&amp;#x27;s method"/>
<link wikidata="Q1864934" start="24580" end="24600" title="Ridders&amp;#x27; method" label="Ridders&amp;#x27; method"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476051" start="24689" end="24709" title="Halley&amp;#x27;s method" label="Halley&amp;#x27;s method"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631446" start="24810" end="24835" title="Householder&amp;#x27;s method" label="Householder&amp;#x27;s method"/>
<link wikidata="Q4667181" start="24990" end="25003" title="Aberth method" label="Aberth method"/>
<link wikidata="Q384021" start="25006" end="25028" title="Bairstow&amp;#x27;s method" label="Bairstow&amp;#x27;s method"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299016" start="25031" end="25051" title="Durand–Kerner method" label="Durand–Kerner method"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592179" start="25054" end="25075" title="Graeffe&amp;#x27;s method" label="Graeffe&amp;#x27;s method"/>
<link wikidata="Q6177639" start="25078" end="25101" title="Jenkins–Traub algorithm" label="Jenkins–Traub algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171964" start="25138" end="25160" title="Laguerre&amp;#x27;s method" label="Laguerre&amp;#x27;s method"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269645" start="25163" end="25186" title="Splitting circle method" label="Splitting circle method"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613931" start="25200" end="25227" title="Wilkinson&amp;#x27;s polynomial" label="Wilkinson&amp;#x27;s polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q7069654" start="25229" end="25251" title="Numerical continuation" label="Numerical continuation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191424" start="25313" end="25342" title="Piecewise linear continuation" label="Piecewise linear continuation"/>
<link wikidata="Q141495" start="25361" end="25386" title="Mathematical optimization" label="Mathematical optimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823740" start="25471" end="25481" title="Active set" label="Active set"/>
<link wikidata="Q17013331" start="25483" end="25501" title="Candidate solution" label="Candidate solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303305" start="25503" end="25527" title="Constraint (mathematics)" label="Constraint (mathematics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4477763" start="25530" end="25554" title="Constrained optimization" label="Constrained optimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q4913885" start="25606" end="25623" title="Binary constraint" label="Binary constraint"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171638" start="25676" end="25691" title="Corner solution" label="Corner solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q17013331" start="25693" end="25708" title="Feasible region" label="Feasible region"/>
<link wikidata="Q845060" start="25787" end="25801" title="Global optimum" label="Global optimum"/>
<link wikidata="Q845060" start="25806" end="25819" title="Local optimum" label="Local optimum"/>
<link wikidata="Q845060" start="25821" end="25838" title="Maxima and minima" label="Maxima and minima"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765718" start="25840" end="25854" title="Slack variable" label="Slack variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165499" start="25856" end="25879" title="Continuous optimization" label="Continuous optimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493786" start="25881" end="25902" title="Discrete optimization" label="Discrete optimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q202843" start="25929" end="25947" title="Linear programming" label="Linear programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q134164" start="26081" end="26098" title="Simplex algorithm" label="Simplex algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924975" start="26102" end="26119" title="Bland&amp;#x27;s rule" label="Bland&amp;#x27;s rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q6420102" start="26169" end="26184" title="Klee–Minty cube" label="Klee–Minty cube"/>
<link wikidata="Q17006040" start="26272" end="26293" title="Criss-cross algorithm" label="Criss-cross algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4905984" start="26332" end="26344" title="Big M method" label="Big M method"/>
<link wikidata="Q461992" start="26466" end="26487" title="Interior point method" label="Interior point method"/>
<link wikidata="Q378574" start="26491" end="26507" title="Ellipsoid method" label="Ellipsoid method"/>
<link wikidata="Q2246305" start="26511" end="26537" title="Karmarkar&amp;#x27;s algorithm" label="Karmarkar&amp;#x27;s algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q6809859" start="26541" end="26576" title="Mehrotra predictor–corrector method" label="Mehrotra predictor–corrector method"/>
<link wikidata="Q3123181" start="26579" end="26596" title="Column generation" label="Column generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6322802" start="26599" end="26631" title="k-approximation of k-hitting set" label="k-approximation of k-hitting set"/>
<link wikidata="Q783105" start="26703" end="26733" title="Linear complementarity problem" label="Linear complementarity problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042795" start="26753" end="26780" title="Benders&amp;#x27; decomposition" label="Benders&amp;#x27; decomposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q4388617" start="26783" end="26810" title="Dantzig–Wolfe decomposition" label="Dantzig–Wolfe decomposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7782457" start="26813" end="26841" title="Theory of two-level planning" label="Theory of two-level planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7915739" start="26844" end="26862" title="Variable splitting" label="Variable splitting"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867053" start="26864" end="26899" title="Basic solution (linear programming)" label="Basic solution (linear programming)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440012" start="26941" end="26968" title="Fourier–Motzkin elimination" label="Fourier–Motzkin elimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q5761207" start="26970" end="27004" title="Hilbert basis (linear programming)" label="Hilbert basis (linear programming)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6459640" start="27095" end="27110" title="LP-type problem" label="LP-type problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3154022" start="27112" end="27129" title="Linear inequality" label="Linear inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q7922775" start="27131" end="27157" title="Vertex enumeration problem" label="Vertex enumeration problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q463359" start="27225" end="27244" title="Convex optimization" label="Convex optimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q290117" start="27246" end="27267" title="Quadratic programming" label="Quadratic programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q6553462" start="27270" end="27304" title="Linear least squares (mathematics)" label="Linear least squares (mathematics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7828122" start="27307" end="27326" title="Total least squares" label="Total least squares"/>
<link wikidata="Q2020318" start="27329" end="27350" title="Frank–Wolfe algorithm" label="Frank–Wolfe algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2679145" start="27353" end="27384" title="Sequential minimal optimization" label="Sequential minimal optimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q4907765" start="27464" end="27480" title="Bilinear program" label="Bilinear program"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867576" start="27482" end="27495" title="Basis pursuit" label="Basis pursuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867574" start="27557" end="27580" title="Basis pursuit denoising" label="Basis pursuit denoising"/>
<link wikidata="Q6008626" start="27630" end="27648" title="In-crowd algorithm" label="In-crowd algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2022760" start="27698" end="27722" title="Linear matrix inequality" label="Linear matrix inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q2654791" start="27724" end="27742" title="Conic optimization" label="Conic optimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269096" start="27745" end="27769" title="Semidefinite programming" label="Semidefinite programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q7442977" start="27772" end="27801" title="Second-order cone programming" label="Second-order cone programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q7636875" start="27804" end="27831" title="Sum-of-squares optimization" label="Sum-of-squares optimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q4960383" start="27869" end="27883" title="Bregman method" label="Bregman method"/>
<link wikidata="Q17086765" start="27947" end="27971" title="Proximal gradient method" label="Proximal gradient method"/>
<link wikidata="Q7631150" start="28056" end="28074" title="Subgradient method" label="Subgradient method"/>
<link wikidata="Q17003174" start="28166" end="28187" title="Biconvex optimization" label="Biconvex optimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q769909" start="28294" end="28315" title="Nonlinear programming" label="Nonlinear programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078279" start="28501" end="28522" title="Geometric programming" label="Geometric programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q7512994" start="28573" end="28582" title="Signomial" label="Signomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078288" start="28647" end="28657" title="Posynomial" label="Posynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268373" start="28701" end="28744" title="Quadratically constrained quadratic program" label="Quadratically constrained quadratic program"/>
<link wikidata="Q4168281" start="28747" end="28776" title="Linear-fractional programming" label="Linear-fractional programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q5477546" start="28845" end="28867" title="Fractional programming" label="Fractional programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q16948724" start="28938" end="28971" title="Nonlinear complementarity problem" label="Nonlinear complementarity problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q74304" start="29115" end="29128" title="Least squares" label="Least squares"/>
<link wikidata="Q3319230" start="29177" end="29201" title="Non-linear least squares" label="Non-linear least squares"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496373" start="29205" end="29227" title="Gauss–Newton algorithm" label="Gauss–Newton algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4835588" start="29232" end="29246" title="BHHH algorithm" label="BHHH algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532438" start="29293" end="29324" title="Generalized Gauss–Newton method" label="Generalized Gauss–Newton method"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426494" start="29379" end="29408" title="Levenberg–Marquardt algorithm" label="Levenberg–Marquardt algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q6094424" start="29412" end="29448" title="Iteratively reweighted least squares" label="Iteratively reweighted least squares"/>
<link wikidata="Q422009" start="29520" end="29541" title="Partial least squares" label="Partial least squares"/>
<link wikidata="Q2873" start="29612" end="29654" title="Non-linear iterative partial least squares" label="Non-linear iterative partial least squares"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881744" start="29665" end="29718" title="Mathematical programming with equilibrium constraints" label="Mathematical programming with equilibrium constraints"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424337" start="29817" end="29838" title="Golden section search" label="Golden section search"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632648" start="29842" end="29876" title="Successive parabolic interpolation" label="Successive parabolic interpolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070951" start="29980" end="29997" title="Descent direction" label="Descent direction"/>
<link wikidata="Q20820485" start="30001" end="30012" title="Guess value" label="Guess value"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278015" start="30082" end="30093" title="Line search" label="Line search"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839787" start="30098" end="30122" title="Backtracking line search" label="Backtracking line search"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002999" start="30127" end="30143" title="Wolfe conditions" label="Wolfe conditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5977448" start="30146" end="30161" title="Gradient method" label="Gradient method"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199743" start="30221" end="30237" title="Gradient descent" label="Gradient descent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617819" start="30242" end="30269" title="Stochastic gradient descent" label="Stochastic gradient descent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6485285" start="30273" end="30292" title="Landweber iteration" label="Landweber iteration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632647" start="30332" end="30361" title="Successive linear programming" label="Successive linear programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q4373881" start="30444" end="30476" title="Sequential quadratic programming" label="Sequential quadratic programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q17086396" start="30562" end="30598" title="Newton&amp;#x27;s method in optimization" label="Newton&amp;#x27;s method in optimization"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30653" end="30709" title="#Finding roots of nonlinear equations" label="section &amp;quot;Finding roots of nonlinear equations&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q17086453" start="30712" end="30747" title="Nonlinear conjugate gradient method" label="Nonlinear conjugate gradient method"/>
<link wikidata="Q5168004" start="30777" end="30795" title="Coordinate descent" label="Coordinate descent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4680733" start="30843" end="30870" title="Adaptive coordinate descent" label="Adaptive coordinate descent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291961" start="30927" end="30952" title="Random coordinate descent" label="Random coordinate descent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253278" start="30977" end="30995" title="Nelder–Mead method" label="Nelder–Mead method"/>
<link wikidata="Q4291856" start="30999" end="31028" title="Pattern search (optimization)" label="Pattern search (optimization)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7236049" start="31032" end="31052" title="Powell&amp;#x27;s method" label="Powell&amp;#x27;s method"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368544" start="31094" end="31112" title="Rosenbrock methods" label="Rosenbrock methods"/>
<link wikidata="Q4820432" start="31196" end="31223" title="Augmented Lagrangian method" label="Augmented Lagrangian method"/>
<link wikidata="Q2010006" start="31328" end="31342" title="Ternary search" label="Ternary search"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424540" start="31345" end="31356" title="Tabu search" label="Tabu search"/>
<link wikidata="Q5615481" start="31359" end="31378" title="Guided Local Search" label="Guided Local Search"/>
<link wikidata="Q6885783" start="31548" end="31560" title="MM algorithm" label="MM algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4291882" start="31616" end="31641" title="Least absolute deviations" label="Least absolute deviations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275153" start="31645" end="31679" title="Expectation–maximization algorithm" label="Expectation–maximization algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100716" start="31684" end="31723" title="Ordered subset expectation maximization" label="Ordered subset expectation maximization"/>
<link wikidata="Q608751" start="31726" end="31749" title="Nearest neighbor search" label="Nearest neighbor search"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572595" start="31752" end="31765" title="Space mapping" label="Space mapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971426" start="31934" end="31949" title="Optimal control" label="Optimal control"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491629" start="31951" end="31986" title="Pontryagin&amp;#x27;s minimum principle" label="Pontryagin&amp;#x27;s minimum principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5175070" start="32044" end="32061" title="Costate equations" label="Costate equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645293" start="32155" end="32183" title="Hamiltonian (control theory)" label="Hamiltonian (control theory)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2520550" start="32270" end="32296" title="Linear-quadratic regulator" label="Linear-quadratic regulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798304" start="32375" end="32408" title="Linear-quadratic-Gaussian control" label="Linear-quadratic-Gaussian control"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098948" start="32496" end="32524" title="Optimal projection equations" label="Optimal projection equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q4723989" start="32581" end="32607" title="Algebraic Riccati equation" label="Algebraic Riccati equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432859" start="32670" end="32687" title="Bang–bang control" label="Bang–bang control"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178947" start="32741" end="32767" title="Covector mapping principle" label="Covector mapping principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275342" start="32769" end="32801" title="Differential dynamic programming" label="Differential dynamic programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205808" start="32870" end="32880" title="DNSS point" label="DNSS point"/>
<link wikidata="Q6517889" start="32967" end="32993" title="Legendre–Clebsch condition" label="Legendre–Clebsch condition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7255577" start="33060" end="33090" title="Pseudospectral optimal control" label="Pseudospectral optimal control"/>
<link wikidata="Q4884066" start="33093" end="33122" title="Bellman pseudospectral method" label="Bellman pseudospectral method"/>
<link wikidata="Q5089017" start="33175" end="33206" title="Chebyshev pseudospectral method" label="Chebyshev pseudospectral method"/>
<link wikidata="Q5457845" start="33258" end="33284" title="Flat pseudospectral method" label="Flat pseudospectral method"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527825" start="33359" end="33386" title="Gauss pseudospectral method" label="Gauss pseudospectral method"/>
<link wikidata="Q6517882" start="33437" end="33467" title="Legendre pseudospectral method" label="Legendre pseudospectral method"/>
<link wikidata="Q17086788" start="33498" end="33528" title="Pseudospectral knotting method" label="Pseudospectral knotting method"/>
<link wikidata="Q7369948" start="33593" end="33626" title="Ross–Fahroo pseudospectral method" label="Ross–Fahroo pseudospectral method"/>
<link wikidata="Q7369947" start="33704" end="33721" title="Ross–Fahroo lemma" label="Ross–Fahroo lemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q17086120" start="33789" end="33807" title="Ross&amp;#x27; π lemma" label="Ross&amp;#x27; π lemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7456650" start="33929" end="33940" title="Sethi model" label="Sethi model"/>
<link wikidata="Q6029718" start="33990" end="34023" title="Infinite-dimensional optimization" label="Infinite-dimensional optimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7449304" start="34025" end="34050" title="Semi-infinite programming" label="Semi-infinite programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q7489239" start="34137" end="34155" title="Shape optimization" label="Shape optimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2443456" start="34157" end="34178" title="Topology optimization" label="Topology optimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825031" start="34218" end="34240" title="Topological derivative" label="Topological derivative"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532510" start="34293" end="34330" title="Generalized semi-infinite programming" label="Generalized semi-infinite programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q176789" start="34466" end="34489" title="Markov decision process" label="Markov decision process"/>
<link wikidata="Q176814" start="34492" end="34536" title="Partially observable Markov decision process" label="Partially observable Markov decision process"/>
<link wikidata="Q2160088" start="34539" end="34558" title="Robust optimization" label="Robust optimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q4241323" start="34562" end="34587" title="Wald&amp;#x27;s maximin model" label="Wald&amp;#x27;s maximin model"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430722" start="34590" end="34611" title="Scenario optimization" label="Scenario optimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q97663916" start="34642" end="34666" title="Stochastic approximation" label="Stochastic approximation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747770" start="34669" end="34692" title="Stochastic optimization" label="Stochastic optimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617831" start="34695" end="34717" title="Stochastic programming" label="Stochastic programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617819" start="34720" end="34747" title="Stochastic gradient descent" label="Stochastic gradient descent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354463" start="34749" end="34768" title="Random optimization" label="Random optimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925641" start="34783" end="34796" title="Random search" label="Random search"/>
<link wikidata="Q863783" start="34856" end="34875" title="Simulated annealing" label="Simulated annealing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4680763" start="34879" end="34907" title="Adaptive simulated annealing" label="Adaptive simulated annealing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289656" start="34992" end="35014" title="Great Deluge algorithm" label="Great Deluge algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q16920215" start="35018" end="35038" title="Mean field annealing" label="Mean field annealing"/>
<link wikidata="Q17002908" start="35088" end="35109" title="Bayesian optimization" label="Bayesian optimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q14489129" start="35188" end="35210" title="Evolutionary algorithm" label="Evolutionary algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662197" start="35214" end="35236" title="Differential evolution" label="Differential evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2596288" start="35240" end="35264" title="Evolutionary programming" label="Evolutionary programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q187787" start="35268" end="35285" title="Genetic algorithm" label="Genetic algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q629498" start="35287" end="35306" title="Genetic programming" label="Genetic programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q16335223" start="35311" end="35342" title="Genetic algorithms in economics" label="Genetic algorithms in economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q17086303" start="35346" end="35352" title="MCACEA" label="MCACEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q17084424" start="35470" end="35520" title="Simultaneous perturbation stochastic approximation" label="Simultaneous perturbation stochastic approximation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6706076" start="35530" end="35542" title="Luus–Jaakola" label="Luus–Jaakola"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072794" start="35545" end="35572" title="Particle swarm optimization" label="Particle swarm optimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350527" start="35575" end="35595" title="Stochastic tunneling" label="Stochastic tunneling"/>
<link wikidata="Q26208718" start="35598" end="35612" title="Harmony search" label="Harmony search"/>
<link wikidata="Q2234833" start="35744" end="35759" title="Convex analysis" label="Convex analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7254692" start="35970" end="35991" title="Pseudoconvex function" label="Pseudoconvex function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126412" start="36150" end="36170" title="Quasiconvex function" label="Quasiconvex function"/>
<link wikidata="Q289500" start="36365" end="36378" title="Subderivative" label="Subderivative"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533980" start="36381" end="36399" title="Geodesic convexity" label="Geodesic convexity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2275559" start="36460" end="36482" title="Duality (optimization)" label="Duality (optimization)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7977943" start="36485" end="36497" title="Weak duality" label="Weak duality"/>
<link wikidata="Q7624553" start="36553" end="36567" title="Strong duality" label="Strong duality"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308839" start="36613" end="36625" title="Shadow price" label="Shadow price"/>
<link wikidata="Q2687694" start="36628" end="36652" title="Dual cone and polar cone" label="Dual cone and polar cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310264" start="36655" end="36666" title="Duality gap" label="Duality gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q5443003" start="36715" end="36745" title="Fenchel&amp;#x27;s duality theorem" label="Fenchel&amp;#x27;s duality theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170952" start="36828" end="36849" title="Perturbation function" label="Perturbation function"/>
<link wikidata="Q7538885" start="36909" end="36932" title="Slater&amp;#x27;s condition" label="Slater&amp;#x27;s condition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7828108" start="37018" end="37040" title="Total dual integrality" label="Total dual integrality"/>
<link wikidata="Q8029991" start="37095" end="37108" title="Wolfe duality" label="Wolfe duality"/>
<link wikidata="Q606254" start="37175" end="37193" title="Farkas&amp;#x27; lemma" label="Farkas&amp;#x27; lemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075125" start="37195" end="37224" title="Karush–Kuhn–Tucker conditions" label="Karush–Kuhn–Tucker conditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5504940" start="37286" end="37307" title="Fritz John conditions" label="Fritz John conditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q598870" start="37337" end="37356" title="Lagrange multiplier" label="Lagrange multiplier"/>
<link wikidata="Q17086206" start="37359" end="37396" title="Lagrange multipliers on Banach spaces" label="Lagrange multipliers on Banach spaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q955072" start="37398" end="37413" title="Semi-continuity" label="Semi-continuity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156417" start="37415" end="37437" title="Complementarity theory" label="Complementarity theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6883962" start="37524" end="37553" title="Mixed complementarity problem" label="Mixed complementarity problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q6883980" start="37557" end="37593" title="Mixed linear complementarity problem" label="Mixed linear complementarity problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q6521168" start="37597" end="37619" title="Lemke&amp;#x27;s algorithm" label="Lemke&amp;#x27;s algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5221089" start="37682" end="37704" title="Danskin&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Danskin&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q6795920" start="37749" end="37764" title="Maximum theorem" label="Maximum theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q255847" start="37858" end="37898" title="No free lunch in search and optimization" label="No free lunch in search and optimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q646590" start="37900" end="37926" title="Relaxation (approximation)" label="Relaxation (approximation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424292" start="38011" end="38032" title="Lagrangian relaxation" label="Lagrangian relaxation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512771" start="38035" end="38064" title="Linear programming relaxation" label="Linear programming relaxation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4406886" start="38137" end="38161" title="Self-concordant function" label="Self-concordant function"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306321" start="38163" end="38175" title="Reduced cost" label="Reduced cost"/>
<link wikidata="Q5656275" start="38228" end="38253" title="Hardness of approximation" label="Hardness of approximation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535496" start="38352" end="38368" title="Geometric median" label="Geometric median"/>
<link wikidata="Q5089012" start="38440" end="38456" title="Chebyshev center" label="Chebyshev center"/>
<link wikidata="Q6094388" start="38542" end="38568" title="Iterated conditional modes" label="Iterated conditional modes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136137" start="38625" end="38653" title="Response surface methodology" label="Response surface methodology"/>
<link wikidata="Q181666" start="38691" end="38716" title="Automatic label placement" label="Automatic label placement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665459" start="38718" end="38736" title="Compressed sensing" label="Compressed sensing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306230" start="38810" end="38831" title="Cutting stock problem" label="Cutting stock problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255043" start="38833" end="38852" title="Demand optimization" label="Demand optimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5265184" start="38854" end="38874" title="Destination dispatch" label="Destination dispatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377176" start="38930" end="38949" title="Energy minimization" label="Energy minimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417473" start="38951" end="38971" title="Entropy maximization" label="Entropy maximization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5759557" start="38973" end="38999" title="Highly optimized tolerance" label="Highly optimized tolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q48996162" start="39001" end="39028" title="Hyperparameter optimization" label="Hyperparameter optimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q252073" start="39030" end="39055" title="Inventory control problem" label="Inventory control problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130009" start="39058" end="39074" title="Newsvendor model" label="Newsvendor model"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130009" start="39077" end="39102" title="Extended newsvendor model" label="Extended newsvendor model"/>
<link wikidata="Q17002435" start="39105" end="39129" title="Assemble-to-order system" label="Assemble-to-order system"/>
<link wikidata="Q6553490" start="39131" end="39158" title="Linear programming decoding" label="Linear programming decoding"/>
<link wikidata="Q6553518" start="39160" end="39181" title="Linear search problem" label="Linear search problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q6692777" start="39233" end="39255" title="Low-rank approximation" label="Low-rank approximation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6822261" start="39354" end="39371" title="Meta-optimization" label="Meta-optimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354474" start="39432" end="39469" title="Multidisciplinary design optimization" label="Multidisciplinary design optimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q15077924" start="39471" end="39506" title="Optimal computing budget allocation" label="Optimal computing budget allocation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7132682" start="39585" end="39602" title="Paper bag problem" label="Paper bag problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q332172" start="39604" end="39624" title="Process optimization" label="Process optimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7303341" start="39626" end="39645" title="Recursive economics" label="Recursive economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7616470" start="39723" end="39735" title="Stigler diet" label="Stigler diet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572554" start="39737" end="39761" title="Space allocation problem" label="Space allocation problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623444" start="39763" end="39782" title="Stress majorization" label="Stress majorization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833062" start="39784" end="39807" title="Trajectory optimization" label="Trajectory optimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929885" start="39809" end="39830" title="Transportation theory (mathematics)" label="Transportation theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q8025069" start="39832" end="39855" title="Wing-shape optimization" label="Wing-shape optimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333872" start="39878" end="39904" title="Combinatorial optimization" label="Combinatorial optimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q380679" start="39906" end="39925" title="Dynamic programming" label="Dynamic programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430750" start="39928" end="39944" title="Bellman equation" label="Bellman equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302775" start="39947" end="39979" title="Hamilton–Jacobi–Bellman equation" label="Hamilton–Jacobi–Bellman equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q968642" start="40029" end="40047" title="Backward induction" label="Backward induction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098950" start="40120" end="40136" title="Optimal stopping" label="Optimal stopping"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014150" start="40196" end="40210" title="Odds algorithm" label="Odds algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341042" start="40214" end="40235" title="Robbins&amp;#x27; problem" label="Robbins&amp;#x27; problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570875" start="40237" end="40256" title="Global optimization" label="Global optimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q4836450" start="40260" end="40274" title="BRST algorithm" label="BRST algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q6714997" start="40277" end="40290" title="MCS algorithm" label="MCS algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052203" start="40292" end="40320" title="Multi-objective optimization" label="Multi-objective optimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q4890227" start="40367" end="40390" title="Benson&amp;#x27;s algorithm" label="Benson&amp;#x27;s algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7917833" start="40404" end="40423" title="vector optimization" label="vector optimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q4907693" start="40434" end="40454" title="Bilevel optimization" label="Bilevel optimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333568" start="40519" end="40539" title="Optimal substructure" label="Optimal substructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q5318686" start="40541" end="40576" title="Dykstra&amp;#x27;s projection algorithm" label="Dykstra&amp;#x27;s projection algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863604" start="40653" end="40669" title="Barrier function" label="Barrier function"/>
<link wikidata="Q3411771" start="40672" end="40686" title="Penalty method" label="Penalty method"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535924" start="40689" end="40701" title="Trust region" label="Trust region"/>
<link wikidata="Q7705773" start="40703" end="40734" title="Test functions for optimization" label="Test functions for optimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981936" start="40738" end="40757" title="Rosenbrock function" label="Rosenbrock function"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075200" start="40815" end="40841" title="Himmelblau&amp;#x27;s function" label="Himmelblau&amp;#x27;s function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485361" start="40907" end="40925" title="Rastrigin function" label="Rastrigin function"/>
<link wikidata="Q7493249" start="40978" end="40993" title="Shekel function" label="Shekel function"/>
<link wikidata="Q948100" start="41029" end="41062" title="Mathematical Optimization Society" label="Mathematical Optimization Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q753445" start="41103" end="41124" title="Numerical integration" label="Numerical integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156903" start="41168" end="41184" title="Rectangle method" label="Rectangle method"/>
<link wikidata="Q833293" start="41252" end="41268" title="Trapezoidal rule" label="Trapezoidal rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q722507" start="41335" end="41354" title="Simpson&amp;#x27;s rule" label="Simpson&amp;#x27;s rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q4680710" start="41425" end="41455" title="Adaptive Simpson&amp;#x27;s method" label="Adaptive Simpson&amp;#x27;s method"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943343" start="41457" end="41474" title="Boole&amp;#x27;s rule" label="Boole&amp;#x27;s rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q944241" start="41545" end="41566" title="Newton–Cotes formulas" label="Newton–Cotes formulas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078449" start="41600" end="41621" title="Romberg&amp;#x27;s method" label="Romberg&amp;#x27;s method"/>
<link wikidata="Q767680" start="41676" end="41695" title="Gaussian quadrature" label="Gaussian quadrature"/>
<link wikidata="Q5089019" start="41752" end="41778" title="Chebyshev–Gauss quadrature" label="Chebyshev–Gauss quadrature"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527850" start="41853" end="41877" title="Gauss–Hermite quadrature" label="Gauss–Hermite quadrature"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527851" start="41973" end="41996" title="Gauss–Jacobi quadrature" label="Gauss–Jacobi quadrature"/>
<link wikidata="Q4218412" start="42137" end="42162" title="Gauss–Laguerre quadrature" label="Gauss–Laguerre quadrature"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527852" start="42256" end="42288" title="Gauss–Kronrod quadrature formula" label="Gauss–Kronrod quadrature formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q767680" start="42334" end="42353" title="Gaussian quadrature" label="Gauss–Kronrod rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q7683194" start="42355" end="42375" title="Tanh-sinh quadrature" label="Tanh-sinh quadrature"/>
<link wikidata="Q5131618" start="42464" end="42490" title="Clenshaw–Curtis quadrature" label="Clenshaw–Curtis quadrature"/>
<link wikidata="Q4680758" start="42561" end="42580" title="Adaptive quadrature" label="Adaptive quadrature"/>
<link wikidata="Q39879" start="42682" end="42705" title="Monte Carlo integration" label="Monte Carlo integration"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42763" end="42782" title="#Monte Carlo method" label="#Monte Carlo method"/>
<link wikidata="Q17120667" start="42790" end="42820" title="Quantized state systems method" label="Quantized state systems method"/>
<link wikidata="Q6511268" start="42870" end="42888" title="Lebedev quadrature" label="Lebedev quadrature"/>
<link wikidata="Q7573793" start="42941" end="42952" title="Sparse grid" label="Sparse grid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167972" start="42954" end="42976" title="Coopmans approximation" label="Coopmans approximation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1683292" start="42978" end="43003" title="Numerical differentiation" label="Numerical differentiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228952" start="43039" end="43078" title="Numerical smoothing and differentiation" label="Numerical smoothing and differentiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683172" start="43081" end="43101" title="Adjoint state method" label="Adjoint state method"/>
<link wikidata="Q282023" start="43168" end="43191" title="Euler–Maclaurin formula" label="Euler–Maclaurin formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q541182" start="43251" end="43304" title="Numerical methods for ordinary differential equations" label="Numerical methods for ordinary differential equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q868454" start="43373" end="43385" title="Euler method" label="Euler method"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421265" start="43430" end="43459" title="Explicit and implicit methods" label="Explicit and implicit methods"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736820" start="43520" end="43541" title="Backward Euler method" label="Backward Euler method"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835583" start="43582" end="43598" title="Trapezoidal rule (differential equations)" label="Trapezoidal rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q725944" start="43631" end="43650" title="Runge–Kutta methods" label="Runge–Kutta methods"/>
<link wikidata="Q17103851" start="43721" end="43736" title="Midpoint method" label="Midpoint method"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531998" start="43779" end="43797" title="Heun&amp;#x27;s method" label="Heun&amp;#x27;s method"/>
<link wikidata="Q4937332" start="43890" end="43913" title="Bogacki–Shampine method" label="Bogacki–Shampine method"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048781" start="43999" end="44015" title="Cash–Karp method" label="Cash–Karp method"/>
<link wikidata="Q5298067" start="44093" end="44114" title="Dormand–Prince method" label="Dormand–Prince method"/>
<link wikidata="Q7379856" start="44201" end="44228" title="Runge–Kutta–Fehlberg method" label="Runge–Kutta–Fehlberg method"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527853" start="44306" end="44327" title="Gauss–Legendre method" label="Gauss–Legendre method"/>
<link wikidata="Q5002457" start="44406" end="44419" title="Butcher group" label="Butcher group"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596023" start="44501" end="44528" title="List of Runge–Kutta methods" label="List of Runge–Kutta methods"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462003" start="44530" end="44553" title="Linear multistep method" label="Linear multistep method"/>
<link wikidata="Q795746" start="44617" end="44649" title="Backward differentiation formula" label="Backward differentiation formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q7069677" start="44728" end="44749" title="Numerov&amp;#x27;s method" label="Numerov&amp;#x27;s method"/>
<link wikidata="Q2650267" start="44810" end="44836" title="Predictor–corrector method" label="Predictor–corrector method"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016015" start="44917" end="44939" title="General linear methods" label="General linear methods"/>
<link wikidata="Q4996463" start="45017" end="45041" title="Bulirsch–Stoer algorithm" label="Bulirsch–Stoer algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148845" start="45130" end="45152" title="Exponential integrator" label="Exponential integrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q766405" start="45311" end="45330" title="Newmark-beta method" label="Newmark-beta method"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984997" start="45376" end="45394" title="Verlet integration" label="Verlet integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810707" start="45429" end="45449" title="Leapfrog integration" label="Leapfrog integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q4879859" start="45490" end="45513" title="Beeman&amp;#x27;s algorithm" label="Beeman&amp;#x27;s algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424291" start="45564" end="45582" title="Dynamic relaxation" label="Dynamic relaxation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535490" start="45584" end="45604" title="Geometric integrator" label="Geometric integrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7661847" start="45674" end="45695" title="Symplectic integrator" label="Symplectic integrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7915797" start="45796" end="45818" title="Variational integrator" label="Variational integrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q5475314" start="45898" end="45924" title="Semi-implicit Euler method" label="Semi-implicit Euler method"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377040" start="46012" end="46024" title="Energy drift" label="Energy drift"/>
<link wikidata="Q4902345" start="46166" end="46191" title="Bi-directional delay line" label="Bi-directional delay line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054492" start="46194" end="46228" title="Partial element equivalent circuit" label="Partial element equivalent circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749769" start="46294" end="46309" title="Shooting method" label="Shooting method"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227584" start="46312" end="46343" title="Direct multiple shooting method" label="Direct multiple shooting method"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164368" start="46532" end="46552" title="Constraint algorithm" label="Constraint algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7131684" start="46610" end="46630" title="Pantelides algorithm" label="Pantelides algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q761604" start="46730" end="46751" title="Euler–Maruyama method" label="Euler–Maruyama method"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396217" start="46800" end="46815" title="Milstein method" label="Milstein method"/>
<link wikidata="Q7379855" start="46851" end="46875" title="Runge–Kutta method (SDE)" label="Runge–Kutta method (SDE)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7071295" start="46982" end="46996" title="Nyström method" label="Nyström method"/>
<link wikidata="Q1868494" start="47057" end="47097" title="Truncation error (numerical integration)" label="Truncation error (numerical integration)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6470604" start="47163" end="47203" title="Lady Windermere&amp;#x27;s Fan (mathematics)" label="Lady Windermere&amp;#x27;s Fan (mathematics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q29744" start="47271" end="47285" title="Stiff equation" label="Stiff equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q277932" start="47388" end="47399" title="L-stability" label="L-stability"/>
<link wikidata="Q4680766" start="47466" end="47483" title="Adaptive stepsize" label="Adaptive stepsize"/>
<link wikidata="Q25304113" start="47553" end="47561" title="Parareal" label="Parareal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7069659" start="47664" end="47704" title="Numerical partial differential equations" label="Numerical partial differential equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147751" start="47804" end="47828" title="Finite difference method" label="Finite difference method"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068418" start="47904" end="47921" title="Finite difference" label="Finite difference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747602" start="47975" end="48004" title="Finite difference coefficient" label="Finite difference coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q451881" start="48082" end="48107" title="Discrete Laplace operator" label="Discrete Laplace operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q5348916" start="48169" end="48222" title="Eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the second derivative" label="Eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the second derivative"/>
<link wikidata="Q6438899" start="48278" end="48314" title="Kronecker sum of discrete Laplacians" label="Kronecker sum of discrete Laplacians"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282040" start="48368" end="48393" title="Discrete Poisson equation" label="Discrete Poisson equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7607499" start="48475" end="48503" title="Stencil (numerical analysis)" label="Stencil (numerical analysis)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155319" start="48592" end="48607" title="Compact stencil" label="Compact stencil"/>
<link wikidata="Q17029661" start="48707" end="48752" title="Higher-order compact finite difference scheme" label="Higher-order compact finite difference scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048872" start="48755" end="48774" title="Non-compact stencil" label="Non-compact stencil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5455804" start="48811" end="48829" title="Five-point stencil" label="Five-point stencil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5427183" start="48999" end="49010" title="FTCS scheme" label="FTCS scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q588725" start="49065" end="49086" title="Crank–Nicolson method" label="Crank–Nicolson method"/>
<link wikidata="Q6505312" start="49184" end="49205" title="Lax–Friedrichs method" label="Lax–Friedrichs method"/>
<link wikidata="Q259958" start="49231" end="49250" title="Lax–Wendroff method" label="Lax–Wendroff method"/>
<link wikidata="Q6721779" start="49277" end="49294" title="MacCormack method" label="MacCormack method"/>
<link wikidata="Q7899499" start="49321" end="49334" title="Upwind scheme" label="Upwind scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q17149739" start="49338" end="49379" title="Upwind differencing scheme for convection" label="Upwind differencing scheme for convection"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527110" start="49437" end="49457" title="Lax–Wendroff theorem" label="Lax–Wendroff theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q4736413" start="49555" end="49592" title="Alternating direction implicit method" label="Alternating direction implicit method"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049593" start="49698" end="49734" title="Nonstandard finite difference scheme" label="Nonstandard finite difference scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q5450390" start="49761" end="49805" title="Finite difference methods for option pricing" label="Finite difference methods for option pricing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417308" start="49808" end="49844" title="Finite-difference time-domain method" label="Finite-difference time-domain method"/>
<link wikidata="Q220184" start="49957" end="49978" title="Finite element method" label="Finite element method"/>
<link wikidata="Q28404790" start="50033" end="50063" title="gradient discretisation method" label="gradient discretisation method"/>
<link wikidata="Q5450397" start="50136" end="50181" title="Finite element method in structural mechanics" label="Finite element method in structural mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491980" start="50231" end="50246" title="Galerkin method" label="Galerkin method"/>
<link wikidata="Q428273" start="50339" end="50368" title="Discontinuous Galerkin method" label="Discontinuous Galerkin method"/>
<link wikidata="Q852247" start="50442" end="50462" title="Rayleigh–Ritz method" label="Rayleigh–Ritz method"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575186" start="50522" end="50545" title="Spectral element method" label="Spectral element method"/>
<link wikidata="Q17027720" start="50583" end="50589" title="hp-FEM" label="hp-FEM"/>
<link wikidata="Q4907766" start="50711" end="50741" title="Bilinear quadrilateral element" label="Bilinear quadrilateral element"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163670" start="50775" end="50807" title="Constant strain triangle element" label="Constant strain triangle element"/>
<link wikidata="Q48969845" start="50847" end="50878" title="Quadratic quadrilateral element" label="Quadratic quadrilateral element"/>
<link wikidata="Q17002802" start="50912" end="50928" title="Barsoum elements" label="Barsoum elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280635" start="50930" end="50953" title="Direct stiffness method" label="Direct stiffness method"/>
<link wikidata="Q7837781" start="51049" end="51063" title="Trefftz method" label="Trefftz method"/>
<link wikidata="Q5450395" start="51065" end="51088" title="Finite element updating" label="Finite element updating"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333647" start="51090" end="51120" title="Extended finite element method" label="Extended finite element method"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508861" start="51190" end="51217" title="Functionally graded element" label="Functionally graded element"/>
<link wikidata="Q7643266" start="51276" end="51288" title="Superelement" label="Superelement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6057275" start="51361" end="51384" title="Interval finite element" label="Interval finite element"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282048" start="51451" end="51477" title="Discrete exterior calculus" label="Discrete exterior calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3780658" start="51545" end="51569" title="Modal analysis using FEM" label="Modal analysis using FEM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816912" start="51632" end="51648" title="Céa&amp;#x27;s lemma" label="Céa&amp;#x27;s lemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056643" start="51756" end="51784" title="Patch test (finite elements)" label="Patch test (finite elements)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51836" end="51843" title="MAFELAP" label="MAFELAP"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51949" end="51955" title="NAFEMS" label="NAFEMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934847" start="52060" end="52092" title="Multiphase topology optimisation" label="Multiphase topology optimisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6057275" start="52180" end="52203" title="Interval finite element" label="Interval finite element"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781595" start="52205" end="52227" title="Applied element method" label="Applied element method"/>
<link wikidata="Q8033730" start="52280" end="52297" title="Wood–Armer method" label="Wood–Armer method"/>
<link wikidata="Q17082433" start="52401" end="52422" title="Isogeometric analysis" label="Isogeometric analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q48844720" start="52500" end="52519" title="Loubignac iteration" label="Loubignac iteration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3851930" start="52521" end="52537" title="Stiffness matrix" label="Stiffness matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q17103615" start="52631" end="52649" title="Weakened weak form" label="Weakened weak form"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="52711" end="52718" title="G space" label="G space"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007230" start="52783" end="52813" title="Smoothed finite element method" label="Smoothed finite element method"/>
<link wikidata="Q65038403" start="52815" end="52844" title="Variational multiscale method" label="Variational multiscale method"/>
<link wikidata="Q3614958" start="52846" end="52886" title="List of finite element software packages" label="List of finite element software packages"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308831" start="52909" end="52924" title="Spectral method" label="Spectral method"/>
<link wikidata="Q7254447" start="52965" end="52987" title="Pseudo-spectral method" label="Pseudo-spectral method"/>
<link wikidata="Q1826712" start="52989" end="53004" title="Method of lines" label="Method of lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935004" start="53077" end="53100" title="Boundary element method" label="Boundary element method"/>
<link wikidata="Q6057267" start="53195" end="53227" title="Interval boundary element method" label="Interval boundary element method"/>
<link wikidata="Q4751128" start="53268" end="53291" title="Analytic element method" label="Analytic element method"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401936" start="53387" end="53407" title="Finite volume method" label="Finite volume method"/>
<link wikidata="Q4291826" start="53504" end="53525" title="Godunov&amp;#x27;s scheme" label="Godunov&amp;#x27;s scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q6719085" start="53620" end="53632" title="MUSCL scheme" label="MUSCL scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q4654996" start="53683" end="53687" title="AUSM" label="AUSM"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463027" start="53728" end="53740" title="Flux limiter" label="Flux limiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6153788" start="53821" end="53835" title="Riemann solver" label="Riemann solver"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53920" end="53956" title="Properties of discretization schemes" label="Properties of discretization schemes"/>
<link wikidata="Q902783" start="54017" end="54040" title="Discrete element method" label="Discrete element method"/>
<link wikidata="Q907367" start="54115" end="54147" title="Extended discrete element method" label="Extended discrete element method"/>
<link wikidata="Q4291891" start="54200" end="54226" title="Movable cellular automaton" label="Movable cellular automaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q14866890" start="54286" end="54302" title="Meshfree methods" label="Meshfree methods"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282050" start="54366" end="54404" title="Discrete least squares meshless method" label="Discrete least squares meshless method"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275411" start="54477" end="54499" title="Diffuse element method" label="Diffuse element method"/>
<link wikidata="Q5450404" start="54502" end="54524" title="Finite pointset method" label="Finite pointset method"/>
<link wikidata="Q6927029" start="54566" end="54602" title="Moving Particle Semi-implicit Method" label="Moving Particle Semi-implicit Method"/>
<link wikidata="Q6823714" start="54605" end="54636" title="Method of fundamental solutions" label="Method of fundamental solutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q4949966" start="54778" end="54798" title="Boundary knot method" label="Boundary knot method"/>
<link wikidata="Q4949970" start="54808" end="54832" title="Boundary particle method" label="Boundary particle method"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309629" start="54842" end="54869" title="Regularized meshless method" label="Regularized meshless method"/>
<link wikidata="Q7524247" start="54879" end="54903" title="Singular boundary method" label="Singular boundary method"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417308" start="54966" end="55002" title="Finite-difference time-domain method" label="Finite-difference time-domain method"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333866" start="55034" end="55064" title="Rigorous coupled-wave analysis" label="Rigorous coupled-wave analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q639896" start="55139" end="55170" title="Transmission-line matrix method" label="Transmission-line matrix method"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885118" start="55259" end="55288" title="Uniform theory of diffraction" label="Uniform theory of diffraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054543" start="55338" end="55354" title="Particle-in-cell" label="Particle-in-cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934844" start="55393" end="55427" title="Multiphase particle-in-cell method" label="Multiphase particle-in-cell method"/>
<link wikidata="Q17029736" start="55495" end="55517" title="High-resolution scheme" label="High-resolution scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q7499862" start="55519" end="55541" title="Shock capturing method" label="Shock capturing method"/>
<link wikidata="Q7941944" start="55543" end="55564" title="Vorticity confinement" label="Vorticity confinement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311789" start="55641" end="55658" title="Split-step method" label="Split-step method"/>
<link wikidata="Q5437042" start="55660" end="55680" title="Fast marching method" label="Fast marching method"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779479" start="55682" end="55704" title="Orthogonal collocation" label="Orthogonal collocation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807064" start="55706" end="55731" title="Lattice Boltzmann methods" label="Lattice Boltzmann methods"/>
<link wikidata="Q7357538" start="55783" end="55793" title="Roe solver" label="Roe solver"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311872" start="55836" end="55865" title="Relaxation (iterative method)" label="Relaxation (iterative method)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6862071" start="55974" end="55989" title="Mimesis (mathematics)" label="Mimetic methods"/>
<link wikidata="Q1829750" start="56067" end="56079" title="Multiphysics" label="Multiphysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11425899" start="56146" end="56170" title="Immersed boundary method" label="Immersed boundary method"/>
<link wikidata="Q17104324" start="56231" end="56257" title="Multisymplectic integrator" label="Multisymplectic integrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623487" start="56317" end="56338" title="Stretched grid method" label="Stretched grid method"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413101" start="56459" end="56475" title="Multigrid method" label="Multigrid method"/>
<link wikidata="Q5289813" start="56537" end="56565" title="Domain decomposition methods" label="Domain decomposition methods"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681340" start="56648" end="56671" title="Additive Schwarz method" label="Additive Schwarz method"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669932" start="56674" end="56706" title="Abstract additive Schwarz method" label="Abstract additive Schwarz method"/>
<link wikidata="Q4850008" start="56791" end="56828" title="Balancing domain decomposition method" label="Balancing domain decomposition method"/>
<link wikidata="Q4835365" start="56895" end="56940" title="BDDC" label="Balancing domain decomposition by constraints"/>
<link wikidata="Q5425382" start="56979" end="57018" title="FETI" label="Finite element tearing and interconnect"/>
<link wikidata="Q5425377" start="57028" end="57035" title="FETI-DP" label="FETI-DP"/>
<link wikidata="Q5446587" start="57068" end="57092" title="Fictitious domain method" label="Fictitious domain method"/>
<link wikidata="Q17099078" start="57186" end="57200" title="Mortar methods" label="Mortar methods"/>
<link wikidata="Q7001954" start="57237" end="57261" title="Neumann–Dirichlet method" label="Neumann–Dirichlet method"/>
<link wikidata="Q7001956" start="57350" end="57373" title="Neumann–Neumann methods" label="Neumann–Neumann methods"/>
<link wikidata="Q17099589" start="57451" end="57476" title="Poincaré–Steklov operator" label="Poincaré–Steklov operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q17103137" start="57549" end="57572" title="Schur complement method" label="Schur complement method"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433186" start="57634" end="57660" title="Schwarz alternating method" label="Schwarz alternating method"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138064" start="57714" end="57726" title="Coarse space (numerical analysis)" label="Coarse space"/>
<link wikidata="Q4680751" start="57811" end="57835" title="Adaptive mesh refinement" label="Adaptive mesh refinement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5437040" start="57906" end="57927" title="Fast multipole method" label="Fast multipole method"/>
<link wikidata="Q15101726" start="57997" end="58020" title="Perfectly matched layer" label="Perfectly matched layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608609" start="58143" end="58162" title="Grid classification" label="Grid classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q7860954" start="58165" end="58178" title="Types of mesh" label="Types of mesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154597" start="58182" end="58194" title="Polygon mesh" label="Polygon mesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3456889" start="58232" end="58245" title="Triangle mesh" label="Triangle mesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635635" start="58285" end="58309" title="Triangulation (geometry)" label="Triangulation (geometry)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049525" start="58388" end="58402" title="Nonobtuse mesh" label="Nonobtuse mesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q17078161" start="58463" end="58486" title="Point-set triangulation" label="Point-set triangulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045660" start="58566" end="58587" title="Polygon triangulation" label="Polygon triangulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q192445" start="58624" end="58646" title="Delaunay triangulation" label="Delaunay triangulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164356" start="58727" end="58761" title="Constrained Delaunay triangulation" label="Constrained Delaunay triangulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3538712" start="58873" end="58895" title="Pitteway triangulation" label="Pitteway triangulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865406" start="58986" end="59014" title="Minimum-weight triangulation" label="Minimum-weight triangulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410803" start="59063" end="59084" title="Kinetic triangulation" label="Kinetic triangulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296387" start="59127" end="59157" title="Triangulated irregular network" label="Triangulated irregular network"/>
<link wikidata="Q4218426" start="59161" end="59180" title="Quasi-triangulation" label="Quasi-triangulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7940896" start="59278" end="59289" title="Volume mesh" label="Volume mesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2646942" start="59331" end="59343" title="Regular grid" label="Regular grid"/>
<link wikidata="Q17078677" start="59417" end="59434" title="Unstructured grid" label="Unstructured grid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898473" start="59437" end="59450" title="Geodesic grid" label="Geodesic grid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4418033" start="59481" end="59496" title="Mesh generation" label="Mesh generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q860606" start="59499" end="59518" title="Image-based meshing" label="Image-based meshing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886184" start="59583" end="59597" title="Marching cubes" label="Marching cubes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7135005" start="59646" end="59670" title="Parallel mesh generation" label="Parallel mesh generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q105742691" start="59673" end="59697" title="Ruppert&amp;#x27;s algorithm" label="Ruppert&amp;#x27;s algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780395" start="59786" end="59804" title="Apollonian network" label="Apollonian network"/>
<link wikidata="Q4078260" start="59871" end="59894" title="Barycentric subdivision" label="Barycentric subdivision"/>
<link wikidata="Q105742691" start="60030" end="60058" title="Chew&amp;#x27;s second algorithm" label="Chew&amp;#x27;s second algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q6488267" start="60134" end="60153" title="Laplacian smoothing" label="Laplacian smoothing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6311028" start="60207" end="60230" title="Jump-and-Walk algorithm" label="Jump-and-Walk algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574085" start="60290" end="60313" title="Spatial twist continuum" label="Spatial twist continuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7255664" start="60371" end="60385" title="Pseudotriangle" label="Pseudotriangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q994399" start="60460" end="60478" title="Simplicial complex" label="Simplicial complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q256303" start="60572" end="60595" title="Lax equivalence theorem" label="Lax equivalence theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023483" start="60661" end="60694" title="Courant–Friedrichs–Lewy condition" label="Courant–Friedrichs–Lewy condition"/>
<link wikidata="Q458556" start="60738" end="60768" title="Von Neumann stability analysis" label="Von Neumann stability analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7069655" start="60825" end="60844" title="Numerical diffusion" label="Numerical diffusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5432694" start="60936" end="60951" title="False diffusion" label="False diffusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q30594078" start="60953" end="60973" title="Numerical dispersion" label="Numerical dispersion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7069662" start="60975" end="60996" title="Numerical resistivity" label="Numerical resistivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q9993851" start="61048" end="61064" title="Weak formulation" label="Weak formulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7828154" start="61142" end="61169" title="Total variation diminishing" label="Total variation diminishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017973" start="61237" end="61259" title="Godunov&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Godunov&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q6918819" start="61314" end="61333" title="Motz&amp;#x27;s problem" label="Motz&amp;#x27;s problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q232207" start="61382" end="61400" title="Monte Carlo method" label="Monte Carlo method"/>
<link wikidata="Q4382753" start="61442" end="61471" title="Direct simulation Monte Carlo" label="Direct simulation Monte Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269435" start="61474" end="61498" title="Quasi-Monte Carlo method" label="Quasi-Monte Carlo method"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191869" start="61501" end="61525" title="Markov chain Monte Carlo" label="Markov chain Monte Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q910810" start="61529" end="61558" title="Metropolis–Hastings algorithm" label="Metropolis–Hastings algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q17082646" start="61563" end="61586" title="Multiple-try Metropolis" label="Multiple-try Metropolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6522961" start="61637" end="61662" title="Wang and Landau algorithm" label="Wang and Landau algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384234" start="61705" end="61762" title="Equation of State Calculations by Fast Computing Machines" label="Equation of State Calculations by Fast Computing Machines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934577" start="61829" end="61852" title="Multicanonical ensemble" label="Multicanonical ensemble"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191905" start="61928" end="61942" title="Gibbs sampling" label="Gibbs sampling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178037" start="61946" end="61968" title="Coupling from the past" label="Coupling from the past"/>
<link wikidata="Q17083869" start="61972" end="62012" title="Reversible-jump Markov chain Monte Carlo" label="Reversible-jump Markov chain Monte Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3855635" start="62015" end="62041" title="Dynamic Monte Carlo method" label="Dynamic Monte Carlo method"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333611" start="62045" end="62064" title="Kinetic Monte Carlo" label="Kinetic Monte Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5562121" start="62068" end="62087" title="Gillespie algorithm" label="Gillespie algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151499" start="62090" end="62105" title="Particle filter" label="Particle filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4827310" start="62109" end="62134" title="Auxiliary particle filter" label="Auxiliary particle filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755871" start="62137" end="62156" title="Reverse Monte Carlo" label="Reverse Monte Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5256228" start="62159" end="62174" title="Demon algorithm" label="Demon algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7254441" start="62176" end="62205" title="Pseudo-random number sampling" label="Pseudo-random number sampling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377019" start="62208" end="62234" title="Inverse transform sampling" label="Inverse transform sampling"/>
<link wikidata="Q381699" start="62304" end="62322" title="Rejection sampling" label="Rejection sampling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894386" start="62394" end="62412" title="Ziggurat algorithm" label="Ziggurat algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q895514" start="62551" end="62571" title="Box–Muller transform" label="Box–Muller transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670367" start="62575" end="62597" title="Marsaglia polar method" label="Marsaglia polar method"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166606" start="62600" end="62635" title="Convolution random number generator" label="Convolution random number generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q6019131" start="62703" end="62717" title="Indexed search" label="Indexed search"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454689" start="62719" end="62737" title="Variance reduction" label="Variance reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3554719" start="62752" end="62771" title="Antithetic variates" label="Antithetic variates"/>
<link wikidata="Q3554721" start="62774" end="62790" title="Control variates" label="Control variates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539564" start="62793" end="62812" title="Importance sampling" label="Importance sampling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517706" start="62815" end="62834" title="Stratified sampling" label="Stratified sampling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7906734" start="62837" end="62852" title="VEGAS algorithm" label="VEGAS algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q6692743" start="62854" end="62878" title="Low-discrepancy sequence" label="Low-discrepancy sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6692743" start="62881" end="62923" title="Constructions of low-discrepancy sequences" label="Constructions of low-discrepancy sequences"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416720" start="62925" end="62940" title="Event generator" label="Event generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7135015" start="62942" end="62960" title="Parallel tempering" label="Parallel tempering"/>
<link wikidata="Q7881414" start="62962" end="62979" title="Umbrella sampling" label="Umbrella sampling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639846" start="63054" end="63072" title="Hybrid Monte Carlo" label="Hybrid Monte Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3072268" start="63074" end="63096" title="Ensemble Kalman filter" label="Ensemble Kalman filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834429" start="63172" end="63196" title="Transition path sampling" label="Transition path sampling"/>
<link wikidata="Q25303850" start="63198" end="63220" title="Walk-on-spheres method" label="Walk-on-spheres method"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433888" start="63305" end="63325" title="Ensemble forecasting" label="Ensemble forecasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q4941317" start="63416" end="63438" title="Bond fluctuation model" label="Bond fluctuation model"/>
<link wikidata="Q17081875" start="63507" end="63525" title="Iterated filtering" label="Iterated filtering"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824946" start="63528" end="63554" title="Metropolis light transport" label="Metropolis light transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6904694" start="63557" end="63581" title="Monte Carlo localization" label="Monte Carlo localization"/>
<link wikidata="Q6904699" start="63636" end="63678" title="Monte Carlo methods for electron transport" label="Monte Carlo methods for electron transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6904697" start="63681" end="63720" title="Monte Carlo method for photon transport" label="Monte Carlo method for photon transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6904707" start="63723" end="63753" title="Monte Carlo methods in finance" label="Monte Carlo methods in finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6904701" start="63757" end="63795" title="Monte Carlo methods for option pricing" label="Monte Carlo methods for option pricing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269433" start="63799" end="63835" title="Quasi-Monte Carlo methods in finance" label="Quasi-Monte Carlo methods in finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6904703" start="63838" end="63868" title="Monte Carlo molecular modeling" label="Monte Carlo molecular modeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7144652" start="63872" end="63904" title="Path integral molecular dynamics" label="Path integral molecular dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3861408" start="63945" end="63964" title="Quantum Monte Carlo" label="Quantum Monte Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3660888" start="63968" end="63989" title="Diffusion Monte Carlo" label="Diffusion Monte Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527847" start="64051" end="64079" title="Gaussian quantum Monte Carlo" label="Gaussian quantum Monte Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q17105204" start="64083" end="64108" title="Path integral Monte Carlo" label="Path integral Monte Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314337" start="64112" end="64133" title="Reptation Monte Carlo" label="Reptation Monte Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7915793" start="64137" end="64160" title="Variational Monte Carlo" label="Variational Monte Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7655875" start="64206" end="64229" title="Swendsen–Wang algorithm" label="Swendsen–Wang algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2588971" start="64285" end="64300" title="Wolff algorithm" label="Wolff algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q910810" start="64349" end="64378" title="Metropolis–Hastings algorithm" label="Metropolis–Hastings algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4827304" start="64381" end="64408" title="Auxiliary field Monte Carlo" label="Auxiliary field Monte Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333633" start="64485" end="64505" title="Cross-entropy method" label="Cross-entropy method"/>
<link wikidata="Q4814227" start="64578" end="64603" title="list of statistics topics" label="list of statistics topics"/>
<link wikidata="Q909554" start="64623" end="64644" title="Computational physics" label="Computational physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157313" start="64647" end="64677" title="Computational electromagnetics" label="Computational electromagnetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q815820" start="64680" end="64708" title="Computational fluid dynamics" label="Computational fluid dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q17104831" start="64718" end="64754" title="Numerical methods in fluid mechanics" label="Numerical methods in fluid mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755722" start="64758" end="64779" title="Large eddy simulation" label="Large eddy simulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q733073" start="64783" end="64814" title="Smoothed-particle hydrodynamics" label="Smoothed-particle hydrodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q423985" start="64818" end="64838" title="Aeroacoustic analogy" label="Aeroacoustic analogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617806" start="64924" end="64961" title="Stochastic Eulerian Lagrangian method" label="Stochastic Eulerian Lagrangian method"/>
<link wikidata="Q17012898" start="65034" end="65065" title="Explicit algebraic stress model" label="Explicit algebraic stress model"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157331" start="65068" end="65102" title="Computational magnetohydrodynamics" label="Computational magnetohydrodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q620920" start="65153" end="65166" title="Climate model" label="Climate model"/>
<link wikidata="Q837552" start="65169" end="65197" title="Numerical weather prediction" label="Numerical weather prediction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898473" start="65201" end="65214" title="Geodesic grid" label="Geodesic grid"/>
<link wikidata="Q184274" start="65217" end="65236" title="Celestial mechanics" label="Celestial mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7069658" start="65240" end="65275" title="Numerical model of the Solar System" label="Numerical model of the Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q17083605" start="65278" end="65297" title="Quantum jump method" label="Quantum jump method"/>
<link wikidata="Q5318900" start="65370" end="65400" title="Dynamic design analysis method" label="Dynamic design analysis method"/>
<link wikidata="Q369472" start="65471" end="65494" title="Computational chemistry" label="Computational chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058193" start="65497" end="65507" title="Cell lists" label="Cell lists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117940" start="65510" end="65525" title="Coupled cluster" label="Coupled cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048589" start="65528" end="65553" title="Density functional theory" label="Density functional theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205116" start="65556" end="65560" title="DIIS" label="DIIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q905036" start="65615" end="65638" title="Computational sociology" label="Computational sociology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157340" start="65640" end="65664" title="Computational statistics" label="Computational statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6631529" start="65717" end="65752" title="list of numerical-analysis software" label="list of numerical-analysis software"/>
<link wikidata="Q4676733" start="65769" end="65782" title="Acta Numerica" label="Acta Numerica"/>
<link wikidata="Q6786906" start="65784" end="65810" title="Mathematics of Computation" label="Mathematics of Computation"/>
<link wikidata="Q465654" start="65829" end="65858" title="American Mathematical Society" label="American Mathematical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q13739406" start="65861" end="65909" title="Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics" label="Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q15716496" start="65911" end="65936" title="BIT Numerical Mathematics" label="BIT Numerical Mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7069670" start="65938" end="65959" title="Numerische Mathematik" label="Numerische Mathematik"/>
<link wikidata="Q782100" start="65979" end="66025" title="Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics" label="Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7390258" start="66028" end="66062" title="SIAM Journal on Numerical Analysis" label="SIAM Journal on Numerical Analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7390259" start="66065" end="66101" title="SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing" label="SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q92871" start="66120" end="66131" title="Cleve Moler" label="Cleve Moler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384851" start="66133" end="66146" title="Gene H. Golub" label="Gene H. Golub"/>
<link wikidata="Q62877" start="66148" end="66166" title="James H. Wilkinson" label="James H. Wilkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16494" start="66168" end="66186" title="Margaret H. Wright" label="Margaret H. Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q3710017" start="66188" end="66206" title="Nicholas Higham" label="Nicholas J. Higham"/>
<link wikidata="Q4505456" start="66208" end="66222" title="Nick Trefethen" label="Nick Trefethen"/>
<link wikidata="Q323331" start="66224" end="66233" title="Peter Lax" label="Peter Lax"/>
<link wikidata="Q822832" start="66235" end="66251" title="Richard S. Varga" label="Richard S. Varga"/>
<link wikidata="Q18222621" start="66253" end="66270" title="Ulrich W. Kulisch" label="Ulrich W. Kulisch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7938222" start="66272" end="66289" title="Vladik Kreinovich" label="Vladik Kreinovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095020" start="66291" end="66303" title="Chi-Wang Shu" label="Chi-Wang Shu"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="444255" wikidata="Q3360437" url="?curid=444255" title="PrimePages">
<text>The PrimePages is a website about prime numbers originally created by Chris Caldwell at the University of Tennessee at Martin who maintained it from 1994 to 2023.

The site maintains the list of the &quot;5,000 largest known primes&quot;, selected smaller primes of special forms, and many &quot;top twenty&quot; lists for primes of various forms.

The PrimePages has articles on primes and primality testing. It includes &quot;The Prime Glossary&quot; with articles on hundreds of glosses related to primes, and &quot;Prime Curios!&quot; with thousands of curios about specific numbers.

The database started as a list of &quot;titanic primes&quot; (primes with at least 1000 decimal digits) by Samuel Yates in 1984.

On March 11, 2023, the PrimePages moved from primes.utm.edu to t5k.org, and is no longer maintained by Caldwell.

== See also ==
* List of largest known primes and probable primes
*List of prime numbers

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3360437" start="0" end="14" title="PrimePages" label="The PrimePages"/>
<link wikidata="Q49008" start="34" end="46" title="prime number" label="prime number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566138" start="92" end="125" title="University of Tennessee at Martin" label="University of Tennessee at Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q829546" start="391" end="405" title="primality test" label="primality test"/>
<link wikidata="Q7412973" start="696" end="708" title="Samuel Yates" label="Samuel Yates"/>
<link wikidata="Q112939567" start="850" end="898" title="List of largest known primes and probable primes" label="List of largest known primes and probable primes"/>
<link wikidata="Q225987" start="900" end="921" title="List of prime numbers" label="List of prime numbers"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="444256" wikidata="Q866972" url="?curid=444256" title="Vonage">
<text>Vonage Holdings Corp. (, or simply Vonage) is an American cloud communications provider operating as a subsidiary of Ericsson. Headquartered in Holmdel Township, New Jersey, the organization was founded in 1998 as Min-X as a provider of residential telecommunications services based on voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP). In 2001, the organization changed its name to Vonage.

As of 2020, Vonage reported consolidated revenues of $1.25 billion. Through a series of acquisitions beginning in 2013, Vonage, previously a consumer-focused service provider, has expanded its presence in the business-to-business marketplace, while still keeping its home VOIP service. Vonage&#x27;s offering includes unified communications, contact center applications and communications APIs. In July 2022, Ericsson completed its acquisition of Vonage for $6.2 billion.

==History==

Min-X.com was founded by Jeff Pulver in 1998 as a Voice over IP (VOIP) exchange. He recruited Jeffrey A. Citron and Carlos Bhola, who each invested $1 million and joined as board members. Citron and Bhola then raised approximately $11 million in additional funding, pivoted the company to being a VOIP service provider, and Citron took over as CEO and Bhola as President. The company changed its name to Vonage Holdings Corp. in 2001. When the name was changed the company was located in Edison, New Jersey. In 2005, the organization relocated its headquarters to Holmdel, New Jersey. Pulver left the company in 2002 to start another VOIP venture.

The company first offered subscription service in the United States, then expanded to Canada in 2004 and the United Kingdom in 2005. Vonage went public on May 24, 2006.

=== Initial public offering ===
In 2006, in preparation for an initial public offering, Michael Snyder, former president of ADT Security Services replaced Vonage co-founder Citron as the organization&#x27;s CEO. Citron could not preside over the IPO because he was permanently barred from associating with any securities brokers or dealers. In 2007, in a restructuring effort to reduce ongoing net losses in the face of double-digit stock price slips and patent infringement issues, Snyder resigned, and Citron returned as interim CEO. The company announced plans for 10% layoffs as it secured $215 million in financing.

Vonage offered shares of its stock to its existing customer base in the period before the initial public offering. Under normal circumstances, only large institutional investors such as banks are able to buy shares of an IPO. Vonage&#x27;s initial public offering occurred on the New York Stock Exchange on May 24, 2006, opening at $17 per share. The price closed at $14.85, a decrease of 12.7 percent, the worst trading day for any IPO in 2006 up to that point. The IPO raised $531 million for the company. However, the existing customers who lost money filed a class action lawsuit. The IPO and its immediate aftermath also earned Vonage a &quot;Business 2.0&quot; Magazine award as 14th of 101 Dumbest Moments in Business for 2006. In 2009, Vonage reached an agreement with the IPO investors. All shareholder claims against Vonage and its individual directors and officers who were named as defendants were dismissed. The amount of the settlement, $3.6 million, was paid by an insurance policy covering the directors and officers of the company.

The firms underwriting the IPO, Citigroup, UBS, and Deutsche Bank, were fined a total of $845,000 and ordered to reimburse customers for &quot;failure to adequately supervise communications&quot; with investors. NYSE regulators went so far as to investigate possible short-selling.

===Acquisitions===

Beginning in 2013, Vonage acquired several companies as it refocused its business from a home phone provider to a global business cloud communications provider, including:
* Vocalocity, a software as a service (SaaS) provider of cloud-based communications services, for $130 million;
* Telesphere, a unified communications as a service (UCaaS) provider to large companies, for $114 million;
* iCore Networks, also a UCSaaS provider to large companies, for $92 million;
* SimpleSignal, another UCSaaS service provider to small and medium-sized businesses, for $25 million;
* , also a cloud-based communications service provider to businesses (price not disclosed).
* Nexmo, the 2nd largest CPaaS company, for $250 million;
*TokBox, a WebRTC programmable video provider, for $35 million.
*NewVoiceMedia, a Contact Center as a Service (CCaaS) provider, for $350 million 
*Over.ai, a Voice and Conversational AI provider for enterprise communications 

=== Acquisition by Ericsson ===
On 22 November 2021, it was announced that Vonage would be acquired by Ericsson in a US$6.2 billion all-cash purchase. The acquisition was completed on 21 July 2022. According to the press release, Ericsson acquired all of Vonage&#x27;s outstanding shares at an all-cash price of US$21 per share, a 28% premium.
The acquisition was financed through Ericsson&#x27;s existing cash resources, which amounted to SEK 88 billion as of 30 September 2021 on a gross basis, and SEK 56 billion on a net basis as of the same date.

Vonage became a wholly owned subsidiary of Ericsson but continues to operate under its existing name and reported as a separate segment in Ericsson accounts. Vonage&#x27;s employees remained with the company and the Vonage CEO Rory Read joined the Executive Team of Ericsson, reporting to CEO, Börje Ekholm.

In February 2024, Niklas Heuveldop was appointed Head of Business Area Global Communications Platform, a new Business Area within Ericsson, and CEO of Vonage.

==Patent infringement lawsuits==
On June 19, 2006, Verizon filed a lawsuit alleging that Vonage infringed on five of Verizon&#x27;s patents related to its VoIP service. The patents describe technology for completing phone calls between VoIP users and people using phones on the traditional public switched network, authenticating VoIP callers, validating VoIP callers&#x27; accounts, fraud protection, providing enhanced features, using Wi-Fi handsets with VoIP services, and monitoring VoIP caller usage.

In 2007, Vonage launched a viral marketing campaign and website freetocompete.com, which garnered press coverage about Vonage, its campaign, the lawsuits, and issues of competition with established telecom corporations.

On March 8, 2007, a jury found Vonage liable for infringing three patents held by Verizon, and but found no infringement as to two other patents. The jury returned a verdict against Vonage for $58 million and included a royalty rate of 5.5% of every sale to a Vonage customer to Verizon. Subsequent to this jury award, there were a series of appeals and intermediate stays on payment. Vonage was also ordered by the court to stop signing up new customers, but this was stayed pending appeal three weeks later. On November 19, 2007, Vonage agreed to pay $120 million in damages to Verizon. In other patent lawsuits, by December 2007, Vonage was ordered to pay $80 million to Sprint Nextel and $39 million to AT&amp;T Inc. Another lawsuit with Nortel resulted in no monetary damages.

==2009 customer service settlement==
In November 2009, Vonage agreed to an assurance of voluntary compliance (AVC) with 32 states. The settlement followed an investigation into complaints about the marketing of Vonage services, including confusion about availability and cost, along with advertisements involving &quot;free&quot; services, money back guarantees and trial periods. The consumer protection agreement also addressed complaints that some consumers were prevented from canceling the Vonage service. In the settlement, Vonage agreed to pay the seven investigating states $3 million for costs, issue refunds to complainants dating back to January 2004, and change several business practices in regard to advertising and customer retention.

==Services==
Originally known for its home VOIP services, Vonage has shifted its primary focus to business cloud communications in the mid 2010s. Vonage offers cloud communications and calling plans for residential customers and businesses, including small and medium-sized businesses, mid-market companies, and enterprises.

===Business services===

Vonage offers two unified communications platforms for businesses that integrate communications services, such as video conferencing, voicemail transcription, and desktop sharing, using voice as a platform. Cloud communications services allow business customers to connect with various business applications and customer relationship management (CRM) tools through a middleware technology. For business customers that rely on high quantities of voice, video and data communications in their day-to-day operations, Vonage provides quality of service over its own private Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS) network and via a Software Defined Area Network (SD-WAN) product.

===Residential services===
Residential services provide home phone plans using VoIP (voice over Internet Protocol) over a broadband Internet connection, such as cable Internet service or DSL. Features for Vonage home phone residential service includes voicemail transcription; 411 calling; caller ID; call waiting; do not disturb; and a network availability feature which forwards all calls to a mobile phone if Internet connectivity is lost. Many of Vonage&#x27;s residential products offer international calling plans.

===Service requirements===

Vonage customers must have a broadband Internet connection, such as cable Internet service or DSL, through an Internet service provider (ISP). To initiate subscription a customer must provide a billing and shipping address in the country of service. Vonage supplies an analog telephone adapter which connects a customer supplied standard analog telephone to the Internet and the Vonage service. Residents of the U.S., Canada, and the UK may subscribe to Vonage by credit card from their respective country, but the Vonage adapter can be connected to the Internet anywhere.

Usage is generally referred to as &quot;unlimited&quot;, though Vonage has different national &quot;fair use&quot; policies limiting Vonage-to-phone calls to a few thousand minutes per month in the UK, Canada, and U.S. Evidence suggests that calls are limited to a length of 3 hours and 56 minutes.

===Telephone number availability===
Subscribers may choose a number in the country of the service they subscribe to for their primary line, in an area code of their choice. Subscribers can obtain additional &quot;virtual numbers&quot; for a monthly fee. Vonage also offers virtual numbers in Mexico, Canada and Europe. While the company supports porting a U.S. telephone number via the FCC&#x27;s local number portability (LNP), not every phone number is available in every area code. Additionally, customers can transfer an existing number to Vonage, which can take up to 7 to 10 business days from the time the customer completes the Number Transfer Authorization (NTA).

===Emergency calls===
Vonage offered 911 service on a VoIP platform for the first time in 2003. For 911 location services to work, subscribers must activate the 911 calling feature by registering their full address with the company. Customers are responsible for maintaining their 911 location information at all times.

If a customer dials 911 before the 911 verification is completed, the call will usually be routed to a national 911 call center where basic information must be given (name, location, nature of emergency, etc.), after which the call is transferred to a local public service answering point, like a local Police Department.

===Quality of service and equipment compatibility===
VoIP service relies upon consistent broadband-ISP uptime and VoIP-equipment compatibility with the ISP&#x27;s modem. Although VoIP was initially optimized for voice, some fax equipment can be operated over VoIP, but compatibility of monitored alarm systems and other devices is less certain. Vonage offers &quot;specially commissioned&quot; &quot;Fax Line&quot; service. Vonage recommends customers keep a basic traditional landline dedicated to their home alarm system and use Vonage for the rest of their calling needs.

Vonage implements Voice over IP sending audio via RTP and signaling via SIP.

===Charitable contributions===
In March 2023, The Vonage Foundation entered into a partnership with Girls Who Code to help provide accessible coding education opportunities to women of all ethnicities and backgrounds by sponsoring their Summer Immersion Program 2023. The program focuses on creating a more diverse workforce in the technology industry by providing virtual classes for high school STEM students for free.

== See also ==
* &quot;Kleffman v. Vonage Holdings Corp.&quot;
* List of VOIP companies

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q866972" start="0" end="21" title="Vonage" label="Vonage Holdings Corp."/>
<link wikidata="Q866972" start="35" end="41" title="Vonage" label="Vonage"/>
<link wikidata="Q52618" start="117" end="125" title="Ericsson" label="Ericsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474335" start="144" end="172" title="Holmdel Township, New Jersey" label="Holmdel Township, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q866972" start="214" end="219" title="Vonage" label="Min-X"/>
<link wikidata="Q81945" start="286" end="314" title="voice over Internet Protocol" label="voice over Internet Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q52618" start="787" end="795" title="Ericsson" label="Ericsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904460" start="889" end="900" title="Jeff Pulver" label="Jeff Pulver"/>
<link wikidata="Q81945" start="914" end="927" title="Voice over IP" label="Voice over IP"/>
<link wikidata="Q6175799" start="958" end="975" title="Jeffrey A. Citron" label="Jeffrey A. Citron"/>
<link wikidata="Q746801" start="1352" end="1370" title="Edison, New Jersey" label="Edison, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474335" start="1428" end="1435" title="Holmdel Township, New Jersey" label="Holmdel"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1567" end="1580" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="1599" end="1605" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="1622" end="1636" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q290680" start="1807" end="1828" title="The ADT Corporation" label="ADT Security Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q185142" start="1929" end="1932" title="IPO" label="IPO"/>
<link wikidata="Q13677" start="2585" end="2608" title="New York Stock Exchange" label="New York Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q185142" start="2738" end="2741" title="Initial public offering" label="IPO"/>
<link wikidata="Q2783852" start="2868" end="2880" title="class action" label="class action"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001668" start="2953" end="2965" title="Business 2.0" label="Business 2.0"/>
<link wikidata="Q219508" start="3387" end="3396" title="Citigroup" label="Citigroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q193199" start="3398" end="3401" title="UBS" label="UBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q66048" start="3407" end="3420" title="Deutsche Bank" label="Deutsche Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254596" start="3846" end="3867" title="software as a service" label="software as a service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696845" start="3944" end="3954" title="Telesphere" label="Telesphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q18153312" start="4051" end="4065" title="iCore Networks" label="iCore Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813437" start="4381" end="4387" title="TokBox" label="TokBox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089715" start="4391" end="4397" title="WebRTC" label="WebRTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q52618" start="4710" end="4718" title="Ericsson" label="Ericsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7366944" start="5387" end="5396" title="Rory Read" label="Rory Read"/>
<link wikidata="Q5629910" start="5454" end="5466" title="Börje Ekholm" label="Börje Ekholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q467752" start="5680" end="5687" title="Verizon" label="Verizon"/>
<link wikidata="Q253623" start="5761" end="5767" title="patent" label="patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q81945" start="5784" end="5788" title="VoIP" label="VoIP"/>
<link wikidata="Q204255" start="6163" end="6178" title="viral marketing" label="viral marketing"/>
<link wikidata="Q301965" start="7031" end="7044" title="Sprint Corporation" label="Sprint Nextel"/>
<link wikidata="Q35476" start="7064" end="7077" title="AT&amp;amp;T" label="AT&amp;amp;T Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q464996" start="7099" end="7105" title="Nortel" label="Nortel"/>
<link wikidata="Q16834810" start="7215" end="7248" title="assurance of voluntary compliance" label="assurance of voluntary compliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070347" start="8260" end="8282" title="unified communications" label="unified communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q5135694" start="8449" end="8469" title="Cloud communications" label="Cloud communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q485643" start="8554" end="8586" title="customer relationship management" label="customer relationship management"/>
<link wikidata="Q146768" start="8609" end="8619" title="middleware" label="middleware"/>
<link wikidata="Q220501" start="8772" end="8790" title="quality of service" label="quality of service"/>
<link wikidata="Q677023" start="8812" end="8841" title="Multiprotocol Label Switching" label="Multiprotocol Label Switching"/>
<link wikidata="Q81945" start="8995" end="8999" title="VoIP" label="VoIP"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="9576" end="9601" title="Internet service provider" label="Internet service provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q484921" start="9735" end="9759" title="analog telephone adapter" label="analog telephone adapter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390458" start="10486" end="10495" title="area code" label="area code"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="10632" end="10638" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="10651" end="10657" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664461" start="10737" end="10761" title="local number portability" label="local number portability"/>
<link wikidata="Q132744" start="11882" end="11885" title="fax" label="fax"/>
<link wikidata="Q945434" start="11954" end="11967" title="alarm device" label="alarm systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q81945" start="12252" end="12265" title="Voice over IP" label="Voice over IP"/>
<link wikidata="Q321213" start="12284" end="12287" title="Real-time Transport Protocol" label="RTP"/>
<link wikidata="Q191018" start="12306" end="12309" title="Session Initiation Protocol" label="SIP"/>
<link wikidata="Q6420104" start="12757" end="12790" title="Kleffman v. Vonage Holdings Corp." label="Kleffman v. Vonage Holdings Corp."/>
<link wikidata="Q24590008" start="12799" end="12821" title="List of VOIP companies" label="List of VOIP companies"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="444259" wikidata="Q3066567" url="?curid=444259" title="Fantasound">
<text>Fantasound was a sound reproduction system developed by engineers of Walt Disney studios and RCA for Walt Disney&#x27;s animated film &quot;Fantasia&quot;, the first commercial film released in stereo.

==Origins==
Walt Disney&#x27;s cartoon character Mickey Mouse entered a decline in popularity in the mid-1930s. Disney devised a comeback appearance for Mickey in 1936 with &quot;The Sorcerer&#x27;s Apprentice&quot;, a more elaborate edition of the animated &quot;Silly Symphonies&quot; series set to the music of &quot;The Sorcerer&#x27;s Apprentice&quot; by Paul Dukas. Disney met conductor Leopold Stokowski in late 1937 at Chasen&#x27;s, a noted Hollywood restaurant, and Stokowski agreed to conduct the piece at no cost. Stokowski was an enthusiast for new and improved methods of sound reproduction and had already participated in experimental stereophonic sound recordings in 1931 and 1932, and a live, long-distance demonstration of multi-channel sound a year later.

==Recording the &quot;Fantasia&quot; soundtrack, 1938–39==
===&quot;The Sorcerer&#x27;s Apprentice&quot;===
In January 1938, over 100 musicians assembled at Culver Studios in California for the recording of the nine-minute Dukas piece. The plan was to create a multi-track recording that allowed the separation of sound channels which would allow the dynamic balance of the music to be adjusted on reproduction. To increase reverberation, the stage was altered acoustically with five double plywood partitions that separated the sections of the orchestra, creating the world&#x27;s first baffles. Although a satisfactory recording was made, in the days before widespread use of headphones and click tracks to control the speed, the musicians could not hear the other instruments clearly enough and this affected the tempo of the piece. Poor control over the separation of low-frequency sounds presented a further problem on playback of the music.

As production costs for &quot;The Sorcerer&#x27;s Apprentice&quot; surpassed $125,000, it became clear to Disney that it would not recoup costs as a short. In February 1938, he decided to expand the concept and start on a feature-length film consisting of several animated segments named &quot;The Concert Feature&quot;.

===Academy of Music sessions===
A year after recording &quot;The Sorcerer&#x27;s Apprentice&quot;, Stokowski signed an 18-month contract with Disney to conduct the remaining pieces for &quot;Fantasia&quot; and the process began in earnest. Fascinated with the rich sound he heard from the playbacks at Culver Studios, Disney felt the conventional sound systems at the time sounded too tinny and inadequate for the experience he wanted &quot;Fantasia&quot; to be. &quot;We know...that music emerging from one speaker behind the screen sounds thin, tinkly and strainy. We wanted to reproduce such beautiful masterpieces...so that audiences would feel as though they were standing at the podium with Stokowski,&quot; he said. The goal was to reproduce a full symphony orchestra with its normal volume range and acoustic output in the theatre. The set-up used for the recording of &quot;The Sorcerer&#x27;s Apprentice&quot; was abandoned, and it was decided to record with the Philadelphia Orchestra, which Stokowski had directed from 1912 to 1938, at the Academy of Music concert hall in Philadelphia, the orchestra&#x27;s home known for its good acoustics.
The recording for &quot;Fantasia&quot; began in April 1939 and lasted seven weeks. In the sessions, 33 microphones placed around the orchestra captured the music which was transferred onto eight optical recording machines located in the hall&#x27;s basement. Several safety measures were enforced to prevent the risk of fire as the Academy was constructed of wood. A maximum of 18 rolls of raw nitrate film stock were allowed in the venue at any one time, with a film delivery truck parked outside the hall being converted into a storage unit for a sufficient quantity of film. Six of the channels recorded different sections of the orchestra which provided a &quot;close-up&quot; of the instruments – cellos and basses, violins, violas, brass, woodwinds and tympani – while the seventh channel recorded a mixture of the first six and the eighth captured the overall sound of the orchestra at a distance. A ninth channel provided the click-track function to help the animators time their drawings to the music.

Each microphone was channeled to a central switching panel, where an operator would read the score and mute those that were not in use to keep noise and leakage to a minimum. Engineers in the basement used headphones for sound mixing and cathode ray oscilloscopes for level indicators, while those who picked up the distant orchestra sound used horn monitoring. In the 42 days of sessions, over ninety miles of sound track were recorded. After being developed, the film was shipped to the Disney studios in Burbank, California, where tone and other adjustments were made prior to mastering. The nine recorded sound tracks were then mixed into four – three for the music, voices and special effects and the fourth for control of the volume of the first three.

==Development and testing, 1939–40==
===Pan pot and togad device===
The average monaural sound systems around the time of the production of &quot;Fantasia&quot; had a number of disadvantages. Their limited range in volume was ineffective as symphonic music was impaired by excessive ground noise and amplitude distortion. Their single point source of sound, though suitable for dialogue and action at the centre of the screen, caused music and sound effects to suffer from acoustic phase distortion which is absent when sound originates from multiple sources. Led by William E. Garity, the chief audio engineer at the Disney studios, technicians developed a multi-channel reproduction system that was dubbed Fantasound, a process that was to be a desirable alternative sound system.

The first task was to create the illusion of sound &quot;moving&quot; across neighboring speakers. It was found that by placing two speakers roughly 20 feet apart it was possible to produce a &quot;moving&quot; sound, but the effect could not be achieved through simple volume control. The problem was solved with a three-circuit differential junction network named the &quot;pan pot&quot; (panoramic potentiometer), that allowed sound to progressively travel using constant fades with a left, center and right speaker configuration. The second issue was dynamic range, the difference in volume between the loudest and quietest sounds. The dynamic range of typical film soundtracks at the time was limited to a poor signal-to-noise ratio of about 40 dB. This was tackled by increasing the volume during loud passages and reducing it during quiet ones, to which the dynamic range would increase. A tone-operated gain adjusting device, or &quot;Togad,&quot; was built that varied the volume of the replayed sound under the control of a tone of varying amplitude. This device was the predecessor of the automated mix-down systems found in modern recording studios.

===Fantasound set-ups===
Ten different Fantasound setups were built and tested during its development. As many as several hundred designs were detailed on paper, each with different equipment combinations. The first set-up that was constructed, the Mark I system, used a left, center and right speaker placed across the stage plus one in each corner at the back of the auditorium. It used two sound channels, one directed at the stage center (or &quot;screen&quot;) speaker, while the second could travel around the remaining four across the room smoothly using a manually controlled four-circuit panpot. The following Mark II configuration used a third sound channel and three additional speakers, one placed on each side wall of the house and a third placed in the middle of the ceiling, all with a manual six-circuit panpot. By the time the &quot;Mark II&quot; system was devised, the control of the sound system was too complex for a single operator. To solve that difficulty, the &quot;Mark III&quot; system was developed to study the effects of a pilot tone-control track. The configuration was a single-channel Togad expander, controlled by either an oscillator or a tone track. The &quot;Mark IV&quot; system was identical to the eight-speaker, three-track &quot;Mark II&quot; system except that a Togad replaced manual control. It was installed at Disney&#x27;s Hyperion studios in the summer of 1939 and was used for sound and music department research until Disney&#x27;s relocation to Burbank in 1940. The equipment for this system required a floor space of about 35 feet by 4 feet and used nearly 400 vacuum tubes.

The &quot;Mark V&quot; system, the first installed at Burbank, was in operation for one day. Though the equipment operated correctly, the system failed because the personnel could not remember the correct configuration from one rehearsal to the next. The crew then developed the simpler &quot;Mark VI&quot; setup that consisted of three stage speakers, three program tracks and a three-tone control track. The first serious dubbing of &quot;Fantasia&quot; was attempted on this system. The &quot;Mark VII&quot; was the first to be manufactured by RCA that closely resembled the Mark VI, but included tone rectifier modifications. The &quot;Mark VIII&quot; system was a rearranged version of the &quot;Mark VII&quot;. A log-log tone rectifier designed by RCA replaced the linear tone rectifier used in the &quot;Mark VII&quot;. The second dubbing of &quot;Fantasia&quot; was done through this system. Following the installation of a stand-by channel, this equipment was installed in New York City for the film&#x27;s premiere. Two further systems were developed after the film&#x27;s opening. The arrangement of the &quot;Mark IX&quot; setup was changed and two sets of rear speakers were manually switched in to supplement or replace the left and right front speakers at several points in the film. In the &quot;Mark X&quot;, the switching and level changes in the rear speakers are done automatically using a thyratron and mechanical relay system operated by means of notches on the edge of the film. This was developed by Disney engineers C. A. Hisserich and Tickner. Disney became an early customer for the newly established Hewlett-Packard company when it ordered eight of its Model 200B oscillators to test the Fantasound systems.

The following table summarizes the different Fantasound setups, panning methods and speaker placement described before:

==&quot;Fantasia&quot; roadshows with Fantasound, 1940–41==

&quot;Fantasia&quot; debuted as a roadshow theatrical release under Walt Disney Productions at The Broadway Theatre in New York City on November 13, 1940. The film was shown in only 13 theatres, as the installation of equipment required for Fantasound at each venue was costly. Twelve of the thirteen theaters were legitimate theaters converted for the purpose, not movie theaters, due to the need to close the theater during installation of Fantasound. With these expenses and its large budget, &quot;Fantasia&quot; was unable to make a profit during its initial release.

Fantasound never expanded beyond the initial roadshow engagements in New York, Los Angeles (where the automatic Mark X system was used), Boston, Philadelphia, Chicago, Detroit, San Francisco, Baltimore, Washington, Minneapolis, Buffalo, Pittsburgh and Cleveland. Eight of the roadshow engagements used the Mark IX systems.

==End of roadshows and development, 1941==
Garity and RCA&#x27;s Watson Jones ended the roadshows in 1941, and later gave these reasons:

* The amount of equipment required and the time necessary to make the installation.
* Because of the time element, attractive theaters were not available to Disney, as the first-class houses in the various communities had established policies and the installation of the equipment would generally require keeping the theater &quot;dark&quot; for a few days.
* The advent of wartime conditions precluded the possibility of developing mobile units that would have lessened installation time and costs.
* The variation in the regulations throughout the country, both as to operating personnel and local ordinances, materially affected the operating and installation costs.
* Limited space in many projection rooms was a major problem.

In April 1941, RKO Radio Pictures acquired the distribution rights of &quot;Fantasia&quot; and replaced the Fantasound soundtrack with a mono soundtrack. The film got a wide release in 1942 as a double feature with &quot;Valley of the Sun&quot; with its duration cut to 80 minutes. All but one of the Fantasound systems were dismantled and contributed to the war effort.

On February 26, 1942, an Academy Honorary Award was given to Disney, Garity, Hawkins and RCA for their &quot;outstanding contribution to the advancement of the use of sound in motion pictures through the production of &quot;Fantasia&quot;&quot;.

==Legacy==
Fantasound marked the first use of the click track, overdubbing of orchestral parts, and simultaneous multi-track recording. Almost a fifth of the film&#x27;s budget was spent on musical recording techniques.

&quot;Fantasia&quot; was re-released multiple times, with the full-length version making a return to theaters in 1946. Stereo sound was not restored until its 1956 release when it was also presented in SuperScope, an anamorphic widescreen format similar to CinemaScope. To create the stereo soundtrack the original tracks were transferred across telephone lines from the optical Fantasound equipment to the new magnetic recording equipment. These were housed in separate buildings and could not be brought together. This wire transfer resulted in some loss of treble response, but the copies retained the original dynamic range.

For &quot;Fantasia&quot;″s 1982 issue, the original recordings were abandoned altogether and a completely new soundtrack was recorded using digital stereo technology in Dolby Stereo, conducted by Irwin Kostal, who later composed the score for &quot;Mickey&#x27;s Christmas Carol&quot; (1983).

The original soundtrack returned when Fantasound was recorded by RCA and was also recreated in Dolby Stereo for the film&#x27;s 1990 theatrical release. Disney audio engineer Terry Porter spent six months restoring the Stokowski soundtrack. He used remastering technology to remove some 3,000 pops from the four-track magnetic copy from 1955, with tools also used on phasing, hiss and distortion. &quot;I proposed to management that we could piece the soundtrack together...in a way that re-created the impact of the original roadshow. When we play it back...it exactly simulates the way their equipment played in the theaters...back then.&quot; The result, named &quot;Fantasound 90,&quot; was only set up in two theaters, one each in New York City and Los Angeles. The six-channel surround print that Porter created was also used as the basis for the master soundtrack of the film&#x27;s DVD release on November 14, 2000.

For Walt Disney Pictures&#x27; 2016 film version of &quot;The Jungle Book&quot;, director Jon Favreau and composer John Debney sought to recreate the Fantasound experience Disney had in mind. When mixing the soundtrack in Dolby Atmos, as Favreau said, &quot;we isolated instruments when we could. And in the sound mix, we created a Fantasound mix. If you see the film in Atmos, you will feel that there are instruments that move around the theater.&quot; A mention for Fantasound appears in the film&#x27;s closing credits.

==Personnel==
The following is a list of persons who were acknowledged by Garity and Hawkins in a 1941 article for their &quot;suggestions and assistance in the development of Fantasound&quot;:

* C. O. Slyfield
* W. C. Lamb, Jr.
* Charles A. Hisserich
* H. M. Tremaine
* P. J. Holmes
* Melville Poche
* H. J. Steck
* E. A. Freitas

==Further reading==
* Fantasound (1941)
* The Future of Fantasound (1942)
* Experiences in Road-Showing Walt Disney&#x27;s Fantasia (1942)

==References==
==Sources==
* 
* 
*
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3066567" start="0" end="10" title="Fantasound" label="Fantasound"/>
<link wikidata="Q20077126" start="17" end="35" title="sound reproduction" label="sound reproduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="69" end="88" title="The Walt Disney Company" label="Walt Disney studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q218038" start="93" end="96" title="RCA" label="RCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q8704" start="101" end="112" title="Walt Disney" label="Walt Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q943192" start="140" end="148" title="Fantasia (1940 film)" label="Fantasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8704" start="215" end="226" title="Walt Disney" label="Walt Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q11934" start="252" end="264" title="Mickey Mouse" label="Mickey Mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q909166" start="467" end="483" title="Silly Symphonies" label="Silly Symphonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066882" start="523" end="553" title="The Sorcerer&amp;#x27;s Apprentice (Dukas)" label="The Sorcerer&amp;#x27;s Apprentice"/>
<link wikidata="Q215556" start="563" end="573" title="Paul Dukas" label="Paul Dukas"/>
<link wikidata="Q297562" start="596" end="613" title="Leopold Stokowski" label="Leopold Stokowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087240" start="630" end="643" title="Chasen&amp;#x27;s" label="Chasen&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q34006" start="653" end="662" title="Hollywood, Los Angeles" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q34678" start="853" end="871" title="stereophonic sound" label="stereophonic sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066882" start="1047" end="1077" title="The Sorcerer&amp;#x27;s Apprentice (Dukas)" label="The Sorcerer&amp;#x27;s Apprentice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3699365" start="1136" end="1150" title="Culver Studios" label="Culver Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="1154" end="1164" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q468809" start="1403" end="1416" title="reverberation" label="reverberation"/>
<link wikidata="Q186819" start="1657" end="1667" title="headphones" label="headphones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5132441" start="1672" end="1683" title="click track" label="click track"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323979" start="2753" end="2764" title="monaural" label="one speaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q659181" start="3222" end="3244" title="Philadelphia Orchestra" label="Philadelphia Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q337337" start="3301" end="3317" title="Academy of Music (Philadelphia)" label="Academy of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="3334" end="3346" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q20682774" start="3599" end="3616" title="sound-on-film" label="optical recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q143874" start="3798" end="3810" title="nitrate film" label="nitrate film"/>
<link wikidata="Q5132441" start="4338" end="4349" title="click-track" label="click-track"/>
<link wikidata="Q83913" start="4654" end="4665" title="Cathode-ray tube" label="cathode ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q174320" start="4666" end="4679" title="oscilloscopes" label="oscilloscopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628295" start="4761" end="4765" title="Horn loudspeaker" label="horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078595" start="4905" end="4919" title="Walt Disney Studios (Burbank)" label="Disney studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q39561" start="4923" end="4942" title="Burbank, California" label="Burbank, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552709" start="5511" end="5523" title="point source" label="point source"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903226" start="5743" end="5760" title="William E. Garity" label="William E. Garity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524510" start="6336" end="6343" title="pan pot" label="pan pot"/>
<link wikidata="Q187868" start="6361" end="6374" title="potentiometer" label="potentiometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161699" start="6515" end="6528" title="dynamic range" label="dynamic range"/>
<link wikidata="Q738628" start="6676" end="6697" title="signal-to-noise ratio" label="signal-to-noise ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q170475" start="8281" end="8291" title="oscillator" label="oscillator"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574371" start="8737" end="8748" title="vacuum tube" label="vacuum tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q218038" start="9299" end="9302" title="RCA" label="RCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q171486" start="9357" end="9366" title="rectifier" label="rectifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q176121" start="10162" end="10171" title="thyratron" label="thyratron"/>
<link wikidata="Q80978" start="10380" end="10395" title="Hewlett-Packard" label="Hewlett-Packard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319880" start="10705" end="10732" title="roadshow theatrical release" label="roadshow theatrical release"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="10739" end="10762" title="Walt Disney Productions" label="Walt Disney Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925870" start="10766" end="10786" title="The Broadway Theatre" label="The Broadway Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="10790" end="10803" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q6518484" start="10986" end="11004" title="legitimate theater" label="legitimate theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q41253" start="11037" end="11050" title="movie theater" label="movie theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q218038" start="11623" end="11626" title="RCA" label="RCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q267282" start="12455" end="12473" title="RKO Radio Pictures" label="RKO Radio Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q4019680" start="12609" end="12621" title="wide release" label="wide release"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251417" start="12635" end="12649" title="double feature" label="double feature"/>
<link wikidata="Q7912370" start="12661" end="12678" title="Valley of the Sun (film)" label="Valley of the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q727328" start="12837" end="12859" title="Academy Honorary Award" label="Academy Honorary Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5132441" start="13109" end="13120" title="click track" label="click track"/>
<link wikidata="Q217422" start="13497" end="13507" title="anamorphosis" label="anamorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q485544" start="13537" end="13548" title="CinemaScope" label="CinemaScope"/>
<link wikidata="Q917075" start="14079" end="14091" title="Dolby Stereo" label="Dolby Stereo"/>
<link wikidata="Q329998" start="14106" end="14118" title="Irwin Kostal" label="Irwin Kostal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539739" start="14159" end="14188" title="Mickey&amp;#x27;s Christmas Carol" label="Mickey&amp;#x27;s Christmas Carol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7276046" start="14269" end="14272" title="RCA (trademark)" label="RCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7704924" start="14379" end="14391" title="Terry Porter (sound engineer)" label="Terry Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q191224" start="15133" end="15153" title="Walt Disney Pictures" label="Walt Disney Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q16857406" start="15187" end="15202" title="The Jungle Book (2016 film)" label="The Jungle Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q295964" start="15219" end="15230" title="Jon Favreau" label="Jon Favreau"/>
<link wikidata="Q48975" start="15244" end="15255" title="John Debney" label="John Debney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3033860" start="15351" end="15362" title="Dolby Atmos" label="Dolby Atmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2819601" start="15851" end="15865" title="C. O. Slyfield" label="C. O. Slyfield"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="444267" wikidata="Q500093" url="?curid=444267" title="Legally Blonde">
<text>Legally Blonde is a 2001 American comedy film directed by Robert Luketic and written by Karen McCullah Lutz and Kirsten Smith, based on Amanda Brown&#x27;s 2001 novel of the same name. It stars Reese Witherspoon, Luke Wilson, Selma Blair, Matthew Davis, Victor Garber, and Jennifer Coolidge. The story follows Elle Woods (Witherspoon), a sorority girl who attempts to win back her ex-boyfriend Warner Huntington III (Davis) by getting a Juris Doctor degree at Harvard Law School, and in the process, overcomes stereotypes against blondes and triumphs as a successful lawyer.

The outline of &quot;Legally Blonde&quot; originated from Brown&#x27;s experiences as a blonde going to Stanford Law School while being obsessed with fashion and beauty, reading &quot;Elle&quot; magazine, and frequently clashing with the personalities of her peers. In 2000, Brown met producer Marc Platt, who helped her develop her manuscript into a novel. Platt brought in screenwriters McCullah Lutz and Smith to adapt the book into a motion picture. The project caught the attention of Luketic, an Australian director new to Hollywood. 

The film was released on July 13, 2001, and was a hit with audiences, grossing $142 million worldwide on an $18 million budget, as well as receiving positive reviews from critics, with praise for Witherspoon&#x27;s performance in particular. It was nominated for a Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture: Musical or Comedy. Witherspoon received a Golden Globe nomination for Best Actress – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy, and the 2002 MTV Movie Award for Best Female Performance. The box office success led to a series of films: a 2003 sequel, &quot;Legally Blonde 2: Red, White &amp; Blonde&quot;, a 2009 direct-to-DVD spin-off, &quot;Legally Blondes&quot;, and in 2007 &quot;Legally Blonde: The Musical&quot;. In May 2020, it was announced that Mindy Kaling and Dan Goor were signed to write a third film. The third film was set to release in 2022 but has been delayed to an undisclosed date. An upcoming Amazon Prime Video prequel series about Woods&#x27;s high school years, &quot;Elle&quot;, is being developed by Witherspoon.

==Plot==

In California, fashion merchandising student and sorority girl Elle Woods is taken to a local restaurant by her boyfriend, Warner Huntington III. She expects a proposal, but he breaks up with her instead. Intending to become a successful senator, he believes Elle is not &quot;serious&quot; enough for that kind of life. Elle assumes she can win Warner back if she shows herself capable of achieving the same things. After months of studying, Elle scores a 179 on the Law School Admission Test and, combined with her 4.0 GPA, is accepted to Harvard Law School.

During the first semester, Elle discovers her SoCal personality is a complete contrast to her distrusting East Coast classmates. Elle learns of Warner&#x27;s engagement to his previous girlfriend, Vivian Kensington, and befriends local manicurist Paulette Bonafonté. Later, as Elle tells Warner she intends to apply for one of her professor&#x27;s internships, he says she is not smart enough. Realizing that Warner will neither take her back nor take her seriously, Elle decides to improve herself by demonstrating her understanding of the subject.

The following semester, Harvard&#x27;s most respected teacher Professor Callahan hires some first-year interns, including Elle, Warner, and Vivian, to participate in a high-profile case involving prominent fitness instructor Brooke Windham, one of Elle&#x27;s role models. Accused of murdering her husband, Brooke is unwilling to produce her alibi, and she later reveals to Elle she was secretly having liposuction during the murder, which Elle promises not to disclose. Vivian later gains a new respect for Elle and reveals Warner&#x27;s father helped him get in. Emmett Richmond, Callahan&#x27;s junior partner, also discovers her potential.

One night, Callahan attempts to seduce Elle, who assumes that is why she became an intern. She quits in devastation and tells Emmett what happened. Brooke, after learning of Callahan&#x27;s behavior, replaces him with Elle under Emmett&#x27;s guidance, as law students may represent clients if they do so under the supervision of a licensed attorney.

While cross-examining Brooke&#x27;s stepdaughter, Chutney, Elle eventually discovers significant inconsistencies in her story: Chutney testified she was home during her father&#x27;s murder but did not hear the gunshot because she was in the shower after getting her hair permed that morning. Elle says washing permed hair within the first 24 hours would deactivate the ammonium thioglycolate, pointing out Chutney&#x27;s curls are still intact. A distraught Chutney admits her dislike towards having a stepmother her own age and, in an attempt to kill Brooke, accidentally shot her father.

After the trial, Chutney is detained, Brooke is cleared of all charges, and Elle is hailed by the media. Warner asks Elle to take him back since she has proven herself, but she rejects him, realizing he is shallow and a &quot;complete bonehead&quot;. However, she and Vivian become best friends, especially after Vivian dumps Warner. Elle gives the graduation speech two years later, while Warner graduates with no honors, no job offers, and no girlfriend. Emmett has started his own law firm, with plans to propose to Elle later that night.

==Cast==
==Production==
===Background===
Amanda Brown published &quot;Legally Blonde&quot; in 2001, basing it upon her real life experiences as a blonde attending Stanford Law School, while being obsessed with fashion and beauty, reading &quot;Elle&quot; magazine, and frequently clashing with the personalities of her peers.

Brown said that when she first arrived at Stanford, she discovered she had made a big mistake. &quot;I was in my first week of law school, in 1993, and I saw this flyer for &quot;The Women of Stanford Law,&quot; so I was like, &#x27;I&#x27;ll go and meet some nice girls. Whatever.&#x27; I went to the meeting, and these were not women. These were really angry people. The woman who was leading it spent three years at Stanford trying to change the name &#x27;&#x27; to &#x27;ovester.&#x27; I started laughing and I realized everyone in the room took it very seriously. So I didn&#x27;t make any friends there.&quot;

Brown wrote letters to her parents about these experiences and originally thought about writing a book of essays about her law school experience until a literary agent advised her to adapt them into a novel. Brown took a community college writing class, put together a manuscript, and shopped the book around but was unsuccessful. She later resubmitted her manuscript again, this time in pink, which got the attention of an agent, and &quot;movie people went nuts.&quot; Amanda&#x27;s mother, Suzanne, remembers the day of the bidding war and thought she would be lucky to get $10,000 but the final figure was considerably more.

Producer Marc Platt was intrigued by the character of Elle Woods when an unpublished novel manuscript was delivered to him. &quot;What I loved about this story is that it&#x27;s hilarious, it&#x27;s sexy and, at the same time, it&#x27;s empowering,&quot; says Platt. &quot;The world looks at Elle and sees someone who is blonde and beautiful but nothing more. Elle, on the other hand, doesn&#x27;t judge herself or anybody else. She thinks the world&#x27;s great, she&#x27;s great, everyone&#x27;s great and nothing can change that. She&#x27;s truly an irrepressible modern heroine.&quot;

Screenwriters Karen McCullah Lutz and Kirsten Smith spent two days on Stanford&#x27;s campus in the spring of 2000 doing research for their screenplay based on Brown&#x27;s novel. Director Robert Luketic, an Australian newcomer who came to Hollywood on the success of his quirky debut short film &quot;Titsiana Booberini,&quot; was drawn to the project while looking for a breakthrough film. &quot;I had been reading scripts for two years, not finding anything I could put my own personal mark on, until &quot;Legally Blonde&quot; came around,&quot; Luketic said.

===Development===

Luketic explained that when the studio first green-lit the project, they were not aware that the film would be structured as a progressively feel-good, women&#x27;s empowerment movie. &quot;Initially, they thought it was going to be much more wet T-shirts and boobs than it actually turned out to be&quot;, said Luketic. The first script for &quot;Legally Blonde&quot; was edgy and raunchy in a similar vein to &quot;American Pie&quot;. The murder trial was not part of the plot and the film ended with Elle getting into a relationship with a professor. &quot;It transformed from nonstop zingers that were very adult in nature to this universal story of overcoming adversity by being oneself,&quot; said Smith. When it was decided to change the film&#x27;s plot, McCullah and Smith finessed some details and added a few characters, like Paulette.

Charlize Theron, Gwyneth Paltrow, Alicia Silverstone, Katherine Heigl, Christina Applegate, Milla Jovovich and Jennifer Love Hewitt were all considered for the lead role but Luketic said he &quot;knew on page five of the script that [he] wanted Reese to play Elle&quot;. &quot;I wanted someone with gravitas and brains,&quot; he explained. &quot;There had to be more behind the face, and Reese just fit the bill&quot;. Witherspoon was the first person who read the script, and it was not sent to any other actresses; casting director Joseph Middleton had also previously worked with Witherspoon in &quot;The Man in the Moon&quot; and &quot;A Far Off Place&quot;, so he strongly believed in her for the role when Platt brought up Witherspoon&#x27;s name. Applegate turned down the role and Platt suggested at one point to cast Britney Spears, but McCullah convinced him to not cast Spears after her &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot; appearance. Despite Luketic&#x27;s enthusiasm for Witherspoon to be cast as the lead, Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer was not convinced. Witherspoon&#x27;s performance as Tracy Flick in &quot;Election&quot; put her at risk of being typecast by the studio heads. &quot;They thought I was a ,&quot; Witherspoon told &quot;The Hollywood Reporter&quot;. Witherspoon had been passed over for several other post-&quot;Election&quot; roles. &quot;My manager finally called and said, &#x27;You&#x27;ve got to go meet with the studio head because he will not approve you. He thinks you really are your character from &quot;Election&quot; and that you&#x27;re repellent.&#x27; And then I was told to dress sexy.&quot; Witherspoon went through several rounds of auditions for the part, even meeting with executives in character with a Southern California accent. &quot;I remember a room full of men who were asking me questions about being a coed and being in a sorority,&quot; Witherspoon recalled. &quot;Even though I had dropped out of college four years earlier and I have never been inside a sorority house.&quot; Luketic remembered meeting with her to discuss how she&#x27;d approach the role. &quot;We met at a hotel on Sunset Boulevard and discussed the film...we were both concerned about some aspects, like how can the audience feel sorry for a rich girl driving a Porsche; and she had to dress in a very particular way that wasn&#x27;t distracting or off-putting...And every decision came from a certain innocence [of the character].&quot;

Jennifer Coolidge was cast as Elle&#x27;s manicurist friend Paulette, a role which Courtney Love and Kathy Najimy had also been considered for, according to some rumors Coolidge heard. For the role of Warner&#x27;s new girlfriend Vivian, Smith suggested casting Chloë Sevigny. This suggestion did not work out, so Selma Blair was cast instead; Blair and Witherspoon had previously been together in &quot;Cruel Intentions&quot;, allowing their friendship to be an anchor between their characters. Ali Larter originally wanted to play one of Elle&#x27;s sorority sisters, but upon reading the script, she fell in love with the character of Brooke Taylor Windham, the fitness instructor on trial for murder.

The screenwriters envisioned Luke Wilson as they were coming up with Elle&#x27;s love interest Emmett Richmond. &quot;They auditioned a bunch of other guys and we&#x27;re like, &#x27;How about auditioning Luke Wilson for the Luke Wilson role?&#x27;&quot; McCullah Lutz said. Middleton desired to cast Paul Bettany as Emmett, but the crew felt that the character should be American whereas Bettany is British.

The final product came after &quot;something like 10 drafts of the script. I worked with the writers (Kirsten Smith, Karen McCullah Lutz, working from Amanda Brown&#x27;s novel) who stayed on after we started shooting,&quot; Luketic explained. &quot;And we&#x27;d have re-thinks and re-writes, often in the middle of the night.&quot; An unused idea for the finished film included having a cameo appearance of &quot;Judge Judy&quot; during Elle&#x27;s Harvard video essay in which Elle and her friends chased down the show&#x27;s host, but the scene was cut when Judge Judy Sheindlin could not get on board. Alanna Ubach suggested instead to cast Witherspoon&#x27;s then-husband Ryan Phillippe for the part, rewritten as a male character, but Witherspoon did not feel the idea would play out.

Witherspoon researched the character by studying sorority girls on their campuses and associated hot spots. She went to dinner with them and joked she was conducting an &quot;anthropological study&quot;. &quot;I could have gone into this and been really ditsy and played what I would have thought this character was, and I would have missed a whole other side of her,&quot; Witherspoon added. &quot;But by going down to Beverly Hills, hanging out in Neiman Marcus, eating in their cafe and seeing how these women walk and speak, I got into the reality of the character. I saw how polite these women are, and I saw how much they value their female friendships and how important it is to support each other&quot;.

The cast and crew also did a lot of research, with McCullah and Smith visiting the Stanford Law School for a week during orientation time; a scene of a group composed of new students going around in a circle was inspired on law students the screenwriters eavesdropped during their visit. They also sat for the criminal law and constitutional law classes; McCullah particularly got bored during the second class despite finding the first interesting, but this inspired her to write some scenes during that class.

Reese Witherspoon said in an interview regarding her character:
===Costume design===

The film&#x27;s costume designer, Sophie De Rakoff, became fast friends with Witherspoon on the set, bonding over Dolly Parton. &quot;It was that simple. We just liked each other, and geeked out on Dolly,&quot; De Rakoff said. The dominant color palette for Elle&#x27;s outfits in the film is pink. &quot;The backstory is, Reese and I, and maybe the production designers, went to visit some sororities [in downtown Los Angeles]. We knew that she needed a signature color, and we were like, &#x27;Do we really want it to be pink? It&#x27;s so on the nose. It&#x27;s so feminine. Could we do lavender? Could we do light blue? Is there another color that we could do?&#x27; When we met all the sorority girls, it had to be pink.&quot;

Witherspoon sported 40 different hairstyles in the film. &quot;Oh my God, it became known as &#x27;The Hair That Ate Hollywood,&#x27;&quot; Luketic said. &quot;It became all about the hair. I have this obsession with flyaways. It would annoy Reese a little bit because I would always have hairdressers in her face. But really the most time and research and testing on the set went into getting the color right, because &#x27;blonde&#x27; is subject to interpretation, I found.&quot;

===Filming===

Luketic said he was &quot;terrified&quot; on his first day of filming. &quot;I come from making a ten-minute short with a crew of ten people to a crew of 200 and having enough trucks and trailers to wrap around a city block.&quot;

Both the University of Southern California and Stanford refused to allow the producers to use their college names in the film. &quot;[The producers of the film] asked if they could set the film at USC, but the images of her as an undergraduate and being in a sorority ... we felt there was too much stereotyping going on,&quot; says Elijah May, campus filming coordinator at USC. The production settled on having Elle go to a fictional college called CULA.

Although the film was primarily set at Harvard University, campus scenes were filmed at USC, University of California, Los Angeles, California Institute of Technology, and Rose City High School in Pasadena, California. Production initially lasted from October to December 2000.

The &quot;bend and snap&quot; scene – where Elle explains to Paulette how to get her crush&#x27;s attention – almost did not make it into the movie.
&quot;[Producer] Marc Platt wanted a B plot for Paulette (Jennifer Coolidge),&quot; McCullah Lutz told &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot;. &quot;At first we were like, &#x27;Should the store be robbed?&#x27;&quot; Co-writer Kirsten Smith observed, &quot;I think we spent a week or two trying to figure out what the B plot and this big set piece should be. There were crime plots. We were pitching scene after scene and it all felt very tonally weird&quot;.

Later, while brainstorming at a bar in Los Angeles, McCullah Lutz came up with a solution: &quot;What if Elle shows [Paulette] a move so she can get the UPS guy?&quot; On the spur of the moment, Smith invented a move, standing up and demonstrating what would become the bend and snap. Smith explains, &quot;It was a spontaneous invention. It was a completely drunken moment in a bar.&quot; Director Robert Luketic later adapted the &quot;bend and snap&quot; move into a dance number for the film.

&quot;... It was a fully choreographed number by Toni Basil, and she was awesome,&quot; Witherspoon recalls. &quot;She did the whole dance.&quot; &quot;I remember just reading it and thinking it was the most hysterical thing ever,&quot; she added. &quot;That is still the most asked request I get from people. Even this past year, when I have been giving speeches or talking about whatever, they always ask me, &#x27;Will you do the bend and snap?&#x27; I have a feeling I will be doing the bend and snap until I am 95&quot;. While filming the courthouse scenes, Raquel Welch requested cinematographer Anthony B. Richmond special lightning for her scenes as Mrs. Windham Vandermark due to her obsession with light and dressed on her own accord to look better.

The film originally ended at the courthouse right after Woods won the case, with Elle on the courthouse steps sharing a victory kiss with Emmett, then cutting one year into the future to her and a now-blonde Vivian starting their own Blonde Legal Defense Club at law school. After test audiences revealed they did not like this ending, McCullah Lutz and Smith consulted with Luketic, Platt and other members of the production team while still in the lobby of the movie theater and they all agreed a new conclusion was necessary. &quot;It was just kind of a weak ending,&quot; explained screenwriter McCullah Lutz. &quot;The kiss didn&#x27;t feel right because it&#x27;s not a rom-com — it wasn&#x27;t about their relationship. So test audiences were saying, &#x27;We want to see what happens — we want to see her succeed.&#x27; So that&#x27;s why we rewrote for graduation&quot;. Ubach and Jessica Cauffiel claim that the original ending also included Elle and Vivian drinking margaritas in Hawaii, with the implication that they were either now best friends or involved romantically although Smith and McCullah never wrote such ending. Other endings proposed for the film included a musical number in which Elle, the judge, the jury and everyone in the courthouse broke into singing and dancing.

The screenwriters wrote a new ending taking place at graduation, which was filmed at Dulwich College in London, England since Witherspoon was in that city filming &quot;The Importance of Being Earnest&quot;. Witherspoon had also cut her hair for that film and Wilson had shaved his head for &quot;The Royal Tenenbaums&quot;. As both actors had changed their hair for their next movies, each had to wear wigs for the scene.

==Reception==
===Box office===
&quot;Legally Blonde&quot; was released on July 13, 2001, in North America. Its opening weekend gross of $20 million made it a sleeper hit for the struggling MGM studio, and it went on to gross $96.5 million in North America and $45.2 million elsewhere, for a worldwide total of $142 million. The film was released in the United Kingdom on October 26, 2001, and opened on No. 2, behind &quot;American Pie 2&quot;.

===Critical response===
On Rotten Tomatoes &quot;Legally Blonde&quot; has an approval rating of 71% based on reviews from 150 critics, with an average rating of 6.20/10. The site&#x27;s consensus reads, &quot;Though the material is predictable and formulaic, Reese Witherspoon&#x27;s funny, nuanced performance makes this movie better than it would have been otherwise.&quot; On Metacritic the film has a score of 59 out of 100, based on 32 reviews, indicating &quot;mixed or average reviews&quot;. Audiences surveyed by CinemaScore gave the film a grade &quot;A−&quot; on scale of A to F.

Roger Ebert gave it three out of four stars, saying the film was &quot;impossible to dislike&quot; and &quot;Witherspoon effortlessly animated this material with sunshine and quick wit.&quot; Todd McCarthy of &quot;Variety&quot; said Witherspoon gave a &quot;wonderful and winning&quot; performance. &quot;Beaming star wattage out of every pore, not to mention her hair, Witherspoon once again proves herself a comedienne worthy of comparison to such golden era greats as Carole Lombard and Ginger Rogers.&quot; Michael Wilmington of &quot;Chicago Tribune&quot; also commended Witherspoon&#x27;s performance, saying her &quot;comic timing immaculate, her persona irresistible. But it&#x27;s her spirit and immersion in the part that really infuse the whole film and make it work.&quot; He added that Witherspoon [pours] &quot;so much humor and pizazz into Elle that she lifts up the whole movie.&quot; B. Ruby Rich of &quot;The Nation&quot; called it &quot;the best empowerment movie for teenage girls to come along in ages.&quot; CNN&#x27;s Paul Clinton lauded the film as a &quot;sassy satire that retains a message: believe in yourself and follow your dreams.&quot;

Others were more critical of the film and its screenplay. Kirk Honeycutt of &quot;The Hollywood Reporter&quot; described the film as &quot;predictable, cutesy and surprisingly short on genuine humor&quot; but &quot;still gets by thanks to the magnetic presence of Witherspoon.&quot; Michael O&#x27;Sullivan of &quot;The Washington Post&quot; called the movie a &quot;&quot;Clueless&quot; redux but without the edgy, knowing wit.&quot; Jessica Winter of &quot;The Village Voice&quot; panned the film as a &quot;junk-food movie striving to be nutritious.&quot; &quot;It&#x27;s one of your racier Be Yourself after-school specials crossed with &quot;Who Moved My Cheese?&quot; for Cosmo girls,&quot; Winter asserted.

===Legal accuracy===
&quot;Legally Blonde&quot; has received mixed reviews among legal scholars for its depiction of law school and the accuracy of its application of the law. Devin Stone, better known online as LegalEagle, a YouTuber and American lawyer, observed that the application process portrayed in the movie in which Elle Woods sent the Harvard Law School admissions board a video essay was not possible. &quot;There&#x27;s no way to upload that on the law school application system,&quot; Stone noted. &quot;During orientation, Harvard Law School actually played the clip of Elle&#x27;s admissions video with the admissions committee deciding to let her in, and then they swore that&#x27;s not how they made decisions,&quot; explained Jameyanne Fuller, a student at Harvard Law School. Certain elements of law school are also omitted from the film. &quot;The movie totally skipped first semester exams which is like the most stressful time in law school ever,&quot; said Fuller.

Stone said Woods had no authority to act as a lawyer when she represented Paulette Bonafonté over custody of her dog from her ex-husband and called her conduct a &quot;huge ethical violation.&quot; &quot;She hasn&#x27;t finished law school, she&#x27;s never passed the bar and she has absolutely no right to call herself an attorney,&quot; Stone observed. &quot;That&#x27;s called the unauthorized practice of law. If anyone finds out that she committed this...while she was at Harvard Law School, she&#x27;d probably be barred from entering the bar in virtually any state in the United States.&quot; Unauthorized practice of law in Massachusetts carries a fine of $100 or imprisonment for not more than six months.

Contrary to what is shown in the film, Woods would not be able to question a witness on the stand during a criminal trial, according to W. Bradley Wendel, a law professor at Cornell Law School&quot;.&quot; The film cites Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court Rule 3.03 as precedent for Woods being able to represent a client while under the supervision of a licensed attorney, but the ruling only applies to third-year law students.

===Accolades===
===Legacy===
More than twenty years later, the film continues to inspire generations of filmgoers, many of them women who went on to become prospective law students. &quot;At least once a week, I have a woman come up to me and say, &#x27;I went to law school because of &quot;Legally Blonde&quot;,&#x27;&quot; Witherspoon said. &quot;It&#x27;s incredible...You can be unapologetically feminine but also smart and driven.&quot; &quot;When I saw the movie I just felt it gave me like a real surge of motivation because I really identified with her,&quot; Layla Summers, a family law attorney, told Spectrum News. &quot;I think the movie is still very relevant,&quot; she added. &quot;Just being a girl and being a woman, the odds are stacked against you still...When I watch the movie now I feel like I&#x27;m part of a great club of powerful professional women, like a sorority.&quot;

&quot;When I got to law school, on the toughest days, I would pop in the movie and get a good laugh,&quot; Shalyn Smith, a California law student and sorority president, said in an interview with &quot;People&quot; magazine. &quot;Elle embodies fighting for what is right, staying true to yourself, and defeating the odds. It&#x27;s crazy that one movie can do that, you know?&quot; Entertainment reporter Lucy Ford revealed to Witherspoon during an interview in 2018 that she had written her college dissertation on the film and presented her a pink-ribbon bound copy.

==Soundtrack==

The &quot;Legally Blonde&quot; soundtrack includes music from Vanessa Carlton, Samantha Mumba, Superchick, and Hoku, who sings the opening song, &quot;Perfect Day.&quot;

&quot;No one really knew that &quot;Legally Blonde&quot; was going to be what it was, Literally, [my label heads] were like, &#x27;This movie&#x27;s not going to become anything.&#x27; And then the next thing you know, it&#x27;s like, this iconic movie. And my song opens it!&quot; Hoku said in an interview with &quot;Billboard&quot;. &quot;Sitting in the premiere and hearing my song open the movie, and everyone&#x27;s cheering – it felt like, &#x27;I&#x27;ve really arrived now, folks.&#x27;&quot;

The soundtrack album was released July 10, 2001, by A&amp;M Records.

==Franchise==

The success of the film spawned a sequel, &quot;Legally Blonde 2: Red, White &amp; Blonde&quot;, a musical, one straight-to-home video release starring British twins Camilla and Rebecca Rosso, &quot;Legally Blondes&quot;, and an upcoming 2025 prequel series announced by Amazon Prime Video, &quot;Elle&quot;.

===Musical===

In April 2007, a musical adaptation premiered on Broadway to mixed reviews, starring Laura Bell Bundy as Elle, Christian Borle as Emmett, Orfeh as Paulette, Nikki Snelson as Brooke, Richard H. Blake as Warner, Kate Shindle as Vivienne, and Michael Rupert as Callahan, running until October 19, 2008. The show, Bundy, Borle, and Orfeh were all nominated for Tony Awards. Later, the Broadway show was the focus of an MTV reality-TV series called &quot;Legally Blonde: The Musical – The Search for Elle Woods&quot;, in which the winner would take over the role of Elle on Broadway. Bailey Hanks from Anderson, South Carolina, won the competition.

&quot;Legally Blonde&quot; also had a three-year run at the Savoy Theatre in London&#x27;s West End, starring Sheridan Smith, Susan McFadden, and Carley Stenson as Elle, and Duncan James, Richard Fleeshman, Simon Thomas, and Ben Freeman as Warner. During its run, the cast also included Alex Gaumond, Denise Van Outen, and Lee Mead.

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q157443" start="34" end="45" title="comedy film" label="comedy film"/>
<link wikidata="Q721107" start="58" end="72" title="Robert Luketic" label="Robert Luketic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6369876" start="88" end="107" title="Karen McCullah" label="Karen McCullah Lutz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6416119" start="112" end="125" title="Kirsten Smith (writer)" label="Kirsten Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q4739578" start="136" end="148" title="Amanda Brown (novelist)" label="Amanda Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q25205848" start="161" end="183" title="Legally Blonde (novel)" label="novel of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q44063" start="194" end="211" title="Reese Witherspoon" label="Reese Witherspoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q107769" start="213" end="224" title="Luke Wilson" label="Luke Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q264748" start="226" end="237" title="Selma Blair" label="Selma Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q345032" start="239" end="252" title="Matthew Davis" label="Matthew Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q270664" start="254" end="267" title="Victor Garber" label="Victor Garber"/>
<link wikidata="Q230278" start="273" end="290" title="Jennifer Coolidge" label="Jennifer Coolidge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5364673" start="310" end="320" title="Elle Woods" label="Elle Woods"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="338" end="346" title="Fraternities and sororities#Sororities" label="sorority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540185" start="437" end="449" title="Juris Doctor" label="Juris Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q49122" start="460" end="478" title="Harvard Law School" label="Harvard Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502290" start="510" end="537" title="Blonde stereotype" label="stereotypes against blondes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8012895" start="680" end="699" title="Stanford Law School" label="Stanford Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q154020" start="760" end="764" title="Elle (magazine)" label="Elle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6755521" start="870" end="880" title="Marc Platt (producer)" label="Marc Platt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="1383" end="1401" title="Golden Globe Award" label="Golden Globe Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q670282" start="1406" end="1444" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture – Musical or Comedy" label="Best Motion Picture: Musical or Comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011564" start="1497" end="1544" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy" label="Best Actress – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q110145" start="1559" end="1574" title="MTV Movie Awards" label="MTV Movie Award"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1579" end="1602" title="2002 MTV Movie Awards#Best Female Performance" label="Best Female Performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q27964332" start="1634" end="1651" title="Legally Blonde (franchise)" label="a series of films"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1674" end="1715" title="Legally Blonde 2: Red, White &amp;amp; Blonde" label="Legally Blonde 2: Red, White &amp;amp; Blonde"/>
<link wikidata="Q844580" start="1730" end="1743" title="Direct-to-video" label="direct-to-DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576487" start="1760" end="1775" title="Legally Blondes" label="Legally Blondes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200020" start="1801" end="1828" title="Legally Blonde (musical)" label="Legally Blonde: The Musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q539917" start="1871" end="1883" title="Mindy Kaling" label="Mindy Kaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5217619" start="1888" end="1896" title="Dan Goor" label="Dan Goor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740856" start="2031" end="2049" title="Amazon Prime Video" label="Amazon Prime Video"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2109" end="2113" title="Elle (TV series)" label="Elle"/>
<link wikidata="Q28401159" start="2182" end="2203" title="fashion merchandising" label="fashion merchandising"/>
<link wikidata="Q3721" start="2216" end="2224" title="sorority" label="sorority"/>
<link wikidata="Q5364673" start="2230" end="2240" title="Elle Woods" label="Elle Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q840999" start="2635" end="2660" title="Law School Admission Test" label="Law School Admission Test"/>
<link wikidata="Q18185" start="2688" end="2691" title="GPA" label="GPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q49122" start="2708" end="2726" title="Harvard Law School" label="Harvard Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q825490" start="3683" end="3694" title="liposuction" label="liposuction"/>
<link wikidata="Q869880" start="4532" end="4555" title="Perm (hairstyle)" label="getting her hair permed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699683" start="4647" end="4669" title="ammonium thioglycolate" label="ammonium thioglycolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4739578" start="5453" end="5465" title="Amanda Brown (novelist)" label="Amanda Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q25205848" start="5482" end="5496" title="Legally Blonde (novel)" label="Legally Blonde"/>
<link wikidata="Q8012895" start="5575" end="5594" title="Stanford Law School" label="Stanford Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q154020" start="5656" end="5660" title="Elle (magazine)" label="Elle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6755521" start="6996" end="7006" title="Marc Platt (producer)" label="Marc Platt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5364673" start="7041" end="7051" title="Elle Woods" label="Elle Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q6369876" start="7591" end="7610" title="Karen McCullah" label="Karen McCullah Lutz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6416119" start="7615" end="7628" title="Kirsten Smith (writer)" label="Kirsten Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q721107" start="7766" end="7780" title="Robert Luketic" label="Robert Luketic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810237" start="7879" end="7897" title="Titsiana Booberini" label="Titsiana Booberini"/>
<link wikidata="Q15675642" start="8313" end="8337" title="women&amp;#x27;s empowerment" label="women&amp;#x27;s empowerment"/>
<link wikidata="Q220713" start="8578" end="8590" title="American Pie (film)" label="American Pie"/>
<link wikidata="Q80046" start="9009" end="9024" title="Charlize Theron" label="Charlize Theron"/>
<link wikidata="Q34460" start="9026" end="9041" title="Gwyneth Paltrow" label="Gwyneth Paltrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q199945" start="9043" end="9061" title="Alicia Silverstone" label="Alicia Silverstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q189554" start="9063" end="9078" title="Katherine Heigl" label="Katherine Heigl"/>
<link wikidata="Q188280" start="9080" end="9099" title="Christina Applegate" label="Christina Applegate"/>
<link wikidata="Q170576" start="9101" end="9115" title="Milla Jovovich" label="Milla Jovovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q175104" start="9120" end="9140" title="Jennifer Love Hewitt" label="Jennifer Love Hewitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293346" start="9308" end="9316" title="gravitas" label="gravitas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195571" start="9613" end="9632" title="The Man in the Moon (1991 film)" label="The Man in the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q178423" start="9649" end="9664" title="A Far Off Place" label="A Far Off Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q11975" start="9835" end="9849" title="Britney Spears" label="Britney Spears"/>
<link wikidata="Q13979" start="9913" end="9932" title="Saturday Night Live" label="Saturday Night Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="10025" end="10044" title="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer" label="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831733" start="10098" end="10109" title="Tracy Flick" label="Tracy Flick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206261" start="10119" end="10127" title="Election (1999 film)" label="Election"/>
<link wikidata="Q444259" start="10159" end="10167" title="Typecasting" label="typecast"/>
<link wikidata="Q61503" start="10247" end="10269" title="The Hollywood Reporter" label="The Hollywood Reporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q860442" start="11143" end="11159" title="Sunset Boulevard" label="Sunset Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q40993" start="11291" end="11298" title="Porsche" label="Porsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q230278" start="11468" end="11485" title="Jennifer Coolidge" label="Jennifer Coolidge"/>
<link wikidata="Q222071" start="11551" end="11564" title="Courtney Love" label="Courtney Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q235460" start="11569" end="11581" title="Kathy Najimy" label="Kathy Najimy"/>
<link wikidata="Q235870" start="11730" end="11743" title="Chloë Sevigny" label="Chloë Sevigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q264748" start="11782" end="11793" title="Selma Blair" label="Selma Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q64151" start="11872" end="11888" title="Cruel Intentions" label="Cruel Intentions"/>
<link wikidata="Q201994" start="11964" end="11974" title="Ali Larter" label="Ali Larter"/>
<link wikidata="Q242707" start="12475" end="12487" title="Paul Bettany" label="Paul Bettany"/>
<link wikidata="Q191796" start="12973" end="12989" title="cameo appearance" label="cameo appearance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367409" start="12999" end="13009" title="Judge Judy" label="Judge Judy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660811" start="13146" end="13166" title="Judge Judy Sheindlin" label="Judge Judy Sheindlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2830641" start="13191" end="13203" title="Alanna Ubach" label="Alanna Ubach"/>
<link wikidata="Q273136" start="13262" end="13276" title="Ryan Phillippe" label="Ryan Phillippe"/>
<link wikidata="Q743497" start="13827" end="13840" title="Neiman Marcus" label="Neiman Marcus"/>
<link wikidata="Q180453" start="14803" end="14815" title="Dolly Parton" label="Dolly Parton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614" start="16162" end="16195" title="University of Southern California" label="University of Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="16650" end="16668" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="16704" end="16741" title="University of California, Los Angeles" label="University of California, Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q161562" start="16743" end="16777" title="California Institute of Technology" label="California Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q485176" start="16808" end="16828" title="Pasadena, California" label="Pasadena, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="17148" end="17168" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q242889" start="18042" end="18052" title="Toni Basil" label="Toni Basil"/>
<link wikidata="Q229545" start="18556" end="18568" title="Raquel Welch" label="Raquel Welch"/>
<link wikidata="Q572838" start="18595" end="18614" title="Anthony B. Richmond" label="Anthony B. Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q445878" start="19644" end="19660" title="Jessica Cauffiel" label="Jessica Cauffiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q657621" start="19731" end="19740" title="margarita" label="margarita"/>
<link wikidata="Q73067531" start="19938" end="19952" title="Number (music)" label="musical number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264867" start="20137" end="20152" title="Dulwich College" label="Dulwich College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366919" start="20221" end="20252" title="The Importance of Being Earnest (2002 film)" label="The Importance of Being Earnest"/>
<link wikidata="Q935105" start="20349" end="20369" title="The Royal Tenenbaums" label="The Royal Tenenbaums"/>
<link wikidata="Q7539815" start="20634" end="20645" title="sleeper hit" label="sleeper hit"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="20665" end="20668" title="MGM" label="MGM"/>
<link wikidata="Q329127" start="20899" end="20913" title="American Pie 2" label="American Pie 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="20949" end="20964" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q150248" start="21301" end="21311" title="Metacritic" label="Metacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2972775" start="21443" end="21454" title="CinemaScore" label="CinemaScore"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="21513" end="21524" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894636" start="21705" end="21718" title="Todd McCarthy" label="Todd McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q471728" start="21728" end="21735" title="Variety (magazine)" label="Variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q207739" start="21985" end="21999" title="Carole Lombard" label="Carole Lombard"/>
<link wikidata="Q95089" start="22004" end="22017" title="Ginger Rogers" label="Ginger Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q47596" start="22053" end="22068" title="Chicago Tribune" label="Chicago Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834185" start="22415" end="22427" title="B. Ruby Rich" label="B. Ruby Rich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897630" start="22437" end="22447" title="The Nation" label="The Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="22544" end="22547" title="CNN" label="CNN"/>
<link wikidata="Q2059160" start="22555" end="22567" title="Paul Clinton" label="Paul Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q61503" start="22765" end="22787" title="The Hollywood Reporter" label="The Hollywood Reporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="22999" end="23018" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q931165" start="23056" end="23064" title="Clueless" label="Clueless"/>
<link wikidata="Q876158" start="23142" end="23159" title="The Village Voice" label="The Village Voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q892375" start="23330" end="23350" title="Who Moved My Cheese?" label="Who Moved My Cheese?"/>
<link wikidata="Q606680" start="23361" end="23372" title="CosmoGirl" label="Cosmo girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q107439708" start="23574" end="23585" title="LegalEagle (YouTuber)" label="Devin Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q17125263" start="23624" end="23632" title="YouTuber" label="YouTuber"/>
<link wikidata="Q907666" start="24657" end="24660" title="Bar examination" label="bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116200" start="24786" end="24801" title="practice of law" label="practice of law"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="25021" end="25034" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q845768" start="25279" end="25297" title="Cornell Law School" label="Cornell Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002625" start="25326" end="25362" title="Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court" label="Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q16986548" start="26150" end="26163" title="Spectrum News" label="Spectrum News"/>
<link wikidata="Q33659" start="26641" end="26647" title="People (magazine)" label="People"/>
<link wikidata="Q233081" start="27088" end="27103" title="Vanessa Carlton" label="Vanessa Carlton"/>
<link wikidata="Q254838" start="27105" end="27119" title="Samantha Mumba" label="Samantha Mumba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808045" start="27121" end="27131" title="Superchick" label="Superchick"/>
<link wikidata="Q433062" start="27137" end="27141" title="Hoku" label="Hoku"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="27516" end="27525" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q277626" start="27752" end="27767" title="A&amp;amp;M Records" label="A&amp;amp;M Records"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27833" end="27874" title="Legally Blonde 2: Red, White &amp;amp; Blonde" label="Legally Blonde 2: Red, White &amp;amp; Blonde"/>
<link wikidata="Q842256" start="27884" end="27891" title="Musical film" label="musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q844580" start="27897" end="27919" title="Direct-to-video" label="straight-to-home video"/>
<link wikidata="Q54863" start="27951" end="27976" title="Camilla and Rebecca Rosso" label="Camilla and Rebecca Rosso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576487" start="27984" end="27999" title="Legally Blondes" label="Legally Blondes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740856" start="28056" end="28074" title="Amazon Prime Video" label="Amazon Prime Video"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28082" end="28086" title="Elle (TV series)" label="Elle"/>
<link wikidata="Q271765" start="28195" end="28211" title="Laura Bell Bundy" label="Laura Bell Bundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5109344" start="28221" end="28236" title="Christian Borle" label="Christian Borle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7101696" start="28248" end="28253" title="Orfeh" label="Orfeh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3813923" start="28320" end="28332" title="Kate Shindle" label="Kate Shindle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6834022" start="28350" end="28364" title="Michael Rupert" label="Michael Rupert"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="28467" end="28478" title="Tony Awards" label="Tony Awards"/>
<link wikidata="" start="28560" end="28615" title="Legally Blonde: The Musical – The Search for Elle Woods" label="Legally Blonde: The Musical – The Search for Elle Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q4848359" start="28689" end="28701" title="Bailey Hanks" label="Bailey Hanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165797" start="28815" end="28828" title="Savoy Theatre" label="Savoy Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359589" start="28846" end="28854" title="West End theatre" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355676" start="28865" end="28879" title="Sheridan Smith" label="Sheridan Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7648166" start="28881" end="28895" title="Susan McFadden" label="Susan McFadden"/>
<link wikidata="Q432045" start="28901" end="28915" title="Carley Stenson" label="Carley Stenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q312450" start="28929" end="28941" title="Duncan James" label="Duncan James"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325707" start="28943" end="28960" title="Richard Fleeshman" label="Richard Fleeshman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4885680" start="28980" end="28991" title="Ben Freeman" label="Ben Freeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4717039" start="29042" end="29054" title="Alex Gaumond" label="Alex Gaumond"/>
<link wikidata="Q5257792" start="29056" end="29072" title="Denise Van Outen" label="Denise Van Outen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3911045" start="29078" end="29086" title="Lee Mead" label="Lee Mead"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="444277" wikidata="Q614761" url="?curid=444277" title="South Prussia">
<text>South Prussia (; ) was a province of the Kingdom of Prussia from 1793 to 1807 created out of territory annexed in the Second Partition of Poland.

==History==
South Prussia was created out of territory annexed in the Second Partition of Poland and in 1793 included:
*the Poznań, Kalisz and Gniezno Voivodeships of Greater Poland; 
*the lands of Sieradz and Łęczyca;
*the Kuyavian voivodeship of Brześć and Dobrzyń Land;
*adjacent parts of the Masovian voivodeships of Płock and Rawa. 
The capital of the province was Poznań (1793–1795) at first, afterwards Warsaw (1795–1806), which was added in 1795 after the Third Partition, but it was actually administered by the General Directory (&quot;General-Direktorium&quot;) in Berlin.

South Prussia bordered on the Brandenburgian Neumark region in the west and the Prussian Netze District in the north. After the Third Partition, the lands of Dobrzyń and Płock northeast of the Vistula river were transferred to New East Prussia, while South Prussia gained the Warsaw region of the former Masovian Voivodeship. In the southeast the Pilica river marked the border with those Lesser Polish territories that in 1795 became part of Austrian New Galicia. In the southwest it bordered on the Prussian Silesia Province and New Silesia, a smaller province including the former Duchy of Siewierz, which was administered from South Prussia.

Some German colonists invited to settle on the province&#x27;s noble estates were known as &quot;Hauländer&quot;, while others who settled on royal crown lands were known as &quot; Kolonisten&quot;. The term Hauländer is a German corruption of the original Hollender who negotiated special terms of democratic rule for their settlements which came to be known as Hollendry. Many Germans still lived under the Schulzendorf style of village government and therefore were not Hauländer.

The underdeveloped province was administered with fiscal profit being a primary goal. The first provincial minister Otto von Voss said that “South Prussia shall not have been bought at too high a price: it should be no burden to other provinces, it should even benefit them and the Prussian state” Thus, while engaging in Germanisation of Poles during the Partitions, the Prussian state extracted more revenue than what it spent from the province and levied duties on goods from the province, which seriously discouraged its industrial development.

Following Napoleon Bonaparte&#x27;s victory in the War of the Fourth Coalition and a Polish uprising, the territory of South Prussia became part of the Duchy of Warsaw, a French client state, according to the 1807 Treaties of Tilsit. After the Congress of Vienna in 1815, it was divided between the Prussian Grand Duchy of Posen and Congress Poland, a part of the Russian Empire.

The General Directory records dealing with the history and genealogy of the Prussian part of Poland were taken from the Prussian archives by Napoleon Bonaparte soon after 1806 and transferred to Warsaw.

==Demographics==
In 1806 the province had 1,503,508 inhabitants.

==Administration==
===Departments===
It was subdivided into the Kammerdepartements &quot;Posen&quot; (Poznań), &quot;Kalisch&quot; (Kalisz), and &quot;Warschau&quot; (Warsaw).

===Districts===

In 1806, South Prussia consisted of three departments (&quot;Kriegs- und Domänen-Kammern&quot;) divided into the following districts or counties (&quot;Kreise&quot;):
==References==
==External links==
*FAQ for Posen, South Prussia, and New East Prussia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q614761" start="0" end="13" title="South Prussia" label="South Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q574299" start="25" end="33" title="Provinces of Prussia" label="province"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="41" end="59" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Kingdom of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025374" start="118" end="144" title="Second Partition of Poland" label="Second Partition of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025374" start="217" end="233" title="Second Partition of Poland" label="Second Partition"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="237" end="243" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q9377200" start="271" end="277" title="Poznań Voivodeship (14th century–1793)" label="Poznań"/>
<link wikidata="Q13403542" start="279" end="285" title="Kalisz Voivodeship (1314–1793)" label="Kalisz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904883" start="290" end="309" title="Gniezno Voivodeship" label="Gniezno Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q211371" start="314" end="328" title="Greater Poland" label="Greater Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023589" start="345" end="352" title="Sieradz Voivodeship (1339–1793)" label="Sieradz"/>
<link wikidata="Q970940" start="357" end="364" title="Łęczyca Voivodeship" label="Łęczyca"/>
<link wikidata="Q836693" start="371" end="378" title="Kuyavia" label="Kuyavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q973078" start="395" end="401" title="Brześć Kujawski Voivodeship" label="Brześć"/>
<link wikidata="Q564882" start="406" end="418" title="Dobrzyń Land" label="Dobrzyń Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q643843" start="443" end="450" title="Masovia" label="Masovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11405685" start="468" end="473" title="Płock Voivodeship (1495–1793)" label="Płock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517509" start="478" end="482" title="Rawa Voivodeship" label="Rawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q268" start="517" end="523" title="Poznań" label="Poznań"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="557" end="563" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453505" start="611" end="626" title="Third Partition of Poland" label="Third Partition"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="723" end="729" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q819411" start="777" end="784" title="Neumark" label="Neumark"/>
<link wikidata="Q538187" start="821" end="835" title="Netze District" label="Netze District"/>
<link wikidata="Q548" start="925" end="932" title="Vistula" label="Vistula"/>
<link wikidata="Q661939" start="959" end="975" title="New East Prussia" label="New East Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845900" start="1036" end="1056" title="Masovian Voivodeship (1526–1795)" label="Masovian Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q750418" start="1079" end="1085" title="Pilica (river)" label="Pilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q11390" start="1121" end="1134" title="Lesser Poland" label="Lesser Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q683332" start="1184" end="1195" title="New Galicia" label="New Galicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q675032" start="1242" end="1258" title="Silesia Province" label="Silesia Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q708159" start="1263" end="1274" title="New Silesia" label="New Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395320" start="1316" end="1333" title="Duchy of Siewierz" label="Duchy of Siewierz"/>
<link wikidata="Q322568" start="1476" end="1485" title="Hauländer" label="Hauländer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4137265" start="2186" end="2230" title="Germanisation of Poles during the Partitions" label="Germanisation of Poles during the Partitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="2424" end="2442" title="Napoleon I of France" label="Napoleon Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q605977" start="2465" end="2492" title="War of the Fourth Coalition" label="War of the Fourth Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q705962" start="2499" end="2514" title="Greater Poland Uprising (1806)" label="Polish uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q152115" start="2566" end="2581" title="Duchy of Warsaw" label="Duchy of Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q71084" start="2585" end="2591" title="First French Empire" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q154596" start="2628" end="2646" title="Treaties of Tilsit" label="Treaties of Tilsit"/>
<link wikidata="Q46362" start="2658" end="2676" title="Congress of Vienna" label="Congress of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783098" start="2722" end="2742" title="Grand Duchy of Posen" label="Grand Duchy of Posen"/>
<link wikidata="Q221457" start="2747" end="2762" title="Congress Poland" label="Congress Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="2778" end="2792" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q268" start="3167" end="3173" title="Poznań" label="Poznań"/>
<link wikidata="Q52842" start="3197" end="3203" title="Kalisz" label="Kalisz"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="3232" end="3238" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283531" start="3411" end="3417" title="Districts of Prussia" label="Kreise"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="444279" wikidata="Q7895554" url="?curid=444279" title="University of Indianapolis">
<text>The University of Indianapolis (UIndy) is a private United Methodist Church-affiliated university in Indianapolis, Indiana. It offers Associate, Bachelor&#x27;s, Master&#x27;s, and Doctoral degrees. It was founded in 1902 as Indiana Central University and was popularly known as Indiana Central College from 1921 until 1975. In 1986 the name was changed to University of Indianapolis.

The main campus is located on the south side of Indianapolis at 1400 East Hanna Avenue, just east of Shelby Street. The campus straddles the Carson Heights and University Heights neighborhoods of Indianapolis. UIndy&#x27;s international sites include joint programs with Ningbo Institute of Technology, Zhejiang University (China) and Zhejiang Yuexiu University of Foreign Languages (China), and an articulation agreement with University of Nicosia (Cyprus). Previous international sites included the Galen University in Belize.

The university&#x27;s colors are crimson and gray. Its athletic teams, known as the Greyhounds, are members of the Great Lakes Valley Conference (GLVC) in the NCAA Division II.

==History==
In the early 20th century William L. Elder, an Indianapolis real estate developer, offered the Church of the United Brethren in Christ eight acres of real estate southeast of downtown Indianapolis to establish a college in exchange for help selling 446 parcels of land around the donated acreage. Indiana Central University was chartered in 1902, but instruction did not start until September 26, 1905, when the first building, Good Hall, was completed.

The school opened with three divisions and eight departments. The three divisions included the academy, which offered high school courses; the normal school, which provided a two-year program of teacher education; and the liberal arts college. The departments included the College of Liberal Arts, Teachers’ College, Conservatory of Music, School of Oratory, School of Commerce, Bible Institute, School of Arts, and the academy, in which students completed their preparatory work and earned high school diplomas.

While established as Indiana Central University (ICU), the school was colloquially known as Indiana Central College (ICC) from 1921 to 1975. The North Central Association of Schools and Colleges accredited the university in March 1947. Academic administration was restructured to group programs into colleges and schools, and the institution returned to using the Indiana Central University name from 1976 to 1986. The initials &quot;ICU&quot; can still be seen in brick on the front side of Krannert Memorial Library on campus. In 1986, the university adopted the name University of Indianapolis.

===Presidents===
*J. T. Roberts, 1905–1908
*L. D. Bonebrake, 1909–1915
*I. J. Good, 1915–1944
*I. Lynd Esch, 1945–1970
*Gene E. Sease, 1970–1988
*G. Benjamin Lantz, Jr., 1988–1998
*Jerry M. Israel, 1998–2005
*Beverley J. Pitts, 2005–2012
*Robert L. Manuel, 2012–2022
*Phillip Terry, 2022–2023 (interim)
*Tanuja Singh, 2023–

==Academics==
===Schools and colleges===
The University of Indianapolis offers 82 undergraduate majors leading to either a bachelor&#x27;s degree (four-year program) or an associate degree (two-year program). Students may also enroll in several pre-professional programs, twenty-seven master&#x27;s degree programs, and five doctoral degrees. The university is organized into the following schools and colleges:

*School of Business
*School of Education
*School of Nursing
*School of Occupational Therapy
*Krannert School of Physical Therapy
*R.B. Annis School of Engineering
*College of Applied Behavioral Sciences
*Health Sciences
*Shaheen College of Arts &amp; Sciences

===Centers and institutes===
UIndy has the following centers and institutes:
*Center for Aging &amp; Community (CAC)
*Center of Excellence in Leadership of Learning (CELL)
*Professional Edge Center
*Richard G. Lugar Academy
*Institute for Civic Leadership &amp; Mayoral Archives
*Center for Business Partnerships
*Institute for Leadership &amp; Professional Development
*The Institute for Postindustrial Leadership

===Rankings and recognition===

*UIndy is ranked in the top tier of Midwest universities by U.S. News &amp; World Report. As of 2018, the university was ranked #34 (tie) in Regional Universities Midwest, #21 (tie) in Best Colleges for Veterans, and #66 in Best Value Schools.

===Admissions statistics===

For fall 2014, UIndy received 5,313 freshmen applications; 4,486 were admitted (84%) and 830 enrolled. For enrolled freshmen, the middle 50% range of SAT scores were 450 - 550 for critical reading, 460 - 560 for math, and 440 - 540 for writing. The middle 50% range of the ACT scores were 19 - 25 for composite, 19 - 26 for math, and 19 - 25 for English.

==Student life==
===Enrollment statistics===
, UIndy had about 5,550 students on its main campus, of which 1,500 were graduate students.

, the student body was 64 percent female and 36 percent male. The student body was 70% White/Non-Hispanic, 9% Black/African-American, 4% Hispanic/Latino, 1% Asian. 44 U.S. states and 68 countries are represented among students on campus. Nine percent of undergraduates and nearly seven percent of graduate students are international students. Overall, 25 percent international and minority enrollment. Over 90% of the students attending the University of Indianapolis come from within the state of Indiana. 57% of undergraduate students are in the 18 to 22 age bracket.

===Media===

&quot;The Reflector&quot; is the University of Indianapolis&#x27;s student newspaper. The student-run serial publication has over 100 years of uninterrupted reporting on campus and today operates in print and online. The first issue was published on November 15, 1922.

WICR (88.7) is an 8,000 watt, Class B public radio station at the University of Indianapolis that broadcasts to listeners in the Indianapolis metropolitan area. It is a campus radio station. The station began broadcasting in 1962 with ten watts of power.

WIX (UIndy TV) is a student television station. Students produce news and entertainment programming for distribution on campus cable channel 5 and on the Comcast and Bright House Networks in Marion County, Indiana. The University of Indianapolis was named Indiana Association of School Broadcasters TV School of the Year in 2008.

Etchings Press is the UIndy&#x27;s teaching press and publishing laboratory. Students produce &quot;Etchings Literary and Fine Arts Magazine&quot; bi-annually, which celebrated its 30th birthday in 2018. The students also judge the Whirling Prize each fall for books published in the past two years that respond to the contest theme and publish three books each spring through Etchings Press&#x27; Chapbook and Novella Prize.

== Campus ==
===Smith Mall===
The most prominent physical feature of the campus was the central parking lot which was framed by a quadrangle of buildings. In 1998 the University of Indianapolis hired Odle McGuire Shook to re-purpose the 5.2 acres into green space and later named the area Smith Mall. The mall is made up of a circular sunken lawn, a recessed long canal, water gardens, and the partial arc of an amphitheater. 80 bald cypresses were planted as part of the project.

===Academic buildings===

*Christel DeHaan Fine Arts Center
*Esch Hall
*Good Hall
*Krannert Memorial Library
*Lilly Science Hall
*Martin Hall
*Schwitzer Student Center
*R.B. Annis Hall (School of Engineering)
*Ruth Lilly Fitness Center
*Stierwalt Alumni House
*UIndy Health Pavilion
===Residential buildings===

*Greyhound Village Apartments
*University Lofts
*Cory Bretz Hall
*Central Hall
*Crowe Hall
*East Hall
*Cravens Hall
*Roberts Hall
*Warren Hall
===Athletics facilities===

*Athletics &amp; Recreation Center (ARC)
*Baumgartner Field
*Greyhound Park
*Kiesel Field at Key Stadium
*Skillman Court at Nicoson Hall
*Tennis Center
==Safety==
The University of Indianapolis Police Department is a campus police force that oversees security. UIndy employs a full-time chief and full-time officers, all certified by the Indiana Law Enforcement Academy. Officers have full arrest powers and are licensed to carry firearms. They enforce all local and state laws, in addition to university regulations.

==Athletics==
The University of Indianapolis&#x27;s athletic teams are known as the &quot;Greyhounds&quot; and participate in Division II of the NCAA. All 23 of the teams compete in the Great Lakes Valley Conference. The school&#x27;s highest finish in the NACDA Directors&#x27; Cup was 3rd in 2021–22. UIndy has finished in the top 20 for 15 consecutive years through 2023, including 10 top 10s in that span.

The mascot is a greyhound named Ace that is depicted in a statue in Schwitzer Student Center and represented at athletic events by a costumed mascot. Since 2019, UIndy has also had a live mascot, a retired racing greyhound named Grady. The university&#x27;s song, called simply the &quot;U of I Fight Song,&quot; was written in 1975 by James M. Stanton, at the time an Indiana Central senior. The lyrics were rewritten when the university changed its name in 1986. In 2006, the cheerleaders changed the &quot;U of I&quot; portions of the song to &quot;UIndy&quot; to reflect the preferred shortened name of the school.

==Notable alumni==
*Harold Achor (1928) – Justice of the Indiana Supreme Court
*Jon Ackerson – lawyer and member of both houses of the Kentucky State Legislature
*Brian Barnhart (1983) – president of Harding Steinbrenner Racing and president of Race Operations for IndyCar
*Craig Bowden (1990) – professional golfer
*George Crowe (1943) – professional baseball and basketball player
*Ray Crowe (1938) – high school basketball coach whose team won Indiana state championships in 1955 and 1956, becoming the first African-American team in the nation to claim a state title. Member of Indiana State House of Representatives (1966-75) and Indianapolis City-County Council (1983-87).
*David &quot;Big Dave&quot; DeJernett (1935) – professional basketball player
*Adam Driver - actor
*Irene Dunne (1918 - Conservatory of Music) - actress 
*Stephane Fortin – professional football player
* Victoria Garcia-Wilburn (DHS 2014) - member of the Indiana General Assembly; faculty member at IUPUI
*Matt Kohn (2005) – professional football player
* John Kuan, President of the Examination Yuan of the Republic of China
*David Logan (2005) – basketball player in European leagues.
*Jordan Loyd (2016) - professional basketball player
*William Raspberry (1958) – newspaper columnist
*Irwin Sparkes and Alphonso Sharland – musician
*Walter Spencer (2004) – professional football player
*Katie R. Stam Irk – 2009 Miss America
*Andrew Werner (2009) – professional baseball player

==References==
==External links==
* Athletics website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7895554" start="4" end="30" title="University of Indianapolis" label="University of Indianapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895554" start="32" end="37" title="University of Indianapolis" label="UIndy"/>
<link wikidata="Q902104" start="44" end="51" title="Private university" label="private"/>
<link wikidata="Q329646" start="52" end="75" title="United Methodist Church" label="United Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q6346" start="101" end="113" title="Indianapolis" label="Indianapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415" start="115" end="122" title="Indiana" label="Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895554" start="225" end="251" title="University of Indianapolis" label="Indiana Central University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895554" start="279" end="302" title="University of Indianapolis" label="Indiana Central College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894720" start="546" end="564" title="University Heights, Indianapolis" label="University Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q7038662" start="657" end="708" title="Ningbo Institute of Technology, Zhejiang University" label="Ningbo Institute of Technology, Zhejiang University"/>
<link wikidata="Q338645" start="813" end="834" title="University of Nicosia" label="University of Nicosia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707030" start="887" end="903" title="Galen University" label="Galen University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246652" start="938" end="944" title="School colors" label="colors"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599490" start="1031" end="1060" title="Great Lakes Valley Conference" label="Great Lakes Valley Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284438" start="1075" end="1091" title="NCAA Division II" label="NCAA Division II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742801" start="1201" end="1240" title="Church of the United Brethren in Christ" label="Church of the United Brethren in Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531190" start="2794" end="2807" title="Gene E. Sease" label="Gene E. Sease"/>
<link wikidata="Q125657246" start="2978" end="2990" title="Tanuja Singh" label="Tanuja Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q113555026" start="3542" end="3574" title="RB Annis School of Engineering" label="R.B. Annis School of Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q738377" start="5540" end="5557" title="student newspaper" label="student newspaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950605" start="5743" end="5747" title="WICR" label="WICR"/>
<link wikidata="Q3575924" start="5872" end="5902" title="Indianapolis metropolitan area" label="Indianapolis metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436229" start="5912" end="5924" title="campus radio" label="campus radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6516740" start="6019" end="6045" title="student television station" label="student television station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151002" start="6153" end="6160" title="Comcast Cable" label="Comcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q16953716" start="6165" end="6186" title="Bright House Networks" label="Bright House Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q506230" start="6190" end="6212" title="Marion County, Indiana" label="Marion County, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5028727" start="7939" end="7952" title="campus police" label="campus police"/>
<link wikidata="Q38571" start="8331" end="8340" title="Greyhound" label="Greyhound"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284438" start="8367" end="8378" title="NCAA Division II" label="Division II"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="8386" end="8390" title="National Collegiate Athletic Association" label="NCAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599490" start="8427" end="8456" title="Great Lakes Valley Conference" label="Great Lakes Valley Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q17020252" start="8498" end="8523" title="NACDA Directors&amp;#x27; Cup" label="NACDA Directors&amp;#x27; Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q38571" start="8668" end="8677" title="greyhound" label="greyhound"/>
<link wikidata="Q111782029" start="9292" end="9304" title="Harold Achor" label="Harold Achor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644915" start="9329" end="9350" title="Indiana Supreme Court" label="Indiana Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q28853750" start="9352" end="9364" title="Jon Ackerson" label="Jon Ackerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6392265" start="9407" end="9433" title="Kentucky State Legislature" label="Kentucky State Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q4963058" start="9435" end="9449" title="Brian Barnhart" label="Brian Barnhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q30238948" start="9472" end="9499" title="Harding Steinbrenner Racing" label="Harding Steinbrenner Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q119822" start="9537" end="9544" title="IndyCar" label="IndyCar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5180758" start="9546" end="9558" title="Craig Bowden" label="Craig Bowden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101503" start="9589" end="9601" title="George Crowe" label="George Crowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q19866709" start="9656" end="9665" title="Ray Crowe" label="Ray Crowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q14328080" start="9952" end="9988" title="David &amp;quot;Big Dave&amp;quot; DeJernett" label="David &amp;quot;Big Dave&amp;quot; DeJernett"/>
<link wikidata="Q4678990" start="10030" end="10041" title="Adam Driver" label="Adam Driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q230099" start="10051" end="10062" title="Irene Dunne" label="Irene Dunne"/>
<link wikidata="Q16729059" start="10106" end="10121" title="Stephane Fortin" label="Stephane Fortin"/>
<link wikidata="Q115937273" start="10155" end="10178" title="Victoria Wilburn" label="Victoria Garcia-Wilburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3634937" start="10206" end="10230" title="Indiana General Assembly" label="Indiana General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433199" start="10250" end="10255" title="Indiana University Purdue University Indianapolis" label="IUPUI"/>
<link wikidata="Q18763606" start="10257" end="10266" title="Matt Kohn" label="Matt Kohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6243484" start="10307" end="10316" title="John Kuan" label="John Kuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q718405" start="10335" end="10376" title="Examination Yuan of the Republic of China" label="Examination Yuan of the Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q509794" start="10378" end="10389" title="David Logan (basketball)" label="David Logan"/>
<link wikidata="Q46704885" start="10439" end="10450" title="Jordan Loyd" label="Jordan Loyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q8017378" start="10492" end="10509" title="William Raspberry" label="William Raspberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q634158" start="10540" end="10553" title="Irwin Sparkes" label="Irwin Sparkes"/>
<link wikidata="Q634158" start="10558" end="10575" title="Alphonso Sharland" label="Alphonso Sharland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7966174" start="10588" end="10602" title="Walter Spencer (Canadian football)" label="Walter Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3813966" start="10642" end="10659" title="Katie Stam" label="Katie R. Stam Irk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2846768" start="10681" end="10694" title="Andrew Werner" label="Andrew Werner"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="444282" wikidata="Q1137568" url="?curid=444282" title="Couperin family">
<text>The Couperin family was a musical dynasty of professional composers and performers. They were the most prolific family in French musical history, active during the Baroque era (17th—18th centuries). Louis Couperin and his nephew, François Couperin &quot;le grand&quot;, are the best known members of the family.

==History==
The earliest mention of the name Couperin is from 1366, but the first musician of the family was apparently Mathurin Couperin (c.1569–c.1640). A Beauvoir trader involved in legal and financial matters, Mathurin was also an amateur musician. No compositions by him survive, and he apparently stopped performing in 1619; but he taught his two sons, Denis and Charles. Charles (died 1654) settled in Chaumes-en-Brie, a little town about 30 miles east of Paris, around 1601. He became a farmer and, eventually, part-time organist at the Benedictine abbey of St. Pierre (not the parish church). At least three of Charles&#x27; many children became professional musicians: Louis (1626–1661), François (1631–1701), and Charles (1639–1679).

The family&#x27;s breakthrough came around 1650, when Jacques Champion de Chambonnières, then harpsichordist to the King of France, was visiting Brie. &quot;Le Parnasse François&quot;, a famous 1732 book by Évrard Titon du Tillet, contains an account of Chambonnières&#x27;s visit: apparently Louis, François, and Charles visited Chambonnières on the Feast of Saint James—Chambonnières&#x27; name day—and offered the host and his guests a short concert, playing several pieces composed by Louis. The royal harpsichordist was so impressed with their skills that he took Louis to Paris with him, and by 1651 the young composer was already living there. His brothers joined him soon afterwards. In 1653 Louis became the organist of Church Saint-Gervais: when he died, he was succeeded by Charles, Charles was succeeded by his son, and so on; the Couperins occupied the position for 173 years.

Louis was evidently a very successful and influential composer, but he died young, in 1661, and most of his compositions remained unpublished until the 20th century. Some years after his death, the second of the two most important Couperins was born: François Couperin, nicknamed &quot;le Grand&quot;—&quot;the Great&quot;. Although suffering from poor health throughout his life, François was a very prolific composer. He produced four &quot;livres&quot; of harpsichord pieces that represent the summit of the French harpsichord school, authored an influential and historically important treatise on harpsichord playing (&quot;L&#x27;art de toucher le clavecin&quot;), and produced a number of other, sacred and secular works, that are still well known today.

==Simplified family tree==

Organists of the Church Saint-Gervais are given in bold. The number in parentheses indicates the order of succession, i.e. Louis was the first organist of the church, succeeded by Charles, who was succeeded by François, etc.

* Mathurin Couperin, died 1640; farmer, instrumentalist
** Denis, died 1656; notary, instrumentalist
** Charles the older, died 1654; instrumentalist
*** Louis (1) (1626–1661); harpsichordist, organist and gambist
*** François (–1708/12); violinist, violist and harpsichordist)
**** Marguerite-Louise (1676–1728) soprano singer and harpsichordist
**** Nicolas (4) (1680–1748), organist
***** Armand-Louis (5) (1727–1789); organist
****** Pierre-Louis (6) (1755–1789); organist
****** Gervais-François (7) (1759–1826); organist
******* Céleste-Thérèse (8) (1795–1860); organist
****** Nicolas-Louis (1760–after 1817)
*** Charles (2) (1639–1679); organist
**** François &quot;the Great&quot; (3) (1668–1733); organist and harpsichordist
***** Marie-Madeleine (1690–1742); nun, organist
***** François-Laurent (died after 1740)
***** Marguerite-Antoinette (1705–1778); harpsichordist of the King&#x27;s chamber

==References==

* David Fuller, Bruce Gustafson, Edward Higginbottom. &quot;Couperin&quot;, &quot;Grove Music Online&quot;, ed. L. Macy (accessed 30 January 2006), grovemusic.com (subscription access).
* Claudia Schweitzer, Art. Couperin, Antoinette-Victoire, Couperin, Céleste-Thérèse, Couperin, Elisabeth, Antoinette, Couperin, Margueritte-Antoinette, Couperin, Marie-Madeleine, Couperin, Marguerite-Louise, in: Lexikon &quot;Europäische Instrumentalistinnen des 18. und 19. Jahrhunderts, hrsg. von Freia Hoffmann, 2008.

== See also ==

* https://books.google.com/books?id=l7tjyKCcjd8C&amp;q=Francois+Couperin
* https://books.google.com/books?id=ByIOxwEACAAJ&amp;q=Francois+Couperin</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1137568" start="4" end="12" title="Couperin family" label="Couperin"/>
<link wikidata="Q36834" start="58" end="66" title="composer" label="composer"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="122" end="128" title="France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="164" end="171" title="Baroque" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q50185" start="199" end="213" title="Louis Couperin" label="Louis Couperin"/>
<link wikidata="Q50186" start="230" end="247" title="François Couperin" label="François Couperin"/>
<link wikidata="Q647238" start="470" end="478" title="Beauvoir, Seine-et-Marne" label="Beauvoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q767562" start="722" end="737" title="Chaumes-en-Brie" label="Chaumes-en-Brie"/>
<link wikidata="Q50185" start="992" end="997" title="Louis Couperin" label="Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q725685" start="1113" end="1146" title="Jacques Champion de Chambonnières" label="Jacques Champion de Chambonnières"/>
<link wikidata="Q914050" start="1204" end="1208" title="Brie (region)" label="Brie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3592904" start="1266" end="1288" title="Évrard Titon du Tillet" label="Évrard Titon du Tillet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11977920" start="1410" end="1430" title="Feast of Saint James" label="Feast of Saint James"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="1637" end="1642" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q427340" start="1788" end="1808" title="Church Saint-Gervais" label="Church Saint-Gervais"/>
<link wikidata="Q50186" start="2201" end="2218" title="François Couperin" label="François Couperin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3578007" start="2461" end="2486" title="List of French harpsichordists" label="French harpsichord school"/>
<link wikidata="Q3817964" start="2578" end="2611" title="L&amp;#x27;art de toucher le clavecin" label="L&amp;#x27;art de toucher le clavecin"/>
<link wikidata="Q427340" start="2757" end="2777" title="Church Saint-Gervais" label="Church Saint-Gervais"/>
<link wikidata="Q50185" start="3120" end="3125" title="Louis Couperin" label="Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q609940" start="3249" end="3266" title="Marguerite-Louise Couperin" label="Marguerite-Louise"/>
<link wikidata="Q582947" start="3358" end="3370" title="Armand-Louis Couperin" label="Armand-Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101137" start="3404" end="3416" title="Pierre-Louis Couperin" label="Pierre-Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q640739" start="3450" end="3466" title="Gervais-François Couperin" label="Gervais-François"/>
<link wikidata="Q2114956" start="3501" end="3516" title="Céleste-Thérèse Couperin" label="Céleste-Thérèse"/>
<link wikidata="Q50186" start="3625" end="3633" title="François Couperin" label="François"/>
<link wikidata="Q2870861" start="3797" end="3818" title="Marguerite-Antoinette Couperin" label="Marguerite-Antoinette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422837" start="3973" end="3991" title="Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians" label="Grove Music Online"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="444283" wikidata="Q6764289" url="?curid=444283" title="Marine hatchetfish">
<text>Marine hatchetfishes or deep-sea hatchetfishes are small deep-sea mesopelagic ray-finned fish of the stomiiform subfamily Sternoptychinae. They should not be confused with the freshwater hatchetfishes, which are not particularly closely related Teleostei in the characiform family Gasteropelecidae.

The scientific name means &quot;&quot;Sternoptyx&quot;-subfamily&quot;, from &quot;Sternoptyx&quot; (the type genus) + the standard animal family suffix &quot;-inae&quot;. It ultimately derives from Ancient Greek &quot;stérnon&quot; (στέρνον, &quot;breast&quot;) + &quot;ptýx&quot; (πτύξ, &quot;a fold/crease&quot;) + Latin &quot;forma&quot; (&quot;external form&quot;), the Greek part in reference to the thorax shape of marine hatchetfishes.

== Description and ecology ==
Found in tropical, subtropical and temperate waters of the Atlantic, Pacific and Indian Oceans, marine hatchetfishes range in size from &quot;Polyipnus danae&quot; at to the c.-long giant hatchetfish (&quot;Argyropelecus gigas&quot;). They are small deep-sea fishes which have evolved a peculiar body shape and like their relatives have bioluminescent photophores. The latter allow them to use counter-illumination to escape predators that lurk in the depths: by matching the light intensity with the light penetrating the water from above, the fish does not appear darker if seen from below. They typically occur at a few hundred meters below the surface, but their entire depth range spans from 50 to 1,500 meters deep.

The body is deep and laterally extremely compressed, somewhat resembling a hatchet (with the thorax being the &quot;blade&quot; and the caudal peduncle being the &quot;handle&quot;). The genus &quot;Polyipnus&quot; is rounded, the other two – in particular &quot;Sternoptyx&quot; – decidedly angular if seen from the side. Their pelvis is rotated to a vertical position. The mouth is located at the tip of the snout and directed almost straight downwards.

Their scales are silvery, delicate and easily abraded. In some species, such as the highlight hatchetfish (&quot;Sternoptyx pseudobscura&quot;), large sections of the body at the base of the anal fin and/or caudal fin are transparent. They have perpendicular spines and blade-like pterygiophores in front of the dorsal fin. The anal fin has 11–19 rays and in some species is divided in two parts; almost all have an adipose fin. Their large, sometimes tube-shaped eyes can collect the faintest of light and focus well on objects both close and far. They are directed somewhat upwards, most conspicuously in the genus &quot;Argyropelecus&quot;. This allows them to discern the silhouettes of prey moving overhead against the slightly brighter upper waters.

== Genera ==
There are three genera in this subfamily, with some 40 species altogether:
* &quot;Argyropelecus&quot; – silver hatchetfishes (7 species)
* &quot;Polyipnus&quot; (32 species)
* &quot;Sternoptyx&quot; (4 species)
Four fossil genera are also known:

* &quot;Eosternoptyx&quot; (middle-late Eocene of Iran)
* &quot;Polyipnoides&quot; (middle Eocene of Georgia)
* &quot;Horbatshia&quot; (Oligocene of the Carpathians)
* &quot;Discosternon&quot; (Miocene of Italy)

== Footnotes ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6764289" start="0" end="20" title="Marine hatchetfish" label="Marine hatchetfishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6764289" start="24" end="46" title="Marine hatchetfish" label="deep-sea hatchetfishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070117" start="57" end="65" title="deep-sea" label="deep-sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q279640" start="66" end="77" title="mesopelagic" label="mesopelagic"/>
<link wikidata="Q127282" start="78" end="93" title="ray-finned fish" label="ray-finned fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q657570" start="101" end="111" title="stomiiform" label="stomiiform"/>
<link wikidata="Q164280" start="112" end="121" title="subfamily" label="subfamily"/>
<link wikidata="Q6764289" start="122" end="137" title="Marine hatchetfish" label="Sternoptychinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q768176" start="176" end="198" title="freshwater hatchetfish" label="freshwater hatchetfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q204861" start="245" end="254" title="Teleostei" label="Teleostei"/>
<link wikidata="Q217458" start="262" end="273" title="characiform" label="characiform"/>
<link wikidata="Q36642" start="304" end="319" title="scientific name" label="scientific name"/>
<link wikidata="Q916630" start="383" end="393" title="Sternoptyx" label="Sternoptyx"/>
<link wikidata="Q842832" start="405" end="415" title="type genus" label="type genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q729" start="432" end="438" title="animal" label="animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q102047" start="446" end="452" title="suffix" label="suffix"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="499" end="512" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="618" end="623" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9645" start="706" end="712" title="thorax" label="thorax"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530" start="784" end="792" title="tropical" label="tropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q16305538" start="794" end="805" title="subtropical" label="subtropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q167466" start="810" end="819" title="temperate" label="temperate"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="834" end="842" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="844" end="851" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="856" end="868" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1880590" start="917" end="932" title="Polyipnus danae" label="Polyipnus danae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2245004" start="957" end="974" title="giant hatchetfish" label="giant hatchetfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070117" start="1025" end="1033" title="deep-sea" label="deep-sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="1052" end="1059" title="evolved" label="evolved"/>
<link wikidata="Q179924" start="1112" end="1126" title="bioluminescent" label="bioluminescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q546205" start="1127" end="1137" title="photophore" label="photophore"/>
<link wikidata="Q196169" start="1169" end="1189" title="counter-illumination" label="counter-illumination"/>
<link wikidata="Q170430" start="1200" end="1208" title="predator" label="predator"/>
<link wikidata="Q488415" start="1519" end="1526" title="Anatomical terms of location" label="lateral"/>
<link wikidata="Q672890" start="1573" end="1580" title="hatchet" label="hatchet"/>
<link wikidata="Q9645" start="1591" end="1597" title="thorax" label="thorax"/>
<link wikidata="Q4162555" start="1634" end="1649" title="caudal peduncle" label="caudal peduncle"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="1685" end="1690" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3762256" start="1697" end="1706" title="Polyipnus" label="Polyipnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q916630" start="1761" end="1771" title="Sternoptyx" label="Sternoptyx"/>
<link wikidata="Q713102" start="1827" end="1833" title="pelvis" label="pelvis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17027571" start="1850" end="1858" title="Vertical direction" label="vertical"/>
<link wikidata="Q188488" start="1961" end="1966" title="scale (zoology)" label="scale"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2039" end="2060" title="Highlight Hatchetfish" label="highlight hatchetfish"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2068" end="2091" title="Sternoptyx pseudobscura" label="Sternoptyx pseudobscura"/>
<link wikidata="Q4162555" start="2146" end="2154" title="anal fin" label="anal fin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4162555" start="2162" end="2172" title="caudal fin" label="caudal fin"/>
<link wikidata="Q205034" start="2200" end="2213" title="perpendicular" label="perpendicular"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568355" start="2236" end="2249" title="pterygiophore" label="pterygiophore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568355" start="2267" end="2277" title="dorsal fin" label="dorsal fin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4162555" start="2283" end="2291" title="anal fin" label="anal fin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4162555" start="2302" end="2306" title="fin ray" label="rays"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="2319" end="2326" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q4162555" start="2371" end="2382" title="adipose fin" label="adipose fin"/>
<link wikidata="Q190909" start="2462" end="2467" title="Focus (optics)" label="focus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3769118" start="2578" end="2591" title="Argyropelecus" label="Argyropelecus"/>
<link wikidata="Q898700" start="2631" end="2641" title="silhouette" label="silhouette"/>
<link wikidata="Q170430" start="2646" end="2650" title="prey" label="prey"/>
<link wikidata="Q164280" start="2756" end="2765" title="subfamily" label="subfamily"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="2780" end="2787" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q3769118" start="2808" end="2821" title="Argyropelecus" label="Argyropelecus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3762256" start="2871" end="2880" title="Polyipnus" label="Polyipnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q916630" start="2908" end="2918" title="Sternoptyx" label="Sternoptyx"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2981" end="2993" title="Eosternoptyx" label="Eosternoptyx"/>
<link wikidata="Q76274" start="3013" end="3019" title="Eocene" label="Eocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="3023" end="3027" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q7226508" start="3037" end="3049" title="Polyipnoides" label="Polyipnoides"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="3074" end="3081" title="Georgia (country)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3091" end="3101" title="Horbatshia" label="Horbatshia"/>
<link wikidata="Q101873" start="3109" end="3118" title="Oligocene" label="Oligocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288" start="3126" end="3137" title="Carpathian Mountains" label="Carpathians"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3147" end="3159" title="Discosternon" label="Discosternon"/>
<link wikidata="Q76267" start="3167" end="3174" title="Miocene" label="Miocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="3178" end="3183" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="444286" wikidata="Q92995" url="?curid=444286" title="Wolfgang Wahlster">
<text>Wolfgang Wahlster (born February 2, 1953) is a German artificial intelligence researcher. He was CEO and Scientific Director of the German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence and full professor of computer science at Saarland University, Saarbrücken. Wahlster remains Chief Executive Advisor of the German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence. In May 2019, he was honored by the Gesellschaft für Informatik as one of 10 most important heads of German artificial intelligence history. He is sometimes called the inventor of the &quot;Industry 4.0&quot; term.

Wahlster was one of the initiators of the Hermes Award, given each year since 2004 at the Hannover Messe and for many years was the Chairman of the Hermes Award Jury.

In 2016, he was elected to the University Council of the Technische Universität Darmstadt.

==Education==

Wahlster graduated from the Max-Planck Gymnasium in Delmenhorst. From 1972 to 1977 he studied computer science and theoretical linguistics at the University of Hamburg, where he received his diploma in 1977. In 1981 he received his doctorate in computer science from the University of Hamburg.

==Awards and recognition==
Wahlster was awarded the &quot;Deutscher Zukunftspreis&quot; (&quot;German Future Award&quot;) in 2001 and has been a foreign member of the Class for Engineering Sciences of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences since 2003. In 2004, he was elected as a fellow of the Gesellschaft für Informatik.

In 2020, Wahlster was awarded an honorary title doctor honoris causa of Czech Technical University (CTU) in Prague and in 2021 elected as an honorary foreign member of the Engineering Academy of the Czech Republic (EACR).

== External links ==

*Wahlster at the German Research Centre for Artificial Intelligence

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q92995" start="0" end="17" title="Wolfgang Wahlster" label="Wolfgang Wahlster"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="54" end="77" title="artificial intelligence" label="artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q896469" start="132" end="182" title="German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence" label="German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="205" end="221" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q700758" start="225" end="244" title="Saarland University" label="Saarland University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724" start="246" end="257" title="Saarbrücken" label="Saarbrücken"/>
<link wikidata="Q896469" start="307" end="357" title="German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence" label="German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518474" start="394" end="421" title="Gesellschaft für Informatik" label="Gesellschaft für Informatik"/>
<link wikidata="Q28130285" start="548" end="560" title="Industry 4.0" label="Industry 4.0"/>
<link wikidata="Q640826" start="664" end="678" title="Hannover Messe" label="Hannover Messe"/>
<link wikidata="Q310695" start="799" end="831" title="Technische Universität Darmstadt" label="Technische Universität Darmstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q351625" start="964" end="987" title="theoretical linguistics" label="theoretical linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q156725" start="995" end="1016" title="University of Hamburg" label="University of Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q537286" start="1202" end="1225" title="Deutscher Zukunftspreis" label="Deutscher Zukunftspreis"/>
<link wikidata="Q191583" start="1349" end="1382" title="Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences" label="Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518474" start="1438" end="1465" title="Gesellschaft für Informatik" label="Gesellschaft für Informatik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329478" start="1540" end="1566" title="Czech Technical University" label="Czech Technical University"/>
<link wikidata="Q896469" start="1730" end="1780" title="German Research Centre for Artificial Intelligence" label="German Research Centre for Artificial Intelligence"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="444289" wikidata="Q5333360" url="?curid=444289" title="Economic Cooperation Foundation">
<text>The Economic Cooperation Foundation (ECF, ) was founded by Dr. Yair Hirschfeld (the initiator of the Oslo Peace Process), together with former Minister of Justice, Dr. Yossi Beilin at the end of 1990 as a non-profit, non-governmental track II think tank, whose objectives are to build, maintain and support Israeli-Palestinian and Israeli-Arab cooperation in the political, economic, and civil society spheres in support of creating a sustainable Permanent Status based on a two-state solution. Based in Tel-Aviv, the ECF is led today by Hirschfeld, Beilin and its Treasurer Mr. Boaz Karni. Dr. Nimrod Novik is Chairman of the ECF Executive Board.

Over the years, ECF has developed a unique network of intimate relations with all the relevant players – Israel, Palestine, Egypt, Jordan, America, Europe, and others. In turn, this has enabled the ECF to create coalitions, design concepts, suggest creative solutions and build structures that have been translated into agreed-upon agendas and specific proposals. These, in turn, have offered policy makers, local, regional and international players practical tools, mechanisms, ideas and means to facilitate progress in practical as well as political issues related to the strengthening of the peace process.

ECF&#x27;s professional input can be found in every initiative for Palestinian-Israeli peace since the inception of the Oslo Process. The ECF initially began and led the secret talks in Oslo, Norway, that resulted in the signing of the Declaration of Principles (DOP) in September 1993. The &#x27;Architects of Oslo&#x27;, then developed the &#x27;Beilin–Abu Mazen Understanding&#x27;, the first jointly developed detailed concept of a comprehensive Permanent Status Understanding between Israel and a Palestinian State.

Though not officially affiliated, Dr. Yossi Beilin as well as other members of ECF were central to the drafting of the Geneva Accord, the most detailed proposal for a Permanent Status Accord negotiated by those with close relations to both the Israeli and Palestinian political establishments. ECF also played a noticeable role in preparing for the Israeli Disengagement Plan from Gaza and parts of the northern West Bank in August–September 2005. The best known ECF contribution was in facilitating the successful purchase of the settlers greenhouses, which were then turned over to the Palestinians in order to provide an economic outlet for the struggling Palestinian economy. Despite the destruction of many of these by Arab groups, these greenhouses have provided a critical employment opportunity for nearly 3000 Palestinians, from the 4000 who had previously been employed there, and serve as a first step in the expansion of the Palestinian agricultural export industry, the most viable economic sector for the Palestinians.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5333360" start="4" end="35" title="Economic Cooperation Foundation" label="Economic Cooperation Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8046980" start="63" end="78" title="Yair Hirschfeld" label="Yair Hirschfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q49107" start="101" end="119" title="Oslo Peace Process" label="Oslo Peace Process"/>
<link wikidata="Q548964" start="168" end="180" title="Yossi Beilin" label="Yossi Beilin"/>
<link wikidata="Q163740" start="205" end="215" title="non-profit" label="non-profit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831477" start="234" end="242" title="Track II diplomacy" label="track II"/>
<link wikidata="Q155271" start="243" end="253" title="think tank" label="think tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="307" end="313" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q201190" start="315" end="326" title="Palestinian people" label="Palestinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="339" end="343" title="Arab" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q719543" start="475" end="493" title="two-state solution" label="two-state solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q33935" start="504" end="512" title="Tel-Aviv" label="Tel-Aviv"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="773" end="778" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="780" end="786" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q124964" start="861" end="870" title="coalition" label="coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q585" start="1446" end="1458" title="Oslo, Norway" label="Oslo, Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q17013132" start="1496" end="1527" title="Oslo Accords" label="Declaration of Principles (DOP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q548964" start="1608" end="1614" title="Yossi Beilin" label="Beilin"/>
<link wikidata="Q127998" start="1615" end="1624" title="Mahmoud Abbas" label="Abu Mazen"/>
<link wikidata="Q869709" start="1901" end="1914" title="Geneva Accord (2003)" label="Geneva Accord"/>
<link wikidata="Q196122" start="2131" end="2157" title="Israel&amp;#x27;s unilateral disengagement plan" label="Israeli Disengagement Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q39760" start="2163" end="2167" title="Gaza Strip" label="Gaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q36678" start="2194" end="2203" title="West Bank" label="West Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q165044" start="2322" end="2332" title="greenhouse" label="greenhouse"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="444294" wikidata="Q4799671" url="?curid=444294" title="Arthur Matthew Weld Downing">
<text>Arthur Matthew Weld Downing (13 April 1850 – 8 December 1917) was an Irish mathematician and astronomer. Downing&#x27;s major contribution to astronomy is in the calculation of the positions and movements of astronomical bodies, as well as being a founder of the British Astronomical Association.

==Early life and education==
Downing was born in County Carlow on 13 April 1850, the younger son of Arthur Matthew Downing and Mary Weld. He attended Nutgrove School, near Rathfarnham, Dublin under the tuition Philip Jones. He then went on to study in Trinity College Dublin, from 1866, receiving a scholarship in science graduating with a BA in 1871 with a gold medal in mathematics. Downing went on to receive a Masters in 1881, and an honorary Doctor of Science in 1893.

==Career==
He became an assistant at the Royal Greenwich Observatory on 17 January 1873. He was first in charge of the manuscripts and library, followed by the time department, and then the circle computations. One of his areas of study was that of the altazimuth or horizontal coordinate system, as well as bring one of the four observers of the transit circle and altazimuth. In 1875, Downing was elected as a fellow of the Royal Astronomical Society, contributing 75 papers dealing primarily with correcting errors in the star catalogues and the computation of the motions of astronomical bodies. In one paper, he worked with George Johnstone Stoney on the perturbations of the Leonid meteors, predicting and explaining the sparseness of the 1899 shower.

He became superintendent of HM Nautical Almanac Office from 1891 until his retirement in 1910. He was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society in June 1896. He collaborated with his American counterpart Simon Newcomb in establishing an international standard for astronomical constants.

Downing was one of the founders of the British Astronomical Association, and was an ardent supporter during its early years. Through this work he gave significant support to amateur astronomy, serving as vice president (1890–1891) and later president (1892–1894) of the Association. He served as secretary (1889–1892) and vice president (1893–1895) of the Royal Astronomical Society.

Downing was married to Ellen Jane Downing, with whom he had one daughter. Downing died suddenly from heart disease on 8 December 1917, in his home at 30 New Oxford Street, Bloomsbury. He was cremated at Golders Green Crematorium on 13 December 1917.

==References==
==External links==
* The Royal Observatory Greenwich biography of Downing

===Obituaries===
* Obs 41 (1918) 70</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4799671" start="0" end="27" title="Arthur Matthew Weld Downing" label="Arthur Matthew Weld Downing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11063" start="93" end="103" title="astronomer" label="astronomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6999" start="208" end="227" title="Astronomical object" label="astronomical bodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q918776" start="263" end="295" title="British Astronomical Association" label="British Astronomical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q181882" start="347" end="360" title="County Carlow" label="County Carlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070442" start="448" end="456" title="Nutgrove" label="Nutgrove"/>
<link wikidata="Q258464" start="550" end="572" title="Trinity College Dublin" label="Trinity College Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q192988" start="814" end="841" title="Royal Greenwich Observatory" label="Royal Greenwich Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q625696" start="1040" end="1068" title="horizontal coordinate system" label="horizontal coordinate system"/>
<link wikidata="Q753299" start="1199" end="1225" title="Royal Astronomical Society" label="Royal Astronomical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q734412" start="1402" end="1425" title="George Johnstone Stoney" label="George Johnstone Stoney"/>
<link wikidata="Q189698" start="1454" end="1468" title="Leonids" label="Leonid meteors"/>
<link wikidata="Q3369664" start="1560" end="1586" title="HM Nautical Almanac Office" label="HM Nautical Almanac Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q15631401" start="1644" end="1671" title="Fellow of the Royal Society" label="Fellow of the Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q164401" start="1732" end="1745" title="Simon Newcomb" label="Simon Newcomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q3556678" start="1792" end="1813" title="astronomical constant" label="astronomical constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q918776" start="1856" end="1888" title="British Astronomical Association" label="British Astronomical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q150120" start="2374" end="2384" title="Bloomsbury" label="Bloomsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q4141350" start="2405" end="2430" title="Golders Green Crematorium" label="Golders Green Crematorium"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="444295" wikidata="Q5012433" url="?curid=444295" title="CKLW">
<text>CKLW (800 AM) is a commercial radio station in Windsor, Ontario, serving Southwestern Ontario and Metro Detroit. CKLW is owned by Bell Media and has a news/talk radio format. It features local hosts in morning and afternoon drive times, with syndicated Canadian hosts in middays and evenings, plus &quot;Coast to Coast AM with George Noory&quot; overnight. Evening newscasts are simulcast from CHWI-DT Channel 16 &quot;CTV Windsor&quot;.

CKLW is a 50,000-watt Class B station, using a five-tower array directional antenna with differing patterns day and night. Despite its high power, it must protect Class A clear-channel station XEROK in Ciudad Juárez, Mexico, and other Canadian and U.S. stations on 800 AM. The transmitter is off County Road 20 West in southern Essex County, between Amherstburg and Harrow, only a few kilometres from the Lake Erie shoreline.

==History==
===Overview===
CKLW was an internationally known Top 40 station in the 1960s and 1970s. During this era, CKLW used a tight Top 40 format known as &quot;Boss Radio&quot;, devised by radio programmer Bill Drake. However, CKLW never actually used the handle &quot;boss&quot; on the air, just the style. Rather than a &quot;Boss 30&quot;, CKLW&#x27;s weekly music survey was known as a &quot;Big 30&quot;. And instead of calling itself &quot;Boss Radio&quot;, CKLW called itself &quot;The Big 8&quot;.

During this period it was the top-rated radio station not only in Windsor, but across the river in Detroit, and even in cities as far away as Toledo and Cleveland.

=== Before the &quot;Big 8&quot;: Gentile and Binge ===
CKLW first came on the air on June 2, 1932, as CKOK on 540 kilocycles, (which until 2013 was the long-time home of today&#x27;s CBEF) with 5,000 watts of power. The station was built by George Storer and was sold to a group of Windsor-area businessmen led by Malcolm Campbell, operating as &quot;Essex Broadcasters, Ltd.&quot; CKOK became CKLW (and moved to 840 kHz) in 1933, when Essex Broadcasters, Ltd. merged with the &quot;London Free Press&quot; and its station CJGC (now CFPL), and became &quot;Western Ontario Broadcasting&quot;, which was co-owned by Essex Broadcasters, and the &quot;London Free Press&quot;. The &quot;LW&quot; in the callsign is said to have stood for &quot;London, Windsor&quot;, considered the two chief cities in the station&#x27;s listening area. When the station&#x27;s power increased to 50,000 watts, its listening area increased accordingly. In 1934, when &quot;London Free Press&quot;″s station CJGC pulled out of the agreement, the station became wholly owned by Western Ontario Broadcasters. CJGC later evolved into today&#x27;s CFPL, while CKLW moved from 840 to 1030 kHz in 1934, before settling on its present frequency of 800 kHz in 1941, thanks to a shuffle of frequency allocations.

CKLW for most of its history had a distinctly American accent to its programming, and for a number of years served as the Detroit affiliate of the Mutual Broadcasting System, an affiliation that began with its switch from CBS to Mutual September 29, 1935, and which would last from then until its purchase by RKO General in 1963. When Mutual was restructured as a cooperative in 1940, CKLW was one of the major shareholders in the network. Alongside its affiliation with Mutual, it also gained a dual affiliation with the CBC in 1935, replacing its CBS Radio Network affiliation with that of Mutual/CBC. In 1948, it became an affiliate of the CBC&#x27;s Dominion Network as well as the main network which became known as the Trans-Canada Network. The Trans-Canada Network affiliation would last until 1950, when CBE 1550 launched and the Dominion Network affiliation remained until 1962 when the network dissolved. The Mutual System&#x27;s owner, General Tire and Rubber Company, purchased a controlling interest in CKLW and its owner at the time, Western Ontario Broadcasting in 1956, along with RKO General (which had purchased a minority interest in 1954 and had controlled Mutual since 1952). RKO would later increase its stake to 100% in 1963.

In the late 1930s and early 1940s, CKLW was home to &quot;Happy Joe&#x27;s Early Morning Frolic&quot; with Joe Gentile and Toby David, which was one of the first popular comedy-oriented radio morning shows in Detroit. The show continued strong after David left CKLW for Washington, D.C., in 1940, and was replaced by Ralph Binge. The duo kept listeners entertained with an endless stream of comedic sketches and situations. The show&#x27;s sponsors got in on the fun as well, as Gentile and Binge&#x27;s trademark was their ability to turn a standard 60-second commercial announcement into a comedy sketch that could run for three minutes or longer. A typical three-and-a-half-hour Gentile and Binge show might feature such comedic commercials for as many as fifty legitimate products, and some imaginary ones as well. Sometimes listeners didn&#x27;t get the joke. For example, according to popular legend, after promoting a miracle weight-loss aid called &quot;Dr. Quack&#x27;s Slim Jim Reducing Pills&quot; with the story of an obese woman who got stuck in a telephone booth, Gentile and Binge received over $3,000 from listeners requesting a $1 trial of the pills as advertised, and the station had to hire a clerk to return the money.

Gentile and Binge were a fixture on CKLW until moving to WJBK radio (now WLQV) in 1948, attracting audience ratings as high as 80% at their peak. The duo disbanded their partnership in 1956, and Gentile returned to CKLW. Toby David also eventually returned to AM 800 to host the morning show in the late 1950s and early 1960s. Both Binge and David were also stars of early Detroit television kiddie shows: Binge was &quot;Pirate Pete&quot; on WJBK-TV in the mid-1950s, and David became CKLW-TV&#x27;s (now CBET-DT) &quot;Captain Jolly&quot; later in the decade (a role which, ironically, Binge had originally been tagged to play).

As television&#x27;s popularity boomed, CKLW, like many other stations, coped with the changes by replacing the dying network radio fare with locally based disc-jockey shows. Throughout most of the 1950s and into the mid-1960s, CKLW was basically a &quot;variety&quot; radio station which filled in the cracks between full-service features with pop music played by announcers like Bud Davies, Ron Knowles (who had a rock-and-roll show on AM 800 as early as 1957), and Joe Van. For a few years in the early 1960s, CKLW also featured a country music program in the evenings called &quot;Sounds Like Nashville&quot;. This ended in 1963 when WEXL 1340 became Detroit&#x27;s first 24-hour country station.

=== Glory years ===
After RKO General took over the station and its FM sister in 1963, CKLW began to shed the variety-format approach and, as &quot;Radio Eight-Oh&quot;, began focusing more aggressively on playing contemporary hits and issuing a record survey. Davies, Knowles, Dave Shafer, Tom Clay, Tom Shannon, Larry Morrow (as &quot;Duke Windsor&quot;), Terry Knight, and Don Zee were among the &quot;Radio Eight-Oh&quot; personalities during this time. The station did well thanks to its huge signal, and beat the local competition in Cleveland, Ohio, though in the local Detroit ratings CKLW still lagged well behind competing hit outlet WKNR.

However, on April 4, 1967, CKLW got a drastic makeover with Bill Drake&#x27;s &quot;Boss Radio&quot; format, programmed locally by Paul Drew. Initially known as &quot;Radio 8&quot; with PAMS jingles, within a few months the station&#x27;s final transformation into &quot;The Big 8,&quot; with new jingles sung by the Johnny Mann Singers, was complete, and the station was on a rapid ratings upswing. In July 1967, CKLW claimed the number one spot in the Detroit ratings for the first time, and WKNR was left in the dust, switching to an easy listening format as WNIC less than five years later.

In addition to Dave Shafer and Tom Shannon, the lone holdouts from the &quot;Radio Eight Oh&quot; era, &quot;Big 8&quot; personalities during the late 1960s and through the mid-1970s included Gary &quot;Morning Mouth&quot; Burbank, &quot;Big&quot; Jim Edwards, &quot;Brother&quot; Bill Gable, Pat Holiday, Steve Hunter, &quot;Super&quot; Max Kinkel, Walt &quot;Baby&quot; Love, Charlie O&#x27;Brien, Scott Regen, Ted &quot;The Bear&quot; Richards, Mike Rivers, Duke Roberts, Charlie Van Dyke, Johnny Williams, and newsmen Randall Carlisle, Grant Hudson, Byron MacGregor (who had a three-and-a-half million-selling #1 hit single with his recording of Gordon Sinclair&#x27;s commentary &quot;The Americans&quot; in 1973), and Dick Smyth.

The station had strong talent behind the scenes as well, most notably longtime music director Rosalie Trombley, who ascended to that position in 1968 after having worked as the station&#x27;s music librarian for five years and became famous for her apparent hit record-spotting abilities. Trombley consciously made an effort to choose the right R&amp;B and soul songs (especially Motown songs) to create a station that would appeal equally to black and white listeners. As a result, CKLW was sometimes referred to as &quot;the blackest white station in America&quot;, and many believe the integrated music mix helped bring Detroiters closer together in racial harmony, especially after the riots of July 1967. The &quot;Rosalie Trombley Award&quot; honours women who have made their mark in broadcasting. Another female employee of CKLW who helped break down gender barriers was reporter Jo-Jo Shutty-MacGregor (the wife of Byron MacGregor), the first female helicopter traffic/news reporter in North America.

The Windsor-based station maintained a sales office in the Detroit suburb of Southfield, Michigan, where it picked up numerous sponsors for U.S. consumer products, some of which had to use the disclaimer and live announcer end-tag &quot;Not available in Ontario&quot;. Possibly the best known of sponsors was Merollis Chevrolet, known for its comedic 30-second spots and the campy Al Jolson-styled jingle &quot;Gene Merollis what a great great guy!&quot;

Another feature of the &quot;Big 8&quot; was its &quot;20/20 News&quot;, so-called because it was delivered at 20 minutes after the hour and 20 minutes before the hour - scheduling that allowed CKLW to be playing music while other stations were airing newscasts at the top of the hour or on the quarter-hour. The CKLW newscasters — including Byron MacGregor, Jon Belmont (later ABC), Bob Losure (CNN), Dick Smyth (who would later become the first newscast when Toronto&#x27;s CFTR went all-news in 1993), Grant Hudson, Joe Donovan (sports), Mark Dailey (CityNews), Randall Carlisle, Keith Radford, and Lee Marshall — delivered imagery-laden news stories in a rapid-fire, excited manner, not sparing any of the gory details when it came to describing murders or rapes. This was an attempt to make the news sound as exciting and gripping as the music. The &quot;blood and guts&quot; style began with Byron MacGregor&#x27;s promotion to news director (replacing Smyth) in 1969. Another memorable feature of the 20/20 newscasts was the incessant clacking of the teletype in the background, which gave the newscasts a unique sound.

CKLW&#x27;s newscasts were acknowledged for more than just their &quot;flash,&quot; however; the station won an Edward R. Murrow Award for its coverage of the 1967 riots, helmed by Smyth. This was the first time that this particular award had ever been given to a Canadian broadcaster.

=== The decline and death of the Big 8 ===
Some listeners believe that CKLW started to decline in popularity after Canadian content regulations went into effect in 1971. Although having to play 30% &quot;CanCon&quot; songs that generated little in the way of sales put the station at a competitive disadvantage compared to its U.S.-based competition, CKLW still managed to help break a number of Canadian songs and artists in the United States. These included Anne Murray, The Poppy Family, Gordon Lightfoot, Joni Mitchell, The Guess Who, April Wine, the Five Man Electrical Band, and Bachman Turner Overdrive. Just as, if not more, responsible for the decline in CKLW&#x27;s ratings as the 1970s wore on was the rise of FM radio as an outlet for contemporary music, as the station gained a direct FM Top 40 competitor, WDRQ, in 1972, and its listening audience was also fragmented between album-oriented rock outlets such as WWWW, WRIF and WABX and adult contemporary stations like WNIC and WMJC. The Canadian government&#x27;s initial unwillingness to license FM frequencies with pop or rock formats stranded Canadian stations on AM while an entire demographic of listeners began the exodus to US-based FM outlets anywhere the signals were in range. For many younger listeners by 1978, CKLW was the station they listened to only if they had an AM-only radio in their cars.

As a result, like many other powerhouse AM Top 40 stations, CKLW evolved during the late 1970s into an Adult Top 40 direction. The station&#x27;s music softened to the point where, by 1982, it gave no airtime to harder-rocking songs like Joan Jett&#x27;s &quot;I Love Rock &#x27;n&#x27; Roll&quot;, and jingles were initially phased out, with new jingles and a new slogan (&quot;The Great Entertainer&quot;) being introduced in 1979.

Dick Purtan joined the station for mornings in 1978, coming over from WXYZ. Largely due to Purtan&#x27;s popularity, CKLW remained a moderately popular station into the early 1980s, but after Purtan departed at the start of 1983 for FM competitor WCZY, the station quickly tumbled to the bottom of Detroit&#x27;s Arbitron ratings (its last appearance in the Top 10 was in 1981). In an attempt to go after longtime &quot;full service&quot; powerhouse WJR, CKLW converted to AM stereo in 1982 and even got the rights to broadcast University of Michigan football and NASL soccer, but in this, it was also unsuccessful.

In 1984, Baton Broadcasting sold CKLW-AM-FM to Russwood Broadcasting Ltd. Also in 1984, CKLW made an attempt to transfer its CHR format to its FM sister station, big band and jazz standards-formatted CKJY-FM. These hopes were dashed when the Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission (CRTC) refused to approve the format change on anything more than an &quot;experimental&quot; basis, reasoning that FM was for &quot;fine&quot; music and that Top 40 music belonged on AM.

The final death knell for the &quot;Big 8&quot; came in October 1984, when the station fired 79 staffers (including most of the remaining announcers and Rosalie Trombley), closed its American sales office in the Detroit suburb of Southfield, Michigan, and announced that it would soon change format to Al Ham&#x27;s &quot;Music of Your Life&quot; format of Jazz standards and big-band music and go completely automated. The &quot;Big 8&quot; was finally laid to rest on Tuesday, January 1, 1985, and the station soon dropped stereo since most of the big-band and jazz standards music in its new format was in mono anyway. CKLW&#x27;s FM sister adopted a beautiful music format with the callsign CKEZ. Briefly, it attempted to resurrect the glory years of the &quot;Big 8&quot; by playing oldies and the jingles from the AM legend&#x27;s peak years in the late 1960s. At this time, both stations were also sold to CUC Broadcasting, which would sell CKLW and CKEZ to CHUM Limited in 1993. For a brief time under CUC Broadcasting ownership, it was a member of the NBC Radio network beginning in 1991 (which was by then a shell of its former self), and ending with the station&#x27;s sale to CHUM Limited in 1993.

CKLW was known as &quot;K-800&quot; during its &quot;Music of Your Life&quot; days and also became the radio home for the Detroit Pistons. Ratings improved dramatically, as the station shot back into the Top 10, although the demographics of the station&#x27;s audience were now substantially older. Longtime CKLW jock and Detroit radio veteran Dave Shafer was the &quot;K-800&quot; program director during this time.

=== Modern history ===
CHUM Limited, which already owned CKWW and CIMX-FM in the Windsor/Detroit market, purchased CKLW-AM-FM in February 1993, and subsequently swapped the formats of CKWW and CKLW on March 1, moving the nostalgic music down to 580 on the AM dial and planting CKWW&#x27;s news-talk format on 800, and thus ending the music on AM 800 for good.

Today, CKLW combines local talk radio with U.S.-based syndication programs and those produced by CHUM. The station now goes by the name &quot;AM 800&quot;, The Information Station (or as &quot;AM 800 CKLW&quot;). The station boasts a fully staffed local newsroom and also airs hourly newscasts from The Canadian Press radio network (formerly known as Broadcast News), primarily at night. CKLW is picked up clearly as far off as Toledo and Cleveland (where it was consistently a highly rated station during its Top 40 days), Lansing, Michigan, and even the outskirts of Cincinnati, Ohio, with reports of night-time reception as far off as Toronto/Oshawa, Ontario; Hartford, Connecticut; Pennsylvania; New York City; Little Rock; Des Moines, Iowa; and San Antonio, Texas. At one point, it was stated that CKLW could be heard in at least 23 states and 4 Canadian provinces.

For the station to be heard as far west as Arkansas, Iowa and Texas is impressive, given the station is not a &quot;clear channel&quot; Class A station, and has an extreme northward/eastward nighttime directional signal in order to protect stations on 800 kHz in Ciudad Juárez (clear channel XEROK-AM across the river from El Paso, Texas). A station in Bonaire in the Netherlands Antilles (PJB3, Trans World Radio), provided severe interference to CKLW during its Big 8 years and beyond, operating with 525,000 watts of power. CKLW was and is under no obligation to protect Bonaire, as PJB signed on long after North American allocations were settled and the Netherlands Antilles did not honour international agreements.

During CKLW&#x27;s Top 40 heyday, because of its nighttime directional pattern, the station was frequently heard in Scandinavia, but was often rendered unlistenable just a few hundred miles to the west and south of Detroit because of interference from the Juarez and/or Bonaire stations. Nevertheless, the current news/talk format enjoys good ratings in Windsor, though it now hovers near the bottom of the Detroit Arbitron reports.

In May 2006, it was announced that CKLW would be a co-flagship station for University of Michigan football with Detroit radio station WOMC. CKLW had served as backup station to WJR previously for Michigan football when WJR was forced to broadcast Detroit Tigers games due to contractual obligations.

On July 12, 2006, it was announced that CHUM would be absorbed by Canadian media conglomerate CTVglobemedia (now Bell Media), the owner of Canadian television network CTV and the successor of CKLW&#x27;s former owner, Baton Broadcasting. The transaction was consummated on June 22, 2007.

On September 10, 2010, Bell Canada announced plans to re-acquire 100% of CTVglobemedia&#x27;s broadcasting arm, including CKLW. The deal was consummated on April 1, 2011.

=== CKLW-FM and CKLW-TV ===

In 1948, CKLW started CKLW-FM on 93.9 MHz (now CIDR-FM). Despite a powerful 100,000-watt signal, CKLW&#x27;s FM sister has never been able to attract a sizeable audience, at least not on the American side of the border. In the 1970s, CKLW-FM programmed a country format, and then big band and jazz as CKJY in the early 1980s.

After the failed &quot;Fox&quot; format, the station became beautiful-music CKEZ in 1985, and then in 1986, the CKLW-FM calls were restored and the station made an attempt to mimic the sound of the classic &quot;Big 8&quot; formula with a playlist spanning the 1950s through 1980s and with many of the original jingles, features and personalities, but it lasted only a few years.

In the early 1990s, CKLW-FM again tried the &quot;Big 8&quot;-style oldies format, as &quot;93.9 The Legend&quot;. Though the sound was again very faithful to the original CKLW, it once again did not last long, as there was a lot of competition for the oldies market in Detroit at the time, with WOMC (104.3) eventually emerging as the most popular oldies station. (As of November 19, 2020, CIDR-FM became known as &quot;93.9 Virgin Radio&quot;, airing a Top 40 format.)

The operation also included CKLW-TV, Channel 9 (now CBET-DT). For years, one of the TV station&#x27;s most popular shows was an &quot;American Bandstand&quot;-style show called &quot;Swingin&#x27; Time&quot; (and later, &quot;The Lively Spot&quot;), hosted by Robin Seymour (and also Tom Shannon for a time) and featuring performances by national and local recording artists and teenagers demonstrating the latest dances. In fact, as early as 1956, Bud Davies hosted a &quot;bandstand&quot;-style show on CKLW-TV called &quot;Top Ten Dance Party&quot;. For the most part, though, CKLW-TV was overshadowed by its powerhouse sister radio station and mainly aired low-budget local shows along with Canadian Broadcasting Corporation (CBC) (and also CTV) network fare.

When the Canadian government requested RKO General divest itself of its Canadian holdings in 1968, the stations were sold to a consortium of the CBC and Baton Broadcasting, which was finalized in 1970. Baton ran the radio station (and CKLW-TV) for several years (under its subsidiary, St. Clair Broadcasting), before selling to CHUM in 1975. When the CBC took full ownership of the television station (CKLW-TV), it changed its call letters to &quot;CBET&quot;.

CKLW-AM-FM then moved from the TV station&#x27;s 825 Riverside Drive West location to its own studios and offices at 1640 Ouellette Avenue. CBET continues as Windsor&#x27;s CBC English affiliate to this day, although recent budget cuts at the CBC have meant less local programming and more simulcasting of programming from Toronto. The Riverside studios would be sold to London-based Clayland Developments Ltd. in September 2014, though the CBC will be leasing space for their local operations. The 1954 building is on Windsor&#x27;s heritage registry, meaning that it could not be torn down without approval by the city government.

CHUM&#x27;s successor, Bell Media, continues to own CKLW and CIDR-FM today, along with country station CIMX-FM (88.7 FM, &quot;Pure Country 89&quot;) and oldies/nostalgia station CKWW (&quot;AM 580 Motor City Favorites&quot;). All four stations are located at the Ouellette Avenue address.

The 2004 film &quot;Radio Revolution: The Rise and Fall of the Big 8&quot;, produced by Michael McNamara and aired on History Television in Canada and PBS member stations WTVS in Detroit (2005) and WVIZ in Cleveland (2006), chronicles the history of CKLW&#x27;s top 40 years. The film has been honoured in Canada with the Gemini Award (equivalent of an Emmy Award) for &quot;Best History Documentary&quot;.

==== Echoes of the Big 8 ====
In 2015, CKLW began airing its first music program, &quot;Hear + Now&quot; (pronounced &quot;Hear and Now&quot;, formerly &quot;Into Tomorrow&quot;) in over twenty years (having switched formats with sister CKWW, becoming all-news in 1993). The station airs an alternative/independent local artists format, with some classic Canadian Rock songs with music from the 1960s to today sprinkled in. While not a full-time return to music, Here + Now airs, as of March 2021, on Saturday Mornings (it previously aired on Sunday Nights) making CKLW more of a full-service station again.

=== 2017 transmitter fire ===
On May 1, 2017, a fire broke out at the transmitter site, located east of Amherstburg (south of Windsor), knocking the station off air. Programming was temporarily moved to its then sister station AM 580 CKWW, while both stations&#x27; internet feeds remained unaffected. The cause is currently unknown, though the station was able to return to the air on its own frequency by mid-afternoon the next day at reduced power.

== See also ==
*RKO General
*Media in Detroit

== References ==
== Further reading ==
*Morrow, Larry (2010). &quot;This is Larry Morrow&quot;. Cleveland, OH: Gray &amp; Company, Publishers. .

== External links ==
*AM 800 CKLW
* CKLW-AM at The History of Canadian Broadcasting by the Canadian Communications Foundation

*Radio-Locator information on CKLW
*The Classic CKLW Page 
*Canadian Stations and History
*CKLW Big 30 Hit Lists, 1967-1979
*Boss 30 Gallery (including CKLW)
*RKO-General&#x27;s History, and its relationship with CKLW
*&quot;Radio Revolution: The Rise and Fall of the Big 8&quot; DVD site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5012433" start="0" end="4" title="CKLW" label="CKLW"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377707" start="10" end="12" title="AM broadcasting" label="AM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378498" start="19" end="29" title="commercial radio" label="commercial"/>
<link wikidata="Q273623" start="30" end="43" title="radio station" label="radio station"/>
<link wikidata="Q182625" start="47" end="63" title="Windsor, Ontario" label="Windsor, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502890" start="73" end="93" title="Southwestern Ontario" label="Southwestern Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925718" start="98" end="111" title="Metro Detroit" label="Metro Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q815713" start="130" end="140" title="Bell Media" label="Bell Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q502319" start="151" end="160" title="Talk radio" label="news/talk"/>
<link wikidata="Q589183" start="161" end="173" title="radio format" label="radio format"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259376" start="224" end="234" title="drive time" label="drive time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572845" start="242" end="252" title="radio syndication" label="syndicated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933766" start="304" end="321" title="Coast to Coast AM" label="Coast to Coast AM"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356377" start="327" end="339" title="George Noory" label="George Noory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933770" start="379" end="388" title="simulcast" label="simulcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q5011418" start="394" end="401" title="CHWI-DT" label="CHWI-DT"/>
<link wikidata="Q767221" start="419" end="422" title="CTV Television Network" label="CTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="456" end="460" title="watt" label="watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6592390" start="461" end="468" title="List of North American broadcast station classes" label="Class B"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829748" start="491" end="502" title="tower array" label="tower array"/>
<link wikidata="Q769152" start="503" end="522" title="directional antenna" label="directional antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130615" start="610" end="631" title="clear-channel station" label="clear-channel station"/>
<link wikidata="Q8041885" start="632" end="637" title="XEROK-AM" label="XEROK"/>
<link wikidata="Q26590" start="641" end="654" title="Ciudad Juárez" label="Ciudad Juárez"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="656" end="662" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q190157" start="716" end="727" title="transmitter" label="transmitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q953088" start="767" end="779" title="Essex County, Ontario" label="Essex County"/>
<link wikidata="Q385335" start="789" end="800" title="Amherstburg" label="Amherstburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5666481" start="805" end="811" title="Harrow, Ontario" label="Harrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5492" start="844" end="853" title="Lake Erie" label="Lake Erie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6148929" start="927" end="933" title="Top 40" label="Top 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947521" start="1030" end="1040" title="Boss Radio" label="Boss Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4908823" start="1076" end="1086" title="Bill Drake" label="Bill Drake"/>
<link wikidata="Q49239" start="1519" end="1525" title="Toledo, Ohio" label="Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="1530" end="1539" title="Cleveland" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931021" start="1726" end="1730" title="CBEF" label="CBEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258959" start="2026" end="2043" title="London Free Press" label="London Free Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q5010761" start="2076" end="2080" title="CFPL (AM)" label="CFPL"/>
<link wikidata="Q92561" start="2284" end="2290" title="London, Ontario" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030706" start="2792" end="2824" title="Canadian allocations changes under NARBA" label="shuffle of frequency allocations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3034218" start="2974" end="3000" title="Mutual Broadcasting System" label="Mutual Broadcasting System"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="3049" end="3052" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750213" start="3136" end="3147" title="RKO General" label="RKO General"/>
<link wikidata="Q461761" start="3349" end="3352" title="Canadian Broadcasting Corporation" label="CBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931046" start="3376" end="3393" title="CBS Radio Network" label="CBS Radio Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q5291062" start="3481" end="3497" title="Dominion Network" label="Dominion Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833507" start="3552" end="3572" title="Trans-Canada Network" label="Trans-Canada Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009077" start="3639" end="3642" title="CBEW-FM" label="CBE"/>
<link wikidata="Q369128" start="3774" end="3805" title="General Tire and Rubber Company" label="General Tire and Rubber Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q14716331" start="5390" end="5394" title="WLQV" label="WLQV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564701" start="5760" end="5767" title="WJBK" label="WJBK-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009076" start="5823" end="5830" title="CBET-DT" label="CBET-DT"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="6483" end="6496" title="country music" label="country music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949117" start="6587" end="6591" title="WCHB" label="WEXL"/>
<link wikidata="Q427487" start="6865" end="6882" title="contemporary hits" label="contemporary hits"/>
<link wikidata="Q7815338" start="6942" end="6950" title="Tom Clay" label="Tom Clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q107201954" start="6952" end="6963" title="Tom Shannon (broadcaster)" label="Tom Shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q15513761" start="7009" end="7021" title="Terry Knight" label="Terry Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="7191" end="7200" title="Cleveland" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="7202" end="7206" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7948606" start="7295" end="7299" title="WDTW (AM)" label="WKNR"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947521" start="7386" end="7396" title="Boss Radio" label="Boss Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7118146" start="7488" end="7492" title="PAMS" label="PAMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q6267195" start="7619" end="7630" title="Johnny Mann" label="Johnny Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524783" start="8090" end="8128" title="Gary Burbank" label="Gary &amp;quot;Morning Mouth&amp;quot; Burbank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7964015" start="8248" end="8274" title="Walt Love" label="Walt &amp;quot;Baby&amp;quot; Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q5085633" start="8373" end="8389" title="Charlie Van Dyke" label="Charlie Van Dyke"/>
<link wikidata="Q5004424" start="8452" end="8467" title="Byron MacGregor" label="Byron MacGregor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5585820" start="8548" end="8563" title="Gordon Sinclair" label="Gordon Sinclair"/>
<link wikidata="Q7713591" start="8588" end="8601" title="The Americans (commentary)" label="The Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7367206" start="8729" end="8745" title="Rosalie Trombley" label="Rosalie Trombley"/>
<link wikidata="Q43327" start="9015" end="9021" title="Motown" label="Motown"/>
<link wikidata="Q988159" start="9723" end="9743" title="Southfield, Michigan" label="Southfield, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6270373" start="10461" end="10472" title="Jon Belmont" label="Jon Belmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q4933202" start="10486" end="10496" title="Bob Losure" label="Bob Losure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931381" start="10578" end="10582" title="CFTR (AM)" label="CFTR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900011" start="10643" end="10654" title="Mark Dailey" label="Mark Dailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514478" start="10704" end="10716" title="Lee Marshall (announcer)" label="Lee Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q66196" start="11160" end="11168" title="teleprinter" label="teletype"/>
<link wikidata="Q7277870" start="11342" end="11364" title="RTNDA Edward R. Murrow Award" label="Edward R. Murrow Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030730" start="11632" end="11648" title="Canadian content" label="Canadian content"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="11947" end="11960" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q236543" start="11977" end="11988" title="Anne Murray" label="Anne Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757776" start="11990" end="12006" title="The Poppy Family" label="The Poppy Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q359552" start="12008" end="12024" title="Gordon Lightfoot" label="Gordon Lightfoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q205721" start="12026" end="12039" title="Joni Mitchell" label="Joni Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141238" start="12041" end="12054" title="The Guess Who" label="The Guess Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q622051" start="12056" end="12066" title="April Wine" label="April Wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q245861" start="12072" end="12096" title="Five Man Electrical Band" label="Five Man Electrical Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q798232" start="12102" end="12126" title="Bachman–Turner Overdrive" label="Bachman Turner Overdrive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368380" start="12238" end="12246" title="FM radio" label="FM radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7948567" start="12337" end="12341" title="WUFL (FM)" label="WDRQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q428656" start="12407" end="12426" title="album-oriented rock" label="album-oriented rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7948605" start="12443" end="12447" title="WLLZ (FM)" label="WWWW"/>
<link wikidata="Q7955059" start="12449" end="12453" title="WRIF" label="WRIF"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957975" start="12458" end="12462" title="WYCD" label="WABX"/>
<link wikidata="Q378988" start="12467" end="12485" title="Adult contemporary music" label="adult contemporary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953420" start="12500" end="12504" title="WNIC" label="WNIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7948110" start="12509" end="12513" title="WCSX" label="WMJC"/>
<link wikidata="Q231106" start="13131" end="13140" title="Joan Jett" label="Joan Jett"/>
<link wikidata="Q719454" start="13154" end="13184" title="I Love Rock &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Roll" label="I Love Rock &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q5273296" start="13328" end="13339" title="Dick Purtan" label="Dick Purtan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2538123" start="13398" end="13402" title="WXYT (AM)" label="WXYZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q7951858" start="13575" end="13579" title="WKQI" label="WCZY"/>
<link wikidata="Q7951362" start="13778" end="13781" title="WJR" label="WJR"/>
<link wikidata="Q16002739" start="13801" end="13810" title="AM stereo" label="AM stereo"/>
<link wikidata="Q230492" start="13856" end="13878" title="University of Michigan" label="University of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095556" start="13892" end="13896" title="North American Soccer League (1968–1984)" label="NASL"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="13897" end="13903" title="Association football" label="soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q815713" start="13954" end="13972" title="Baton Broadcasting" label="Baton Broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q427487" start="14070" end="14073" title="Contemporary hit radio" label="CHR"/>
<link wikidata="Q207378" start="14107" end="14115" title="big band" label="big band"/>
<link wikidata="Q591990" start="14120" end="14133" title="jazz standard" label="jazz standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5011629" start="14145" end="14152" title="CIDR-FM" label="CKJY-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993801" start="14187" end="14246" title="Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission" label="Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q4703962" start="14738" end="14744" title="Al Ham" label="Al Ham"/>
<link wikidata="Q113997659" start="14758" end="14776" title="Music of Your Life" label="Music of Your Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="14793" end="14797" title="Jazz" label="Jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4877851" start="15090" end="15105" title="beautiful music" label="beautiful music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852647" start="15224" end="15230" title="oldies" label="oldies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5014675" start="15349" end="15365" title="CUC Broadcasting" label="CUC Broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931475" start="15401" end="15413" title="CHUM Limited" label="CHUM Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q58037172" start="15497" end="15506" title="NBC Radio Network" label="NBC Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q169661" start="15769" end="15784" title="Detroit Pistons" label="Detroit Pistons"/>
<link wikidata="Q5012611" start="16122" end="16126" title="CKWW" label="CKWW"/>
<link wikidata="Q5011764" start="16131" end="16138" title="CIMX-FM" label="CIMX-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q502319" start="16453" end="16463" title="talk radio" label="talk radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572845" start="16480" end="16500" title="Broadcast syndication" label="syndication programs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410130" start="16725" end="16743" title="The Canadian Press" label="The Canadian Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q49239" start="16854" end="16860" title="Toledo, Ohio" label="Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="16865" end="16874" title="Cleveland, Ohio" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6148929" start="16936" end="16942" title="Top 40" label="Top 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q28237" start="16950" end="16967" title="Lansing, Michigan" label="Lansing, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q43196" start="16995" end="17005" title="Cincinnati" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="17007" end="17011" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="17064" end="17071" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q211867" start="17072" end="17087" title="Oshawa" label="Oshawa, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q33486" start="17089" end="17110" title="Hartford, Connecticut" label="Hartford, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="17112" end="17124" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="17126" end="17139" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q33405" start="17141" end="17152" title="Little Rock, Arkansas" label="Little Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q39709" start="17154" end="17170" title="Des Moines, Iowa" label="Des Moines, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="17176" end="17194" title="San Antonio" label="San Antonio, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130615" start="17414" end="17427" title="Clear-channel stations" label="clear channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6592390" start="17434" end="17441" title="List of North American broadcast station classes" label="Class A"/>
<link wikidata="Q26590" start="17561" end="17574" title="Ciudad Juárez" label="Ciudad Juárez"/>
<link wikidata="Q8041885" start="17590" end="17598" title="XEROK-AM" label="XEROK-AM"/>
<link wikidata="Q16562" start="17621" end="17635" title="El Paso, Texas" label="El Paso, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q25396" start="17651" end="17658" title="Bonaire" label="Bonaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q25227" start="17666" end="17686" title="Netherlands Antilles" label="Netherlands Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q702641" start="17694" end="17711" title="Trans World Radio" label="Trans World Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6148929" start="18039" end="18045" title="Top 40" label="Top 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="18136" end="18147" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q38926" start="18334" end="18338" title="news" label="news"/>
<link wikidata="Q502319" start="18339" end="18343" title="Talk radio" label="talk"/>
<link wikidata="Q629981" start="18435" end="18443" title="Arbitron" label="Arbitron"/>
<link wikidata="Q230492" start="18529" end="18551" title="University of Michigan" label="University of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837794" start="18552" end="18560" title="Michigan Wolverines football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="18566" end="18573" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953898" start="18588" end="18592" title="WOMC" label="WOMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7951362" start="18631" end="18634" title="WJR" label="WJR"/>
<link wikidata="Q650855" start="18701" end="18715" title="Detroit Tigers" label="Detroit Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931475" start="18795" end="18799" title="CHUM Limited" label="CHUM"/>
<link wikidata="Q815713" start="18868" end="18878" title="Bell Media" label="Bell Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q767221" start="18922" end="18925" title="CTV Television Network" label="CTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q815694" start="19067" end="19078" title="Bell Canada" label="Bell Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q39369" start="19283" end="19286" title="Hertz" label="MHz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5011629" start="19292" end="19299" title="CIDR-FM" label="CIDR-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="19329" end="19333" title="watt" label="watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953898" start="20249" end="20253" title="WOMC" label="WOMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5011629" start="20344" end="20351" title="CIDR-FM" label="CIDR-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q6148929" start="20408" end="20414" title="Top 40" label="Top 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009076" start="20477" end="20484" title="CBET-DT" label="CBET-DT"/>
<link wikidata="Q463447" start="20559" end="20577" title="American Bandstand" label="American Bandstand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7658673" start="20608" end="20626" title="Swingin&amp;#x27; Time" label="Swingin&amp;#x27; Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q16090906" start="20685" end="20698" title="Robin Seymour (DJ)" label="Robin Seymour"/>
<link wikidata="Q461761" start="21120" end="21153" title="Canadian Broadcasting Corporation" label="Canadian Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750213" start="21229" end="21240" title="RKO General" label="RKO General"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="21975" end="21982" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q815713" start="22309" end="22319" title="Bell Media" label="Bell Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q5011764" start="22389" end="22396" title="CIMX-FM" label="CIMX-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q5012611" start="22465" end="22469" title="CKWW" label="CKWW"/>
<link wikidata="Q130755646" start="22665" end="22681" title="Michael McNamara (filmmaker)" label="Michael McNamara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621065" start="22695" end="22713" title="History (Canadian TV network)" label="History Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="22728" end="22731" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564810" start="22748" end="22752" title="WTVS" label="WTVS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7956855" start="22775" end="22779" title="WVIZ" label="WVIZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="22783" end="22792" title="Cleveland" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="22883" end="22889" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q923408" start="22899" end="22911" title="Gemini Awards" label="Gemini Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="22930" end="22940" title="Emmy Award" label="Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q11366" start="23276" end="23287" title="alternative rock" label="alternative"/>
<link wikidata="Q183504" start="23288" end="23299" title="indie rock" label="independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q385335" start="23698" end="23709" title="Amherstburg" label="Amherstburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q182625" start="23720" end="23727" title="Windsor, Ontario" label="Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7531248" start="23806" end="23820" title="sister station" label="sister station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750213" start="24063" end="24074" title="RKO General" label="RKO General"/>
<link wikidata="Q677103" start="24076" end="24092" title="Media in Detroit" label="Media in Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029898" start="24331" end="24365" title="Canadian Communications Foundation" label="Canadian Communications Foundation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="444298" wikidata="Q1928721" url="?curid=444298" title="Michael Nava">
<text>Michael Angel Nava (born September 16, 1954) is an American attorney and writer. He has worked on the staff for the California Supreme Court, and ran for a Superior Court position in 2010. He authored a ten-volume mystery series featuring Henry Rios, an openly gay protagonist who is a criminal defense lawyer. His novels have received seven Lambda Literary Awards and critical acclaim in the GLBT and Latino communities.

==Early life and family==
Nava grew up in Gardenland, a predominantly working-class Mexican neighborhood in Sacramento, California that he described as &quot;not as an American suburb at all, but rather as a Mexican village, transported perhaps from Guanajuato, where my grandmother&#x27;s family originated, and set down lock, stock and chicken coop in the middle of California.&quot; His maternal family settled there in 1920 after escaping from the Mexican Revolution. Nava&#x27;s grandmother was an &quot;influential force&quot; whose &quot;piety and humility was highlighted by her Catholic beliefs.&quot;

At 12 years old, he started writing and it was also around that time he recognized that he was gay. He was the first person in his family to go to college; he attended Colorado College and &quot;acquired a special affinity for literature and writing.&quot; He joined a group of young poets that included writer and humorist David Owen and the poet David Mason. He graduated in 1976 cum laude with a Bachelor of Arts in History.

Nava received a Thomas J. Watson Fellowship, and spent the following year in Buenos Aires and Madrid where he worked on translations of works by Spanish-American poet Rubén Darío. After returning, he considered graduate education in English or History. He enrolled in Stanford Law School, and received his J.D. in 1981.

==Legal career==
Nava worked in the Los Angeles City Attorney&#x27;s office, where he was a deputy attorney and prosecutor on about 50 jury trials. In 1985, he became an associate at the appellate boutique firm Horvitz &amp; Levy, located in Encino, California. He then served as a judicial staff attorney for Arleigh Woods, the first female African-American appellate court justice in California, from 1986-1995. One of the cases he worked on was &quot;Jasperson v. Jessica&#x27;s Nail Clinic&quot; in 1989, which resulted in the first published decision to uphold an HIV/AIDS anti-discrimination statute.

After Woods retired, Nava moved back to Northern California and settled in San Francisco. In 1999, he joined the staff of the California Supreme Court. In 2004, he became a judicial attorney for Carlos R. Moreno, who was the third Latino to ever sit on the California Supreme Court. Nava said &quot;Judicial attorneys and law clerks can have a huge influence in shaping the direction of the law, but there are very few attorneys of color in those positions because they are mostly filled through the Old Boys Network. We need to establish our own network.&quot;

In 2002, Nava was given a Doctor of Humane Letters honorary degree from the Colorado College in recognition of his literary achievements.

From 2007 to 2009, he was a member of the State Bar of California&#x27;s Council on Access and Fairness, which advises the State Bar&#x27;s board of governors on diversity issues. In 2008, he wrote &quot;The Servant of All: Humility, Humanity, and Judicial Diversity&quot;, a law review article where he put forth the case for judicial diversity.

In 2010, Nava ran for Seat 15 of the San Francisco Superior Court. In the June election, he received a plurality of the votes, but the position required a majority. In the November run-off election with incumbent Richard Ulmer, he received 87,511 votes (46.83%) compared to Ulmer&#x27;s 99,342 (53.17%).

==Writing career==
After graduating from Stanford Law School, Nava began writing his first novel. &quot;The Little Death&quot; features Henry Rios, an openly gay Latino criminal defense lawyer who worked in Los Angeles. He was inspired to create Rios because of a comment by author Toni Morrison about writing books that she wished she could have read when she was growing up. After the novel was rejected by thirteen publishers, it was picked up by Alyson Books, and published in 1986. His follow-up novel, &quot;Goldenboy&quot;, published in 1988, received critical acclaim by the &quot;New York Times&quot; which called him a &quot;brilliant storyteller.&quot; From 1990-2000, Nava wrote five more Henry Rios books: &quot;How Town&quot;, &quot;The Hidden Law&quot;, &quot;The Death of Friends&quot;, &quot;The Burning Plain&quot;, and &quot;Rag and Bone&quot;. He received six Lambda Literary Awards. In 2001, he was awarded the Bill Whitehead Award for Lifetime Achievement from Publishing Triangle, a GLBT professional group within the publishing industry.

In 1994, he co-authored the book &quot;Created Equal: Why Gay Rights Matter to America&quot;.

After not having written any new novels since 2000, Nava announced in 2008 that he had drafted a new work, &quot;The Children of Eve&quot;, which was set in the Mexican Revolution. He based one of the main characters on his grandfather. &quot;The Children of Eve&quot; would later be redone as a quartet of historical fiction novels; the first book would be titled &quot;The City of Palaces.&quot; 
In 2016, he published a revised version of the first Henry Rios novel, “The Little Death,” which he retitled “Lay Your Sleeping Head.” In 2018, he adapted the revised novel into season one of an audiodrama podcast called “The Henry Rios Mysteries Podcast.” In 2019, he started his own small press, Persigo Press, with the goal of publishing a new edition of the existing Rios novels and to add new novels to the series. The first new novel, “Carved in Bone”, was published in October 2019. Nava also announced he hoped to publish other LGBTQ writers and writers of color through Persigo Press.

==Personal life==
In October 2008, Nava married his partner George Herzog, an oncology nurse at the Veteran&#x27;s Administration hospital in San Francisco. California Supreme Court justice Carlos R. Moreno presided over the ceremony. They live in Daly City, California.

==Awards==
==Publications==

*&quot;Hometowns: Gay Men Write About Where They Belong&quot; (1991) - &quot;Gardenland&quot;
* &quot;Created Equal: Why Gay Rights Matter to America&quot;, with Robert Dawidoff (1994)
* &quot;A Member of the Family: Gay Men Write About Their Families&quot; (1994) - &quot;Abuelo&quot;
* &quot;Finale: Short Stories of Mystery and Suspense&quot; (1997) - editor
* &quot;Street People&quot; (2017)

=== Henry Rios series ===
* &quot;The Little Death&quot; (1986)
* &quot;Goldenboy&quot; (1988)
* &quot;Howtown&quot; (1990)
* &quot;The Hidden Law&quot; (1992)
* &quot;The Death of Friends&quot; (1996)
* &quot;The Burning Plain&quot; (1997)
* &quot;Rag and Bone&quot; (2001)
* &quot;Lay Your Sleeping Head&quot; (2016) (This is a reworked version of &quot;The Little Death&quot;)
* &quot;Carved in Bone&quot; (2019) (This is a reworked version of &quot;Goldenboy&quot;)
* &quot;Lies With Man&quot; (2021)

=== The Children of Eve series ===
* &quot;The City of Palaces&quot; (2014)

=== Anthologies edited ===

* &quot;Finale: Stories of Mystery&quot; (1989)

=== Anthology contributions ===

* &quot;Certain Voices&quot;, edited by Darryl Pilcher (1991)
* &quot;Equality: What Do You Think About When You Think of Equality?&quot;, edited by Paul Alan Fahey (2017)

==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* 
* - (12.5 linear feet) are housed at the Charles E. Young Research Library at the University of California at Los Angeles.

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1928721" start="0" end="18" title="Michael Nava" label="Michael Angel Nava"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629503" start="116" end="140" title="California Supreme Court" label="California Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q594550" start="342" end="364" title="Lambda Literary Awards" label="Lambda Literary Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="393" end="397" title="LGBT" label="GLBT"/>
<link wikidata="Q5522469" start="465" end="475" title="Gardenland, Sacramento, California" label="Gardenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q18013" start="531" end="553" title="Sacramento, California" label="Sacramento, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q46475" start="673" end="683" title="Guanajuato" label="Guanajuato"/>
<link wikidata="Q214426" start="875" end="893" title="Mexican Revolution" label="Mexican Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111261" start="1203" end="1219" title="Colorado College" label="Colorado College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5238275" start="1359" end="1369" title="David Owen (author)" label="David Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5237199" start="1383" end="1394" title="David Mason (writer)" label="David Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q6581478" start="1417" end="1426" title="cum laude" label="cum laude"/>
<link wikidata="Q55316394" start="1480" end="1507" title="Thomas J. Watson Fellowship" label="Thomas J. Watson Fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486" start="1541" end="1553" title="Buenos Aires" label="Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="1558" end="1564" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q173767" start="1631" end="1642" title="Rubén Darío" label="Rubén Darío"/>
<link wikidata="Q8012895" start="1732" end="1751" title="Stanford Law School" label="Stanford Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682001" start="1821" end="1846" title="Los Angeles City Attorney" label="Los Angeles City Attorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190590" start="2027" end="2045" title="Encino, California" label="Encino, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629503" start="2519" end="2543" title="California Supreme Court" label="California Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5042520" start="2588" end="2604" title="Carlos R. Moreno" label="Carlos R. Moreno"/>
<link wikidata="Q9301216" start="2982" end="3006" title="Doctor of Humane Letters" label="Doctor of Humane Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111261" start="3032" end="3048" title="Colorado College" label="Colorado College"/>
<link wikidata="Q190656" start="3257" end="3266" title="Multiculturalism" label="diversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7413988" start="3480" end="3508" title="San Francisco Superior Court" label="San Francisco Superior Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799148" start="3546" end="3555" title="Plurality (voting)" label="plurality"/>
<link wikidata="Q72334" start="4030" end="4043" title="Toni Morrison" label="Toni Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q594550" start="4628" end="4650" title="Lambda Literary Awards" label="Lambda Literary Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q16275128" start="4680" end="4700" title="Bill Whitehead Award" label="Bill Whitehead Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7258114" start="4731" end="4750" title="Publishing Triangle" label="Publishing Triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q214426" start="5067" end="5085" title="Mexican Revolution" label="Mexican Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5042520" start="6090" end="6106" title="Carlos R. Moreno" label="Carlos R. Moreno"/>
<link wikidata="Q370925" start="6148" end="6169" title="Daly City, California" label="Daly City, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q5077208" start="7547" end="7580" title="Charles E. Young Research Library" label="Charles E. Young Research Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="7588" end="7627" title="University of California at Los Angeles" label="University of California at Los Angeles"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="444308" wikidata="Q7181533" url="?curid=444308" title="Phi Iota Alpha">
<text>Phi Iota Alpha (), established on December 26, 1931, is the oldest active Latino fraternity in the mainland United States, and works to motivate people, develop leaders, and create innovative ways to unite the Latino community. The organization has roots that stem back to the late 19th century to the second intercollegiate Latin American fraternity, and one of the first Latin American student organization in the United States. The brotherhood is composed of undergraduate, graduate, and professional men committed towards the empowerment of the Latin American community by providing intensive social and cultural programs and activities geared towards the appreciation, promotion and preservation of Latin American culture.

Membership in Phi Iota Alpha is open to all men regardless of race, creed, color, or national origin who challenge themselves to develop a strong network for the advancement of Latino people. Phi Iota Alpha&#x27;s membership includes prominent and accomplished educators, politicians, businessmen, and four former presidents of Latin American countries. Phi Iota Alpha utilizes motifs from the Pan-American revolutionary period and uses images and colors depicting the time of Latin American revolutionaries and thinkers to represent the organization.

==History==

===Origins===

The origins of Phi Iota Alpha are at the Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (RPI), Troy, New York, on November 20, 1898. A group of a seven Latin American students organized the Union Hispano Americana (UHA) as a cultural and intellectual secret society based on the ideology of Pan-Americanism in attempt to promote further unity amongst the Latin student body that comprised nearly a dozen individuals in Fall 1899. These founders were Joaquin Maria Buenaventura, Nicolas De La Cava (of Delta Tau Delta), Jorge Adelberto Guirola (of Theta Xi), Alfredo LeBlanc, Luis Gonzaga Morphy (of Theta Xi), Pedro Eugenio Raygada, and Alfredo Gregorio Vergara (of Theta Xi). The founding members were all international students originally from Colombia, Cuba, Ecuador, El Salvador, Mexico, and Peru. Morphy served as the first President of the organization and would play an essential role in the organization throughout its initial years.
The immediate goal of the UHA was to provide a cultural environment for students of Latin America and Spain. The UHA was the first association of Latin American students ever founded in the United States. The UHA expanded to several colleges and universities in the United States; however, due to the secrecy imposed upon its members, not many records were kept.

The expansion and growth of the UHA were based on compromise and the ultimate need for similar organizations to unify and become more powerful. In the Northeastern Province of the United States, a group of Latin American students decided to organize a cultural and intellectual fraternity; as a result Pi Delta Phi () fraternity was founded at Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) in 1916 by Nemesio Alvare y Gomez, Segundo Heliodoro Ayala, Rodolfo Lucio Fonseca, Eduardo Germain, Viviano Llano Valdés, Marcial Ernesto Martínez Vilches, Roberto José Ottonello, José Augusto Padilla, Luciano Atilio Preloran, Enrique Rivero Monasterio, and Antonio Helier Rodriguez y Cintra. Shortly after its foundation, Pi Delta Phi initiated a search to expand to other colleges and universities where they became aware of the existence of other similar organizations.

===Consolidation===
Pi Delta Phi established communications with Phi Lambda Alpha () fraternity, which had been recently founded in 1920 by Enrique Munguia Benitez, Luis Obispo Benoist, Horacio Peter Gabriel Madero, Raul Ramirez, Alfonso Samper, Abel Santos, Jesus Elias Sasaeta, Santiago Sompre, Gustavo Stahl, Juan Valenzuela, and Douglas Weatherston, in the Western Province of the United States, at the University of California, Berkeley. After some communication, these two organizations realized the existence of a non-Greek letter secret society, the Union Hispano Americana (UHA). As a result of intensive correspondence and various interviews, the three organizations merged. In their merger agreement, the three organizations adopted the name of Phi Lambda Alpha fraternity, with the distinctive emblem &amp; constitution of Pi Delta Phi, and the goals and motto of the UHA. This new union was formalized on June 11, 1921, in the City of New York.

After Phi Lambda Alpha was organized, other societies joined it: the &quot;Club Latino-Americano&quot; founded in 1919 at Colorado School of Mines; the &quot;Federación Latino-Americana&quot; founded in 1926 at Columbia University which joined in 1928; the &quot;Club Hispania&quot; founded in 1929 of Cornell University which joined in 1931; the &quot;Club Hispano-Americano&quot; founded in 1921 at (then) Tri-State College in Angola, Indiana which joined in 1929 and the Alfa Tenoxtitlan Militant chapter founded in 1929 made up of members of the Phi Lambda Alpha in Mexico.

Meanwhile, another similar organization was under development in the Southeastern Province of the United States. In 1904, an organization with similar goals as Phi Lambda Alpha was founded under the name Sociedad Hispano-Americana at Louisiana State University. In 1911, the society transformed itself into Sigma Iota and became the second intercollegiate Latin American–based fraternity in the United States. By 1928, Sigma Iota had lost many of its chapters and therefore sought to stabilize its operations by consolidating its chapters in the United States with a more stationary and well-rooted organization.

Phi Lambda Alpha was seeking to expand throughout the United States and to promote the ideology of Pan-Americanism. Sigma Iota fraternity was in search of revitalizing some of its defunct chapters. Thus both organizations complemented each other and began to work towards the creation of the fraternity now known as Phi Iota Alpha.

=== Establishment ===
In December 1931 in Troy, New York, delegates from Phi Lambda Alpha and Sigma Iota assembled to form a unified fraternity to address the needs of Latin American Students in universities in the United States.

On December 26, 1931, the first day of a three-day convention, Phi Iota Alpha was born as both groups agreed to the merger. They resolved to unify under one name, one banner, one organization and one ideal. The next day of business was dedicated to preparing the details of revising the constitution and working on the creation of a shield to represent the newly formed national Latino brotherhood. On December 28, by the end of the three-day convention, the majority of the merger was completed. The last step in the merger was the ratification of some of the chapters of Sigma Iota that were not represented at the convention.

The fraternity was incorporated as a national organization on October 28, 1936, in the State of Louisiana, as Phi Iota Alpha Fraternity.

===International expansion===
After the unification of Sigma Iota and Phi Lambda Alpha, Phi Iota Alpha&#x27;s goal was to expand on the national level and develop a plan for its existing and potential international possibilities. Phi Iota Alpha sponsored the 1932 convention in New York City to form the Union Latino Americana (ULA) with hopes of expanding its ideals internationally. The ULA was a Pan-American governing body of Latino fraternities that provided the framework for the implementation of Pan-American ideology. The ULA organized Latin America into 22 zones with each of the 21 Latin American countries constituting a zone, and Phi Iota Alpha representing the 22nd zone in the United States. By 1937, the ULA had several well-established and functional zones including the following:
* – Phi Iota Alpha in the United States
* – Phi Kappa Alpha in Cuba
* – Phi Sigma Alpha in Puerto Rico 
* – Phi Tau Alpha in Mexico

In September 1938, the Phi Sigma Alpha zone decided to separate from the ULA and formed the Phi Sigma Alpha and Sigma Iota Alpha fraternities of Puerto Rico and Louisiana (both part of greater Sigma Fraternity union) which would also be composed of former members of Phi Iota Alpha. Twelve years later, Phi Tau Alpha has established itself as a local fraternity at the Juarez Institute in Mexico. As of 1955, Phi Iota Alpha had two international chapters designated &quot;Juarez&quot; (in Mexico) and &quot;Marti&quot; (in Cuba).

===History: 1939–1983===
The outbreak of World War II greatly hindered the growth of Phi Iota Alpha in the United States. After the war, the fraternity drafted and implemented a new expansion strategy. As a result, the post-war period saw positive internal growth for the fraternity. In the early 1950s, Phi Iota Alpha eradicated any remnant of its political agenda. With only a few chapters, the fraternity continued to pursue its mission. The fraternity was again incorporated as a national organization on January 9, 1953, when the of New York accepted the incorporation of Phi Iota Alpha fraternity.

The 1960s were very challenging years for Phi Iota Alpha. The effects of the Vietnam War and the &#x27;60s counter-culture created an anti-institutional atmosphere amongst many college students. In addition, this drastically reduced the enrollment of Latin American students in American universities. This in turn hindered potential membership to the organization. As a result, by 1968, after many years of struggle, the only active undergraduate chapters were at LSU and RPI. The chapter at RPI became inactive in 1973 with the graduation of its Secretary General. The Secretary-General took with him the chapter&#x27;s official fraternity documents. By 1979, the last active brother from the chapter at LSU graduated, marking the closing of the undergraduate chapter at LSU.

From 1979 to 1983, the fraternity witnessed a period of inactivity only at the undergraduate level. Some efforts were made to re-establish Phi Iota Alpha at the undergraduate level, but these efforts were not successful. Throughout this period, the brothers continued to maintain communication and continued to accomplish the mission of the organization. The history, ideals, and goals of the fraternity never diminished; they simply did not have active undergraduate members to cultivate them. Phi Iota Alpha continued to exist with the many Alumni members and Alumni chapters as they continued to develop their professional lives mostly in Latin American countries and in the United States.
===History: 1984–2000===
In 1984, a group of male students at RPI, set upon learning about the fraternity that once existed on their campus, re-established Phi Iota Alpha. After the re-emergence of the fraternity, the last Secretary General instituted the members of the RPI chapter as the Alpha chapter of Phi Iota Alpha. In the 1980s the fraternity dedicated its efforts to rebuilding the organizational infrastructure and to expand to several universities in New York State. The fraternity was considered officially revived nationwide in 1987 at the collegiate level due to this effort. In 1990, after roughly five years of effort, members of the current Alpha, Beta, Gamma, and Delta chapters were able to assist in the creation of the Hermandad de Sigma Iota Alpha, Incorporada which used the Greek-letter designation of the defunct Sigma Iota Alpha formed by members who seceded from Phi Iota Alpha in 1939. By 2000, Phi Iota Alpha had chartered chapters across the United States; which include the re-establishment of a presence on campuses where Sigma Iota and Phi Lambda Alpha had been present like Syracuse University and Columbia University.

===75th anniversary===

Phi Iota Alpha declared 2006 and 2007 to celebrate the Diamond Jubilee. Preparations consisted of nationwide activities and events, including the commissioning of intellectual and scholarly works, presentation of exhibits, lectures, artwork and musical expositions, and the production of video presentations. The 75th Anniversary Celebration was launched with a pilgrimage to Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute on October 13, 2006, and culminated with the Semi sesquicentennial Anniversary Convention on the weekend of July 27 to July 29, 2007, in New York City.

==Fraternal ideology==
===Beliefs===
Members of Phi Iota Alpha share a lifelong commitment to Latin American culture. Involves intellectual development, cultural consciousness, personal growth, personal achievement, and social awareness.
Members of Phi Iota Alpha believe that the Latin American community in the United States and the Latin American countries need new sources of intellectual capital to identify, address, and solve the difficult challenges they face. Therefore, the organization is dedicated to developing in its members an awareness of the common values and traditions of the nations of Latin America and to preparing them to become active participants in the process of advancing the social and economic conditions of all Latin Americans.

The fraternity instills in its members a global Latino perspective. This is an orientation that transcends the existing national boundaries that have separated Latin America. It builds on the spirit and traditions of Pan-Americanism, and supports and promotes actions leading to an eventual unification of all the countries of Latin America.

=== Mission ===
* Promotion of personal, community, and Pan-American development through the ideals of Simón Bolívar and José Martí as well as other Pan-American intellectuals and their philosophies;
* Creation of a Latin American consciousness,
* Intensification of education with a Latin American character;
* Economic and social mobilization of Latin American communities globally;

* Intensification of contact between Pan-American Countries to form a unified network of professional and economic contacts to ultimately achieve the unification of Latin America;
* Conservation of the integrity of the Latin American character.
* Rejection of war and violence as a means to achieving unification.

===Pillars===
The organization has five &quot;pillars&quot;, respected historical figures from Latin America:
=== Dates of celebration ===
The fraternity&#x27;s dates of celebration include:
* April 14 (Pan American Day)
* September 15 – October 15 (National Hispanic Heritage Month)
* October 12 (Day of the Race)
* December 26 (Establishment Anniversary and Day of the Illuminated Latin Americans)
==Symbols==

===Pan-Americanism===
Phi Iota Alpha chose to use Pan-American symbolism to be more representative of the goals and ideals of the organization.
Phi Iota Alpha utilizes motifs from the Pan-American revolutionary period and uses images and colors depicting the time of Latin American revolutionaries and thinkers to represent the organization. This is in contrast to most other Latino fraternities that traditionally echo themes from the Pre-Columbian period of Latin American history. Phi Iota Alpha&#x27;s constant reference to Pan-American ideals in hymns and poems are further examples of Phi Iota Alpha&#x27;s mission to imbue with a Pan-American cultural perspective.

===Colors===
The colors of the fraternity in English heraldry are gold, azure, gules and argent. The colors of the fraternity in Spanish are oro, azul marino, rojo, and blanco. The colors of the fraternity are gold, navy blue, red and white.

===Badge===
The badge is the most prominent symbol of membership. It is a gold pin in the shape of a Roman fasces topped with a double-edged ax and crowned in the superior of the fasces of six stars, each star with an argent pearl at its center. The fasces are held together by two ropes in gold that tie the fasces at the top and the bottom with the middle tied in the form of an x-shaped cross. In the middle of the fasces, above the ropes lies an argent riband engraved with the Greek letters ΦΙΑ. The badge dies at the bottom with a golden sphere that culminates the fasces.

===Flag===
The official flag consists of three bands in gold, azure, and gules of equal height. The Greek letters ΦΙΑ in gold are located on the azure field at the center outlined with argent. The chapter letter is carried on the Gules band sinister in argent. The flag is modeled after the flag of Simón Bolívar&#x27;s Republic of Great Colombia, the short-lived republic that consisted of present-day Colombia, Venezuela, Ecuador, and Panama.

===Coat of arms===

The fraternity&#x27;s insignia, coat of arms or , consists of a blazon composed of a gold shield, gules chevron lowered a third charged with six argent stars, three dexter, three sinister. At the fess point, under an oval azure field, the Latin American Map in gold, surrounded by a steel chain made of 21 links. The Greek letters ΦΙΑ in azure in dexter, fess point and sinister of the chief, occupying a third part of the canton. At the base, a Phrygian Cap in gules facing dexter. The principal bordure is double in azure and argent, respectively. The shield is crowned with a frontal steel helm with nine bars and adorned with argent lambrequins falling at dexter and sinister. The crest is formed by a Roman fasces in a vertical position and a double-edged ax. A pair of lions rampant with sanguine tongues supports the shield. The riband for the motto at the lions&#x27; feet, in argent, with azure letters states &quot;Semper Parati Semper Juncti.&quot;

== National programs ==
Phi Iota Alpha asserts that through community outreach initiatives, the fraternity supplies voice and vision to the struggle of Latino and Hispanic Americans in the United States and Latin America. The fraternity provides for charitable endeavors through its Foundations, providing academic scholarships and support for community development projects.

===Affiliations===
The fraternity maintains dual membership in the National Association of Latino Fraternal Organizations (NALFO) and the North American Interfraternity Conference (NIC).

NALFO is composed of 19 Latino Greek-letter sororities and fraternities, of which Phi Iota Alpha is the oldest member. The association promotes and fosters positive interfraternal relations, communication, and development of all Latino fraternal organizations through mutual respect, leadership, honesty, professionalism, and education.

The NIC serves to advocate the needs of its member fraternities through the enrichment of the fraternity experience; advancement and growth of the fraternity community; and enhancement of the educational mission of the host institutions.

Phi Iota Alpha is also a member of the NIC Latino Fraternal Caucus. One of the only four Latino fraternities that are part of the NIC. Before joining NALFO, Phi Iota Alpha was a member of the Concilio Nacional de Hermandades Latinas.

== Membership ==

Phi Iota Alpha&#x27;s membership is predominantly Latino and Hispanic American in composition. Members come from the United States, the Caribbean, Latin America, Africa, Asia, and Europe. As Phi Iota Alpha expanded, the membership ranks grew to include many prominent and accomplished educators, politicians, businessmen, and four former presidents of Latin American countries.
== Chapters ==
==Notable members==
* Miguel Hernandez Agosto – former President of the Popular Democratic Party of Puerto Rico
* Emilio Bacardi – former mayor of Santiago, Cuba and son of Bacardi Founder Facundo Bacardi
* Eric Arturo Delvalle – former President of Panama
* Carlos Roberto Flores – former President of Honduras
* Rudolph Matas – the father of modern vascular surgery
* Enrique Oltuski – Deputy Minister of Communication for former President Manuel Urrutia Lleo of Cuba
* Mariano Ospina Pérez – former President of Colombia
* Carlos Lleras Restrepo – former President of Colombia
* Alfonso Robelo Callejas – Founder of the Democratic Movement Party of Nicaragua
* Manny De Los Santos – City of New York 72nd Assembly Male District Leader of Inwood/Marble Hill
*Andy Vargas – Massachusetts State Representative, 3rd Essex District

==See also==
* Cultural interest fraternities and sororities
* List of Latino fraternities and sororities 

==References==
==External links==
* Official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7181533" start="0" end="14" title="Phi Iota Alpha" label="Phi Iota Alpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181533" start="16" end="16" title="Phi Iota Alpha" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q7512324" start="302" end="350" title="Sigma Iota" label="second intercollegiate Latin American fraternity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3721" start="435" end="446" title="Fraternities and sororities in North America" label="brotherhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q16799549" start="704" end="718" title="Latin American" label="Latin American"/>
<link wikidata="Q49211" start="1351" end="1383" title="Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute" label="Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q600301" start="1391" end="1405" title="Troy, New York" label="Troy, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q276548" start="1547" end="1561" title="secret society" label="secret society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140451" start="1587" end="1602" title="Pan-Americanism" label="Pan-Americanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254760" start="1797" end="1812" title="Delta Tau Delta" label="Delta Tau Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q629524" start="1843" end="1851" title="Theta Xi" label="Theta Xi"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="2042" end="2050" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="2052" end="2056" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q736" start="2058" end="2065" title="Ecuador" label="Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q792" start="2067" end="2078" title="El Salvador" label="El Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="2080" end="2086" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="2092" end="2096" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q24460" start="2753" end="2795" title="Northeastern United States" label="Northeastern Province of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="2946" end="2983" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="Massachusetts Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181542" start="3529" end="3545" title="Phi Lambda Alpha" label="Phi Lambda Alpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q12606" start="3825" end="3862" title="Pacific States" label="Western Province of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="3871" end="3905" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="4404" end="4420" title="New York City" label="City of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111367" start="4545" end="4569" title="Colorado School of Mines" label="Colorado School of Mines"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="4634" end="4653" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49115" start="4725" end="4743" title="Cornell University" label="Cornell University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7842344" start="4831" end="4848" title="Trine University" label="Tri-State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140073" start="5071" end="5113" title="West South Central States" label="Southeastern Province of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521725" start="5236" end="5262" title="Louisiana State University" label="Louisiana State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7512324" start="5309" end="5319" title="Sigma Iota" label="Sigma Iota"/>
<link wikidata="Q600301" start="5991" end="5995" title="Troy, New York" label="Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="5997" end="6005" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="6906" end="6915" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740587" start="7819" end="7834" title="Phi Sigma Alpha" label="Phi Sigma Alpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740587" start="7972" end="7987" title="Phi Sigma Alpha" label="Phi Sigma Alpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894282" start="8249" end="8265" title="Universidad Juárez Autónoma de Tabasco" label="Juarez Institute"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8843" end="8850" title="#Mission" label="mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="9093" end="9104" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q188976" start="9123" end="9138" title="Counterculture" label="counter-culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="10949" end="10963" title="New York State" label="New York State"/>
<link wikidata="Q7512326" start="11227" end="11269" title="Sigma Iota Alpha" label="Hermandad de Sigma Iota Alpha, Incorporada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740587" start="11325" end="11341" title="Phi Sigma Alpha" label="Sigma Iota Alpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q7512324" start="11541" end="11551" title="Sigma Iota" label="Sigma Iota"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181542" start="11556" end="11572" title="Phi Lambda Alpha" label="Phi Lambda Alpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q617433" start="11595" end="11614" title="Syracuse University" label="Syracuse University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="11619" end="11638" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12027" end="12037" title="Pilgrimage#Modern pilgrimage" label="pilgrimage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5366165" start="14234" end="14250" title="Pan American Day" label="Pan American Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973362" start="14281" end="14313" title="National Hispanic Heritage Month" label="National Hispanic Heritage Month"/>
<link wikidata="Q202390" start="14880" end="14893" title="Pre-Columbian" label="Pre-Columbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785501" start="15189" end="15194" title="azure (heraldry)" label="azure"/>
<link wikidata="Q858055" start="15196" end="15201" title="gules" label="gules"/>
<link wikidata="Q936472" start="15206" end="15212" title="argent" label="argent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="15461" end="15466" title="Ancient Rome" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q328712" start="15467" end="15473" title="fasces" label="fasces"/>
<link wikidata="Q43436" start="15585" end="15590" title="pearl" label="pearl"/>
<link wikidata="Q40843" start="15750" end="15755" title="cross" label="cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q371718" start="16272" end="16287" title="Flag of Great Colombia" label="Great Colombia,"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="16438" end="16450" title="coat of arms" label="coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q120083528" start="16470" end="16476" title="blazon" label="blazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q131559" start="16496" end="16502" title="shield" label="shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q26935196" start="16510" end="16517" title="Chevron (insigne)" label="chevron"/>
<link wikidata="Q662639" start="16558" end="16563" title="Star (heraldry)" label="stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088484" start="16602" end="16606" title="fess" label="fess"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16645" end="16663" title=":Image:Map-Latin America2.png" label="Latin American Map"/>
<link wikidata="Q2397485" start="16695" end="16700" title="Link chain" label="chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475346" start="16792" end="16797" title="Chief (heraldry)" label="chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q213240" start="16852" end="16864" title="Phrygian Cap" label="Phrygian Cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q849732" start="16903" end="16910" title="bordure" label="bordure"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16999" end="17003" title="Helmet#Heraldry" label="helm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289089" start="17043" end="17053" title="Mantling" label="lambrequin"/>
<link wikidata="Q725975" start="17217" end="17225" title="Supporters" label="supports"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970694" start="17811" end="17865" title="National Association of Latino Fraternal Organizations" label="National Association of Latino Fraternal Organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352596" start="17882" end="17923" title="North American Interfraternity Conference" label="North American Interfraternity Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q6844605" start="19177" end="19200" title="Miguel Hernandez Agosto" label="Miguel Hernandez Agosto"/>
<link wikidata="Q199319" start="19227" end="19266" title="Popular Democratic Party of Puerto Rico" label="Popular Democratic Party of Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q5371805" start="19269" end="19283" title="Emilio Bacardi" label="Emilio Bacardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q117040" start="19302" end="19310" title="Santiago, Cuba" label="Santiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q685395" start="19328" end="19335" title="Bacardi" label="Bacardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103630" start="19344" end="19359" title="Facundo Bacardi" label="Facundo Bacardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q739390" start="19362" end="19382" title="Eric Arturo Delvalle" label="Eric Arturo Delvalle"/>
<link wikidata="Q654177" start="19414" end="19435" title="Carlos Roberto Flores" label="Carlos Roberto Flores"/>
<link wikidata="Q13448520" start="19469" end="19482" title="Rudolph Matas" label="Rudolph Matas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103781" start="19525" end="19540" title="Enrique Oltuski" label="Enrique Oltuski"/>
<link wikidata="Q449356" start="19597" end="19616" title="Manuel Urrutia Lleo" label="Manuel Urrutia Lleo"/>
<link wikidata="Q559034" start="19627" end="19647" title="Mariano Ospina Pérez" label="Mariano Ospina Pérez"/>
<link wikidata="Q540230" start="19681" end="19703" title="Carlos Lleras Restrepo" label="Carlos Lleras Restrepo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3649515" start="19737" end="19760" title="Alfonso Robelo" label="Alfonso Robelo Callejas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7024444" start="19778" end="19803" title="Nicaraguan Democratic Movement" label="Democratic Movement Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q110981567" start="19819" end="19838" title="Manny De Los Santos" label="Manny De Los Santos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470702" start="19858" end="19892" title="New York State Assembly" label="72nd Assembly Male District Leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q63363984" start="19916" end="19927" title="Andy Vargas" label="Andy Vargas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193378" start="20001" end="20046" title="Cultural interest fraternities and sororities" label="Cultural interest fraternities and sororities"/>
<link wikidata="Q6576506" start="20049" end="20091" title="List of Latino fraternities and sororities" label="List of Latino fraternities and sororities"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="444309" wikidata="Q262472" url="?curid=444309" title="Orăștie">
<text>Orăștie (; , , , &quot;Transylvanian Saxon&quot;: Brooss) is a small town and municipality in Hunedoara County, south-western Transylvania, central Romania.

== History ==

7th–9th century – On the site of an old swamp was a human settlement, now the location of the old town center, whose remains can be traced into the 10th century when the first fortification was built with raised earth and wood stockades.

11th–12th century – The first Christian religious edifice was raised: The Orăștie Rotunda. It is a circular chapel, with an age estimated at 1000 years. Perhaps it was used only by aristocratic families that dominated the Orăștie area and surroundings in the 11th century. Nearby there is a similar construction from the same period – The Geoagiu Rotunda.

1105 – In the wake of the First Crusade Anselm von Braz ”liber de liberis genitus&quot;, châtelain of Logne, Walloon ministerial count settled here. The historian Karl Kurt Klein implies – though without proof – that he moved with his sons and descendants into the region where Orăștie City is located today.

1200 – According to Transylvanian chronicles, this is the year in which construction of the city walls began. Subsequently, this was abandoned because of unfavorable conditions.

1206 – The King of Hungary, Andrew II, mentioned Romos, a village near Orăștie, as one of the first three villages in Transylvania comprising Saxon colonists. The other two villages are Ighiu and Cricău.

1224 – Andrew II confirmed the privileges of the Saxon colonists and mentioned the existence of Romanian (&quot;Blachi&quot;) and Pecheneg (&quot;Bisseni&quot;) populations who lived in the forests surrounding the town. The settlement kept a number of privileges granted by the Hungarian royalty. The town was ruled by a royal judge (iudex regium), helped by 12 jurors chosen from local craftsmen and rich traders.

1239 – This is the probable founding year of the convent of the Orăștie Franciscan church.

1241 – Orăștie was devastated during the Mongol invasion. A Mongolian tumen under the leadership of Büri entered Transylvania via the Olt Valley, near Făgăraș, from the direction of Sibiu, which was conquered on 11 April. One after another were devastated the Seats of Miercurea Sibiului (Ruzmargt), Sebeș (Mühlbach) and Orăștie (Broos). The Mongolian army arrived at Cenad on 25 April. Orăștie was probably destroyed between 11 and 25 April. The Mongol devastation of the settlements and cities is vividly shown in the dramatic description of Alba Iulia written by the Franciscan friar Rogerius of Apulia:
“ ... I could not find anything except the bones and skulls of those who were killed, scattered and broken walls of churches and palaces that have been sprinkled by the blood of Christians&quot;.
In the future, King Béla IV would populate the region with new Saxon colonists and settlers.

1309 – Orăștie had about 1,600 inhabitants. The Franciscan Order had been established in the city, and they built a church on the site of the current Franciscan friary.

1324 – The Hungarian King Charles I Robert announced that the settlement would be awarded the rank of town.

1334 – The priest John &quot;( Johannes Sacerdos )&quot;, the tax collector in the Orăștie region, performed a census by counting chimneys. Three hundred forty-four houses were numbered, a public bath, and four houses belonging to four nuns and the priest Nicholas &quot;(Nikolaus)&quot;. This was the first time the presence of Saxons in the Pricaz village was mentioned. Also mentioned are two public schools belonging to the Saxons in the Orăștie area.

1344 – Earliest mention was made of the patron &quot;Saint Nicholas&quot; of the Catholic Church from Orăștie.

1349 – In a document issued at Sibiu, the Seat of Orăștie &quot;(de sede Waras)&quot; was noted for the first time.

1364 – Saxons were settled in a colony near Orăștie, in the Căstău village.

1367 – A letter sent to the comes Christian of Orăștie &quot;(de Warasyo)&quot; from Archeacon Ladislau of Ugocsa is the oldest evidence for the functioning of a royal judge for the Seat of Orăștie.

1372 – Comes Stephanus of Warasyo &quot;(Ștefan de Orăștie)&quot; was named as representative of the Seven Saxon Seats in Transylvania.

1374 – Chronicles named Count Mihai de Orăștie (de Warasio) and the ruler of the region Mihai Blas de Orăștie (Michael Blas von Broos).

1376 – Nineteen guilds (&quot;fraternitas&quot;) were mentioned as active in the town.

1420 – The county was raided by the Ottomans. On 24 September 1420, a Turkish army invaded the south-east of Transylvania defeating, near Hațeg County, an armed militia under the command of Transylvanian voivode Miklós Csáki. After two days the Turkish army looted and burned Orăștie and its surroundings before retreating, taking several thousand prisoners as slaves.

1425 – Saxons from Orăștie became suppliers for the Turks. The town was referred to by its German name, &quot;Bros&quot; or &quot;Broos&quot;.

1433 – Registers of the Vatican listed a few pilgrims from Transylvania, Banat, and Wallachia. Among them was Petru, son of Blasius of Orăștie (de Orastiia). The register stated that Peter, previously of the Eastern Orthodox faith (grecorum), was baptized on the day of Holy Trinity into the Catholic Church of Saint Peter in Rome, in the presence of John Sigismund, King of Hungary. It was also noted that Peter, as a soldier of his king, took part in several military actions against the Turks and Bohemians.

1436 – Hungarians were mentioned as living in the center of the town.

1438 – A Turkish army led by sultan Murad II together with a Wallachian army under Vlad Dracula entered Transylvania, where they looted and spoiled Orăștie and the Romos village. On this occasion the Franciscan friary was burned. Later the Franciscan order rebuilt it.

1442 – Another Turkish invasion of Transylvania led to a battle at Sântimbru (18 March 1442), which ended with a Turkish victory under Mezid (Mezet) Bey of Vidin. The town was looted and burned.

1449 – Chronicles note the comes Bartholomew of Orăștie attending a meeting of the Seven Seats.

1479 – A Turkish army entered Transylvania near Câlnic on 9 October, led by Ali Kodsha and Skender, or, according to some sources, by Ali Michaloglu and Skander. Ottoman forces likely numbered 20000 soldiers, and 1000–2000 Wallachian infantrymen under Basarab cel Tânăr-Țepeluș. On 13 October Kodsha Bey set up camp in the Breadfield, a place between Șibot and Orăștie.
The Hungarian army was led by Pál Kinizsi, István Báthory, Vuk Branković, and Basarab Laiotă cel Bătrân. All forces combined totaled 12 or 15,000 men. The Battle of Breadfield took place in a location between Orăștie and Șibot. Turkish casualties were high, with several thousand killed, including a thousand Wallachian allies. The few Turks who survived fled into the mountains, where the majority were killed by the local population. In memory of this victory, Stephen Báthory raised a chapel near the village Aurel Vlaicu. When the Turks looted the city, they destroyed a large part of cultivated land, and the church inside the castle was damaged. Later, the church was rebuilt and taken into possession by the Hungarians. This is why, although the city was a Saxon fortress, the church became the property of reforming Hungarians and Saxons received only a room beside the church. This room was used as a place of worship until 1823 when a new church was built by Saxons.

1486 – Because of disagreements between the Seat of Orăștie and Hunyad County, the Saxon University of Sibiu called in the Hungarian king Matthias Corvinus to regulate the borders between the two territories.

1488 – A population census of the Saxon Seats recorded population, mills, devastated properties, Catholics and Orthodox priests, and sometimes impoverished households. In Orăștie (oppidi Brosz) were recorded: 158 Saxons, 2 poor inhabitants, 4 shepherds, 1 miller and 10 abandoned households.

1491 – Saxons and Hungarians worked out an agreement that the function of Royal Judge be held alternately, and that each of the two nations should be represented in the Senate by equal numbers.

1500 – The annual fair on Saint Nicholas Day was held for the first time in history.

1504 – Stephen Olahus, father of the great humanist Nicolaus Olahus, was appointed by the King as a judge of Orăștie.

1509 – The presence of gypsies is first noted in Orăștie: &quot;The ledger of Sibiu city notes a payment made to two employees sent to Orăștie to escort some Gypsies who were held and accused of violent crimes in the market place in Orăștie.&quot; In this year, Voivode John Zápolya moved population from Banat to Orăștie and Turdaș to bolster the region&#x27;s decreasing population growth.

1514 – During the war led by Gheorghe Doja, Zápolya&#x27;s army passed through the region, and Zápolya noted that the town was not sufficiently protected or equipmed for war.

1520 – 25 April, at Buda, Louis II Hungary directed the Mayor of Sibiu to appoint the noble Matia Olah of Orăștie (de Zazwaras) as Royal Judge of the town, a position then held by Matia&#x27;s elderly father Stefan. The sovereign conferred along with this all revenues from taxation, and also other customary benefits.

1529 – Orăștie was to make its oath of allegiance to the new King John Zápolya.

1533 – Following the expansion of Lutheranism in Orăștie, the Franciscan Order was expelled.

1536 – On 4 June 1536 Matthew Olah, brother of Nicolaus Olahus, archbishop of Strigoniu, died.

1544 – Orăștie fortress was mentioned in chronicles by Sebastian Münster.
“... and there is another strong fortress, below Sebeș, near the town Orăștie ...”

1550 – The name Saxopolis appeared for the first time. Georg Reicherstorffer in &quot;Chorographia Transilvaniae&quot;, printed in Vienna in 1550, wrote: &quot;Orăștie city, which is called Broos by the Saxons, is located a mile away to the south of the grain fields. It is situated on the river Mureș. The soil is unusually fertile, liberally yielding wheat, wine, and many fruits; the people are very tractable and in clothing style and diet are closer to the Romanians, who live broadly scattered in the desolate plains around&quot;.

1560 – Orăștie Fortress is mentioned in chronicles by Giovanandrea Gromo. At about this time the ethnic Hungarian community converted to Protestantism and the Romanian Catholic Church became Reformed Calvinist.

1599 – Michael the Brave asked the town for a loan of 1,000 florins.

1582 – The &quot;Old Testament of Orăștie&quot;, one of the first Romanian-language translations of the Bible, was printed here with the help of the constable of Deva castle, Geszti Ferenc.

1602 – General Giorgio Basta garrisoned 400 Imperial soldiers in the town. Their conduct caused the townsfolk to flee or otherwise barricade themselves in the church&#x27;s castle. Later in the same year, general Gabriel Bethlen, with an army of Tatars, Turks, Hungarians and Serbs besieged the town. The Imperial soldiers were denied access to the church&#x27;s castle, and all but eleven were killed. In August, Basta retook Transylvania and hanged the Mayor of Orăștie and two other prominent burghers.

1604 – Fifteen hundred of Basta&#x27;s soldiers were garrisoned in the town. Extreme famine gave rise to cannibalism.

1605 – A large part of the town was destroyed.

1661 – An Ottoman army in pursuit of John Kemény set fire to Orăștie and Sebeș.

1663 – The Reformed College was established by Michael I Apafi.

1697 – The first pharmacy of the town, &quot;Graffius&quot;, was established.

1733 – The tax registry mentioned 2,800 inhabitants in 568 families: 240 Romanian families, 170 Hungarian, 100 Saxon, 50 Gypsy and 8 Greek.

1738 – plague caused the deaths of 156 people.

1749 – The Roman Catholic Church was built in its current form (a tower being added in 1880).

1752–1756 – One hundred forty-four colonists from Upper Austria settled in the town.

1757–1758 – Another 222 colonists arrived from the same region.

1784 – The peasants&#x27; rebellion of Horea, Cloșca and Crișan occurred.

1820–1823 – The Lutheran church was built (a tower being added in 1841).

1828 – A large fire destroyed 127 houses.

1848 – Fighting was seen between Hungarian Revolutionary forces under General Józef Bem and the Austrian armies.

1853 – Transylvania was reorganised into 10 counties. The third one was centered on Orăștie. The county had 134,77 square miles/348,90 square km and 214,165 inhabitants. By ethnicity, its population comprised: 192,995 Romanians, 7,809 Hungarians, 1,063 Germans (and 12,297 of other categories). By religion: 160,603 Eastern Orthodox, 38,550 Eastern Rite Catholics, 8,565 Lutherans, 4,283 Roman Catholic, 2,141 Calvinists and 23 of other religions.

1857 – The census counted 5,029 inhabitants: 1,850 Eastern Orthodox, 1,136 Roman Catholic, 884 Lutheran, 688 Calvinist, 486 Eastern Rite, 24 Jewish, 19 Unitarian and 5 Armenian.

1867 – The synagogue was built.

1869 – The first bank was established: &quot;Brooser Vorschuss-verein&quot;.

1880 – Orăștie had 1,086 houses and 5,451 inhabitants: 2,312 Romanians, 1,427 Germans, 1,227 Hungarians, 16 Slovaks, 8 Serbs, 176 other nationalities, 138 foreigners and 147 of unknown maternal language (a category that included Roma (Gypsies)); 2,030 Eastern Orthodox, 1,002 Roman Catholic, 964 Lutheran, 769 Calvinist, 523 Eastern Rite, 163 Jewish.

1900 – Electrical street lighting was introduced.

1910 – 6,937 inhabitants (of which 3,276 Romanians).

1940–44 Persecution and eventual deportation of Jewish and Roma residents.

2011 – The 2011 census counted 17,255 inhabitants: 92.01% Romanians, 5.59% Roma, 1.75% Hungarians, 0.41% Germans.

2021 – At the 2021 census, the city had a population of 16,825.

== Culture and recreation ==
A medieval fortified church in Orăștie was built around 1400 in the Gothic style on the foundations of the older Romanesque basilica. A new Lutheran church was built to the north of the old one between 1820 and 1823. Both churches are surrounded by a wall.

The city no longer has an active Jewish population, but its historic synagogue has been renovated by the municipality and is used as House of Culture.

== Natives ==
* Mihai Iacob (1933–2009), film director and screenwriter
* Ernő Koch (1898–1970), graphic artist
* Elizabeth Roboz Einstein (1904–1995), biochemist and neuroscientist, daughter-in-law to Albert Einstein
* Nicolae Szoboszlay (1925–2019), football goalkeeper and manager

== Image gallery ==
== See also ==
* Dacian Fortresses of the Orăștie Mountains
* Orăștie River
* CSM Dacia Orăștie
* Stadionul Dacia (Orăștie)

== Notes ==
== References ==

* Chronicles and documents about the history of Orăștie – vol. 1 1200–1541, Anton E. Dörner.
* Orăștie – 750 years, Ion Iliescu, Tiberiu Istrate.
* Orăștie – 775, dr. Anton E. Dörner, Vasile Ionaş, Ioachim Lazăr, Mihai Căstăian.
* Orăștie – Encyclopedia, Petru Baciu.
== External links ==
* www.orastieinfo.ro
* Everything you want to know about Orăștie and the surrounding areas</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q262472" start="0" end="7" title="Orăștie" label="Orăștie"/>
<link wikidata="Q260942" start="23" end="42" title="Transylvanian Saxon dialect" label="Transylvanian Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q640364" start="78" end="90" title="municipiu" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q191071" start="94" end="110" title="Hunedoara County" label="Hunedoara County"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="126" end="138" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="148" end="155" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q57821" start="349" end="362" title="fortification" label="fortification"/>
<link wikidata="Q104840593" start="400" end="409" title="stockades" label="stockades"/>
<link wikidata="Q623525" start="494" end="501" title="Rotunda (architecture)" label="Rotunda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017982" start="751" end="758" title="Geoagiu" label="Geoagiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q51649" start="795" end="808" title="First Crusade" label="First Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q16144287" start="858" end="867" title="châtelain" label="châtelain"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="1099" end="1112" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q208083" start="1269" end="1273" title="List of Hungarian rulers" label="King"/>
<link wikidata="Q171150" start="1277" end="1284" title="Kingdom of Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q271104" start="1286" end="1295" title="Andrew II of Hungary" label="Andrew II"/>
<link wikidata="Q170352" start="1400" end="1405" title="Transylvanian Saxons" label="Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q475021" start="1575" end="1581" title="Vlachs" label="Blachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q181752" start="1593" end="1601" title="Pecheneg" label="Pecheneg"/>
<link wikidata="Q852171" start="2012" end="2027" title="Mongol invasion of Europe" label="Mongol invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q946868" start="2041" end="2046" title="Tumen (unit)" label="tumen"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="2084" end="2096" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7088748" start="2105" end="2108" title="Olt Defile" label="Olt"/>
<link wikidata="Q685869" start="2122" end="2129" title="Făgăraș" label="Făgăraș"/>
<link wikidata="Q83324" start="2153" end="2158" title="Sibiu" label="Sibiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q197687" start="2240" end="2258" title="Miercurea Sibiului" label="Miercurea Sibiului"/>
<link wikidata="Q732376" start="2271" end="2276" title="Sebeș" label="Sebeș"/>
<link wikidata="Q946757" start="2339" end="2344" title="Cenad" label="Cenad"/>
<link wikidata="Q174665" start="2515" end="2525" title="Alba Iulia" label="Alba Iulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q277766" start="2558" end="2576" title="Rogerius of Apulia" label="Rogerius of Apulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q170352" start="2837" end="2842" title="Transylvanian Saxons" label="Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q208083" start="3049" end="3063" title="List of Hungarian monarchs" label="Hungarian King"/>
<link wikidata="Q213061" start="3064" end="3080" title="Charles I of Hungary" label="Charles I Robert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087553" start="3490" end="3496" title="Turdaș" label="Pricaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="4232" end="4244" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q939871" start="4400" end="4405" title="guild" label="guild"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="4508" end="4516" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottomans"/>
<link wikidata="Q17304961" start="4610" end="4622" title="Țara Hațegului" label="Hațeg County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416040" start="4662" end="4683" title="Voivode of Transylvania" label="Transylvanian voivode"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4684" end="4696" title="Miklós Csáki" label="Miklós Csáki"/>
<link wikidata="Q108169" start="5010" end="5017" title="Roman Curia" label="Vatican"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="5045" end="5057" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q170143" start="5059" end="5064" title="Banat" label="Banat"/>
<link wikidata="Q171393" start="5070" end="5079" title="Wallachia" label="Wallachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="5194" end="5210" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="5312" end="5316" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q313396" start="5337" end="5351" title="John Sigismund Zápolya" label="John Sigismund"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="5476" end="5481" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q39193" start="5486" end="5493" title="Bohemia" label="Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131394" start="5605" end="5613" title="Murad II" label="Murad II"/>
<link wikidata="Q43715" start="5652" end="5664" title="Vlad the Impaler" label="Vlad Dracula"/>
<link wikidata="Q16425356" start="5906" end="5915" title="Sântimbru, Alba" label="Sântimbru"/>
<link wikidata="Q178531" start="5995" end="6000" title="Vidin" label="Vidin"/>
<link wikidata="Q510532" start="6180" end="6186" title="Câlnic, Alba" label="Câlnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3611608" start="6266" end="6280" title="Ali Bey Mihaloğlu" label="Ali Michaloglu"/>
<link wikidata="Q303223" start="6455" end="6465" title="Breadfield" label="Breadfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q239785" start="6532" end="6543" title="Pál Kinizsi" label="Pál Kinizsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q647430" start="6545" end="6559" title="István Báthory" label="István Báthory"/>
<link wikidata="Q690291" start="6657" end="6677" title="Battle of Breadfield" label="Battle of Breadfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q687184" start="6965" end="6980" title="Stephen V Báthory" label="Stephen Báthory"/>
<link wikidata="Q188634" start="7618" end="7635" title="Matthias Corvinus" label="Matthias Corvinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q44269" start="8204" end="8218" title="Saint Nicholas" label="Saint Nicholas"/>
<link wikidata="Q497524" start="8316" end="8331" title="Nicolaus Olahus" label="Nicolaus Olahus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="8406" end="8413" title="Romani people" label="gypsies"/>
<link wikidata="Q32607" start="8653" end="8665" title="John Zápolya" label="John Zápolya"/>
<link wikidata="Q170143" start="8688" end="8693" title="Banat" label="Banat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087553" start="8709" end="8715" title="Turdaș" label="Turdaș"/>
<link wikidata="Q366978" start="8805" end="8818" title="György Dózsa" label="Gheorghe Doja"/>
<link wikidata="Q61073" start="9598" end="9615" title="Sebastian Münster" label="Sebastian Münster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="9832" end="9838" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10293" end="10311" title="Giovanandrea Gromo" label="Giovanandrea Gromo"/>
<link wikidata="Q118755" start="10458" end="10475" title="Michael the Brave" label="Michael the Brave"/>
<link wikidata="Q203607" start="10511" end="10518" title="Guilder" label="florins"/>
<link wikidata="Q220782" start="10727" end="10740" title="Giorgio Basta" label="Giorgio Basta"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="10756" end="10764" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Imperial"/>
<link wikidata="Q313494" start="10925" end="10940" title="Gabriel Bethlen" label="Gabriel Bethlen"/>
<link wikidata="Q35565" start="10958" end="10964" title="Tatars" label="Tatars"/>
<link wikidata="Q127885" start="10988" end="10993" title="Serbs" label="Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q52090" start="11208" end="11216" title="Bourgeoisie" label="burghers"/>
<link wikidata="Q168247" start="11304" end="11310" title="famine" label="famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853058" start="11324" end="11335" title="Human cannibalism" label="cannibalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q708458" start="11423" end="11434" title="John Kemény (Prince)" label="John Kemény"/>
<link wikidata="Q732376" start="11459" end="11464" title="Sebeș" label="Sebeș"/>
<link wikidata="Q550811" start="11514" end="11529" title="Michael I Apafi" label="Michael I Apafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q614304" start="11549" end="11557" title="pharmacy" label="pharmacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="11732" end="11737" title="Romani people" label="Gypsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="11744" end="11749" title="Greeks" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q217519" start="11759" end="11765" title="Bubonic plague" label="plague"/>
<link wikidata="Q41967" start="11945" end="11958" title="Upper Austria" label="Upper Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q694246" start="12053" end="12109" title="Revolt of Horea, Cloșca and Crișan" label="The peasants&amp;#x27; rebellion of Horea, Cloșca and Crișan"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="12137" end="12145" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q690959" start="12281" end="12294" title="The Revolutions of 1848 in the Habsburg areas" label="Revolutionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q266339" start="12316" end="12325" title="Józef Bem" label="Józef Bem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333484" start="12668" end="12684" title="Eastern Orthodox" label="Eastern Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q49376" start="12693" end="12714" title="Eastern Rite Catholic" label="Eastern Rite Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="12762" end="12772" title="Reformed churches" label="Calvinists"/>
<link wikidata="Q106687" start="12953" end="12962" title="Unitarianism" label="Unitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q683724" start="12969" end="12977" title="Armenian Apostolic Church" label="Armenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q171336" start="13199" end="13206" title="Slovaks" label="Slovaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q503958" start="13461" end="13476" title="street lighting" label="street lighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q12181933" start="13635" end="13646" title="2011 Romanian census" label="2011 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q106566382" start="13753" end="13764" title="2021 Romanian census" label="2021 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021460" start="13844" end="13860" title="List of fortified churches in Transylvania" label="fortified church"/>
<link wikidata="Q12735474" start="14259" end="14270" title="Mihai Iacob" label="Mihai Iacob"/>
<link wikidata="Q5395231" start="14317" end="14326" title="Ernő Koch" label="Ernő Koch"/>
<link wikidata="Q57515793" start="14357" end="14381" title="Elizabeth Roboz Einstein" label="Elizabeth Roboz Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="14445" end="14460" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q18544358" start="14463" end="14481" title="Nicolae Szoboszlay" label="Nicolae Szoboszlay"/>
<link wikidata="Q729327" start="14565" end="14607" title="Dacian Fortresses of the Orăștie Mountains" label="Dacian Fortresses of the Orăștie Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q7105421" start="14610" end="14623" title="Orăștie River" label="Orăștie River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5014179" start="14626" end="14643" title="CSM Dacia Orăștie" label="CSM Dacia Orăștie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7596383" start="14646" end="14671" title="Stadionul Dacia (Orăștie)" label="Stadionul Dacia (Orăștie)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="444313" wikidata="Q748921" url="?curid=444313" title="Spotted owl">
<text>The spotted owl (Strix occidentalis) is a species of true owl. It is a resident species of old-growth forests in western North America, where it nests in tree hollows, old bird of prey nests, or rock crevices. Nests can be between high and usually contain two eggs (though some contain as many as four). It is a nocturnal owl which feeds on small mammals and birds. Three subspecies are recognized, ranging in distribution from British Columbia to Mexico. The spotted owl is under pressure from habitat destruction throughout its range, and is currently classified as a near-threatened species.

==Description==
The spotted owl has an average length of , wingspan of , and weight of . Its eggs are a little over long, and are white and smooth with a slightly grainy texture. The spotted owl is similar in appearance to the barred owl, but has cross-shaped markings on the underparts, whereas the barred owl is alternately barred on the breast and streaked on the belly. Barred owls are larger and grayer than spotted owls. In recent years, the California and northern subspecies of spotted owl have been displaced by barred owls (&quot;S. varia&quot;), which are more aggressive, have a broader diet, and occur in more varied habitats. Though the two species are genetically quite distinct, they may hybridize in areas where displacement is occurring, resulting in an interspecific hybrid owl referred to as a &quot;sparred owl&quot;.

==Subspecies==
*&quot;S. o. caurina&quot; – Northern spotted owl
*&quot;S. o. lucida&quot; – Mexican spotted owl
*&quot;S. o. occidentalis&quot; – California spotted owl

The Gila Wilderness is home to the largest population of the Mexican subspecies.

==Distribution==
The northern spotted owl has a nearly contiguous range from southwestern British Columbia south through western Washington and Oregon to Marin County, California. The California spotted owl&#x27;s range overlaps this range in the southern Cascade Range, and extends south through the western Sierra Nevada to Tulare County, with discrete populations in mountainous areas of coastal and southern California from Monterey County to northern Baja California. The Mexican spotted owl occurs in disjunct populations in mountain ranges and canyons of the Southwestern US (including Utah, Colorado, Arizona, New Mexico, and extreme western Texas), as well as in western Mexico (Sonora, Chihuahua, Nuevo León, and eastern Coahuila) through the Sierra Madre Occidental and the Sierra Madre Oriental.

==Habitat==
Spotted owls occur in a variety of hardwood and coniferous forest habitats, although the species prefers closed-canopy, uneven-aged, late-successional, and old-growth forests. The Mexican subspecies may also make use of chaparral and pinyon woodlands, including areas in deep, steep-walled canyons with little canopy cover. The California subspecies uses unlogged, complex early seral forests created by wildfire for foraging, and more high-severity fire in a territory increases reproduction.

Large trees seem to constitute preferred nesting and roosting habitat for all three subspecies, and canopy cover greater than 40% (often greater than 70%) is generally sought out. Substantial tall shrub cover is a common characteristic of spotted owl habitat. Spotted owls can be found at elevations of for the northern subspecies, at for the California subspecies, and rather higher () for the Mexican spotted owl. All subspecies appear to value the proximity of water sources.

==Ecology==

===Home range and density===
Spotted owl home ranges are generally large but of variable size, with extents of , depending on subspecies, habitat, and prey availability. Home ranges are smaller in the breeding season than in the nonbreeding season, and females have larger home ranges than males.

Density of spotted owl pairs within suitable habitat also depends on specific habitat quality and location, varying between 0.022 owls/km2 in pinyon-juniper woodlands of the Sacramento Mountains and 1.049 owls/km2.

===Nesting===
Spotted owls do not build their own nests, instead making use of cavities found in trees, deadwood, and snags, as well as the sites of abandoned raptor or squirrel nests. Some nest sites are used repeatedly. High-quality (consistently occupied and reproductive) breeding sites remain occupied after wildfire and post-fire salvage logging, while lower quality sites that are inconsistently occupied and reproductive are more likely to be abandoned after fire and salvage logging. Spotted owls most often choose the same type of cover selected for nesting sites for daytime roosting.

===Breeding===
The spotted owl&#x27;s breeding season occurs from early spring to late summer or fall, with prelaying behaviors such as preening and roosting together starting in February or March.
Spotted owl pairs are monogamous and rarely re-nest after failed breeding attempts. The species does not normally breed every year, with average breeding probability being 62%. Young owls may start breeding at an the of one year but two years or older is more common. Normal clutch size is two eggs but may reach four on rare occasions. The female sits on the eggs and cares for the young, while the male provides food for them. Egg incubation times of about a month have been reported from western Oregon; time from fledging to independence of chicks is between three and four months. Once independent, juveniles disperse in late summer to fall, in the northern range often settling into a wintering range before seeking out breeding territories in the spring. Dispersal range is often less than .

===Lifespan and mortality===
Spotted owls are long-lived and maximum ages of 16 or 17 years have been documented in the northern subspecies. The average annual survival rate is usually in excess of 80% for adults, although it is considerably lower for juveniles, which have an average annual survival rate of 21–29%. In New Mexico, the survival rate for fledgling Mexican spotted owls can be as low as 11%. The most common causes of mortality are predation, starvation, and possibly disease.

Various birds and mammals such as the fisher (&quot;Pekania pennanti&quot;) are among the predators of eggs and young spotted owls, American goshawks (&quot;Accipiter atricapillus&quot;), crows may prey on juvenile spotted owls, while great horned owls (&quot;Bubo virginianus&quot;), red-tailed hawks (&quot;Buteo jamaicensis&quot;), and golden eagles (&quot;Aquila chrysaetos&quot;) are likely predators of both juveniles and adults. Great horned and barred owls compete with spotted owls for food and space in some areas. Barred owls have a negative effect on northern spotted owl survival and fecundity.There are also negative effects when Barred owls live in the same area as Spotted Owls.

Spotted owls are nocturnal, sit-and-wait predators. They often hunt from a perch and swoop or pounce on prey, or may take arboreal prey from tree boles and limbs. They do occasionally hunt during the day. Although diet varies with location, the majority consists of a few mammalian species. Species taken most often are northern flying squirrels (which may comprise more than 30% of total prey) and woodrats (the most common prey overall), including dusky-footed (&quot;Neotoma fuscipes&quot;), bushy-tailed, (&quot;N. cinerea&quot;), and Mexican woodrats (&quot;N. mexicana&quot;). In some portions of its range, much of the spotted owl&#x27;s diet is composed of several other mammals such as deer mice (&quot;Peromyscus maniculatus&quot;), pocket gophers (&quot;Thomomys&quot; spp.), voles (&quot;Microtus&quot;, &quot;Clethrionomys&quot;, and &quot;Phenocomys&quot; spp.), snowshoe hares (&quot;Lepus americanus&quot;), rabbits, and several species of squirrels. Bats and non-mammalian prey species are taken to a lesser extent, including birds (smaller owls, jays, woodpeckers, and passerines, including various songbirds), amphibians, reptiles, and insects.

==Conservation==
The IUCN Red List status for the spotted owl is near threatened with a decreasing population trend. NatureServe considers the species &quot;Vulnerable&quot;. All studies assessing the species&#x27; population trend have found populations to be in decline. Habitat loss due to timber harvesting is generally recognized as the main threat. One study reported that competition with the barred owl is also a major contributor to the decline of the spotted owl. Forest and spotted owl management documents often state that severe wildfire is a cause of recent declines in populations of spotted owls, and that mixed-severity fires (5–70% of burned area in high-severity patches, with &gt;75% mortality of dominant vegetation) pose a primary threat to spotted owl population viability, but a systematic review and meta-analysis found fires created more benefits than costs for spotted owls.

The northern spotted owl and Mexican spotted owl subspecies are listed as threatened in the United States under the Endangered Species Act (ESA). On February 23, 2023, The California spotted owl was proposed for listing under the Endangered Species Act by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) after 20 years of attempts by environmental groups to get it listed. The Coastal-Southern California distinct population segment (DPS) is proposed for endangered status, while the Sierra Nevada DPS is proposed for threatened status with a 4D rule exception. The northern spotted owl was one of a few cases where the &quot;God committee&quot;, a provision of the Endangered Species Act, has been invoked to decide whether or not to open up more federal forest for commercial logging. In a battle between two federal agencies, the Bureau of Land Management, and the Fish and Wildlife Service, the committee ruled for the exemption of 1,700 acres from the ESA. The legal battle went on at different levels, creating a complex case study in environmental law.

Each subspecies of the spotted owl is a frequent subject of disagreement between conservationists and loggers, cattle grazers, developers, and other organizations whose activities can affect forest conservation. In February 2008, a federal judge reinforced a USFWS decision to designate in Arizona, Utah, Colorado, and New Mexico as critical habitat for the Mexican spotted owl. The decision was challenged by the Arizona Cattle Growers&#x27; Association, but the decision was upheld on appeal.

By 2006, the northern spotted owl was reported to be in rapid decline in the northernmost part of its range, with a 7.2% annual decline across northern Washington and southwestern British Columbia. Fewer than 30 breeding pairs were thought to exist in Canada in 2006, and some experts have predicted the imminent extirpation of the species from Canada.

An experiment sanctioned by the USFWS investigated the suitability of protecting the spotted owl by controlling its competitor, the barred owl. Work began in 2009 by removing populations of barred owls in designated areas. The studies found that in the absence of barred owls, the population of spotted owls did not decline, and were able to bounce back.

==References==

==External links==

*Read Congressional Research Service (CRS) Reports regarding the spotted owl
*CBS News: Blasting Some Owls To Save Others? Government Proposes Selectively Killing Cousins Of Threatened Spotted Owls To Protect The Species
*B.C.&#x27;s spotted owl near extinction: Science advisory team recommends capturing and breeding remaining owls in British Columbia
*Spotted Owl videos on the Internet Bird Collection
*Spotted Owl photo gallery on VIREO
* Spotted owl Species Account – Cornell Lab of Ornithology</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q748921" start="4" end="15" title="Spotted owl" label="spotted owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q26012" start="53" end="61" title="true owl" label="true owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q208478" start="91" end="109" title="old-growth forests" label="old-growth forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="121" end="134" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2392414" start="154" end="165" title="tree hollow" label="tree hollow"/>
<link wikidata="Q48428" start="172" end="184" title="bird of prey" label="bird of prey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137226" start="210" end="215" title="Bird nest" label="Nests"/>
<link wikidata="Q25222" start="322" end="325" title="owl" label="owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="428" end="444" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="448" end="454" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q552431" start="495" end="514" title="habitat destruction" label="habitat destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q719675" start="570" end="593" title="near-threatened species" label="near-threatened species"/>
<link wikidata="Q630457" start="823" end="833" title="barred owl" label="barred owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q42621" start="1300" end="1309" title="Hybrid (biology)" label="hybridize"/>
<link wikidata="Q42621" start="1368" end="1388" title="interspecific hybrid" label="interspecific hybrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058979" start="1480" end="1500" title="Northern spotted owl" label="Northern spotted owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q5560677" start="1611" end="1626" title="Gila Wilderness" label="Gila Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q4257161" start="1744" end="1760" title="Species distribution" label="contiguous range"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="1779" end="1795" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="1818" end="1828" title="Washington (state)" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q824" start="1833" end="1839" title="Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q108117" start="1843" end="1867" title="Marin County, California" label="Marin County, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q4558" start="1945" end="1958" title="Cascade Range" label="Cascade Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q26777" start="1998" end="2011" title="Sierra Nevada (U.S.)" label="Sierra Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q109686" start="2015" end="2028" title="Tulare County" label="Tulare County"/>
<link wikidata="Q108072" start="2117" end="2132" title="Monterey County" label="Monterey County"/>
<link wikidata="Q58731" start="2145" end="2160" title="Baja California" label="Baja California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228546" start="2196" end="2216" title="Disjunct distribution" label="disjunct populations"/>
<link wikidata="Q858847" start="2255" end="2270" title="Southwestern United States" label="Southwestern US"/>
<link wikidata="Q829" start="2282" end="2286" title="Utah" label="Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="2288" end="2296" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="2298" end="2305" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="2307" end="2317" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358102" start="2331" end="2344" title="West Texas" label="western Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q46422" start="2377" end="2383" title="Sonora" label="Sonora"/>
<link wikidata="Q655" start="2385" end="2394" title="Chihuahua (state)" label="Chihuahua"/>
<link wikidata="Q15282" start="2396" end="2406" title="Nuevo León" label="Nuevo León"/>
<link wikidata="Q53079" start="2420" end="2428" title="Coahuila" label="Coahuila"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124584" start="2442" end="2465" title="Sierra Madre Occidental" label="Sierra Madre Occidental"/>
<link wikidata="Q144040" start="2474" end="2495" title="Sierra Madre Oriental" label="Sierra Madre Oriental"/>
<link wikidata="Q842123" start="2730" end="2739" title="chaparral" label="chaparral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476258" start="2744" end="2750" title="pinyon pine" label="pinyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q169950" start="2914" end="2922" title="wildfire" label="wildfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6901585" start="4829" end="4839" title="Monogamy in animals" label="monogamous"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914884" start="5324" end="5332" title="fledge" label="fledging"/>
<link wikidata="Q584064" start="6138" end="6144" title="fisher (animal)" label="fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q26787327" start="6232" end="6248" title="American goshawk" label="American goshawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q81515" start="6335" end="6351" title="great horned owl" label="great horned owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q457471" start="6385" end="6400" title="red-tailed hawk" label="red-tailed hawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q41181" start="6439" end="6451" title="golden eagle" label="golden eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587899" start="6697" end="6706" title="fecundity" label="fecundity"/>
<link wikidata="Q309179" start="6813" end="6822" title="nocturnal" label="nocturnal"/>
<link wikidata="Q445478" start="6824" end="6846" title="sit-and-wait predators" label="sit-and-wait predators"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094722" start="7116" end="7140" title="northern flying squirrel" label="northern flying squirrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q468544" start="7195" end="7202" title="woodrat" label="woodrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763729" start="7266" end="7282" title="Neotoma fuscipes" label="Neotoma fuscipes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017409" start="7312" end="7322" title="Neotoma cinerea" label="N. cinerea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764203" start="7335" end="7350" title="Mexican woodrat" label="Mexican woodrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232962" start="7491" end="7500" title="deer mice" label="deer mice"/>
<link wikidata="Q756901" start="7539" end="7552" title="pocket gopher" label="pocket gopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q10952397" start="7583" end="7588" title="voles" label="voles"/>
<link wikidata="Q81063" start="7673" end="7687" title="snowshoe hares" label="snowshoe hares"/>
<link wikidata="Q9394" start="7720" end="7726" title="rabbit" label="rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q32059" start="7982" end="7995" title="IUCN Red List" label="IUCN Red List"/>
<link wikidata="Q719675" start="8026" end="8041" title="near threatened" label="near threatened"/>
<link wikidata="Q3337099" start="8078" end="8089" title="NatureServe" label="NatureServe"/>
<link wikidata="Q630457" start="8361" end="8371" title="barred owl" label="barred owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743374" start="8980" end="9002" title="Endangered Species Act" label="Endangered Species Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q674113" start="9124" end="9154" title="U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service" label="U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282963" start="9264" end="9291" title="distinct population segment" label="distinct population segment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010556" start="9692" end="9717" title="Bureau of Land Management" label="Bureau of Land Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088777" start="10001" end="10017" title="conservationists" label="conservationists"/>
<link wikidata="Q845249" start="10022" end="10029" title="logging" label="loggers"/>
<link wikidata="Q509028" start="10031" end="10045" title="Ranching" label="cattle grazers"/>
<link wikidata="Q695829" start="10047" end="10057" title="real estate development" label="developers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10334" end="10374" title="Arizona Cattle Growers&amp;#x27; Association" label="Arizona Cattle Growers&amp;#x27; Association"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="444314" wikidata="Q1919209" url="?curid=444314" title="Bravo Two Zero">
<text>Bravo Two Zero was the call sign of an eight-man British Army Special Air Service (SAS) patrol, deployed into Iraq during the First Gulf War in January 1991. According to Chris Ryan&#x27;s account, the patrol was given the task of gathering intelligence, finding a good lying-up position (LUP), setting up an observation post (OP), and monitoring enemy movements, especially Scud missile launchers on the Iraqi Main Supply Route (MSR) between Baghdad and northwestern Iraq; however, according to Andy McNab&#x27;s account, the task was to find and destroy Iraqi Scud missile launchers along a 250 km stretch of the MSR.

The patrol has been the subject of several books. Accounts in the first two books, one in 1993 by patrol commander Steven Mitchell (writing under the pseudonym Andy McNab), &quot;Bravo Two Zero&quot;, and the other in 1995 by Colin Armstrong (writing under the pseudonym Chris Ryan), &quot;The One That Got Away&quot;, do not always correspond with one another about the events. Both accounts also conflict with SAS&#x27;s Regimental Sergeant Major (RSM) at the time of the patrol, Peter Ratcliffe, in his 2000 memoir, &quot;Eye of the Storm&quot;. Another book by a member of the patrol, Mike Coburn, titled &quot;Soldier Five&quot;, was published in 2004.

Michael Asher, a former soldier with the SAS, went to Iraq and traced in person the route of the patrol and interviewed local Iraqi witnesses to its actions; afterward, he alleged that much of Mitchell&#x27;s &quot;Bravo Two Zero&quot; and Armstrong&#x27;s &quot;The One That Got Away&quot; were fabrication. His findings were published in a British television documentary filmed by Channel 4 Television, and in a 2002 book entitled &quot;The Real Bravo Two Zero&quot;. Both Armstrong and Mitchell reacted angrily to the documentary and Asher&#x27;s conclusions.

Mitchell was awarded the Distinguished Conduct Medal for his actions during the mission, whilst Armstrong and two other patrol members (Steven Lane and Robert Consiglio), were awarded the Military Medal.

==Patrol members==

;Sergeant Steven Billy Mitchell, DCM, MM, patrol commander: former Royal Green Jackets. Captured by the enemy, later released. Author of &quot;Bravo Two Zero&quot; and referred to as &quot;Andy McNab&quot; in the books.
;Sergeant Vincent David Phillips, patrol 2IC: former Royal Army Ordnance Corps. Died of hypothermia during action, 25 January 1991.
;Corporal Colin Armstrong, MM: former 23(R) SAS. The only member of the patrol to escape capture. Author of &quot;The One That Got Away&quot; and better known under his pseudonym as &quot;Chris Ryan&quot;.
;Lance Corporal Ian Robert &quot;Dinger&quot; Pring MBE VR. :former Parachute Regiment. Captured by the enemy, later released.
;Trooper Robert Gaspare Consiglio, MM (posthumous): former Royal Marine 42 Cdo RM. Killed in action, 27 January 1991.
;Trooper Steven John &quot;Legs&quot; Lane, MM (posthumous): former Lance Corporal of 9 Parachute Squadron, Royal Engineers and former Parachute Regiment. Died of hypothermia during action, 27 January 1991.
;Trooper Malcolm Graham MacGown, BDS (Univ. Syd): former Australian 1st Commando Regiment. Captured by the enemy, later released. Referred to as &quot;Stan&quot; in the books.
;Trooper Mike &quot;Kiwi&quot; Coburn (pseudonym): former New Zealand Special Air Service. Captured by the enemy, later released. Author of &quot;Soldier Five&quot;. Referred to as &quot;Mark the Kiwi&quot; in the books.

==The patrol==

===Background===
In January 1991, during the prelude to the Coalition ground invasion of Iraq, B Squadron 22 SAS were stationed at a forward operating base in Saudi Arabia. The squadron provided a number of long-range, similarly tasked teams deep into Iraq including three eight-man patrols: &quot;Bravo One Zero&quot;, &quot;Bravo Two Zero&quot; and &quot;Bravo Three Zero&quot;. Asher lists one of the three patrols as &quot;Bravo One Niner&quot;, though it is not clear whether this is one of the same three listed by Ryan.

===Insertion===
On the night of 22/23 January, the patrol were transported into Iraqi airspace by a RAF Chinook helicopter, along with Bravo Three Zero and their Land Rover 110 vehicles. Unlike Bravo Three Zero, the patrol had decided not to take vehicles. According to McNab&#x27;s account, the patrol walked during the first night to the proposed location of the observation post. However, both Ryan&#x27;s and Coburn&#x27;s accounts put the distance at . Eyewitness accounts of Bedouin tribesmen and Asher&#x27;s re-creation support the Ryan/Coburn estimate of . Ryan states the patrol was intentionally dropped only from the observation post because of heavy pack weights.

According to both Ryan and McNab, the weight of their equipment required the patrol to &quot;shuttle&quot; the equipment to the observation post. Four members would walk approximately , then drop their bergens and wait. The next four would move up and drop their bergens, then the first four would return for their jerry cans of water and bring them back to the group, followed by the second four doing the same. In this manner, each member of the patrol covered three times the distance from the drop off to the observation post.

Soon after the patrol landed on Iraqi soil, Lane discovered that they had communication problems and could not receive messages on the patrol&#x27;s radio. McNab later claimed that the patrol had been issued incorrect radio frequencies; however, a 2002 BBC report discovered that there was no error with the frequencies because the patrol&#x27;s transmissions had been noted in the SAS daily record log. Ratcliffe lays the blame for the faulty radios on McNab as the patrol commander; it was his job to make sure the patrol&#x27;s equipment was working.

===Compromise===
In late afternoon of 24 January, the patrol was discovered by a herd of sheep and a young shepherd. Believing themselves compromised, the patrol decided to withdraw, leaving behind excess equipment. As they were preparing to leave, they heard what they thought to be a tank approaching their position. The patrol took up defensive positions, prepared their LAW rockets, and waited for it to come into sight. However, the vehicle turned out to be a bulldozer, which reversed rapidly after seeing the patrol. Realising that they had now definitely been compromised, the patrol withdrew from their position. Shortly afterwards, as they were exfiltrating (according to McNab&#x27;s account), a firefight with Iraqi armoured personnel carriers and soldiers began.

In 2001, Asher interviewed the Bedouin family that discovered the patrol. The family stated the patrol had been spotted by the driver of the bulldozer, not the young shepherd. According to the family, they were not sure who the men were and followed them a short distance, eventually firing several warning shots, whereupon the patrol returned fire and moved away. Asher&#x27;s investigation into the events, the terrain, and position of the Iraqi Army did not support McNab&#x27;s version of events, and excludes an attack by Iraqi soldiers and armoured personnel carriers. Coburn&#x27;s version, &quot;Soldier Five&quot;, partially supports McNab&#x27;s version of events (specifically the presence of one armoured personnel carrier) and describes being fired upon by a 12.7 mm DShK heavy machine gun and numerous Iraqi soldiers. In Ryan&#x27;s version, &quot;[MacGown] also saw an armoured car carrying a .50 caliber machine gun pull up. Somehow, I never saw that.&quot; Ryan later estimated that he fired 70 rounds during the incident.

===Emergency pickup===
British standard operating procedure (SOP) states that in the case of an emergency or no radio contact, a patrol should return to their original infiltration point, where a helicopter will land briefly every 24 hours. This plan was complicated by the incorrect location of the initial landing site; the patrol reached the designated emergency pickup point, but the helicopter never appeared. Ratcliffe later revealed that this was due to an illness suffered by the pilot while en route, necessitating his abandoning his mission on this occasion.

Because of a malfunctioning emergency radio that allowed them only to send messages and not receive them, the patrol did not realise that while trying to reach overhead allied jets, they had in fact been heard by a US jet pilot. The jet pilots were aware of the patrol&#x27;s problems but were unable to raise them. Many sorties were flown to the team&#x27;s last known position and their expected exfiltration route in an attempt to locate them and to hinder attempts by Iraqi troops trying to capture them.

===Exfiltration route===
Standard operating procedure mandates that before an infiltration of any team behind enemy lines, an exfiltration route should be planned so that members of the patrol know where to go if they get separated or something goes wrong. The plans of the patrol indicated a southern exfiltration route towards Saudi Arabia. According to the SAS daily record log kept during that time, a TACBE transmission from the patrol was received on 24 January. The log read &quot;Bravo Two Zero made TACBE contact again, it was reasonable to assume that they were moving south&quot;, though in fact the patrol headed north-west towards the Syrian border. Coburn&#x27;s account suggests that during the planning phase of the mission, Syria had been the agreed-upon destination should an escape plan need to be implemented. He also suggests that this was on the advice of the officer commanding B Squadron at that time.

According to Ratcliffe, the change in plan nullified all efforts over the following days by allied forces to locate and rescue the team. McNab has been criticised for refusing advice from superiors to include vehicles in the mission (to be left at an emergency pickup point) which would have facilitated an easier exfiltration. Another SAS team used Land Rovers in this role when they also had to abandon a similar mission. However, it is also suggested that the patrol jointly agreed not to take vehicles because they felt they were too few in number and the vehicles too small (only short-wheelbase Land Rovers were available) to be of use and were ill-suited to a mission that was intended to be conducted from a fixed observation post.

===Separation===
During the night of 24/25 January, while McNab was trying to contact a passing Coalition aircraft using a TACBE communicator, the patrol inadvertently became separated into two groups. Whilst the others waited for a response on the TACBE, Phillips, Ryan and MacGown continued to move through the darkness. Neither of the two resultant groups followed the standard emergency rendezvous (ERV) procedure they had been trained to follow, and had followed the night before. Instead, both groups independently continued north towards the Syrian border.

After the separation, Phillips, Ryan and MacGown had two M16/M203 assault rifles and a Browning Hi-Power pistol among them, as well as at least one TACBE, and the night sight around Ryan&#x27;s neck. McNab, Pring, Lane, Consiglio, and Coburn had their original weapons (three Minimis and two M16/M203s among them), as well as MacGown&#x27;s Minimi (which McNab was carrying, but soon discarded). The larger group carried at least one TACBE, and the Magellan GPS.

According to Ryan, he was also carrying a 66 mm LAW rocket which he had struggled to free from his Bergen during the initial contact. According to McNab, however, the only item removed by Ryan from his Bergen was a silver hipflask, and it was McNab who was the only one carrying a 66 after this contact; he stated he left the 66 in the Bergen and was the only one to do so. Despite conflicting accounts, it is possible that Ryan may have in fact eventually ended up with McNab&#x27;s LAW rocket, an item that Ryan later claimed to have used against an Iraqi &quot;Land-Rover type&quot; vehicle; this event is discounted by Ratcliffe who states that, at the Regimental debrief, &quot;[Ryan] made no mention at all of encountering enemy troops on his trek.&quot;

===Death of Phillips===
On the evening of 25 January, Ryan, MacGown and Phillips left the tank berm they had stayed in during the day and headed north. Phillips was already suffering from hypothermia, and could no longer hold his M16/M203, which was handed to MacGown. As they continued, Phillips&#x27; condition worsened to the point where he mistook his black gloves for the colour of his own hands, and began yelling out loud. Eventually, Phillips lost contact with the other two somewhere around 2000 hrs, and died a short time later. According to Ryan and MacGown, they both searched for Phillips for about twenty minutes before deciding to continue without him, while according to General Sir Peter de la Billière, only Ryan searched while MacGown waited. Ryan also indicated that he didn&#x27;t know Phillips was necessarily dead when he wrote &quot;I hoped to God that [Phillips] was doing the same. That he would find his way down&quot; and later &quot;there were still five to account for&quot;, though MacGown admitted he knew Phillips was dead at the time. According to the SAS regimental roll of honour, it states that Phillips died of exposure while evading capture in Iraq on 22 January 1991 at the age of 36.

===Capture of MacGown===
At about midday on 26 January, Ryan and MacGown were discovered by an &quot;old&quot; (according to MacGown) goat herder tending a flock of goats. After discussing possibly killing the man, MacGown decided to go with him to locate a vehicle, while Ryan decided it was not safe to do so and remained where he was under the agreement that MacGown would return by 1830 hrs. MacGown took with him Phillips&#x27; M16/M203, but left his belt kit, in order to not &quot;cut such an aggressive figure&quot;. MacGown walked with the goat herder for about four hours, before encountering a group of men with a Toyota Landcruiser vehicle. According to Ryan, MacGown shot and killed an unarmed Arab as he ran towards the vehicle, followed by two more armed with AK-47s. Without his belt kit, he had run out of ammunition, and was captured as he attempted to take the vehicle.

According to McNab&#x27;s secondary account of these events, the old goat herder left MacGown with directions to a hut, where he found two vehicles. After killing a uniformed Iraqi soldier attempting to reach one of the vehicles, &quot;six or seven&quot; more came from the hut, three of whom were killed before MacGown&#x27;s M16/M203 jammed, and he was captured as he sat in one of the vehicles. According to an interview given by MacGown in 2002, he came across the first soldier near a vehicle: &quot;I brought up my trump card which was &#x27;mohaba&#x27; and he said nothing, and I carried on talking and he then made a dash for the vehicle. I shot him in the head. A single shot.&quot; As more soldiers came out of the hut, MacGown aimed his rifle and fired but heard a click, indicating he was out of ammunition. It was apparent that Phillips had never reloaded the weapon after the initial contact on 24 January. For reasons unknown to MacGown, the soldiers did not return fire, but instead took him captive.

===Hijack of vehicle by McNab&#x27;s group===
During the evening of 26 January, McNab&#x27;s group of five stole a taxi at gun point by having Consiglio pretend to be wounded in McNab&#x27;s arms whilst lying on the side of a road. When the car approached, Pring, Lane, and Coburn came up from behind cover and surrounded the vehicle. According to McNab&#x27;s account, the group evicted all occupants from the taxi and drove until they reached a checkpoint, where Lane shot and killed one soldier, while the others in the group killed two more. According to Ryan&#x27;s secondhand account, the group were driven to the checkpoint by one of the Iraqi occupants of the taxi. They exited the vehicle with plans to rendezvous on the other side of the checkpoint, but the driver alerted the police, and the group were forced to continue on foot. Asher&#x27;s investigation, based on evidence from the actual driver of the car, supported Ryan&#x27;s version of events with no reported armed contact and no reported Iraqi casualties.

===Capture of McNab&#x27;s group===
On the morning of 27 January, McNab&#x27;s group of five came into contact with local civilians and police. Consiglio was shot and killed by armed civilians at approximately 0200 hrs. Lane died of hypothermia later that same morning after swimming the Euphrates with Pring, who along with McNab and Coburn was subsequently captured. During an exchange of gunfire prior to capture, Coburn was shot in both the arm and ankle.

According to McNab, the four captured patrol members (McNab, Pring, MacGown and the wounded Coburn) were moved numerous times, enduring torture and interrogation at each successive location. According to MacGown, however, &quot;incidents such as teeth extraction and burning with a heated spoon did not happen. It is inconceivable that any such incidents could have occurred without them being discussed or being physically obvious.&quot; At the time of the release on 5 March of MacGown and Pring, they were described as &quot;in good shape&quot; by a Red Cross representative.

They were last held at Abu Ghraib Prison before their release.

===Ryan&#x27;s escape to Syria===
Ryan claimed to have made SAS history with the &quot;longest escape and evasion by an SAS trooper or any other soldier&quot; to make it to Syria, covering .

==Equipment==
Each member of the patrol wore a two-shade desert DPM uniform with a World War II era sand-coloured desert smock. While the other members had regular issue army boots, Ryan (the only member to avoid eventual capture) wore a pair of £100 &quot;brown Raichle Gore-Tex-lined walking boots.&quot;

Each member carried a belt kit, Bergen rucksack, one sandbag of food, one sandbag containing two NBC suits, extra ammunition bandoliers and a jerry can of water. &quot;The belt kit contained ammunition, water, food and trauma-care equipment.&quot; The rucksack contained of sandbags and observation post equipment, seven days worth of rations, spare batteries for the radio, demolition equipment (including PE4 plastic explosive, detonators, and both Claymore and Elsie anti-personnel mines), and intravenous drips and fluids for emergencies.

The patrol also had a PRC 319 HF patrol radio carried by Lane, four TACBE communication devices (carried by McNab, Ryan, and two others) to communicate with allied aircraft, a Magellan GPS carried by Coburn, and a KITE night sight carried by MacGown. The total weight of each member&#x27;s kit was estimated at by McNab and by Ryan.

McNab, Phillips, Ryan, and Lane carried M16/M203 assault rifles, while Pring, Consiglio, MacGown, and Coburn carried FN Minimi light support machine guns. Each member carried a 66 mm LAW rocket on his back. Due to a missing shipment within the squadron, Phillips was the only member who carried a backup weapon, a Browning Hi-Power pistol.

==Literary accounts==
* The first public literary mention of the patrol was in &quot;Storm Command&quot;, the autobiography of Lieutenant-General Peter de la Billière, who served as the commander of the British Forces during the Gulf War, although the patrol is only mentioned in passing. The book was released in 1992.
* Patrol commander Steven Mitchell wrote an account of the patrol in a book titled &quot;Bravo Two Zero&quot; () under the pseudonym Andy McNab. Mitchell used pseudonyms and nicknames for the patrol members who survived, but controversially used the full names of those who died. The book was released in 1993.
* Colin Armstrong wrote &quot;The One That Got Away&quot; () under the pseudonym Chris Ryan. It criticized Mitchell&#x27;s leadership of the patrol and was particularly hostile in tone to the conduct of Phillips. Armstrong used the same pseudonyms as McNab for those who survived, but also referred to Phillips, Lane and Consiglio by their real names. Ratcliffe said of this move that it was &quot;insensitive&quot; for Mitchell and Armstrong &quot;to hide behind pseudonyms when they named their dead colleagues in their books, in deliberate contravention of the Regiment&#x27;s traditions.&quot; The book was released in 1995.
* Peter Ratcliffe (The SAS&#x27;s Regimental Sergeant Major at the time of the patrol) wrote &quot;Eye of the Storm&quot; (), which refers to the controversy surrounding the differing accounts of the patrol in some detail. The book was released in 2000.
* Both Mitchell&#x27;s and Armstrong&#x27;s earlier accounts were critiqued by SAS reserve veteran Michael Asher in &quot;The Real Bravo Two Zero&quot; (). In 2001, Asher followed the original path of the patrol, interviewing local Iraqis who witnessed the events. The book was released in 2002.
* &quot;The Gulf War Chronicles&quot; () by Richard Lowry recounted much of the patrol&#x27;s story, though appeared to borrow heavily from the earlier story published by Mitchell. The book was released in 2003, aiming to &quot;set the story straight&quot;.
* A third member of the patrol wrote &quot;Soldier Five: The Real Truth about the Bravo Two Zero Mission&quot; () under the pseudonym Mike Coburn, which more forcefully contradicted the previous accounts. The account also levelled damning accusations against the army, and the Ministry of Defence went to great lengths to attempt to prevent its publication, which they failed to do, although they were granted all of the book&#x27;s profits. The book was released in 2004.
* Will Fowler writes of the patrol over a number of pages in &quot;SAS Behind Enemy Lines: Covert Operations 1941-2005&quot; (). He named the patrol commander as Sergeant &quot;Mitch&quot; Mitchell, whilst naming the other members as per previous literary accounts.

==Dramatic and documentary accounts==
* ITV produced a one-off dramatic version of Armstrong&#x27;s book, also titled &quot;The One That Got Away&quot;, in 1996. The film starred Paul McGann as Ryan and was directed by Paul Greengrass.
* The BBC produced a two-part adaptation of Mitchell&#x27;s book, also titled &quot;Bravo Two Zero&quot;, in 1998. It starred Sean Bean as McNab and was directed by Tom Clegg. In addition to using all of Mitchell&#x27;s characters&#x27; pseudonyms, the names of the three deceased patrol members, Phillips, Consiglio and Lane were also changed for the film.
* In 2002, Channel 4 aired Asher&#x27;s documentary (which accompanied his book), also titled &quot;The Real Bravo Two Zero&quot;, directed and produced by Gavin Searle.
* Also in 2002, the BBC&#x27;s Panorama series released a documentary titled &quot;A Question of Betrayal&quot; featuring both Coburn and MacGowan, alleging that the patrol&#x27;s distress calls had been received and ignored.
* In 2003, the television series &quot;JAG&quot; ran an episode (&quot;The One That Got Away&quot;, S9, EP04) loosely based on the story of Bravo Two Zero involving US Marines Force Recon in Iraq. The name of the team that was involved was Bravo Two One.
* The video game &quot;I.G.I.-2: Covert Strike&quot; had &quot;Chris Ryan&quot; as a consultant for game development.
* &quot;No Man Left Behind&quot; episode &quot;The One That Got Away&quot; is focused on Bravo Two Zero.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1919209" start="0" end="14" title="Bravo Two Zero" label="Bravo Two Zero"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23" end="32" title="call sign#British Army" label="call sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="49" end="61" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q222883" start="62" end="81" title="Special Air Service" label="Special Air Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="110" end="114" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="126" end="140" title="Gulf War" label="First Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q432087" start="171" end="181" title="Chris Ryan" label="Chris Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q163021" start="309" end="325" title="observation post" label="observation post"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="375" end="379" title="Scud#Gulf War" label="Scud"/>
<link wikidata="Q16875680" start="411" end="428" title="Main Supply Route" label="Main Supply Route"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="443" end="450" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q433597" start="496" end="506" title="Andy McNab" label="Andy McNab"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="562" end="566" title="Scud#Gulf War" label="Scud"/>
<link wikidata="Q433597" start="781" end="791" title="Andy McNab" label="Andy McNab"/>
<link wikidata="Q3897970" start="800" end="814" title="Bravo Two Zero (1993 book)" label="Bravo Two Zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755057" start="911" end="932" title="The One That Got Away (book)" label="The One That Got Away"/>
<link wikidata="Q3479611" start="1044" end="1069" title="Regimental Sergeant Major" label="Regimental Sergeant Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q7176536" start="1103" end="1118" title="Peter Ratcliffe" label="Peter Ratcliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7557302" start="1236" end="1248" title="Soldier Five" label="Soldier Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q6828281" start="1280" end="1293" title="Michael Asher (explorer)" label="Michael Asher"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="1663" end="1683" title="Channel 4 Television" label="Channel 4 Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q339016" start="1869" end="1896" title="Distinguished Conduct Medal" label="Distinguished Conduct Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584344" start="2032" end="2046" title="Military Medal" label="Military Medal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2070" end="2078" title="Sergeant#United Kingdom" label="Sergeant"/>
<link wikidata="Q433597" start="2079" end="2100" title="Andy McNab" label="Steven Billy Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q339016" start="2102" end="2105" title="Distinguished Conduct Medal" label="DCM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584344" start="2107" end="2109" title="Military Medal" label="MM"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445950" start="2136" end="2155" title="Royal Green Jackets" label="Royal Green Jackets"/>
<link wikidata="Q3897970" start="2212" end="2226" title="Bravo Two Zero (1993 book)" label="Bravo Two Zero"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2290" end="2298" title="Sergeant#United Kingdom" label="Sergeant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7442967" start="2330" end="2333" title="Second-in-Command" label="2IC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373697" start="2342" end="2367" title="Royal Army Ordnance Corps" label="Royal Army Ordnance Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036696" start="2377" end="2388" title="hypothermia" label="hypothermia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2422" end="2430" title="Corporal#United Kingdom" label="Corporal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584344" start="2448" end="2450" title="Military Medal" label="MM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755057" start="2535" end="2556" title="The One That Got Away (1995 book)" label="The One That Got Away"/>
<link wikidata="Q432087" start="2609" end="2619" title="Chris Ryan" label="Chris Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2628" end="2642" title="Lance Corporal#United Kingdom" label="Lance Corporal"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="2679" end="2682" title="Order of the British Empire" label="MBE"/>
<link wikidata="Q7941050" start="2683" end="2685" title="Volunteer Reserves Service Medal" label="VR"/>
<link wikidata="Q197217" start="2695" end="2713" title="Parachute Regiment (United Kingdom)" label="Parachute Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3540989" start="2755" end="2762" title="Trooper (rank)" label="Trooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584344" start="2789" end="2791" title="Military Medal" label="MM"/>
<link wikidata="Q85794142" start="2793" end="2803" title="Posthumous recognition" label="posthumous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046947" start="2813" end="2825" title="Royal Marine" label="Royal Marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3540989" start="2873" end="2880" title="Trooper (rank)" label="Trooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584344" start="2916" end="2918" title="Military Medal" label="MM"/>
<link wikidata="Q85794142" start="2920" end="2930" title="Posthumous recognition" label="posthumous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463070" start="2940" end="2954" title="Lance Corporal" label="Lance Corporal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4646421" start="2958" end="2978" title="9 Parachute Squadron RE" label="9 Parachute Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098650" start="2980" end="2995" title="Royal Engineers" label="Royal Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036696" start="3035" end="3046" title="hypothermia" label="hypothermia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3540989" start="3080" end="3087" title="Trooper (rank)" label="Trooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q116880560" start="3112" end="3127" title="Bachelor of Dental Surgery" label="BDS (Univ. Syd)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4596277" start="3136" end="3168" title="1st Commando Regiment" label="Australian 1st Commando Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3540989" start="3256" end="3263" title="Trooper (rank)" label="Trooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q503949" start="3313" end="3344" title="New Zealand Special Air Service" label="New Zealand Special Air Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7557302" start="3401" end="3413" title="Soldier Five" label="Soldier Five"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3553" end="3586" title="Gulf War#Ground campaign" label="Coalition ground invasion of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q222883" start="3588" end="3605" title="Special Air Service" label="B Squadron 22 SAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604714" start="3626" end="3648" title="forward operating base" label="forward operating base"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="3652" end="3664" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q651389" start="4072" end="4078" title="Patrolling" label="patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="4121" end="4124" title="Royal Air Force" label="RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q4937129" start="4125" end="4132" title="Boeing Chinook (UK variants)" label="Chinook"/>
<link wikidata="Q908027" start="4183" end="4197" title="Land Rover 110" label="Land Rover 110"/>
<link wikidata="Q180688" start="4502" end="4519" title="Bedouin" label="Bedouin tribesmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5843" start="4901" end="4907" title="Backpack" label="bergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="5484" end="5487" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7176536" start="5635" end="5644" title="Peter Ratcliffe" label="Ratcliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q177372" start="6160" end="6171" title="M72 LAW" label="LAW rockets"/>
<link wikidata="Q131677" start="6251" end="6260" title="bulldozer" label="bulldozer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4407246" start="6514" end="6541" title="armoured personnel carriers" label="armoured personnel carriers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6828281" start="6572" end="6577" title="Michael Asher (explorer)" label="Asher"/>
<link wikidata="Q180688" start="6594" end="6601" title="Bedouin" label="Bedouin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7557302" start="7167" end="7179" title="Soldier Five" label="Soldier Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q4407246" start="7271" end="7297" title="armoured personnel carrier" label="armoured personnel carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q477863" start="7343" end="7347" title="DShK" label="DShK"/>
<link wikidata="Q38194" start="7471" end="7482" title=".50 caliber" label=".50 caliber"/>
<link wikidata="Q702761" start="7635" end="7663" title="standard operating procedure" label="standard operating procedure"/>
<link wikidata="Q7176536" start="8019" end="8028" title="Peter Ratcliffe" label="Ratcliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q55633520" start="8495" end="8501" title="sortie" label="sortie"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="9013" end="9025" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355426" start="9090" end="9095" title="Tactical beacon" label="TACBE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088782" start="9328" end="9345" title="Iraq–Syria border" label="the Syrian border"/>
<link wikidata="Q35907" start="9961" end="9971" title="Land Rover" label="Land Rover"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115894" start="10448" end="10457" title="Coalition of Gulf War" label="Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355426" start="10475" end="10480" title="Tactical beacon" label="TACBE"/>
<link wikidata="Q170318" start="10974" end="10977" title="M16 rifle" label="M16"/>
<link wikidata="Q907351" start="10978" end="10982" title="M203 grenade launcher" label="M203"/>
<link wikidata="Q248874" start="11004" end="11021" title="Browning Hi-Power" label="Browning Hi-Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q328989" start="11080" end="11091" title="night sight" label="night sight"/>
<link wikidata="Q844707" start="11193" end="11199" title="FN Minimi" label="Minimi"/>
<link wikidata="Q170318" start="11209" end="11212" title="M16 rifle" label="M16"/>
<link wikidata="Q907351" start="11213" end="11217" title="M203 grenade launcher" label="M203"/>
<link wikidata="Q18822" start="11375" end="11378" title="GPS" label="GPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q177372" start="11429" end="11439" title="LAW rocket" label="LAW rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q5843" start="11480" end="11486" title="Backpack" label="Bergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q81957" start="12238" end="12242" title="berm" label="berm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036696" start="12331" end="12342" title="hypothermia" label="hypothermia"/>
<link wikidata="Q170318" start="12373" end="12376" title="M16 rifle" label="M16"/>
<link wikidata="Q907351" start="12377" end="12381" title="M203 grenade launcher" label="M203"/>
<link wikidata="Q968340" start="12842" end="12862" title="Peter de la Billière" label="Peter de la Billière"/>
<link wikidata="Q5575361" start="13503" end="13514" title="goat herder" label="goat herder"/>
<link wikidata="Q170318" start="13802" end="13805" title="M16 rifle" label="M16"/>
<link wikidata="Q907351" start="13806" end="13810" title="M203 grenade launcher" label="M203"/>
<link wikidata="Q914069" start="13994" end="14012" title="Toyota Landcruiser" label="Toyota Landcruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="14076" end="14080" title="Arab" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q37116" start="14144" end="14149" title="AK-47" label="AK-47"/>
<link wikidata="Q170318" start="14586" end="14589" title="M16 rifle" label="M16"/>
<link wikidata="Q907351" start="14590" end="14594" title="M203 grenade launcher" label="M203"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036696" start="16540" end="16551" title="hypothermia" label="hypothermia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34589" start="16595" end="16604" title="Euphrates" label="Euphrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178" start="17321" end="17330" title="Red Cross" label="Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q334740" start="17371" end="17388" title="Abu Ghraib Prison" label="Abu Ghraib Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="17585" end="17590" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17651" end="17671" title="Disruptive Pattern Material#Later developments" label="two-shade desert DPM"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="17687" end="17699" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q495318" start="17867" end="17874" title="Mammut Sports Group" label="Raichle"/>
<link wikidata="Q867068" start="17875" end="17883" title="Gore-Tex" label="Gore-Tex"/>
<link wikidata="Q5476745" start="17934" end="17942" title="personal load carrying equipment" label="belt kit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17944" end="17959" title="Backpack#Terminology" label="Bergen rucksack"/>
<link wikidata="Q16682231" start="18009" end="18017" title="NBC suit" label="NBC suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q91398" start="18186" end="18193" title="sandbag" label="sandbag"/>
<link wikidata="Q163021" start="18199" end="18215" title="observation post" label="observation post"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501106" start="18247" end="18254" title="Field ration" label="rations"/>
<link wikidata="Q220775" start="18319" end="18340" title="PE4" label="PE4 plastic explosive"/>
<link wikidata="Q261152" start="18363" end="18371" title="M18A1 Claymore Antipersonnel Mine" label="Claymore"/>
<link wikidata="Q971444" start="18376" end="18381" title="C3A1 mine" label="Elsie"/>
<link wikidata="Q178795" start="18382" end="18402" title="Land mine" label="anti-personnel mines"/>
<link wikidata="Q640448" start="18409" end="18426" title="Intravenous therapy" label="intravenous drips"/>
<link wikidata="Q5125823" start="18478" end="18485" title="Clansman (military radio)" label="PRC 319"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355426" start="18524" end="18550" title="Tactical beacon" label="TACBE communication device"/>
<link wikidata="Q18822" start="18641" end="18644" title="GPS" label="GPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q328989" start="18675" end="18686" title="night sight" label="night sight"/>
<link wikidata="Q170318" start="18830" end="18833" title="M16 rifle" label="M16"/>
<link wikidata="Q907351" start="18834" end="18838" title="M203 grenade launcher" label="M203"/>
<link wikidata="Q844707" start="18907" end="18916" title="FN Minimi" label="FN Minimi"/>
<link wikidata="Q177372" start="18973" end="18983" title="LAW rocket" label="LAW rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q248874" start="19104" end="19121" title="Browning Hi-Power" label="Browning Hi-Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544390" start="19258" end="19276" title="Lieutenant-general (United Kingdom)" label="Lieutenant-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q968340" start="19277" end="19297" title="Peter de la Billière" label="Peter de la Billière"/>
<link wikidata="Q3897970" start="19540" end="19554" title="Bravo Two Zero (1993 book)" label="Bravo Two Zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q433597" start="19584" end="19594" title="Andy McNab" label="Andy McNab"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755057" start="19792" end="19813" title="The One That Got Away (1995 book)" label="The One That Got Away"/>
<link wikidata="Q432087" start="19843" end="19853" title="Chris Ryan" label="Chris Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7176536" start="20393" end="20408" title="Peter Ratcliffe" label="Peter Ratcliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3479611" start="20425" end="20450" title="Regimental Sergeant Major" label="Regimental Sergeant Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q6828281" start="20744" end="20757" title="Michael Asher (explorer)" label="Michael Asher"/>
<link wikidata="Q7557302" start="21242" end="21303" title="Soldier Five" label="Soldier Five: The Real Truth about the Bravo Two Zero Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143261" start="21476" end="21495" title="Ministry of Defence (United Kingdom)" label="Ministry of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="21979" end="21982" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755051" start="22063" end="22084" title="The One That Got Away (1996 film)" label="The One That Got Away"/>
<link wikidata="Q335863" start="22118" end="22129" title="Paul McGann" label="Paul McGann"/>
<link wikidata="Q356275" start="22158" end="22173" title="Paul Greengrass" label="Paul Greengrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="22181" end="22184" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q902821" start="22259" end="22273" title="Bravo Two Zero (film)" label="Bravo Two Zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q191104" start="22301" end="22310" title="Sean Bean" label="Sean Bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q5609809" start="22340" end="22349" title="Tom Clegg (director)" label="Tom Clegg"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="22544" end="22553" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q6828281" start="22560" end="22565" title="Michael Asher (explorer)" label="Asher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247810" start="22734" end="22742" title="Panorama (British TV programme)" label="Panorama"/>
<link wikidata="Q754197" start="22968" end="22971" title="JAG (TV series)" label="JAG"/>
<link wikidata="" start="23207" end="23230" title="I.G.I.-2: Covert Strike" label="I.G.I.-2: Covert Strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q105038782" start="23310" end="23328" title="No Man Left Behind" label="No Man Left Behind"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="444322" wikidata="Q954234" url="?curid=444322" title="Goodness Gracious Me (TV series)">
<text>Goodness Gracious Me is a BBC sketch comedy show originally aired on BBC Radio 4 from 1996 to 1998 and later on BBC Two from 1998 to 2001. The ensemble cast were four British Indian actors, Sanjeev Bhaskar, Kulvinder Ghir, Meera Syal and Nina Wadia. The show explored British Asian culture, and the conflict and integration between traditional Indian culture and modern British life. Some sketches reversed the roles to view the British from an Indian perspective, and others poked fun at Indian and Asian stereotypes. In the television series, most of the white characters were played by Dave Lamb and Fiona Allen; in the radio series those parts were played by the cast themselves. Some of the white characters were also played by Amanda Holden and Emma Kennedy.

The show&#x27;s title and theme tune is a bhangra rearrangement of the comedy song of the same name, originally performed by Peter Sellers (portraying an Indian doctor, Ahmed el Kabir) and Sophia Loren, reprising their characters from the 1960 film, &quot;The Millionairess&quot;. Sellers sang the 1960s song in a stereotypical &quot;cod-Indian&quot; accent. (In her 1996 novel &quot;Anita and Me&quot;, Syal had referred to British parodies of south Asian speech as &quot;a goodness-gracious-me accent&quot;.)

The cast casually drop Punjabi and Hindi slang phrases into their speech, in the manner of many British Asians living in the UK.

The Radio Show won Gold at the Sony Radio Academy Awards in 1997. The TV show won Best Entertainment at the Broadcasting Press Guild Award and the Team Award from the Royal Television Society, UK in 1999.

In March 2014, the BBC announced that the show would return with a special episode as part of celebrations of fifty years of BBC Two. An India special was broadcast on BBC Two on 25 August 2015.

== Parodies and references in the show ==
* &quot;The Six Million Rupee Man&quot; – parodies &quot;The Six Million Dollar Man&quot;.
* &quot;I Know Him Too Well&quot; – parodies the song &quot;I Know Him So Well&quot;.
* &quot;Skipinder: The Punjabi Kangaroo&quot; – parodies &quot;Skippy the Bush Kangaroo&quot;.
* &quot;I&#x27;m a Punjabi Girl...&quot; – parodies Aqua&#x27;s &quot;Barbie Girl&quot; song.
* &quot;Hindi People&quot; – parodies Pulp&#x27;s &quot;Common People&quot;.
* &quot;Club Nirvana&quot; – parodies Wham!&#x27;s &quot;Club Tropicana&quot;.
* &quot;The Marriage Emporium&quot; – pays homage to Monty Python&#x27;s Cheese Shop sketch and &quot;Dead Parrot sketch&quot;.
* &quot;Fawlty Turrets&quot; – pays homage to &quot;Fawlty Towers&quot;.
* &quot;The Delhi Tubbies&quot; – fictional Asian equivalent of &quot;Teletubbies&quot;.
* &quot;They Were The Blacked-Up Men&quot; – parodies &quot;Men in Black&quot;.
* &quot;The Bhandari Bunch&quot; – parodies &quot;The Brady Bunch&quot; opening sequence.
* &quot;Channa&#x27;s Angels&quot; – parodies &quot;Charlie&#x27;s Angels&quot;
* &quot;Arranged Shag&quot; – parodies the arranged marriage
* &quot;Not Saving Private Narayan&quot; – parodies &quot;Saving Private Ryan&quot;
Other parodies are based on shows such as &quot;Animal Hospital&quot; (where members of lower castes take the place of the pets) and &quot;Rough Guides&quot; (where tourists from India visit and make unpleasant remarks about the United Kingdom).

===Going for an English===
One of the best known sketches featured the cast &quot;going out for an English&quot; after a few lassis. They continually mispronounce the waiter&#x27;s name, order the blandest thing on the menu (apart from one of them, who opts for the stronger option of a steak and kidney pie) and ask for 24 plates of chips. The sketch parodies British people &quot;going out for an Indian&quot; after drinking heavily, being rude to the waiter, demanding the spiciest thing available on the menu for show and ordering far too many papadums. This sketch was voted the 6th Greatest Comedy Sketch on a Channel 4 list show.

== Recurring characters ==

* Cheque, Please – A man who, on serial dinner dates, always says something so tactless or offensive that the woman walks out on him, leaving him asking for the &quot;Cheque, please!&quot;
* The competitive mothers – Two women who constantly argue about the respective accomplishments of their sons, becoming more and more exaggerated as they go along. Their discussions always end with one of them using their catchphrase, &quot;Yes, but how big is his danda?&quot; (slang for penis)
* Mr &quot;Everything Comes From India&quot; – A man who insists that just about everything comes from India or was invented by Indians (often to the chagrin of his more knowledgeable son), including William Shakespeare, Cliff Richard (who, in the character&#x27;s defence, was actually born in India), Leonardo da Vinci, most English words: (veranda, shampoo, conditioner), the British Royal Family (all except Prince Charles, who he claims to be African, because of the size of his ears), Superman (who is apparently Indian as he has two jobs, a bad haircut and, in a reference to Indian railways, can run faster than a train) and the number zero (which is a widely attributed discovery in Indian culture). In one short sketch, he was found in a bookshop, transferring books from the English and Chinese Literature sections to the Indian Literature section. He even claims that Jesus was Indian as he worked for his father, and managed to feed 5,000 people with very small amounts of food. He also claimed that everyone in the Bible was Indian, except God, as he &quot;created the world in six days and rested on the seventh. What kind of Indian doesn&#x27;t work Sundays?&quot;.
* The Coopers (Kapoors) and Robinsons (Rabindranaths) – Two snobbish &quot;nouveau riche&quot; couples who claim to be entirely English with no Indian blood whatsoever, but often give themselves away by using each other&#x27;s real names, mispronouncing words or making silly mistakes such as serving guests some Pimm&#x27;s with sliced courgettes in it. They refuse to acknowledge their real ethnic background under any circumstances, and become very upset whenever anyone refers to them as foreigners.
* Skipinder, The Punjabi Kangaroo – Redubbed footage of the television show about &quot;Skippy the Bush Kangaroo&quot; (1968–70), with the kangaroo being &quot;voiced over&quot; so that he can talk. Skippy, who now calls himself Skipinder, is always drunk, speaks in a Punjabi accent and frequently insults the other characters.
* The Bhangra Muffins – Two Anglo-Asian teenage boys who are always trying to be &quot;cool&quot; and attract girls, referring to them as &quot;ras malai&quot; (Indian sweet) but failing miserably. In their sketches, they seem to be having an intelligent discussion, albeit in their own &quot;street&quot; language, but it is then shown that they are doing something nonsensical or are in the wrong place (for example: in one episode they are waiting in the audience of what they think is a taping of &quot;The Oprah Winfrey Show&quot;, leading to a conversation about the purpose of television and talk shows in society, but then the show starts and they find out they have in fact gone to an opera performance by mistake.) Their catchphrase is &quot;Kiss my chuddies, man!&quot; – &quot;chuddies&quot; being slang for underwear.
* Chunky Lafunga (&quot;lafunga&quot; means &quot;hooligan&quot;) – A Bollywood superstar (probably based on Bollywood actor Chunky Pandey) who is now trying to make his name in Western cinema, but manages to turn every production he appears in, from an adaptation of a Jane Austen novel to an Australian soap opera, into a Bollywood musical.
* Mrs &quot;I can make it at home for nothing!&quot; – A mother who, when out in restaurants with her family, repeatedly decries various things as wasteful, saying &quot;I can make it at home for nothing!&quot; For some reason she always seems to need &quot;a small aubergine&quot; to be able to do so – in one episode she even appears on &quot;Masterchef&quot;, describing a series of complicated dishes she intends to cook, yet has only the ubiquitous aubergine in her ingredients. In later episodes she claims to be able to recreate other, non-food experiences for nothing – even reacting to the news that her husband has a mistress with &quot;mistress I can make at home...&quot; followed by flirtatious behaviour. She was inspired by Nina Wadia&#x27;s mother.
* Meena and Beena, the Minx Twins – Two teenage Anglo-Indian girls who believe themselves to be highly desirable &#x27;Asian babes&#x27; and complain about unwanted male attention and shout out rude comments at the men who walk past them, with the camera then pulling back to reveal why the men are there (e.g. in one sketch the girls are shown to have gone to a gay bar, in another they are standing outside a men&#x27;s public toilet.) During one episode they actually managed to get dates, but insist on leaving because the men fail to offer to buy them a drink. Their catchphrase is: &quot;In your dreams, buddy!&quot; This can be varied, for example, in a Christmas sketch, when acting as Santa&#x27;s assistants, they say to a little boy, &quot;In your dreams, very small buddy!&quot; Nina Wadia said on the BBC documentary &quot;Comedy Connections&quot; that Meera Syal was behind the creation of these characters and they are one of Nina&#x27;s favourites on the series. &quot;West End Girls&quot; by the Pet Shop Boys frequently plays in the background of their scenes.
* Guru Maharishi Yogi (based on Maharishi Mahesh Yogi) – A man who in different sketches is either shown giving completely made up lectures about Hinduism, or going door to door saying silly things to the people who answer. During his symposia, he claims to translate words of wisdom from original Sanskrit, but they are actually random gibberish in English (often containing pop culture references). In one sketch he resorts to handing out flyers for a double-glazing company when a householder does not want to hear him talk about religion. He also has two similarly dubious guru friends, with whom he likes to play board games and football.
* Smita Smitten, Showbiz Kitten (from Series 2, her name becomes &quot;Smeeta Smitten&quot;) – A &quot;showbiz gossip&quot; style TV reporter who claims to be at a big movie premiere or showbiz party, but turns out to be somewhere very ordinary, like queueing outside a video shop or a public bathroom. She is then refused entrance, so to distract the viewers, she finishes by saying &quot;Look, there goes Art Malik!&quot; and running out of the picture. She was once in a chip shop, and Art Malik was there, but she did not recognise him. After making a fool of herself, she tried to get out of the situation by pointing to Art outside the shop, and running after him. Fellow character Chunky Lafunga is the only &quot;celebrity&quot; she has ever managed to interview. In Series 2 she loses her job and resorts to presenting her TV show from different rooms of her mother&#x27;s house, then in Series 3 produces a variety of pilot shows for a possible new TV series, with disastrous results.
* Uncle Fixer – A man who shows up to greet different family members in unexpected places, such as at a funeral or during a kidney transplant operation, and then asks why they didn&#x27;t come to him for help with the arrangements, because &quot;I could have got it for you much cheaper!&quot;. He often says &quot;Don&#x27;t worry&quot; or &quot;Don&#x27;t insult me!&quot; when people decline his help. He usually destroys what was the topic of conversation i.e. cash from a cash machine and a kidney.
* The Sindi Dolls – Two wealthy young women who act like Valley Girl stereotypes, forever showing off about the number of credit cards they have and how much their fathers have spent on them. They are nearly always seen in an expensive clothes shop, which may or may not be Harvey Nichols and are forever berating and physically assaulting the sales assistants who are attending to them. In series three, they have (reluctantly) got themselves jobs as air stewardesses, and reveal to the flight passengers during the emergency procedure instructions that they only took the jobs because of the glamour factor. In one notable sketch they state their opinion that a friend of theirs should make more effort with her appearance, &quot;leprosy or no leprosy&quot;.
* Will I, bollocks! (Ironic Granny) – This sketch follows an old woman who is continually causing trouble for her family, then when she is asked to do something to help with the situation, she replies: &quot;Will I, bollocks!&quot; In the last of her sketches, she collapses at home and her son-in-law, Ravi, offers to perform mouth to mouth resuscitation but when his wife asks him if he will really do it, he says, &quot;Will I, bollocks!&quot;
* The Delhi Students – These sketches are about four Indian young adults who go to England and describe their experiences. They parody the way westerners act when they visit India (in one sketch, they remark on the number of beggars on the streets; they say that you can&#x27;t eat meat off the street, in reference to a McDonald&#x27;s burger; and they say that you must drink water from a bottle, as tap water could be dangerous).
* Bhangraman – A parody of superheroes in general, he always saves the day using his &quot;uncanny bhangra powers&quot;, which usually consist of bhangra dance moves. While he speaks entirely in Punjabi, every other character understands him perfectly. His battle cry is &quot;chaakde phaate&quot;, meaning &quot;raise the floorboards&quot;. His supervillain arch rival is the Morris Dancer.
* The Reporter – A reporter constantly tries to do &quot;exposés&quot; on British Asians. He often runs into Mr Ishaq, a Muslim man whom the reporter interviews. The reporter assumes that Mr Ishaq is &quot;up to something&quot;, ultimately being disappointed when Mr Ishaq reveals that he is doing something extremely ordinary.
* The Buddhist Exterminator – A Buddhist monk who is often hired in jobs that will force him to kill living beings, as a mouse exterminator, a mafia murderer and even as a surgeon (where he discovered how to kill cancer cells), which conflicts with his religion and prevents him from doing his job, being surprised that people would want him to kill. As an exterminator, he was determined to make the mice reflect upon their actions until they reach Nirvana. He has an &quot;exterminator&quot; friend who would make the mice reincarnate as pebbles, &quot;which are much easier to catch, they don&#x27;t run about as much.&quot; His catchline is: &quot;Kill?! No, no, we mustn&#x27;t kill&quot;.

==Series==

===Radio show===
* 5–26 July 1996 (4 episodes)
*11 July – 1 August 1997 (4 episodes)
*21 May – 25 June 1998 (6 episodes)

==Television show==
===Series 1 (1998)===
===Series 2 (1998)===
===Series 3 (2000)===
===Specials===
==Cast and crew==

===Directors and producers===
*Gareth Carrivick (&quot;director&quot;)
*Nick Wood (&quot;director&quot;)
*Christine Gernon (&quot;director&quot;)
*Anil Gupta (&quot;producer&quot;)
*Jon Plowman (&quot;executive producer&quot;)
===Cast===
*Sanjeev Bhaskar
*Meera Syal
*Kulvinder Ghir
*Nina Wadia
*Dave Lamb
*Sharat Sardana
*Amanda Holden (&quot;Series 1&quot;)
*Fiona Allen (&quot;Series 2&quot;)
*Emma Kennedy (&quot;Series 3&quot;)
*Anil Desai 
*Nitin Sawhney
*Parminder Nagra
===Writers===
*Sanjeev Bhaskar
*Anil Gupta
*Sanjeev Kohli
*Richard Pinto
*Sharat Sardana
*Meera Syal
*Nina Wadia
*Kulvinder Ghir
==See also==
* British television programmes with Asian leads
*&quot;The Kumars at No. 42&quot;, another British comedy show about an Indian family
*&quot;The Real McCoy&quot;, a preceding sketch comedy show about Black British life and British Asians, including the creators of &quot;Goodness Gracious Me&quot;
*&quot;Citizen Khan&quot;, sitcom about a British-Pakistani family
*&quot;Brown Nation&quot;, Indian-American comedy show
*&quot;Fresh Off the Boat&quot;, sitcom about a Taiwanese-American family
*&quot;Kim&#x27;s Convenience&quot;, sitcom about a Korean-Canadian family

==References==

==External links==
* Comedy Guide
*
*
*In Conversation with Meera Syal, BAFTA webcast, March 2008</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="26" end="29" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q743934" start="30" end="43" title="sketch comedy" label="sketch comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="69" end="80" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q216108" start="112" end="119" title="BBC Two" label="BBC Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115170" start="167" end="181" title="British Indian" label="British Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3472307" start="190" end="205" title="Sanjeev Bhaskar" label="Sanjeev Bhaskar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6443316" start="207" end="221" title="Kulvinder Ghir" label="Kulvinder Ghir"/>
<link wikidata="Q261981" start="223" end="233" title="Meera Syal" label="Meera Syal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6043141" start="238" end="248" title="Nina Wadia" label="Nina Wadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722871" start="268" end="281" title="British Asian" label="British Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q323466" start="344" end="358" title="Indian culture" label="Indian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q17021893" start="489" end="517" title="South Asian stereotypes" label="Indian and Asian stereotypes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994501" start="557" end="562" title="White British" label="white"/>
<link wikidata="Q5229146" start="589" end="598" title="Dave Lamb" label="Dave Lamb"/>
<link wikidata="Q3745787" start="603" end="614" title="Fiona Allen" label="Fiona Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q237204" start="733" end="746" title="Amanda Holden" label="Amanda Holden"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372872" start="751" end="763" title="Emma Kennedy" label="Emma Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193470" start="792" end="802" title="theme tune" label="theme tune"/>
<link wikidata="Q854844" start="808" end="815" title="Bhangra (music)" label="bhangra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5583491" start="837" end="865" title="Goodness Gracious Me (song)" label="comedy song of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q177984" start="891" end="904" title="Peter Sellers" label="Peter Sellers"/>
<link wikidata="Q862086" start="920" end="926" title="Indian people" label="Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q43252" start="955" end="967" title="Sophia Loren" label="Sophia Loren"/>
<link wikidata="Q138373" start="1022" end="1039" title="The Millionairess" label="The Millionairess"/>
<link wikidata="Q550931" start="1150" end="1162" title="Anita and Me" label="Anita and Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q58635" start="1301" end="1308" title="Punjabi language" label="Punjabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568" start="1313" end="1318" title="Hindi" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925844" start="1516" end="1540" title="Broadcasting Press Guild" label="Broadcasting Press Guild"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446049" start="1575" end="1599" title="Royal Television Society" label="Royal Television Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q216108" start="1739" end="1746" title="BBC Two" label="BBC Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196836" start="1909" end="1935" title="The Six Million Dollar Man" label="The Six Million Dollar Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136344" start="2003" end="2021" title="I Know Him So Well" label="I Know Him So Well"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479213" start="2092" end="2116" title="Skippy the Bush Kangaroo" label="Skippy the Bush Kangaroo"/>
<link wikidata="Q213388" start="2176" end="2180" title="Aqua (band)" label="Aqua"/>
<link wikidata="Q790315" start="2194" end="2205" title="Barbie Girl" label="Barbie Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q504464" start="2256" end="2260" title="Pulp (band)" label="Pulp"/>
<link wikidata="Q11680820" start="2274" end="2287" title="Common People" label="Common People"/>
<link wikidata="Q744087" start="2333" end="2338" title="Wham!" label="Wham!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103155" start="2352" end="2366" title="Club Tropicana" label="Club Tropicana"/>
<link wikidata="Q16402" start="2427" end="2439" title="Monty Python" label="Monty Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362592" start="2447" end="2465" title="Cheese Shop sketch" label="Cheese Shop sketch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196138" start="2476" end="2494" title="Dead Parrot sketch" label="Dead Parrot sketch"/>
<link wikidata="Q212731" start="2554" end="2567" title="Fawlty Towers" label="Fawlty Towers"/>
<link wikidata="Q41403" start="2645" end="2656" title="Teletubbies" label="Teletubbies"/>
<link wikidata="Q51416" start="2724" end="2736" title="Men in Black (1997 film)" label="Men in Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q250767" start="2794" end="2809" title="The Brady Bunch" label="The Brady Bunch"/>
<link wikidata="Q617274" start="2886" end="2907" title="Charlie&amp;#x27;s Angels" label="Charlie&amp;#x27;s Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923231" start="2957" end="2974" title="arranged marriage" label="arranged marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q165817" start="3033" end="3052" title="Saving Private Ryan" label="Saving Private Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4764820" start="3107" end="3122" title="Animal Hospital" label="Animal Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q955545" start="3198" end="3210" title="Rough Guides" label="Rough Guides"/>
<link wikidata="Q827654" start="3431" end="3436" title="lassi" label="lassi"/>
<link wikidata="Q861304" start="3593" end="3613" title="steak and kidney pie" label="steak and kidney pie"/>
<link wikidata="Q170539" start="3658" end="3666" title="parody" label="parodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q918148" start="3854" end="3861" title="papadum" label="papadum"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="3922" end="3931" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="4657" end="4676" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q82238" start="4678" end="4691" title="Cliff Richard" label="Cliff Richard"/>
<link wikidata="Q762" start="4760" end="4777" title="Leonardo da Vinci" label="Leonardo da Vinci"/>
<link wikidata="Q693922" start="4800" end="4807" title="veranda" label="veranda"/>
<link wikidata="Q180204" start="4809" end="4816" title="shampoo" label="shampoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056607" start="4818" end="4829" title="Hair conditioner" label="conditioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q645968" start="4836" end="4856" title="British Royal Family" label="British Royal Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="4869" end="4883" title="Prince Charles" label="Prince Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q185038" start="4925" end="4945" title="African elephant" label="the size of his ears"/>
<link wikidata="Q79015" start="4948" end="4956" title="Superman" label="Superman"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="5337" end="5342" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898394" start="5714" end="5727" title="nouveau riche" label="nouveau riche"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761185" start="5952" end="5963" title="Pimm&amp;#x27;s" label="Pimm&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7533" start="5976" end="5985" title="courgette" label="courgette"/>
<link wikidata="Q5070208" start="6168" end="6176" title="Kangaroo" label="Kangaroo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479213" start="6231" end="6255" title="Skippy the Bush Kangaroo" label="Skippy the Bush Kangaroo"/>
<link wikidata="Q58635" start="6412" end="6419" title="Punjabi language" label="Punjabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5656299" start="6616" end="6625" title="ras malai" label="ras malai"/>
<link wikidata="Q694106" start="6979" end="7001" title="The Oprah Winfrey Show" label="The Oprah Winfrey Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q622812" start="7071" end="7080" title="talk show" label="talk show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344" start="7166" end="7171" title="opera" label="opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q93196" start="7373" end="7382" title="Bollywood" label="Bollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3676086" start="7428" end="7441" title="Chunky Pandey" label="Chunky Pandey"/>
<link wikidata="Q36322" start="7573" end="7584" title="Jane Austen" label="Jane Austen"/>
<link wikidata="Q23739" start="7608" end="7618" title="soap opera" label="soap opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q842256" start="7637" end="7644" title="Musical film" label="musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q7540" start="7912" end="7921" title="eggplant" label="aubergine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5861276" start="7991" end="8001" title="Masterchef" label="Masterchef"/>
<link wikidata="Q6043141" start="8385" end="8395" title="Nina Wadia" label="Nina Wadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043639" start="8774" end="8781" title="gay bar" label="gay bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q813966" start="8833" end="8846" title="public toilet" label="public toilet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6043141" start="9202" end="9212" title="Nina Wadia" label="Nina Wadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q261981" start="9277" end="9287" title="Meera Syal" label="Meera Syal"/>
<link wikidata="Q180418" start="9396" end="9410" title="West End Girls" label="West End Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q485625" start="9424" end="9437" title="Pet Shop Boys" label="Pet Shop Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q244968" start="9522" end="9543" title="Maharishi Mahesh Yogi" label="Maharishi Mahesh Yogi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="9636" end="9644" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="9788" end="9796" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037104" start="9944" end="9958" title="double-glazing" label="double-glazing"/>
<link wikidata="Q131436" start="10108" end="10119" title="board games" label="board games"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="10124" end="10132" title="association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q705644" start="10541" end="10550" title="Art Malik" label="Art Malik"/>
<link wikidata="Q201676" start="11233" end="11240" title="funeral" label="funeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q9377" start="11253" end="11259" title="kidney" label="kidney"/>
<link wikidata="Q105196" start="11260" end="11270" title="Organ transplant" label="transplant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3129796" start="11690" end="11701" title="Valley Girl" label="Valley Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088141" start="11907" end="11921" title="Harvey Nichols" label="Harvey Nichols"/>
<link wikidata="Q101539" start="12085" end="12101" title="Air hostess" label="air stewardesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q36956" start="12365" end="12372" title="leprosy" label="leprosy"/>
<link wikidata="Q38076" start="13162" end="13177" title="McDonald&amp;#x27;s" label="McDonald&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q188784" start="13301" end="13310" title="superhero" label="superhero"/>
<link wikidata="Q58635" start="13469" end="13476" title="Punjabi language" label="Punjabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900271" start="13651" end="13663" title="Morris Dance" label="Morris Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="14000" end="14008" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q18550" start="14137" end="14142" title="mafia" label="mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q774306" start="14166" end="14173" title="surgeon" label="surgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q42927" start="14444" end="14451" title="Nirvana (concept)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4764638" start="15091" end="15101" title="Anil Gupta (writer)" label="Anil Gupta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3472307" start="15183" end="15198" title="Sanjeev Bhaskar" label="Sanjeev Bhaskar"/>
<link wikidata="Q261981" start="15200" end="15210" title="Meera Syal" label="Meera Syal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6443316" start="15212" end="15226" title="Kulvinder Ghir" label="Kulvinder Ghir"/>
<link wikidata="Q6043141" start="15228" end="15238" title="Nina Wadia" label="Nina Wadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5229146" start="15240" end="15249" title="Dave Lamb" label="Dave Lamb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337643" start="15251" end="15265" title="Sharat Sardana" label="Sharat Sardana"/>
<link wikidata="Q237204" start="15267" end="15280" title="Amanda Holden" label="Amanda Holden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3745787" start="15305" end="15316" title="Fiona Allen" label="Fiona Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372872" start="15341" end="15353" title="Emma Kennedy" label="Emma Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18684123" start="15378" end="15388" title="Anil Desai" label="Anil Desai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396434" start="15391" end="15404" title="Nitin Sawhney" label="Nitin Sawhney"/>
<link wikidata="Q236374" start="15406" end="15421" title="Parminder Nagra" label="Parminder Nagra"/>
<link wikidata="Q30693446" start="15566" end="15612" title="British television programmes with Asian leads" label="British television programmes with Asian leads"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521499" start="15620" end="15640" title="The Kumars at No. 42" label="The Kumars at No. 42"/>
<link wikidata="Q7759613" start="15700" end="15726" title="The Real McCoy (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;The Real McCoy&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5122563" start="15870" end="15882" title="Citizen Khan" label="Citizen Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q27890282" start="15937" end="15949" title="Brown Nation" label="Brown Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16919664" start="15992" end="16010" title="Fresh Off the Boat" label="Fresh Off the Boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q27821111" start="16066" end="16088" title="Kim&amp;#x27;s Convenience" label="Kim&amp;#x27;s Convenience"/>
<link wikidata="Q159661" start="16223" end="16228" title="BAFTA" label="BAFTA"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="444337" wikidata="Q227717" url="?curid=444337" title="Blastocyst">
<text>The blastocyst is a structure formed in the early embryonic development of mammals. It possesses an inner cell mass (ICM) also known as the &quot;embryoblast&quot; which subsequently forms the embryo, and an outer layer of trophoblast cells called the trophectoderm. This layer surrounds the inner cell mass and a fluid-filled cavity or lumen known as the blastocoel. In the late blastocyst, the trophectoderm is known as the trophoblast. The trophoblast gives rise to the chorion and amnion, the two fetal membranes that surround the embryo. The placenta derives from the embryonic chorion (the portion of the chorion that develops villi) and the underlying uterine tissue of the mother. The corresponding structure in non-mammalian animals is an undifferentiated ball of cells called the blastula.

In humans, blastocyst formation begins about five days after fertilization when a fluid-filled cavity opens up in the morula, the early embryonic stage of a ball of 16 cells.
The blastocyst has a diameter of about 0.1–0.2 mm and comprises 100-200 cells following 7-8 rounds of cleavage (cell division without cell growth). About seven days after fertilization, the blastocyst undergoes implantation, embedding into the endometrium of the uterine wall where it will undergo further developmental processes, including gastrulation. Embedding of the blastocyst into the endometrium requires that it hatches from the &quot;zona pellucida&quot;, the egg coat that prevents adherence to the fallopian tube as the pre-embryo makes its way to the uterus.

The use of blastocysts in &quot;in vitro&quot; fertilization (IVF) involves culturing a fertilized egg for five days before transferring it into the uterus. It can be a more viable method of fertility treatment than traditional IVF. The inner cell mass of blastocysts is the source of embryonic stem cells, which are broadly applicable in stem cell therapies including cell repair, replacement and regeneration. Assisted zona hatching may also be used in IVF and other fertility treatments.

The name &quot;blastocyst&quot; arises from the Greek &#x27; (&quot;a sprout&quot;) and&#x27; (&quot;bladder, capsule&quot;).

==Development cycle==
The blastocyst stage occurs between 5 and 9 days after conception. During embryonic development, after fertilization (approximately 5–6 days in the human), the cells of the morula begin to undergo cell differentiation, and the morula changes into the blastocyst by pumping fluid to grow a lumen. In the uterus the zona pellucida surrounding the blastocyst breaks down, allowing it to implant into the uterine wall. Implantation marks the end of the germinal stage of embryogenesis, and the beginning of gestation.

===Blastocyst formation===
The zygote undergoes several rounds of mitosis. After the 3rd cleavage division, the embryo begins the process of compaction, which, in human, is only completed when the embryo consists of 8-16 cells, then becoming known as the morula. Compaction results from increased contractility of the actomyosin cortex, which pull cells together into a tighter configuration. Increased contractility during compaction is observed in both mouse and human embryos, but is stronger in humans, which could contribute to its fragmentation. Until this developmental stage, cells (blastomeres) were not specified to any particular cell lineage but, when reaching the 16-cell stage, cells at the surface of the embryo begin to differentiate into trophectoderm while cells with inner position initiate their differentiation into inner cell mass fate. The morula then develops by cavitation to become the blastocyst, or in many other animals the blastula. Cell differentiation then further commits the morula&#x27;s cells into two types: trophectoderm cells that surround the lumen and the inner mass of cells (the embryoblast). The inner cell mass is at the origin of embryonic stem cells. The conceptus is then known as the blastocyst. 

Before cell differentiation takes place there are two transcription factors, Oct-4 and nanog that are uniformly expressed in all cells, but both of these transcription factors are turned off in the trophoblast once it has formed. The outer cells of the trophectoderm pump sodium ions into the blastocyst, which causes water to enter through osmosis. Water accumulation between cell-cell contacts breaks them open via hydraulic fracturing. The fluid then collects into a single lumen in a process akin to Ostwald ripening to form the blastocoel, which determines the first axis of symmetry of the mammalian embryo. The side of the blastocyst where the inner cell mass forms is called the embryonic pole, and the opposite side is the abembryonic pole. The blastocoel, trophectoderm, and inner cell mass are hallmarks of the blastocyst.

===Implantation===

Implantation is critical to the survival and development of the early human embryo. It establishes a connection between the mother and the early embryo which will continue through the remainder of the pregnancy. Implantation is made possible through structural changes in both the blastocyst and endometrial wall. The zona pellucida surrounding the blastocyst breaches, referred to as hatching. This removes the constraint on the physical size of the embryonic mass and exposes the outer cells of the blastocyst to the interior of the uterus. Furthermore, hormonal changes in the mother, specifically a peak in luteinizing hormone (LH), prepare the endometrium to receive and envelop the blastocyst. The immune system is also modulated to allow for the invasion of the foreign embryonic cells. Once bound to the extracellular matrix of the endometrium, trophoblast cells secrete enzymes and other factors to embed the blastocyst into the uterine wall. The enzymes released degrade the endometrial lining, while autocrine growth factors such as human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) and insulin-like growth factor (IGF) allow the blastocyst to further invade the endometrium.

Implantation in the uterine wall allows for the next step in embryogenesis, gastrulation, which includes the formation of the placenta from trophoblastic cells and differentiation of the inner cell mass into the amniotic sac and epiblast.

== Structure ==
There are two types of blastomere cells:
* The inner cell mass, also known as the embryoblast, gives rise to the primitive endoderm and the embryo proper (epiblast).
** The primitive endoderm develops into the amniotic sac which forms the fluid-filled cavity that the embryo resides in during pregnancy.
** The epiblast gives rise to the three germ layers of the developing embryo during gastrulation (endoderm, mesoderm, and ectoderm).
* The trophoblast is a layer of cells forming the outer ring of the blastocyst that combines with the maternal endometrium to form the placenta. Trophoblast cells also secrete factors to make the blastocoel.
** After implantation, cytotrophoblast is the inner layer of the trophoblast, composed of stem cells which give rise to cells comprising the chorionic villi, placenta, and syncytiotrophoblast.
** After implantation, syncytiotrophoblast is the outermost layer of the trophoblast. These cells secrete proteolytic enzymes to break down the endometrial extracellular matrix to allow for implantation of the blastocyst in the uterine wall.

The blastocoel fluid cavity contains amino acids, growth factors, and other molecules necessary for cellular differentiation.

===Cell specification===

Multiple processes control cell lineage specification in the blastocyst to produce the trophoblast, epiblast, and primitive endoderm. These processes include gene expression, cell signaling, cell-cell contact and positional relationships, and epigenetics.

Once the inner cell mass has been established within the blastocyst, it prepares for further specification into the epiblast and primitive endoderm. This process of specification known as cell fate determination is carried out in part by fibroblast growth factor (FGF) signaling which generates a MAP kinase pathway to alter cellular genomes. Further segregation of blastomeres into the trophectoderm and inner cell mass are regulated by the homeodomain protein, Cdx2. This transcription factor represses the expression of Oct4 and Nanog transcription factors in the trophoblast. These genomic alterations allow for the progressive specification of both epiblast and primitive endoderm lineages at the end of the blastocyst phase of development preceding gastrulation. Much of the research conducted on these early embryonic stages is on mouse embryos and specific factors may differ between mammals.

During implantation, the trophoblast gives rise to extraembryonic membranes and cell types that will eventually form most of the fetal placenta, the specialized organ through which the embryo obtains maternal nourishment necessary for subsequent exponential growth. The specification of the trophoblast is controlled by the combination of morphological cues arising from cell polarity with differential activity of signaling pathways such as Hippo and Notch, and the restriction to outer cells of lineage specifiers such as CDX2.

In the mouse, primordial germ cells are specified from epiblast cells, a process that is accompanied by extensive genome-wide epigenetic reprogramming. Reprogramming involves global DNA demethylation and chromatin reorganization resulting in cellular totipotency. The process of genome-wide demethylation involves the DNA base excision repair pathway.

Trophoblasts express integrin on their cell surfaces which allow for adhesion to the extracellular matrix of the uterine wall. This interaction allows for implantation and triggers further specification into the three different cell types, preparing the blastocyst for gastrulation.

==Clinical implications==
===Pregnancy tests===
The level of human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) secreted by the blastocyst during implantation is the factor measured in a pregnancy test. hCG can be measured in both blood and urine to determine whether a woman is pregnant. More hCG is secreted in a multiple pregnancy. Blood tests of hCG can also be used to check for abnormal pregnancies.

===In vitro fertilization===
In vitro fertilization (IVF) is an alternative to traditional &quot;in vivo&quot; fertilization for fertilizing an egg with sperm and implanting that embryo into a female&#x27;s womb. For many years the embryo was inserted into the uterus two to three days after fertilization. However at this stage of development it is very difficult to predict which embryos will develop best, and several embryos were typically implanted. Several implanted embryos increased the likelihood of a developing fetus but also led to the development of multiple fetuses. This was a major problem and drawback for using embryos in IVF.

The use of blastocysts for human IVF has proved successful. A blastocyst is implanted five to six days after the eggs have been fertilized. After five or six days it is much easier to determine which embryos will result in healthy live births. Knowing which embryos will succeed allows just one blastocyst to be implanted, cutting down dramatically on the health risk and expense of multiple births. Now that the nutrient requirements for embryonic and blastocyst development have been determined, it is much easier to give embryos the correct nutrients to sustain them into the blastocyst phase.

Embryo transfer following in vitro fertilization is a procedure in which a catheter is inserted into the vagina, guided through the cervix via ultrasound, and into the uterine cavity where the blastocysts are inserted into the womb.

Blastocysts also offer an advantage because they can be used to genetically test the cells to check for genetic problems. There are enough cells in a blastocyst that a few trophectoderm cells can be removed without disturbing the developing blastocyst. These cells can be tested for chromosome aneuploidy using preimplantation genetic screening (PGS), or specific conditions such as cystic fibrosis, often known as preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD).

===Embryo transfer process ===
In an embryo transfer procedure following an initial ultrasound, a speculum is used to open the walls of the vagina, and using a catheter an embryo is passed through the tube for placement into the womb.

== See also ==

*Developmental biology

== References ==

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q227717" start="4" end="14" title="Blastocyst" label="blastocyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q28962" start="50" end="71" title="embryonic development" label="embryonic development"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="75" end="81" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335221" start="100" end="115" title="inner cell mass" label="inner cell mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q33196" start="193" end="199" title="embryo" label="embryo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889778" start="223" end="234" title="trophoblast" label="trophoblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889778" start="252" end="265" title="trophectoderm" label="trophectoderm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335221" start="292" end="307" title="inner cell mass" label="inner cell mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141325" start="337" end="342" title="lumen (anatomy)" label="lumen"/>
<link wikidata="Q420263" start="356" end="366" title="blastocoel" label="blastocoel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889778" start="426" end="437" title="trophoblast" label="trophoblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q22328086" start="473" end="480" title="chorion" label="chorion"/>
<link wikidata="Q473749" start="485" end="491" title="amnion" label="amnion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445907" start="501" end="515" title="fetal membrane" label="fetal membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212935" start="547" end="555" title="placenta" label="placenta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2272222" start="633" end="638" title="Chorionic villi" label="villi"/>
<link wikidata="Q125116225" start="790" end="798" title="blastula" label="blastula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666904" start="862" end="875" title="human fertilization" label="fertilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q376172" start="919" end="925" title="morula" label="morula"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868" start="969" end="974" title="Cell (biology)" label="cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q174789" start="1023" end="1025" title="millimetre" label="mm"/>
<link wikidata="Q376172" start="1078" end="1086" title="Cleavage (embryo)" label="cleavage"/>
<link wikidata="Q266500" start="1187" end="1199" title="Implantation (embryology)" label="implantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q839508" start="1220" end="1231" title="endometrium" label="endometrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q9612" start="1239" end="1251" title="uterus" label="uterine wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141026" start="1317" end="1329" title="gastrulation" label="gastrulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q266500" start="1397" end="1404" title="Zona hatching" label="hatches"/>
<link wikidata="Q219841" start="1420" end="1434" title="zona pellucida" label="zona pellucida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233836" start="1486" end="1500" title="fallopian tube" label="fallopian tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q11200326" start="1508" end="1518" title="pre-embryo" label="pre-embryo"/>
<link wikidata="Q200117" start="1575" end="1609" title="in vitro fertilization" label="&amp;quot;in vitro&amp;quot; fertilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q237118" start="1673" end="1685" title="Embryo transfer" label="transferring"/>
<link wikidata="Q25862" start="1740" end="1759" title="Assisted reproductive technology" label="fertility treatment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151519" start="1834" end="1853" title="embryonic stem cell" label="embryonic stem cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533033" start="1888" end="1907" title="stem cell therapies" label="stem cell therapies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809083" start="1961" end="1983" title="Assisted zona hatching" label="Assisted zona hatching"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="2089" end="2094" title="Ancient Greek" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q227717" start="2095" end="2128" title="Blastocyst" label="&amp;#x27; (&amp;quot;a sprout&amp;quot;) and"/>
<link wikidata="Q28962" start="2264" end="2285" title="embryonic development" label="embryonic development"/>
<link wikidata="Q14890574" start="2293" end="2306" title="fertilization" label="fertilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q376172" start="2363" end="2369" title="morula" label="morula"/>
<link wikidata="Q210861" start="2387" end="2407" title="cell differentiation" label="cell differentiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141325" start="2479" end="2484" title="lumen (anatomy)" label="lumen"/>
<link wikidata="Q219841" start="2504" end="2518" title="zona pellucida" label="zona pellucida"/>
<link wikidata="Q266500" start="2574" end="2581" title="implantation (embryology)" label="implant"/>
<link wikidata="Q964797" start="2639" end="2653" title="germinal stage" label="germinal stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q28627" start="2693" end="2702" title="gestation" label="gestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q170145" start="2736" end="2742" title="zygote" label="zygote"/>
<link wikidata="Q14763008" start="2771" end="2778" title="mitosis" label="mitosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q376172" start="2794" end="2802" title="Cleavage (embryo)" label="cleavage"/>
<link wikidata="Q376172" start="2960" end="2966" title="morula" label="morula"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058180" start="3034" end="3040" title="cell cortex" label="cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q8565286" start="3242" end="3255" title="Fragmentation (cell biology)" label="fragmentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q882097" start="3296" end="3306" title="blastomere" label="blastomere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889778" start="3460" end="3473" title="trophectoderm" label="trophectoderm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335221" start="3542" end="3557" title="inner cell mass" label="inner cell mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055164" start="3592" end="3602" title="Cavitation (embryology)" label="cavitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889778" start="3750" end="3763" title="trophectoderm" label="trophectoderm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141325" start="3788" end="3793" title="lumen (anatomy)" label="lumen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335221" start="3802" end="3821" title="Inner cell mass" label="inner mass of cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151519" start="3881" end="3900" title="embryonic stem cell" label="embryonic stem cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158447" start="3907" end="3916" title="conceptus" label="conceptus"/>
<link wikidata="Q407384" start="4006" end="4026" title="transcription factor" label="transcription factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q409423" start="4029" end="4034" title="Oct-4" label="Oct-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q420522" start="4039" end="4044" title="Homeobox protein NANOG" label="nanog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889778" start="4205" end="4218" title="trophectoderm" label="trophectoderm"/>
<link wikidata="Q54237" start="4293" end="4300" title="osmosis" label="osmosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q890794" start="4369" end="4389" title="hydraulic fracturing" label="hydraulic fracturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q903984" start="4456" end="4472" title="Ostwald ripening" label="Ostwald ripening"/>
<link wikidata="Q420263" start="4485" end="4495" title="blastocoel" label="blastocoel"/>
<link wikidata="Q420263" start="4706" end="4716" title="blastocoel" label="blastocoel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889778" start="4718" end="4731" title="trophectoderm" label="trophectoderm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335221" start="4737" end="4752" title="inner cell mass" label="inner cell mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q266500" start="4807" end="4819" title="Implantation (embryology)" label="Implantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q219841" start="5125" end="5139" title="zona pellucida" label="zona pellucida"/>
<link wikidata="Q266500" start="5192" end="5200" title="Zona hatching" label="hatching"/>
<link wikidata="Q11364" start="5363" end="5371" title="hormonal" label="hormonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q50265477" start="5418" end="5437" title="luteinizing hormone" label="luteinizing hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059" start="5511" end="5524" title="immune system" label="immune system"/>
<link wikidata="Q21108636" start="5818" end="5827" title="autocrine" label="autocrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q407172" start="5851" end="5879" title="human chorionic gonadotropin" label="human chorionic gonadotropin"/>
<link wikidata="Q24766801" start="5890" end="5916" title="insulin-like growth factor" label="insulin-like growth factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141026" start="6056" end="6068" title="gastrulation" label="gastrulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096614" start="6192" end="6204" title="amniotic sac" label="amniotic sac"/>
<link wikidata="Q519516" start="6209" end="6217" title="epiblast" label="epiblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335221" start="6318" end="6329" title="embryoblast" label="embryoblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q617412" start="6349" end="6367" title="primitive endoderm" label="primitive endoderm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096614" start="6446" end="6458" title="amniotic sac" label="amniotic sac"/>
<link wikidata="Q660498" start="6580" end="6591" title="germ layers" label="germ layers"/>
<link wikidata="Q331858" start="6638" end="6646" title="endoderm" label="endoderm"/>
<link wikidata="Q323438" start="6648" end="6656" title="mesoderm" label="mesoderm"/>
<link wikidata="Q272474" start="6662" end="6670" title="ectoderm" label="ectoderm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3009555" start="6904" end="6919" title="cytotrophoblast" label="cytotrophoblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q48196" start="6971" end="6980" title="stem cell" label="stem cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2272222" start="7022" end="7037" title="chorionic villi" label="chorionic villi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212935" start="7039" end="7047" title="placenta" label="placenta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745412" start="7053" end="7072" title="syncytiotrophoblast" label="syncytiotrophoblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745412" start="7097" end="7116" title="syncytiotrophoblast" label="syncytiotrophoblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q212410" start="7180" end="7199" title="proteolytic enzymes" label="proteolytic enzymes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="7354" end="7365" title="amino acids" label="amino acids"/>
<link wikidata="Q408378" start="7367" end="7381" title="growth factors" label="growth factors"/>
<link wikidata="Q210861" start="7417" end="7441" title="cellular differentiation" label="cellular differentiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q26939" start="7713" end="7724" title="epigenetics" label="epigenetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058196" start="7915" end="7938" title="cell fate determination" label="cell fate determination"/>
<link wikidata="Q24727126" start="7965" end="7989" title="fibroblast growth factor" label="fibroblast growth factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q899651" start="8024" end="8034" title="MAP kinase" label="MAP kinase"/>
<link wikidata="Q898769" start="8169" end="8180" title="homeodomain" label="homeodomain"/>
<link wikidata="Q17860880" start="8190" end="8194" title="Cdx2" label="Cdx2"/>
<link wikidata="Q409423" start="8250" end="8254" title="Oct4" label="Oct4"/>
<link wikidata="Q420522" start="8259" end="8264" title="Homeobox protein NANOG" label="Nanog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889778" start="8294" end="8305" title="trophoblast" label="trophoblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q30674142" start="8680" end="8703" title="extraembryonic membrane" label="extraembryonic membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q189118" start="8709" end="8718" title="cell type" label="cell type"/>
<link wikidata="Q281579" start="9185" end="9194" title="germ cell" label="germ cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q519516" start="9215" end="9223" title="epiblast" label="epiblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020" start="9274" end="9280" title="genome" label="genome"/>
<link wikidata="Q26939" start="9286" end="9296" title="epigenetics" label="epigenetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205753" start="9342" end="9359" title="DNA demethylation" label="DNA demethylation"/>
<link wikidata="Q180951" start="9364" end="9373" title="chromatin" label="chromatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q862600" start="9411" end="9422" title="cell potency" label="totipotency"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020" start="9439" end="9445" title="genome" label="genome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113091" start="9482" end="9502" title="base excision repair" label="base excision repair"/>
<link wikidata="Q409715" start="9534" end="9542" title="integrin" label="integrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q210861" start="9702" end="9715" title="Cellular differentiation" label="specification"/>
<link wikidata="Q407172" start="9858" end="9886" title="human chorionic gonadotropin" label="human chorionic gonadotropin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135142" start="9968" end="9982" title="pregnancy test" label="pregnancy test"/>
<link wikidata="Q200117" start="10217" end="10239" title="In vitro fertilization" label="In vitro fertilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q237118" start="11432" end="11447" title="Embryo transfer" label="Embryo transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q666412" start="11564" end="11570" title="cervix" label="cervix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889778" start="11838" end="11851" title="trophectoderm" label="trophectoderm"/>
<link wikidata="Q37748" start="11949" end="11959" title="chromosome" label="chromosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q529622" start="11960" end="11970" title="aneuploidy" label="aneuploidy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501356" start="11977" end="12010" title="preimplantation genetic screening" label="preimplantation genetic screening"/>
<link wikidata="Q178194" start="12049" end="12064" title="cystic fibrosis" label="cystic fibrosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501356" start="12081" end="12114" title="preimplantation genetic diagnosis" label="preimplantation genetic diagnosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q237118" start="12160" end="12175" title="embryo transfer" label="embryo transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q162564" start="12207" end="12217" title="ultrasound" label="ultrasound"/>
<link wikidata="Q5880" start="12263" end="12269" title="vagina" label="vagina"/>
<link wikidata="Q652297" start="12283" end="12291" title="catheter" label="catheter"/>
<link wikidata="Q9612" start="12352" end="12356" title="womb" label="womb"/>
<link wikidata="Q213713" start="12376" end="12397" title="Developmental biology" label="Developmental biology"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="444338" wikidata="Q9032823" url="?curid=444338" title="Miguel Piñero">
<text>Miguel Piñero (December 19, 1946 – June 16, 1988) was a Puerto Rican born American playwright, actor and co-founder of the Nuyorican Poets Café. He was a leading member of the Nuyorican literary movement.

== Early years ==
Piñero was born on December 19, 1946, in Gurabo, Puerto Rico, to Miguel Angel Gómez Ramos and Adelina Piñero. In 1950, when Miguel was four, he moved with his parents and sister Elizabeth to Loisaida (or Lower East Side) in New York City. His father abandoned the family in 1954 when his mother was pregnant with their fifth child. His mother then moved into a basement and began receiving welfare. He attended four different schools, three public and one parochial. He would steal food for his family to eat. His first of many criminal convictions came at the age of eleven, for theft. He was sent to the Juvenile Detention Center in the Bronx, and to Otisville State Training School for Boys. He joined a street gang called &quot;The Dragons&quot; when he was 13; when he was 14, he was hustling in the streets.

He moved to Brooklyn, where he and three other friends committed robberies (according to Piñero, more than 100), until they were caught at a jewelry store. He was sent to Rikers Island in 1964. After this, he joined the Job Corps, and was sent to Camp Kilmer for training. It turned out the opportunity was, as Piñero put it, &quot;Dope City, Skag Town.&quot; He returned to New York City and became affiliated with the Young Lords, a group similar to the Black Panthers. He was back in Rikers for drug possession not long after, and spent time at Phoenix House. After his second stint at Rikers, his mother sent him to Manhattan State Hospital, where he would receive his high-school equivalency diploma.

== &quot;Short Eyes&quot; ==
In 1972, when Piñero was 25 years old, he was incarcerated in Sing Sing prison for second-degree armed robbery. His first literary work was &quot;Black Woman with a Blonde Wig On&quot;. Marvin Felix Camillo, the director of The Family, an acting troupe made up of ex-cons, submitted the poem to a contest, which it won. The warden of Sing Sing then became concerned that &quot;contraband&quot; was being taken from the prison and nearly put Camillo in jail after seeing an article in the newspaper. While serving time in prison, Piñero wrote the play &quot;Short Eyes&quot; as part of the inmates&#x27; playwriting workshop. Mel Gussow came to see it, and due to his review in &quot;The New York Times&quot;, the director of the Theater at Riverside Church wanted Piñero to present it there.

When Piñero was released from Sing Sing on parole in 1973, he was able to present &quot;Short Eyes&quot; with The Family. The title comes from the prison slang term for child molestation. The play is a drama based on his experiences in prison and portrays how a house of detention populated primarily by Black and Latino inmates is affected by the incarceration there of a white pedophile, considered the lowest form of prison life. In 1974, the play was presented at Riverside Church in Manhattan. Theater impresario Joseph Papp saw the play and was so impressed that he moved the production to Broadway. It went from Riverside Church, then to The Public Theater, eventually to Vivian Beaumont Theater. The play was nominated for six Tony Awards. It won the New York Drama Critics Circle Award and an Obie Award for the &quot;best play of the year&quot;. The play was also a success in Europe. The play catapulted Piñero to literary fame. &quot;Short Eyes&quot; was published in book form by the editorial house Hill &amp; Wang. It became the first play written by a Puerto Rican playwright to be put on Broadway.

== Nuyorican Poets Café ==

In the 1970s, Piñero co-founded the Nuyorican Poets Café with a group of artists including Pedro Pietri and Miguel Algarín, who would become his closest friends. The Café is a place for performance of poetry about the experience of being a Nuyorican or Puerto Rican in New York.

== Television and films ==
In 1977, Piñero&#x27;s play &quot;Short Eyes&quot; was turned into a film directed by Robert M. Young and Piñero played the part of &quot;Go-Go,&quot; a prisoner.

While on set, he and Tito Goya were arrested for armed robbery and were arraigned in the same building where they were filming. The charges were dropped, but some thought Piñero had a &quot;need&quot; to go back to prison. The following year, Piñero was arrested and charged with armed robbery, but those charges were also dropped when state Supreme Court Judge Peter J. McQuillan ruled that the evidence against him and two other men was inadmissible in court, because there was no justifiable cause for the arrest.

In subsequent years, Piñero would land supporting roles in such films as &quot;The Jericho Mile&quot; (1979), &quot;Times Square&quot; (1980), &quot;Fort Apache, The Bronx&quot; (1981), &quot;Breathless&quot; (1983), &quot;Deal of the Century&quot; (1983), and &quot;Alphabet City&quot; (1984). Piñero was considered a talented writer who described the evils of society, even though he continued to be a drug addict. Piñero wrote the &quot;Baretta&quot; TV episode &quot;The Gadjo&quot; in 1978 and acted in the episode &quot;Por Nada&quot; in 1977. He played the part of drug lord Esteban Calderone in two episodes of the TV series &quot;Miami Vice&quot; in 1984 and drug cartel boss Esteban Revilla in another episode in 1985, as well as writing the 1984 episode &quot;Smuggler&#x27;s Blues&quot;. He also wrote the screenplay for the 1977 film &quot;Short Eyes&quot;. In 1985, Pinero returned to Miami Vice, appearing in Season II, as the drug lord Revilla.

== Writing career ==
His next play, &quot;Sideshow&quot; (1974), which would be a shorter version of &quot;Playland Blues&quot; (1980), and follows street kids as they decide to put on their own play about a social worker placing difficult teenagers in various living situations and their attempts to adapt.

He followed that with a one-act play titled &quot;The Guntower&quot;, premiered at the 1976 New York Shakespeare Festival. Instead of following prisoners, like in &quot;Short Eyes&quot;, this one is about two guards in the watchtower. In that same year was &quot;The Sun Always Shines for the Cool&quot; (1976) which follows the lives of players, operators, drug dealers, and thieves as they come together in a bar owned by a man named Justice.

In 1975, he moved to Philadelphia to star in Bruce Jay Friedman&#x27;s &quot;Steambath&quot; as God. &quot;Eulogy for a Small-Time Thief&quot; (1977) was set in his new hometown. It regards a small-time thief who does not really know his place in the world and thinks he can manipulate it to his liking.

He wrote two one-act plays, &quot;Paper Toilet&quot; and &quot;Cold Beer&quot;, around 1979. The former is set in a subway men&#x27;s room and involves a series of events framed by the voice of a man asking for toilet paper from inside a stall. The latter examines the role of the dramatist and writer through an alter-ego protagonist.

== Later years ==
Piñero played an important role in acquainting his writing partner and erstwhile lover, the Chinese-American gay artist Martin Wong, with the Lower East Side, becoming a benefactor at a time when Wong found it difficult to meet his rent. Several of Wong&#x27;s paintings are illustrations of poems given to him by Piñero. &quot;The Annunciation According to Mikey Piñero (Cupcake and Paco)&quot; (1984) pictures a scene from &quot;Short Eyes&quot;.

Miguel Piñero died on June 16, 1988, in New York City from cirrhosis. Piñero&#x27;s ashes were scattered across the Lower East Side of Manhattan, as he asked in his 1985 &quot;Lower East Side Poem&quot;. The homage to his beloved neighborhood concluded:

Leading up to his death, he was working with Papp on a new play to premiere at the New York Shakespeare Festival. &quot;Every Form of Refuge Has Its Price&quot;, his unfinished piece, is set in an intensive care unit. He also had another unfinished play, &quot;The Cinderella Ballroom&quot;.

Typescripts for Piñero&#x27;s &quot;The Guntower&quot; and &quot;All Junkies&quot; are in the Billy Rose Theatre Collection at the New York Public Library for the Performing Arts.

== Legacy ==
The life of Miguel Piñero was portrayed in the 2001 Hollywood production &quot;Piñero&quot;, directed by Leon Ichaso and starring Benjamin Bratt as Piñero. In the film, Piñero&#x27;s love life is displayed, ranging from his interactions with men and women, including his protégé Reinaldo Povod. The relationships are secondary to the life of the writer as an individual, as the movie shows a non-chronological portrayal of Piñero&#x27;s development as both a poet and a person. The movie blends visual and audio segments shot in short, music/slam poetry videos with typical movie narratives to show Piñero&#x27;s poetics in action.

The poems &quot;January In Motion&quot; and &quot;The Bronx 1979&quot; by Neil Raymond Ricco were written for Pińero.

In 2022, Pińero was featured in the book &quot;50 Key Figures in Queer US Theatre&quot;, with a profile written by theatre scholar Karen Jaime.

== Awards and nominations ==
; Awards
* 1974 Drama Desk Award, Outstanding New Playwright
* 1974 New York Drama Critics&#x27; Circle Award, Best American Play
* 1974 Obie Award, Best American Play
* 1982 Guggenheim Fellowship in Drama and Performance Art
; Nominations
* 1975 Tony Award for Best Play

Pinero was inducted into the New York Writers Hall of Fame in 2013.

== Work ==

=== Filmography ===
* &quot;Kojak&quot; (1977, TV Series) – Rudy
* &quot;Looking Up&quot; (1977) – Mugger
* &quot;Short Eyes&quot; (1977) – Go-Go
* &quot;The Jericho Mile&quot; (1979, TV Movie) – Rubio
* &quot;The Streets of L.A.&quot; (1979, TV Movie) – 2nd Duster
* &quot;Times Square&quot; (1980) – Roberto
* &quot;See China and Die&quot; (1981, TV Movie) – Gonzalez
* &quot;Fort Apache, The Bronx&quot; (1981) – Hernando
* &quot;Exposed&quot; (1983) – Man in the Street (New York)
* &quot;Breathless&quot; (1983) – Carlito
* &quot;Deal of the Century&quot; (1983) – Molino
* &quot;Miami Vice&quot; (1984–1985, TV Series) – Esteban Calderone / Esteban Revilla
* &quot;Alphabet City&quot; (1984) – Dealer
* &quot;Almost You&quot; (1985) – Ralph
* &quot;D.C. Cops&quot; (1986, TV Movie) – Pablo

=== Plays ===
* &quot;All Junkies&quot; (1973)
* &quot;Straight from the Ghetto&quot; (1973)
* &quot;Short Eyes&quot; (1974)
* &quot;Sideshow&quot; (1974)
* &quot;The Guntower&quot; (1976)
* &quot;The Sun Always Shines for the Cool&quot; (1976)
* &quot;Eulogy for a Small Time Thief&quot; (1977)
* &quot;Paper Toilet&quot; (1979)
* &quot;Cold Beer&quot; (1979)
* &quot;NuYorican Nights at the Stanton Street Social Club&quot; (1980)
* &quot;Playland Blues&quot; (1980)
* &quot;Midnight Moon at the Greasy Spoon&quot; (1981)
== See also ==

*List of Puerto Ricans
*List of Puerto Rican writers
*Puerto Rican literature
*Pedro Pietri, co-founder of Nuyorican Poetry movement
*Miguel Algarín, co-founder of Nuyorican Poet&#x27;s Cafe
*Latino literature
*Latino theatre in the United States

== References ==
== Bibliography ==
*&quot;Short Eyes&quot;, 1975. New York: Hill and Wang. and (paperback)
*&quot;La Bodega Sold Dreams&quot;, 1985. Houston: Arte Público Press. 
*&quot;The sun always shines for the cool; A midnight moon at the Greasy Spoon; Eulogy for a small time thief&quot;, 1984. Houston : Arte Público Press. 
*&quot;Outrageous: One Act Plays&quot;, 1986. Houston: Arte Público Press. 
*&quot;Nuyorican Poetry: An Anthology of Puerto Rican Words and Feelings&quot;, (co-editor, with Miguel Algarín)
* Roger S. Platizky. &quot;Human Vision in Miguel Piñero&#x27;s Short Eyes.&quot; Americas Review. 19. Spring 1991. pp. 83–91. Ariel Ruiz.

== External links ==
* 
* Audio link
* &quot;Leon Ichaso&quot;, &quot;BOMB&quot;, Lynn Geller, 78/Winter 2002</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9032823" start="0" end="13" title="Miguel Piñero" label="Miguel Piñero"/>
<link wikidata="Q214917" start="83" end="93" title="playwright" label="playwright"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142721" start="123" end="143" title="Nuyorican Poets Café" label="Nuyorican Poets Café"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070689" start="176" end="203" title="Nuyorican Movement" label="Nuyorican literary movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2159630" start="265" end="284" title="Gurabo, Puerto Rico" label="Gurabo, Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156938" start="415" end="423" title="Loisaida" label="Loisaida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511813" start="428" end="443" title="Lower East Side" label="Lower East Side"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="448" end="461" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q234852" start="585" end="593" title="basement" label="basement"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002092" start="614" end="621" title="Welfare (financial aid)" label="welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2727213" start="804" end="809" title="theft" label="theft"/>
<link wikidata="Q18426" start="863" end="868" title="Bronx" label="Bronx"/>
<link wikidata="Q275186" start="931" end="942" title="street gang" label="street gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q120119" start="1210" end="1223" title="Rikers Island" label="Rikers Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206647" start="1259" end="1268" title="Job Corps" label="Job Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027302" start="1286" end="1297" title="Camp Kilmer" label="Camp Kilmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3572855" start="1459" end="1470" title="Young Lords" label="Young Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q189150" start="1495" end="1509" title="Black Panthers" label="Black Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7186903" start="1587" end="1600" title="Phoenix House" label="Phoenix House"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061283" start="1659" end="1683" title="Central Islip Psychiatric Center" label="Manhattan State Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q947286" start="1712" end="1743" title="General Educational Development" label="high-school equivalency diploma"/>
<link wikidata="Q764049" start="1837" end="1846" title="Sing Sing" label="Sing Sing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6778334" start="1961" end="1981" title="Marvin Felix Camillo" label="Marvin Felix Camillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7501778" start="2332" end="2342" title="Short Eyes (play)" label="Short Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4152873" start="2400" end="2410" title="Mel Gussow" label="Mel Gussow"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="2458" end="2476" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2861050" start="2715" end="2727" title="prison slang" label="prison slang"/>
<link wikidata="Q26553" start="2737" end="2754" title="child molestation" label="child molestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q25372" start="2770" end="2775" title="drama" label="drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q8388" start="2947" end="2956" title="pedophile" label="pedophile"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="3056" end="3065" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5480583" start="3086" end="3097" title="Joseph Papp" label="Joseph Papp"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="3164" end="3172" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048768" start="3213" end="3231" title="The Public Theater" label="The Public Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q176205" start="3247" end="3270" title="Vivian Beaumont Theater" label="Vivian Beaumont Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="3303" end="3314" title="Tony Awards" label="Tony Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711507" start="3327" end="3362" title="New York Drama Critics Circle Award" label="New York Drama Critics Circle Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813995" start="3370" end="3380" title="Obie Award" label="Obie Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q8242" start="3493" end="3501" title="literature" label="literary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142721" start="3748" end="3768" title="Nuyorican Poets Café" label="Nuyorican Poets Café"/>
<link wikidata="Q3898706" start="3803" end="3815" title="Pedro Pietri" label="Pedro Pietri"/>
<link wikidata="Q6844403" start="3820" end="3834" title="Miguel Algarín" label="Miguel Algarín"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070687" start="3952" end="3961" title="Nuyorican" label="Nuyorican"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810174" start="4204" end="4213" title="Tito Goya" label="Tito Goya"/>
<link wikidata="Q68817608" start="4545" end="4563" title="Peter J. McQuillan" label="Peter J. McQuillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986068" start="4780" end="4796" title="The Jericho Mile" label="The Jericho Mile"/>
<link wikidata="Q4449895" start="4817" end="4829" title="Times Square (1980 film)" label="Times Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q760926" start="4850" end="4872" title="Fort Apache, The Bronx" label="Fort Apache, The Bronx"/>
<link wikidata="Q754304" start="4893" end="4903" title="Breathless (1983 film)" label="Breathless"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757076" start="4924" end="4943" title="Deal of the Century" label="Deal of the Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q167494" start="5141" end="5148" title="Baretta" label="Baretta"/>
<link wikidata="Q559321" start="5340" end="5350" title="Miami Vice" label="Miami Vice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7501776" start="5554" end="5564" title="Short Eyes (film)" label="Short Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013975" start="6064" end="6093" title="New York Shakespeare Festival" label="New York Shakespeare Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="6439" end="6451" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4977733" start="6463" end="6481" title="Bruce Jay Friedman" label="Bruce Jay Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7605393" start="6495" end="6504" title="Steambath (play)" label="Steambath"/>
<link wikidata="Q592" start="7187" end="7190" title="gay" label="gay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522057" start="7198" end="7209" title="Martin Wong" label="Martin Wong"/>
<link wikidata="Q147778" start="7587" end="7596" title="cirrhosis" label="cirrhosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013975" start="7866" end="7895" title="New York Shakespeare Festival" label="New York Shakespeare Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013890" start="8170" end="8199" title="Billy Rose Theatre Collection" label="Billy Rose Theatre Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q219555" start="8207" end="8230" title="New York Public Library" label="New York Public Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q380675" start="8322" end="8331" title="Cinema of the United States" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q10632500" start="8349" end="8355" title="Piñero" label="Piñero"/>
<link wikidata="Q6524700" start="8375" end="8386" title="Leon Ichaso" label="Leon Ichaso"/>
<link wikidata="Q73362" start="8400" end="8414" title="Benjamin Bratt" label="Benjamin Bratt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310256" start="8549" end="8563" title="Reinaldo Povod" label="Reinaldo Povod"/>
<link wikidata="Q20852" start="8812" end="8823" title="slam poetry" label="slam poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q60840468" start="8977" end="8995" title="Neil Raymond Ricco" label="Neil Raymond Ricco"/>
<link wikidata="Q682154" start="9212" end="9228" title="Drama Desk Award" label="Drama Desk Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711507" start="9264" end="9299" title="New York Drama Critics&amp;#x27; Circle" label="New York Drama Critics&amp;#x27; Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813995" start="9333" end="9343" title="Obie Award" label="Obie Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316544" start="9371" end="9392" title="Guggenheim Fellowship" label="Guggenheim Fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="9443" end="9453" title="Tony Award" label="Tony Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q16203236" start="9498" end="9527" title="New York Writers Hall of Fame" label="New York Writers Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q510554" start="9578" end="9583" title="Kojak" label="Kojak"/>
<link wikidata="Q65062233" start="9623" end="9633" title="Looking Up (film)" label="Looking Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q7501776" start="9664" end="9674" title="Short Eyes (1977 film)" label="Short Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986068" start="9704" end="9720" title="The Jericho Mile" label="The Jericho Mile"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9760" end="9779" title="The Streets of L.A." label="The Streets of L.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q4449895" start="9824" end="9836" title="Times Square (1980 film)" label="Times Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q19363814" start="9868" end="9885" title="See China and Die" label="See China and Die"/>
<link wikidata="Q760926" start="9928" end="9950" title="Fort Apache, The Bronx" label="Fort Apache, The Bronx"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498130" start="9983" end="9990" title="Exposed (1983 film)" label="Exposed"/>
<link wikidata="Q754304" start="10043" end="10053" title="Breathless (1983 film)" label="Breathless"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757076" start="10085" end="10104" title="Deal of the Century" label="Deal of the Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q559321" start="10135" end="10145" title="Miami Vice" label="Miami Vice"/>
<link wikidata="Q4735191" start="10221" end="10234" title="Alphabet City (film)" label="Alphabet City"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10305" end="10314" title="D.C. Cops" label="D.C. Cops"/>
<link wikidata="Q7501778" start="10448" end="10458" title="Short Eyes (play)" label="Short Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6595198" start="10888" end="10909" title="List of Puerto Ricans" label="List of Puerto Ricans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862771" start="10911" end="10939" title="List of Puerto Rican writers" label="List of Puerto Rican writers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7774694" start="10941" end="10964" title="Puerto Rican literature" label="Puerto Rican literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3898706" start="10966" end="10978" title="Pedro Pietri" label="Pedro Pietri"/>
<link wikidata="Q6844403" start="11021" end="11035" title="Miguel Algarín" label="Miguel Algarín"/>
<link wikidata="Q99510652" start="11079" end="11096" title="Latino literature" label="Latino literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q25339930" start="11098" end="11133" title="Latino theatre in the United States" label="Latino theatre in the United States"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="444345" wikidata="Q440564" url="?curid=444345" title="Michael Morris">
<text>Michael Morris may refer to:
==Arts== 
*Michael Morris (artist) (1942–2022), British-born Canadian visual artist
*Michael Morris (director) (born 1974), English television director and producer
*Michael Morris (screenwriter) (1918–2003), Ukraine born American television and film screenwriter
*MickDeth (Mick Richard Morris, 1978–2013), American musician

==Politics== 
*Michael Morris, Baron Morris (1826–1901), Irish lawyer and political figure, became the first Lord Killanin in 1900
*Michael Morris, 3rd Baron Killanin (1914–1999), Irish former head of the International Olympic Committee
*Michael Morris, Baron Naseby (born 1936), British Conservative politician, Deputy Speaker of the House of Commons 1992–1997
==Science and industry==
*Michael G. Morris (born 1947), president, chief executive officer, and chairman of American Electric Power
*G. Michael Morris, scientist, past president of the Optical Society of America
*Michael Morris (oceanographer), scientist and entrepreneur, founder of Ocean Optics, Inc.

==Sports==
*Mick Morris (footballer, born 1943) (1943–2020), English footballer
*Mick Morris (Australian footballer) (1882–1959), Australian rules footballer
*Mick Morris (Gaelic footballer) (born 1943), Irish former sportsperson
*Mouse Morris (Michael Morris, born 1951), Irish racehorse trainer
*Michael Armstrong (boxer) (born 1968), British boxer, born Michael Morris

==See also==
*Mike Morris (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q440564" start="0" end="14" title="Michael Morris" label="Michael Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380471" start="40" end="63" title="Michael Morris (artist)" label="Michael Morris (artist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6832915" start="114" end="139" title="Michael Morris (director)" label="Michael Morris (director)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18128201" start="195" end="224" title="Michael Morris (screenwriter)" label="Michael Morris (screenwriter)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6838036" start="294" end="302" title="MickDeth" label="MickDeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747637" start="371" end="399" title="Michael Morris, Baron Morris" label="Michael Morris, Baron Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q320604" start="488" end="522" title="Michael Morris, 3rd Baron Killanin" label="Michael Morris, 3rd Baron Killanin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928654" start="594" end="622" title="Michael Morris, Baron Naseby" label="Michael Morris, Baron Naseby"/>
<link wikidata="Q6830468" start="744" end="761" title="Michael G. Morris" label="Michael G. Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q5512362" start="852" end="869" title="G. Michael Morris" label="G. Michael Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q60736734" start="932" end="962" title="Michael Morris (oceanographer)" label="Michael Morris (oceanographer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6838349" start="1035" end="1070" title="Mick Morris (footballer, born 1943)" label="Mick Morris (footballer, born 1943)"/>
<link wikidata="Q21070288" start="1104" end="1139" title="Mick Morris (Australian footballer)" label="Mick Morris (Australian footballer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6838350" start="1182" end="1213" title="Mick Morris (Gaelic footballer)" label="Mick Morris (Gaelic footballer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15040091" start="1254" end="1266" title="Mouse Morris" label="Mouse Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q46994987" start="1321" end="1346" title="Michael Armstrong (boxer)" label="Michael Armstrong (boxer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6848114" start="1410" end="1438" title="Mike Morris (disambiguation)" label="Mike Morris (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="444349" wikidata="Q1385195" url="?curid=444349" title="Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation">
<text>Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO), is a form of extracorporeal life support, providing prolonged cardiac and respiratory support to persons whose heart and lungs are unable to provide an adequate amount of oxygen, gas exchange or blood supply (perfusion) to sustain life. The technology for ECMO is largely derived from cardiopulmonary bypass, which provides shorter-term support with arrested native circulation. The device used is a membrane oxygenator, also known as an artificial lung.

ECMO works by temporarily drawing blood from the body to allow artificial oxygenation of the red blood cells and removal of carbon dioxide. Generally, it is used either post-cardiopulmonary bypass or in late-stage treatment of a person with profound heart and/or lung failure, although it is now seeing use as a treatment for cardiac arrest in certain centers, allowing treatment of the underlying cause of arrest while circulation and oxygenation are supported. ECMO is also used to support patients with the acute viral pneumonia associated with COVID-19 in cases where artificial ventilation alone is not sufficient to sustain blood oxygenation levels.
== Medical uses ==

Guidelines that describe the indications and practice of ECMO are published by the Extracorporeal Life Support Organization (ELSO). Criteria for the initiation of ECMO vary by institution, but generally include acute severe cardiac or pulmonary failure that is potentially reversible and unresponsive to conventional management. Examples of clinical situations that may prompt the initiation of ECMO include the following:
* Hypoxemic respiratory failure with a ratio of arterial oxygen tension to fraction of inspired oxygen (PaO2/FiO2) of &lt;100 mmHg despite optimization of the ventilator settings, including the fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2), positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP), and inspiratory to expiratory (I:E) ratio
* Hypercapnic respiratory failure with an arterial pH &lt;7.20
* Refractory cardiogenic shock
* Thyroid storm
* Cardiac arrest
* Failure to wean from cardiopulmonary bypass after cardiac surgery
* As a bridge to either heart transplantation or placement of a ventricular assist device
* As a bridge to lung transplantation
* Septic shock is a more controversial but increasingly studied use of ECMO
* Hypothermia, with a core temperature between 28 and 24 °C and cardiac instability, or with a core temperature below 24 °C.

In those with cardiac arrest or cardiogenic shock, it is believed to improve survival and good outcomes. However, a recent clinical trial has shown that in patients with cardiogenic shock following acute myocardial infarction, ECLS did not improve survival (as measured via 30-day mortality); on the contrary, it resulted in increased complications (e.g., major bleeding, lower limb ischemia). This finding is corroborated by a recent meta-analysis that used data from four previous clinical trials, indicating a need to reassess current guidelines for initiation of ECLS treatment.

===Use in COVID-19 patients===
Beginning in early February 2020, doctors in China increasingly used ECMO as an adjunct support for patients presenting with acute viral pneumonia associated with SARS-CoV-2 infection (COVID-19) when, with ventilation alone, the blood oxygenation levels still remain too low to sustain the patient. Initial reports indicated that it assisted in restoring patients&#x27; blood oxygen saturation and reducing fatalities among the approximately 3% of severe cases where it was utilized. For critically ill patients, the mortality rate reduced from around 59–71% with conventional therapy to approximately 46% with extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. A March 2021 &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; cover story illustrated the efficacy of ECMO in an extremely challenging COVID patient. In February 2021, three pregnant Israeli women who had &quot;very serious&quot; cases of COVID-19 were given ECMO treatment and it seemed this treatment option would continue.

=== Outcomes ===
Early studies had shown survival benefit with use of ECMO for people in acute respiratory failure especially in the setting of acute respiratory distress syndrome. A registry maintained by ELSO of nearly 51,000 people that have received ECMO has reported outcomes with 75% survival for neonatal respiratory failure, 56% survival for pediatric respiratory failure, and 55% survival for adult respiratory failure. Other observational and uncontrolled clinical trials have reported survival rates from 50 to 70%. These reported survival rates are better than historical survival rates. Even though ECMO is used for a range of conditions with varying mortality rates, early detection is key to prevent the progression of deterioration and increase survival outcomes.

In the United Kingdom, veno-venous ECMO deployment is concentrated in designated ECMO centers to potentially improve care and promote better outcomes.

== Contraindications ==
Most contraindications are relative, balancing the risks of the procedure versus the potential benefits. The relative contraindications are:
* Conditions incompatible with normal life if the person recovers
* Preexisting conditions that affect the quality of life (CNS status, end-stage malignancy, risk of systemic bleeding with anticoagulation)
* Age and size
* Futility: those who are too sick, have been on conventional therapy too long, or have a fatal diagnosis.

== Side effects and complications ==
===Neurologic===
A common consequence in ECMO-treated adults is neurological injury, which may include intracerebral hemorrhage, subarachnoid hemorrhage, ischemic infarctions in susceptible areas of the brain, hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy, unexplained coma, and brain death. Bleeding occurs in 30 to 40% of those receiving ECMO and can be life-threatening. It is due to both the necessary continuous heparin infusion and platelet dysfunction. Meticulous surgical technique, maintaining platelet counts greater than 100,000/mm3, and maintaining the target activated clotting time reduce the likelihood of bleeding.

===Blood===
Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) is increasingly common among people receiving ECMO. When HIT is suspected, the heparin infusion is usually replaced by a non-heparin anticoagulant.

There is retrograde blood flow in the descending aorta whenever the femoral artery and vein are used for VA (Veno-Arterial) ECMO. Stasis of the blood can occur if left ventricular output is not maintained, which may result in thrombosis.

===Bridge-to-assist device===
In VA ECMO, those whose cardiac function does not recover sufficiently to be weaned from ECMO may be bridged to a ventricular assist device (VAD) or transplant. A variety of complications can occur during cannulation, including vessel perforation with bleeding, arterial dissection, distal ischemia, and incorrect location.

===Children===
Preterm infants, having inefficiency of the heart and lungs, are at unacceptably high risk for intraventricular hemorrhage (IVH) if ECMO is performed at a gestational age less than 32 weeks.

===Infections===
The prevalence of hospital-acquired infections during ECMO is 10-12% (higher compared to other critically ill patients). Coagulase-negative staphylococci, &quot;Candida&quot; spp., &quot;Enterobacteriaceae&quot; and &quot;Pseudomonas aeruginosa&quot; are the most frequently involved pathogens. ECMO patients display a high incidence of ventilator-associated pneumonia (24.4 cases/1000 ECMO days), with a major role played by &quot;Enterobacteriaceae&quot;. The infectious risk was shown to increase along the duration of the ECMO run, which is the most important risk factor for the development of infections. Other ECMO-specific factors predisposing to infections include the severity of illness in ECMO patients, the high risk of bacterial translocation from the gut and ECMO-related impairment of the immune system. Another important issue is the microbial colonisation of catheters, ECMO cannulae and the oxygenator.

==Types==

There are several forms of ECMO; the two most common are veno-arterial (VA) ECMO and veno-venous (VV) ECMO. In both modalities, blood drained from the venous system is oxygenated outside of the body. In VA ECMO, this blood is returned to the arterial system and in VV ECMO the blood is returned to the venous system. In VV ECMO, no cardiac support is provided.

=== Veno-arterial ===
In veno-arterial (VA) ECMO, a venous cannula is usually placed in the right or left common femoral vein for extraction, and an arterial cannula is usually placed into the right or left femoral artery for infusion. The tip of the femoral venous cannula should be maintained near the junction of the inferior vena cava and right atrium, while the tip of the femoral arterial cannula is maintained in the iliac artery. In adults, accessing the femoral artery is preferred because the insertion is simpler. Central VA ECMO may be used if cardiopulmonary bypass has already been established or emergency re-sternotomy has been performed (with cannulae in the right atrium (or SVC/IVC for tricuspid repair) and ascending aorta).

VA ECMO is typically reserved when native cardiac function is minimal to mitigate increased cardiac stroke work associated with pumping against retrograde flow delivered by the aortic cannula.

=== Veno-venous ===
In veno-venous (VV) ECMO, cannulae are usually placed in the right common femoral vein for drainage and right internal jugular vein for infusion. Alternatively, a dual-lumen catheter is inserted into the right internal jugular vein, draining blood from the superior and inferior vena cavae and returning it to the right atrium.

== Initiation ==
ECMO should be performed only by clinicians with training and experience in its initiation, maintenance, and discontinuation. ECMO insertion is typically performed in the operating room setting by a cardiothoracic surgeon. ECMO management is commonly performed by a registered nurse, respiratory therapist, or a perfusionist. Once it has been decided to inititiate ECMO, the patient is anticoagulated with intravenous heparin to prevent thrombus formation from clotting off the oxygenator. Prior to initiation, an IV bolus of heparin is given and measured to ensure that the activated clotting time (ACT) is between 300 and 350 seconds. Once the ACT is between this range, ECMO can be initiated and a heparin drip will be started after as a maintenance dose.

=== Cannulation ===
Cannulae can be placed percutaneously by the Seldinger technique, a relatively straightforward and common method for obtaining access to blood vessels, or via surgical cutdown. The largest cannulae that can be placed in the vessels are used in order to maximize flow and minimize shear stress. However, limb ischemia is one of the notorious complications of ECMO but can be avoided utilizing a proper distal limb perfusion method. In addition, ECMO can be used intraoperatively during lung transplantation to stabilize the patient with excellent outcomes.

ECMO required for complications post-cardiac surgery can be placed directly into the appropriate chambers of the heart or great vessels. Peripheral (femoral or jugular) cannulation can allow patients awaiting lung transplantation to remain awake and ambulatory with improved post-transplant outcomes.

=== Titration ===
Following cannulation and connection to the ECMO circuit, the appropriate amount of blood flow through the ECMO circuit is determined using hemodynamic parameters and physical exam. Goals of maintaining end-organ perfusion via ECMO circuit are balanced with sufficient physiologic blood flow through the heart to prevent stasis and subsequent formation of blood clot.

== Maintenance ==

Once the initial respiratory and hemodynamic goals have been achieved, the blood flow is maintained at that rate. Frequent assessment and adjustments are facilitated by continuous venous oximetry, which directly measures the oxyhemoglobin saturation of the blood in the venous limb of the ECMO circuit.

=== Special considerations ===
VV ECMO is typically used for respiratory failure, while VA ECMO is used for cardiac failure. There are unique considerations for each type of ECMO, which influence management.

==== Blood flow ====
High flow rates are usually desired during VV ECMO to optimize oxygen delivery. In contrast, the flow rate used during VA ECMO must be high enough to provide adequate perfusion pressure and venous oxyhemoglobin saturation (measured on drainage blood) but low enough to provide sufficient preload to maintain left ventricular output.

==== Diuresis ====
Since most people are fluid-overloaded when ECMO is initiated, aggressive diuresis is warranted once the patient is stable on ECMO. Ultrafiltration can be easily added to the ECMO circuit if the patient has inadequate urine output. ECMO &quot;chatter&quot;, or instability of ECMO waveforms, represents under-resuscitation and would support cessation of aggressive diuresis or ultrafiltration. There is an increased risk of acute kidney injury related to the use of ECMO and systemic inflammatory response.

==== Left ventricular monitoring ====
Left ventricular output is rigorously monitored during VA ECMO because left ventricular function can be impaired from increased afterload, which can in turn lead to formation of thrombus within the heart.

== Weaning and discontinuing ==
For those with respiratory failure, improvements in radiographic appearance, pulmonary compliance, and arterial oxyhemoglobin saturation indicate that the person may be ready to be taken off ECMO support. For those with cardiac failure, enhanced aortic pulsatility correlates with improved left ventricular output and indicates that they may be ready to be taken off ECMO support. If all markers are in good status, the blood flows on the ECMO will be slowly decreased and the patients parameters will be observed during this time to ensure that the patient can tolerate the changes. When the flows are below 2 liters per minute, permanent removal is attempted and the patient is continuously monitored during this time until the cannulae can be removed.

=== Veno-venous ECMO liberation trial ===
VV ECMO trials are performed by eliminating all countercurrent sweep gas through the oxygenator. Extracorporeal blood flow remains constant, but gas transfer does not occur. They are then observed for several hours, during which the ventilator settings that are necessary to maintain adequate oxygenation and ventilation off ECMO are determined as indicated by arterial and venous blood gas results.

=== Veno-arterial ECMO liberation trial ===
VA ECMO trials require temporary clamping of both the drainage and infusion lines, while allowing the ECMO circuit to circulate through a bridge between the arterial and venous limbs. This prevents thrombosis of stagnant blood within the ECMO circuit. In addition, the arterial and venous lines should be flushed continuously with heparinized saline or intermittently with heparinized blood from the circuit. In general, VA ECMO trials are shorter in duration than VV ECMO trials because of the higher risk of thrombus formation.

==History==
ECMO was developed in the 1950s by John Gibbon, and then by C. Walton Lillehei. The first use for neonates was in 1965.

Banning Gray Lary first demonstrated that intravenous oxygen could maintain life. His results were published in &quot;Surgical Forum&quot; in November 1951. Lary commented on his initial work in a 2007 presentation wherein he writes, &quot;Our research began by assembling an apparatus that, for the first time, kept animals alive while breathing pure nitrogen. This was accomplished with very small bubbles of oxygen injected into the blood stream. These bubbles were made by adding a &#x27;wetting agent&#x27; to oxygen being forced through a porcelain filter into the venous blood stream. Shortly after its initial presentation to the American College of Surgeons, this apparatus was reviewed by Walton Lillehei who with DeWall made the first practical heart[–]lung machine that employed a bubble oxygenator. With variations such machines were used for the next twenty years.&quot;

== Manufacturers ==
* Medtronic
* Maquet (Getinge Group)
* Xenios AG (Fresenius Medical Care)
* Sorin Group
* Terumo
* Nipro
* MicroPort

==Availability by country==


==Research==

=== Randomized controlled trials (RCTs) ===
Four randomized controlled trials (RCTs) have been conducted to evaluate the effectiveness of ECMO in respiratory failure patients. Early trials conducted by Zapol et al. and Morris et al. were plagued by technical challenges related to the ECMO technology available in the 1970s and 1990s. The CESAR and EOLIA trials utilized modern ECMO systems and are considered the central ECMO RCTs.

==== CESAR Trial (2009) ====
The Conventional Ventilatory Support vs. Extracorporeal Membrane Oxygenation for Severe Adult Respiratory Failure (CESAR) Trial was a UK-based multicenter RCT aiming to evaluate the safety, efficacy and cost effectiveness of ECMO compared to conventional mechanical ventilation in adults with severe but reversible respiratory failure. Death or severe disability at 6 months or prior to hospital discharge was the primary outcome. The primary outcome was analyzed by intention to treat only. Economic analysis included quality-adjusted life-years (QALYs), analysis of cost generating events, cost-utility 6-months post-randomization and modelling of life-time cost utility. The trial planned to enroll 180 patients; 90 to each arm.

The Trial met its enrollment goal of 180 patients. 68 of the 90 (75%) of the patients intended to be treated with ECMO were actually treated with ECMO. Survival of patients allocated to the ECMO group (i.e. referred for consideration for treatment with ECMO) was significantly higher than patients allocated to the conventional ventilation group (63% vs 47%, p=0.03). The referral to ECMO group gained 0.03 QALY compared to the conventional ventilation group at the 6-month follow-up. The referral to ECMO group had longer lengths of stay and higher costs.

No standardized treatment protocol for the conventional ventilation group is the main limitation of the CESAR study. The trial authors note that this occurred due to the inability of enrolling sites to agree on a protocol. This resulted in control patients not receiving lung protective ventilation which is known to improve mortality in ARDS patients.

The authors conclude that referral of patients with severe, potentially reversible respiratory failure to an ECMO center can significantly improve 6-month, severe disability free survival. The CESAR trial results do provide a direct survival comparison for treatment with ECMO versus conventional mechanical ventilation alone since only 75% of the ECMO group were actually treated with ECMO.

==== EOLIA Trial (2018) ====
The ECMO to Rescue Lung Injury in Severe ARDS (EOLIA) Trial was designed to evaluate the effects of early ECMO initiation compared to continued standard of care (conventional mechanical ventilation) in severe ARDS patients. Mortality at 60 days was the primary endpoint. The calculated sample size was 331 patients with an intent to show a 20% reduction in absolute mortality in the ECMO group. The main secondary endpoint was treatment failure – cross-over to ECMO due to refractory hypoxemia or death in the control group and death in the ECMO group.

Following the fourth planned interim analysis the trial was ended due to futility. A total of 249 patients were enrolled at study termination. Thirty-five control group patients (28%) required emergency cross-over to ECMO. Results of EOLIA demonstrated no significant difference in 60-day mortality between the ECMO group and the control group (35% vs 46%, respectively). The interpretation of this result however is complicated by the cross-over patients. The secondary endpoint, treatment failure, demonstrated a relative risk of 0.62 (p&lt;0.001) in favor of the ECMO group. Results of the secondary endpoint should be interpreted cautiously due to the primary end point results. With respect to safety, the ECMO group had significantly higher rates of severe thrombocytopenia and bleeding requiring transfusion, but lower rates of ischemic stroke.

The primary limitation to the EOLIA Trial was that it was underpowered. For EOLIA to have been properly powered to detect significance of an 11% reduction in mortality a total of 624 patients would need to have been enrolled. Such a trial would take 9 years based on the EOLIA recruitment rates and is likely not feasible.

The main conclusion the study authors drew from these results is that early ECMO initiation in severe ARDS patients does not provide a mortality benefit compared to continued standard of care treatment. Subsequent editorials by key opinion leaders suggest that the practical implication is that ECMO may improve mortality if used as a rescue therapy for patients failing conventional ARDS therapies.

== References ==
== External links ==
* 
* Extracorporeal Education Portal</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1385195" start="0" end="35" title="Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation" label="Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385195" start="37" end="41" title="Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation" label="ECMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q127953364" start="57" end="84" title="extracorporeal life support" label="extracorporeal life support"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891" start="118" end="129" title="respiratory system" label="respiratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072" start="155" end="160" title="human heart" label="heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886" start="165" end="169" title="human lung" label="lung"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266915" start="253" end="262" title="perfusion" label="perfusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q552304" start="329" end="351" title="cardiopulmonary bypass" label="cardiopulmonary bypass"/>
<link wikidata="Q6815136" start="444" end="463" title="membrane oxygenator" label="membrane oxygenator"/>
<link wikidata="Q37187" start="593" end="607" title="red blood cell" label="red blood cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="1022" end="1031" title="pneumonia" label="pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="1048" end="1056" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q545991" start="1072" end="1094" title="artificial ventilation" label="artificial ventilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422185" start="1259" end="1299" title="Extracorporeal Life Support Organization" label="Extracorporeal Life Support Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q767485" start="1611" end="1630" title="respiratory failure" label="respiratory failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q5477511" start="1674" end="1701" title="fraction of inspired oxygen" label="fraction of inspired oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q352381" start="1829" end="1861" title="positive end-expiratory pressure" label="positive end-expiratory pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477062" start="1988" end="2005" title="cardiogenic shock" label="cardiogenic shock"/>
<link wikidata="Q4458080" start="2008" end="2021" title="Thyroid storm" label="Thyroid storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q202837" start="2024" end="2038" title="Cardiac arrest" label="Cardiac arrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q552304" start="2062" end="2084" title="cardiopulmonary bypass" label="cardiopulmonary bypass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2897721" start="2171" end="2196" title="ventricular assist device" label="ventricular assist device"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637912" start="2214" end="2234" title="lung transplantation" label="lung transplantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765564" start="2237" end="2249" title="Septic shock" label="Septic shock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036696" start="2313" end="2324" title="Hypothermia" label="Hypothermia"/>
<link wikidata="Q89655944" start="3097" end="3102" title="COVID-19 pandemic in China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q82069695" start="3215" end="3225" title="Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2" label="SARS-CoV-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="3237" end="3245" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q545991" start="3258" end="3269" title="Artificial ventilation" label="ventilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="3719" end="3736" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q344873" start="4152" end="4187" title="acute respiratory distress syndrome" label="acute respiratory distress syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="4796" end="4810" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q47273" start="5230" end="5233" title="Central nervous system" label="CNS"/>
<link wikidata="Q693442" start="5601" end="5624" title="subarachnoid hemorrhage" label="subarachnoid hemorrhage"/>
<link wikidata="Q190016" start="5875" end="5882" title="heparin" label="heparin"/>
<link wikidata="Q101026" start="5896" end="5904" title="platelet" label="platelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677454" start="6030" end="6053" title="activated clotting time" label="activated clotting time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1598365" start="6102" end="6134" title="Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia" label="Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6058597" start="6994" end="7021" title="intraventricular hemorrhage" label="intraventricular hemorrhage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755077" start="7229" end="7238" title="Coagulase" label="Coagulase"/>
<link wikidata="Q9655" start="8284" end="8292" title="artery" label="arterial"/>
<link wikidata="Q9609" start="8344" end="8350" title="vein" label="venous"/>
<link wikidata="Q2125439" start="8463" end="8470" title="cannula" label="cannula"/>
<link wikidata="Q368521" start="8517" end="8529" title="femoral vein" label="femoral vein"/>
<link wikidata="Q707174" start="8611" end="8625" title="femoral artery" label="femoral artery"/>
<link wikidata="Q745438" start="8724" end="8742" title="inferior vena cava" label="inferior vena cava"/>
<link wikidata="Q749592" start="9483" end="9495" title="jugular vein" label="jugular vein"/>
<link wikidata="Q2964004" start="9909" end="9931" title="cardiothoracic surgeon" label="cardiothoracic surgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q190016" start="10128" end="10135" title="heparin" label="heparin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588755" start="10147" end="10155" title="thrombus" label="thrombus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677454" start="10285" end="10308" title="activated clotting time" label="activated clotting time"/>
<link wikidata="Q2125439" start="10490" end="10497" title="Cannula" label="Cannula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143681" start="10535" end="10554" title="Seldinger technique" label="Seldinger technique"/>
<link wikidata="Q584691" start="12716" end="12724" title="diuresis" label="diuresis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299082" start="13316" end="13325" title="afterload" label="afterload"/>
<link wikidata="Q261327" start="14867" end="14877" title="thrombosis" label="thrombosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378995" start="15247" end="15258" title="John Heysham Gibbon" label="John Gibbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q358046" start="15272" end="15290" title="C. Walton Lillehei" label="C. Walton Lillehei"/>
<link wikidata="Q642189" start="16241" end="16250" title="Medtronic" label="Medtronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q442311" start="16253" end="16259" title="Maquet" label="Maquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337240" start="16261" end="16274" title="Getinge Group" label="Getinge Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q650259" start="16289" end="16311" title="Fresenius Medical Care" label="Fresenius Medical Care"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491211" start="16315" end="16326" title="Sorin Group" label="Sorin Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518961" start="16329" end="16335" title="Terumo" label="Terumo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11324590" start="16338" end="16343" title="Nipro" label="Nipro"/>
<link wikidata="Q6839948" start="16346" end="16355" title="MicroPort" label="MicroPort"/>
<link wikidata="Q614165" start="17383" end="17410" title="Quality-adjusted life year" label="quality-adjusted life-years"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="444351" wikidata="Q6539426" url="?curid=444351" title="Liaden universe">
<text>Liaden Universe ( or ) is an ongoing science fiction book series written by Sharon Lee and Steve Miller. The series incorporates elements of space opera, romance, and supernatural themes&quot;.&quot;

As of July 2024, the series comprises 25 novels and 33 chapbooks.

== Series overview ==
The first two books in the seven-book &quot;Agent of Change&quot; sequence were published in 1988. These books follow the conflict between Clan Korval, a prominent Liaden clan, and the mysterious &quot;Department of the Interior.&quot; Despite destroying the department&#x27;s headquarters on Liad by the end of the original sequence, the department&#x27;s remnants continue to influence Clan Korval in subsequent novels.

The eighth novel, &quot;Balance of Trade&quot;, is set 275 years before the conclusion of the &quot;Agent of Change&quot; sequence. It features Jethri Gobelyn, a young Terran trader adopted by a Liaden Master Trader, which causes unrest among many. A sequel, &quot;Trade Secret&quot;, was published in 2013, chronicling Jethri&#x27;s career as a trader. A third book in the sequence, &quot;Fair Trade&quot;, was published in May 2022.

Published in February 2005, the ninth novel, Crystal Soldier, takes place earlier in the timeline. It is the first half of &quot;The Great Migration Duology&quot; and tells the story of Cantra yos&#x27;Phelium, who piloted the original exodus to Liad, and her partner M Jela. A sequel, &quot;Crystal Dragon&quot;, was published in 2006 and continues the story, covering the founding of Liad and Clan Korval.

==Publication history==
After writing the first three books (&quot;Agent of Change&quot;, &quot;Conflict of Honors&quot;, and &quot;Carpe Diem&quot;, published in 1988–1989), the authors were informed that sales were insufficient to justify continuing the series. However, the books developed a following on the Usenet group rec.arts.sf.written, where they were added to the group&#x27;s FAQ.

Upon gaining internet access, the authors discovered a significant reader base eager for the next installment, which was anticipated to be titled &quot;Plan B&quot;. In response, they published several chapbooks and began writing &quot;Plan B&quot; (released in 1999), followed by three more books to complete the &quot;Agent of Change&quot; sequence. Additionally, the authors wrote numerous short stories, some filling gaps between novels and others providing background on various characters.

The first three novels were initially published in mass-market editions by Del Rey. They were later re-published by the now-defunct Meisha Merlin, which also anthologized the earlier books. Subsequently, the novels were re-issued in mass-market format by Ace Books. Some of the earlier works and stories were made available as e-books through Embiid Publishing, which is no longer in business.

In 2007, Baen Books began publishing the first ten Liaden novels in electronic form, followed by two short story collections. Baen continued with new Liaden novels starting in 2009 and began releasing the first ten novels in omnibus trade paperback editions in 2010.

As of 2022, the series remains ongoing with twenty-three novels, numerous chapbooks, and short stories. Additional novels are scheduled for publication. All of the novels are available as e-books.

==Books in the series==
===Novels===
====Timeline chart====
Chart Notes:
* Time flows down the chart, so events in those novels on the same horizontal level are happening (roughly) concurrently
* Columns represent main characters and/or clans
* Color Key
** Red = Progenitor Universe
** Orange = Trade Areas of Terran and Liaden space
** Yellow = primarily Liaden Space (with primary characters shown in parentheses)
** Green = Theo&#x27;s home world (Delgado), first journey, Anlingdin Piloting Academy, and beyond
** Pink = Planet Surebleak
** Blue = Planet Surebleak and wide-ranging space faring &amp; trading
** Gray = Trading, space faring, and A.I. mentoring

Novels listed in the order of the timeline of the Liaden universe.

====The Great Migration Duology====
These two novels comprise the origin story of the Liaden universe and introduce Cantra and Jela.
* &quot;Crystal Soldier&quot; (February 2005, )
* &quot;Crystal Dragon&quot; (February 2006, )

====Liaden novels featuring Jethri Gobelyn====
These stories of merchants and intrigue take place between &quot;The Great Migration&quot; and &quot;Agent of Change&quot; sequences.
* &quot;Balance of Trade&quot; (2004, , winner of the Hal Clement Award for best Young Adult Science Fiction novel of 2004)
* &quot;Trade Secret&quot;, a sequel to &quot;Balance of Trade&quot;, was published by Baen in hardcover in November 2013 ().
* &quot;Fair Trade&quot;, a sequel to &quot;Trade Secret&quot;, was published by Baen in hardcover in May 2022. ().
* Due to the death of Steven Miller additional books in the series may following, with the next being &quot;Trade Lanes&quot; (see &quot;Forthcoming&quot;).

====The &quot;Agent of Change&quot; sequence====
This is the mainline for stories in the Liaden universe. In the later novels, the &quot;Theo Waitley&quot; story timeline becomes coincident with the &quot;Clan Korval&quot; and &quot;Surebleak&quot; timelines. See notes below tables.


====Notes on novels====
* &quot;Fledgling&quot; (2007), a 31-chapter serialized novel, was first seen in draft form on the authors&#x27; website, with chapters released weekly from January 2007 through October 2007. &quot;Fledgling&quot; introduces Theo Waitley and gives some of the background to her unexpected arrival at the end of &quot;I Dare&quot;. The revised version &quot;Fledgling (2009)&quot; was published in hardcover by Baen Books (September 2009 ). The original pre-revision &quot;Fledgling&quot; can be downloaded for free from both Amazon and the Baen Free Library.
* &quot;Saltation&quot; (draft complete, January 2009), the sequel to &quot;Fledgling&quot;, a weekly serial novel on the authors&#x27; website. Publication began on Monday, 21 January 2008. A revised version was released in hardcover by Baen Books in April 2010 .
* &quot;Ghost Ship&quot;, the sequel to &quot;Saltation&quot;, was published by Baen Books on 2 August 2011. A synopsis of &quot;Ghost Ship&quot; was published in September 2010.&quot; Ghost Ship&quot;&#x27;s first draft was completed in late August 2010, and was published in hardcover by Baen in August 2011, and paperback in July 2012
* &quot;Dragon Ship&quot;, the sequel to &quot;Ghost Ship&quot;, was published in hardcover by Baen Books on 4 September 2012. .
* &quot;Necessity&#x27;s Child&quot;, which occurs on Surebleak at the same time as &quot;Ghost Ship&quot;, was published by Baen in hardcover in Feb. 2013.
* &quot;Dragon in Exile&quot;, was published in hardcover (2 June 2015) and e-book (15 May 2015) by Baen Books in May 2015. .

====Thirtieth Anniversary Editions====
The (30th) Anniversary edition of the first Liaden Universe novel, &quot;Agent of Change&quot;, was published in November 2018 as a mass market paperback.

The (30th) Anniversary edition of the second Liaden Universe novel, &quot;Conflict of Honors&quot;, was published in October 2019 as a mass market paperback.

The (30th) Anniversary edition of the third Liaden Universe novel, &quot;Carpe Diem&quot;, was published in November 2020 as a mass market paperback.

====Forthcoming====
The latest book to be published was the Clan Korval/Redlands novel &quot;Ribbon Dance&quot;, a direct sequel to &quot;Trader&#x27;s Leap&quot;. It was published in June 2024. &quot;Diviner&#x27;s Bow&quot;, a direct sequel to &quot;Ribbon Dance&quot; is expected in April 2025.

Following &quot;Fair Trade&quot; there may be a fourth Jethri Gobelyn novel (&quot;Trade Lanes&quot;) 

====Omnibus volumes====
=====Pre-Baen=====
* &quot;Partners in Necessity&quot; (Feb. 2000, hardcover, trade paperback)
** Contains &quot;Conflict of Honors&quot;, &quot;Agent of Change&quot;, and &quot;Carpe Diem&quot;
* &quot;Pilots Choice&quot; (Feb. 2001, hardcover; November 2004, trade paperback)
** Contains &quot;Local Custom&quot; and &quot;Scout&#x27;s Progress&quot;

=====Baen e-book only=====
These were released immediately upon Lee &amp; Miller coming to Baen in the wake of Meisha Merlin&#x27;s dissolution, to bring the e-books back into print and begin earning royalties for Lee &amp; Miller (who had not been paid by Meisha Merlin) right away. For new readers, the subsequent Baen omnibus editions (below) provide the same books at a lower cost.
* &quot;Korval&#x27;s Legacy Collection&quot; (Baen ebook bundle)
** Contains &quot;Conflict of Honors&quot;, &quot;Agent of Change&quot;, &quot;Carpe Diem&quot;, &quot;Plan B&quot;, and &quot;Local Custom&quot;
* &quot;Phase Change Collection&quot; (Baen ebook bundle)
** Contains &quot;Scout&#x27;s Progress&quot;, &quot;I Dare&quot;, &quot;Crystal Soldier&quot;, &quot;Crystal Dragon&quot;, and &quot;Balance of Trade&quot;

Additionally, &quot;Agent of Change&quot; and &quot;Fledgling&quot; are available at no cost in the Baen Free Library

=====Baen print and e-book=====
* &quot;The Dragon Variation&quot; (Jun. 2010, trade paperback)
** Contains &quot;Local Custom&quot;, &quot;Scout&#x27;s Progress&quot;, and &quot;Conflict of Honors&quot;
* &quot;The Agent Gambit&quot; (Jan. 2011, trade paperback)
** Contains &quot;Agent of Change&quot; and &quot;Carpe Diem&quot;
* &quot;Korval&#x27;s Game&quot; (May 2011, trade paperback)
** Contains &quot;Plan B&quot; and &quot;I Dare&quot;
* &quot;The Crystal Variation&quot; (Sep. 2011, trade paperback)
** Contains &quot;Crystal Soldier&quot;, &quot;Crystal Dragon&quot;, and &quot;Balance of Trade&quot;

Audiobooks

A number of novels have currently available audio-book editions
* &quot;Accepting the Lance&quot;
* &quot;The Tomorrow Log&quot;
* &quot;Neogenesis&quot;
* &quot;The Gathering Edge&quot;
* &quot;Alliance of Equals&quot;
* &quot;Dragon Ship&quot;
* &quot;Necessity&#x27;s Child&quot;
* &quot;Ghost Ship&quot;
* &quot;Saltation&quot;
* &quot;Fledgling&quot;
* &quot;Mouse &amp; Dragon&quot;
* &quot;Scout&#x27;s Progress&quot;
* &quot;Local Custom&quot;
* &quot;Balance of Trade&quot;
* &quot;Crystal Soldier&quot;
* &quot;Dragon in Exile&quot;
* &quot;I Dare&quot;
* &quot;Plan B&quot;
* &quot;Carpe Diem&quot;
* &quot;Conflict of Honors&quot;
* &quot;Crystal Dragon&quot;
* &quot;Agent of Change&quot;

===Short stories===
These also include stories about Lute and Moonhawk, the earlier incarnations of two major characters in the books. Some short stories also are being made available for free either in the Baen Free Library or at Splinter Universe.

==== Current collections ====
On 2 April 2012, Sharon Lee and Steve Miller announced that Baen had purchased publication rights for the contents of Chapbooks #1 through #17 (&quot;Two Tales of Korval&quot; through &quot;Skyblaze&quot;), and they would be reissued in two volumes. The first, &quot;Liaden Universe Constellation Volume I&quot; was published by Baen for July 2013 in trade paperback (tpb) and ebook formats. The second volume was published by Baen in January 2014. The third volume was published by Baen in August 2015. The fourth volume was published by Baen in June 2019.

Baen has collected the chapbooks and other short stories in five volumes:

# &quot;A Liaden Universe Constellation Volume 1&quot; (2013, trade paperback, eBook)
# &quot;A Liaden Universe Constellation Volume 2&quot; (2014, trade paperback, eBook)
# &quot;A Liaden Universe Constellation Volume 3&quot; (2015, trade paperback, eBook)
# &quot;A Liaden Universe Constellation Volume 4&quot; (4 June 2019, trade paperback, eBook)
# &quot;A Liaden Universe Constellation Volume 5&quot; (1 February 2022, trade paperback, eBook)

==== Out of print collections ====
The chapbooks have been collected in two compilations:

# &quot;Liaden Universe Companion Volume One&quot; (2005, hardcover, trade paperback)
# &quot;Liaden Universe Companion Volume Two&quot; (2007, hardcover, soft cover)

These stories are also being published by Baen webscriptions as the Liaden Universe Big Bang consisting of &quot;Liaden Unibus I&quot; and &quot;Liaden Unibus II&quot;. This includes the first 12 Liaden Universe chapbooks. It does not include the chapbook &quot;Calamity&#x27;s Child&quot; (containing Liaden story &quot;Sweet Waters&quot; and non-Liaden &quot;A Night At the Opera&quot;), or the non-Liaden chapbooks &quot;The Naming of Kinzel&quot; and &quot;Master Walk&quot;.

Selected chapbooks are now being published by SRM Publisher (using the imprint Pinbeam Books) in the Amazon Kindle, Angus &amp; Robertson, Apple, Baen, Barnes and Noble Nook, Google Play, Indigo, Rakuten Kobo, Scribd, Mondadori and Thalia ebook stores. In all these stores, they are sold without DRM. See below for availability.

=== Table of Liaden Universe short stories and novelettes ===


==Factions==
In addition to members of the three main divisions of the human race Terran, Liaden, and Yxtrang, there are members of non-human races that are featured, such as Clutch Turtles, Cats, Norbears, and Ssussdriads.

===Liaden===
Home planet &quot;Liad&quot;. Liadens are usually shorter than the Terran norm, often with golden skin. They are deeply concerned with their &quot;melant&#x27;i&quot; which roughly corresponds to the concern with &quot;face&quot; for which Japanese samurai are famous. Some are almost rabidly isolationist; it is not uncommon for bigoted Liaden to refer to those of other races as &quot;it&quot;, likening them to animals. Several characters are part- or even half-Terran: this does not endear them to the isolationists.

Liaden society is clan-based, each Clan being made up of one or more families (&quot;lines&quot;). The Head of a Clan is the &quot;Delm&quot;, the head of a line is the &quot;Thodelm&quot;; either might be male or female as circumstances dictate.

Liaden Clans do not generally allow lifemating. Instead, Liadens practice contract marriages, where two individuals from different clans are ordered, or allowed, by their Delms to create a progeny for one of the two clans. This marriage is over when the terms of the contract are fulfilled. Most members of the clan must produce at least one progeny to replace them.

Lifemating is when two individuals become exclusively bound to one and other. This can happen rarely by order of a Delm, or this can happen by the physical, emotional, and spiritual bonding of two individuals with dramliza abilities (regardless of the depth of those abilities).

Some Liaden are trained as explorers: the Scouts. They are regarded with distaste by the more isolationist within Liaden society.

Most of the stories thus far center on members of Clan Korval, made up of the yos&#x27;Phelium and yos&#x27;Galan lines. Scouts also appear often.

Korval
* &quot;Val Con yos&#x27;Phelium&quot;: Delm, ex-Scout, &quot;Lifemate&quot; to Miri
* &quot;Shan yos&#x27;Galan&quot;: Master Trader, foster-brother to Val Con; &quot;Lifemate&quot; of Priscilla Delacroix y Mendoza; (current incarnation of &quot;Lute&quot;)
* &quot;Daav yos&#x27;Phelium&quot;: ex-Delm, ex-Scout, father to Val Con and Theo Waitley
** &quot;Jen Sar Kiladi&quot;: Daav&#x27;s alter ego, a professor of Cultural Genetics at Delgado University. Jen Sar was the &quot;onagrata&quot; of Kamele Waitley.
* &quot;Aelliana Caylon&quot;: &quot;Lifemate&quot; to Daav, mother to Val Con
* &quot;Er Thom yos&#x27;Galan&quot;: Master Trader, &quot;Lifemate&quot; of Anne Davis, father to Shan, Nova and Anthora
* &quot;Pat Rin yos&#x27;Phelium&quot;: cousin to Val Con
* &quot;Kareen yos&#x27;Phelium&quot;: sister to Daav, mother to Pat Rin, expert on &quot;The Code of proper conduct&quot;
* &quot;Anthora yos&#x27;Galan&quot;: sister to Shan and Nova, with preternatural (&quot;Dramliza&quot;) abilities
* &quot;Ren Zel dea&#x27;Judan&quot;: &quot;Lifemate&quot; to Anthora, with preternatural (&quot;Dramliza&quot;) abilities
* &quot;Nova yos&#x27;Galan&quot;: sister to Shan, Anthora and Val Con
* &quot;Luken bel&#x27;Tarda&quot;: cousin, rug dealer, foster father of Pat Rin.
* Children and younger members (in no particular order): Quinn, Padi, Syl Vor; Mik and Shindi; and Talizea.
* &quot;Jen Sin yos&#x27;Phelium&quot;: Chief Light Keeper at Tinsori Light. Thought to have died two hundred years ago, but was &quot;merely temporarily misplaced&quot;.

Others
* &quot;Jan Rek ter&#x27;Astin&quot;: Scout Captain, friend of Jethri Gobelyn
* &quot;Clonak ter&#x27;Meulen&quot;: Scout, friend of Daav and Val Con
* &quot;Shadia ne&#x27;Zame&quot;: Scout, friend of Clonak
* &quot;Win Ton yo&#x27;Vala&quot;: Scout, friend of Theo Waitley and Less Pilot of &quot;Bechimo&quot;
* &quot;Kara ven&#x27;Arith&quot;: Crew of &quot;Bechimo&quot;
* &quot;Vertu dea&#x27;San&quot;: Taxi driver originally from Liad, subsequently exiled to Surebleak. Significant Other to Cheever McFarland.

===Terran===
Home planet known as &quot;Terra&quot;. As remarked above, there is a brief reference to the possibility in which this planet would be the fourth of that name. Possibly one prior Terra would have been destroyed along with the war-torn universe/galaxy from which mankind fled in &quot;Crystal Dragon&quot;, though neither the word Terra, nor Terran appear in that book. From cultural references, familiar English names, and references to regional linguistic dialects that appear in the core books, it seems likely that this Terra is nonetheless our own Earth. There appears to be some resentment that the &quot;younger&quot; races (usually Liaden) hold more power in the realm of shipping and commerce than Terra; there is reference to at least one political party involved in less-than-legal operations. Based on the description of the Liaden as younger races, it may be reasonable to assume that they predated the Liaden arrival in the expanding universe. Whether they simply arrived sooner and separately from Cantra&#x27;s convoy or whether Terra existed in the expanded universe separately from the &quot;Predecessor&quot; universe is unclear.

The Juntavas are an organized-crime &quot;clan&quot; who appear in various guises, sometimes as antagonists, sometimes as allies of the main characters. Unlike the real-world mafia, the Juntavas are apparently able to act as an unopposed organized government in their own right, to the point of having appointed officials called Sector Judges who administer justice within their appointed jurisdictions. The Juntavas are usually not as oppressive as they might be, as it could be &quot;bad for business.&quot;

A number of other planets are known to have non-Liaden human inhabitants, presumably of the Terran strain. Some of these worlds, such as Surebleak and Delgado, were settled by Terrans from this universe&#x27;s Terra. Others, such as Sintia, were settled by ships from the same &quot;Crystal Dragon&quot;-era colonization waves as Liad and Terra.

Some of these colony worlds, such as Vandar, have backslid to pre-spaceflight technology levels. These worlds have been considered interdicted by the Liaden Scout Corps, with external contact forbidden in order to permit their societies to develop without interference. As of &quot;Prodigal Son&quot;, post–&quot;I Dare&quot;, there are signs that this policy may be changing.

Gobelyns
* &quot;Jethri Gobelyn&quot;: apprentice trader, apprenticed to Norn ven&#x27;Deelin
* &quot;Iza Gobelyn&quot;: Captain of Gobelyn&#x27;s Market, mother to Cris, Seeli, Jethri
* &quot;Arin Gobelyn&quot;: deceased, husband to Iza, father to Jethri, related to Uncle
* &quot;Cris Gobelyn&quot;: first mate of Gobelyn&#x27;s Market, Iza&#x27;s eldest child
* &quot;Dyk Gobelyn&quot;: junior on Gobelyn&#x27;s Market, cook
* &quot;Khatelane Gobelyn&quot;: pilot on Gobelyn&#x27;s Market
* &quot;Mel Gobelyn&quot;: on Gobelyn&#x27;s Market
* &quot;Paitor Gobelyn&quot;: trader on Gobelyn&#x27;s Market, brother to Iza
* &quot;Seeli Gobelyn&quot;: admin on Gobelyn&#x27;s Market, Iza&#x27;s second child
* &quot;Zam Gobelyn&quot;: on Gobelyn&#x27;s Market
* &quot;Grig Tomas&quot;: back-up everything on Gobelyn&#x27;s Market, Arin&#x27;s cousin, related to Uncle

Korval clan-members
* &quot;Anne Davis&quot;: &quot;Lifemate&quot; to Er Thom, mother to Shan, master linguist and musician
* &quot;Priscilla Delacroix y Mendoza&quot;: &quot;Lifemate&quot; to Shan (current incarnation of &quot;Moonhawk&quot;)
* &quot;Miri Robertson&quot;: half-Liaden &quot;Mercenary Retired, Bodyguard Retired, Have Weapon Will Travel&quot;, &quot;Lifemate&quot; to Val Con and joint Delm (Delmae)
* &quot;Inas Bhar&quot;: Juntavas Sector Judge Natesa the Assassin, &quot;Lifemate&quot; of Pat Rin
* &quot;Gordy Arbuthnot&quot;: cabin boy, &quot;Dutiful Passage&quot;. Shan&#x27;s cousin via the Davis side of the family.

Korval-linked
* &quot;Theo Waitley&quot;: recently discovered (by Delm Korval and the clan generally) daughter to Daav yos&#x27;Phelium and acknowledged in Ghost Ship as blood kin to Korval but not &quot;Seen&quot; by Delm Korval so not a clan member (Daav and Val Con would probably advise Theo against membership at present).
* &quot;Kamele Waitley&quot;: Theo&#x27;s mother and professor at Delgado University. Da&#x27;av was Kamele&#x27;s &quot;Onagrata&quot; using the name Jen Sar Kiladi after Aelliana&#x27;s murder.
* &quot;Cheever McFarland&quot;: Master Pilot, messenger to Korval, then Pat Rin&#x27;s bodyguard/chief of security.
* &quot;Clarence o&#x27;Berin&quot;: Juntavas Boss on Liad; after retirement sat Second on &quot;Bechimo&quot;.
* &quot;Tollance Berik-Jones&quot; aka &quot;Tolly&quot; aka &quot;1362&quot;: a mentor, who ensures that AIs are brought into awareness well socialized. Attached to Tocohl&#x27;s mission.

Uncle-linked
* (The) Uncle (aka Yuri Tomas): a serially reborn meddler with a finger in everybody&#x27;s pies, while at any one time tending a half-dozen certain-to-be-unsettling projects of his own. Uncle &quot;remembers&quot; the old universe. Has ties to Cantra and to some crew members of Gobelyn&#x27;s Market.
** Note: technically Uncle isn&#x27;t a Terran because he predates Terra.
* &quot;Seignur Veeoni&quot;: one of Uncle&#x27;s clones; she&#x27;s working on making modern-day fractins at an undisclosed location.
* &quot;Dulsey Omron&quot;: Uncle&#x27;s long-time companion and assistant.
* &quot;Grig (Grigory) Tomas&quot;: See Gobelyns.
* &quot;Raisy (Raisana) Thomas&quot;: Grig&#x27;s older twin sister.

Others
* &quot;Hakan Meltz&quot;: Val Con and Miri&#x27;s musical friend on Vandar
* &quot;Estra Trelu&quot;: person Val Con and Miri stayed with on Vandar
* &quot;Athna Brigsbee&quot;: Vandar busybody
* &quot;Kem Darmill&quot;: Hakan Meltz&#x27; girlfriend and later (by the time of &quot;Prodigal Son&quot;) wife.
* various &quot;Juntavas&quot;
* various people on &quot;Surebleak&quot;
* various people on Vandar

===Independent A.I.s===
* &quot;Jeeves&quot;: planetary security A.I. repurposed as butler to yos&#x27;Galen at &quot;Trealla Fantrol&quot;, but transferred to &quot;Jelaza Kazone&quot; upon Korval&#x27;s relocation to Surebleak.
* &quot;Tocohl Lorlin&quot; (Daughter of Korval): Jeeves&#x27; daughter. Currently in control of Tinsori Light.
* &quot;Bechimo&quot;: a &quot;sentient and sapient&quot; space ship, built long ago as a &quot;long-loop trader&quot;, incorporating &quot;old tech.&quot; He was rediscovered by Win Ton yo&#x27;Vala. Theo Waitley became his Captain.
* &quot;Admiral Bunter&quot;: Originally a composite AI, made up of seven semiderelict ships (with thirteen old and cramped computers between them) out of the junkyard at Jemiatha&#x27;s Jumble Stop. &quot;Admiral Bunter&quot; is Theo&#x27;s Fault. It guarded Jamiatha&#x27;s Jumble Stop Station from pirates for a time; it was later transferred to another &quot;cranium&quot; and ship by Mentor Tolly Jones, Tocol Lorin, and Inkirani Yo (another mentor), and has since become a &quot;Free Ship,&quot; no longer associated with Jamiatha&#x27;s Jumble Stop.
* &quot;Disian&quot;: A &quot;Free ship&quot; mentored by Tolly Jones.

===Yxtrang===
Home planet unknown at this time. Usually much larger than the Terran norm, they are a war-like people who live for conquest. They are almost universally prone to thinking of the other human races as animals.

References in &quot;Crystal Soldier&quot; and &quot;Crystal Dragon&quot; suggest that the Yxtrang are the descendants of a group of &quot;X Strain&quot; and &quot;Y Strain&quot; genetically engineered soldiers who served in a platoon with Jela and accompanied the human migration to the new universe. Some of them venerate Jela (an &quot;M Strain&quot;) for his skills and deeds as a warrior.

It is not known whether they can interbreed with Liadens or Terrans, though given their common genetic origin there is no reason why they should not be able to; the likely lifespan of such offspring is short, not for merely biological reasons.
* &quot;Nelirikk&quot;: ex-Explorer (equivalent to Scout), subsequently sworn to Line yos&#x27;Phelium, becomes Miri&#x27;s bodyguard; aka &quot;Beautiful&quot;.
* &quot;Hazenthull Explorer&quot;: junior Explorer, subsequently sworn to Line yos&#x27;Phelium.
* &quot;Diglon Rifle&quot;: enlisted soldier attached to Hazenthull, subsequently sworn to Line yos&#x27;Phelium.
* &quot;Commander Vepal&quot;: Yxtrang roving ambassador.
** &quot;Pilot Erthax&quot;: member of Vepal&#x27;s Small Troop.
** &quot;Ochin Rifle&quot;: member of Vepal&#x27;s Small Troop.

===Clutch Turtles===
These non-humans are even larger than Yxtrang and very long-lived; they appear much like turtles walking upright, hence the name. The length of their names are directly proportional to how old they are and their accomplishments: Edger&#x27;s full name apparently takes some hours to recite. They are usually slow to act, but are very dangerous when angered and can move quickly when needed.

Clutch turtles travel in starships made from hollowed-out asteroids using an electron substitution drive that can have hallucinogenic effects on the human nervous system. Both a &#x27;low drive&#x27; and &#x27;high drive&#x27; exist; usually the clutch turtles use the slower low drive, but used the considerably faster high drive in &quot;I Dare.&quot;

Clutch turtles are able to command forces of great destructive or healing potential by singing. Clutch turtles are greatly feared and avoided by the Yxtrang as the result of a resounding defeat in battle many years prior to the timeframe of the story.

The Clutch turtles encountered in the &quot;Agent of Change&quot; sequence make up a &quot;market research&quot; team on behalf of their clan, who are known for manufacturing crystalline blades of extreme sharpness and durability by growing them in caves over a timespan of decades.
* Edger
* Sheather
* Watcher
* Selector
* Handler

===Cats===
There are many cats which appear in the stories, usually by name, often taking an active part in the proceedings. Unlike ordinary housecats, these cats often display paranormal abilities, as well as considerable intelligence.
* &quot;Flinx&quot;: at Tarnia&#x27;s Clanhouse
* &quot;Lord Merlin&quot;: Anthora&#x27;s cat, very active in &quot;I Dare&quot;
* &quot;Patch&quot;: Binjali Repair Shop&#x27;s resident cat and &quot;co-owner&quot;
* &quot;Lady Dignity&quot;: Daav yos&#x27;Phelium&#x27;s answer to his sister&#x27;s complaint that he has no (dignity, that is)
* &quot;Relchin&quot;: An orange-and-white cat who &quot;enjoys the outdoors&quot; also resides with Daav yos&#x27;Phelium
* &quot;Silk&quot;: Pat Rin&#x27;s mouser and majordomo on Surebleak
* &quot;Charzi&quot;: lives in the Lysta Clanhouse in &quot;Misfits&quot;
* &quot;Coyster&quot;: Jen Sar Kiladi&#x27;s cat, attached to Theo Waitley on Delgado in &quot;Fledgling&quot;
* &quot;Mandrin&quot;: Jen Sar Kiladi&#x27;s black and white on Delgado

===Norbears===
Norbear—Size: 16–22 cm; Weight: 121–180 g. Furred quadrupedal herbivorous mammal with a burrowing habit possessing a soft dense coat, ranging in color from grey, brown, black, orange, white, or mixed. It has a fearless and lively disposition, and is a natural empath. Adapts well to domestication, but is banned on certain worlds.
* Master Frodo aboard the &quot;Dutiful Passage&quot; in &quot;Conflict of Honors&quot;.
* Hevelin (named after long-time science fiction fan Rusty Hevelin)
* Podesta: Hevelin&#x27;s great-granddaughter

===Trees (Ssussdriads)===
The race formally known as Ssussdriads. An unusual character is &quot;Jelaza Kazone&quot; (a term that has been translated as &quot;Jela&#x27;s Promise,&quot; &quot;Jela&#x27;s Contract,&quot; or &quot;Jela&#x27;s Dream,&quot; among other variants) and the seedlings thereof (of which only two have thus far appeared in narrative). This very large tree lives in the grounds of Clan Korval&#x27;s primary residence (also called Jelaza Kazone) and is in the habit of communicating its likes and dislikes to senior members of that clan; it has particularly been noted to have an interest in the likely parents of future children of the Clan.

As a young soldier, Jela found the tree on a desert planet on which his ship had crashed. Though barely a stunted seedling and the last member of a dying race, the tree was by itself able to repel invasion of the planet by the enemy Sheriekas. As an act of trust, the tree gave its only seed pod to feed the starving Jela. When Jela&#x27;s rescue came, he refused to leave the tree behind.

The tree proved to be intelligent, and able to communicate via mental images. It also had the ability to manipulate the chemistry of its seed pods to create useful pharmaceutical compounds. Both these powers proved useful as Jela and Cantra searched for information necessary for mankind to escape its collapsing universe.

The name &quot;Jelaza Kazone&quot; refers to the promise Cantra yos&#x27;Phelium made to Jela, who knew he was destined to die before the migration could be complete, to see the tree through to safety on the new human homeworld. Clan Korval holds itself the guardian of this promise in perpetuity, and every trading vessel of Korval carries a seed of the tree somewhere on board, to ensure the survival of its race.
* Tree mentioned in Plan B at Erob&#x27;s Clan house on Lytaxin.
* Seedling was installed on Cantra&#x27;s ship at the end of Crystal Dragon. This sapling was recovered, alive, in &quot;Neogenesis&quot;.
* Sapling planted on Yulie Sharper&#x27;s freeholding.
* Two saplings planted on yos&#x27;Galan&#x27;s island on SureBleak.

==Concepts==
===Melant&#x27;i===
A great deal of the Liaden culture centers on melant&#x27;i. Part of this concept is roughly analogous to personal honor or good manners: a person of impeccable melant&#x27;i will behave in a certain way, in a given situation. It is also used to distinguish between a person&#x27;s different roles in life. If one is speaking to a shipmate in one&#x27;s role as an officer of the ship, one uses a particular mode to cue the shipmate as to the formality of the situation, and is said to be expressing one&#x27;s melant&#x27;i as that officer. If, on the other hand, one is speaking to the same shipmate, but in the role of daughter, one uses a different mode and is expressing the melant&#x27;i as a family member. Different levels of formality, and actions, will be appropriate in each case.

===Bows and modes of speech===
====High and Low Liaden====
The High Liaden language is used for all formal conversations between people, reflecting the exact melant&#x27;i and roles of the two individuals. For example, a sentence might be in the role of Master Pilot to Student Pilot, while another sentence might be Parent to Child, or Adult to Adult, or Adult to Your Delm (your clan leader), or Adult to Another Delm (some else&#x27;s clan leader). The forms are symmetrical and directional, with Master Pilot to Student Pilot being a different mode than Student Pilot to Master Pilot. With High Liaden, you can always tell the roles that the speaker intends for the listener to interpret what is being said.

Low Liaden is reserved for informal family conversations.

====Liaden bows====
Bows are used by Liadens when both meeting and parting, and also reflect the exact melant&#x27;i and roles of the two individuals. Bows are precise and complicated.

===Space travel===
====Jump drive====
Human ships are able to travel quickly between planets by &quot;jumping&quot;; different technologies exist but are all fairly quick; journey durations are comparable to swift sea-travel here on Earth. Only the Clutch Turtles use a different method, with predictably idiosyncratic side-effects (of which few details are available).

Propulsion and artificial gravity is provided by &quot;Struven Surface Units&quot; which Theo describes as having a &quot;sense of presence.&quot; The sealed unit is the source of gravity that the ship generates and &quot;the source of the Struven Surface that the engines then amplified and tuned, building fields that allow the ship to interact with the lattice crystal of space-time and to move...elsewhere.&quot;

From &quot;The Gathering Edge&quot;:

====Ships====
Ships range from single-person courier, small trade craft, private ships, long-loop, and family trade ships (depreciated in modern shipping) to large trade ships (often carrying a Master Trader), bulk cargo ships, and large passenger liners. There are of course many specialty craft for station maintenance, and other utilitarian functions. In this era of relative peace, there is little mention of purpose-built military ships, except for the battleships of the warlike Yxtrang (though mercenary companies have troop ships and various support ships). Planetary governments may have small fleets of fighter craft, for defensive purposes, that operate both in air and near space. It is not uncommon, however, for merchant ships to carry weaponry to defend themselves from pirates and brigands. Some large trade ships, such as Korval&#x27;s &quot;Dutiful Passage&quot;, have incorporated enough weaponry to be considered full battleships.

====Pilots and piloting====
Pilots are shown deference in the Liaden Universe, both in Terran and Liaden space. This is due to respect and/or fear of the pilots&#x27; capabilities and their importance to the lifeblood of trade and commerce for planetary society. Pilots are addressed as &quot;Pilot&quot; as an honorific title.

Pilots must have superior reflexes, coordination, and spatial orientation. Pilots need proficiency in higher mathematics to be able to quickly and accurately solve equations in trajectory, orbital mechanics, and jump coordinates (to many decimal places); one does not place one&#x27;s life and one&#x27;s crew or passengers in peril should computer navigation fail. A pilot needs to be able to defend herself in the low port or away from civilization, thus trains in self-defense and personal weaponry.

The Pilot is responsible for the ship and passengers; the Co-pilot is responsible for the pilot and ship. (&quot;Bechimo&quot; adds, &quot;the ship is responsible for pilot and crew.&quot;) The pilot/captain operates the ship from the primary control board—&quot;sits First&quot;. The co-pilot, or acting co-pilot, &quot;sits Second&quot;. Larger ships may have a third board, communications officer, executive officer, etc.

Many, if not most, pilots belong to the Pilots Guild. The Guild takes 3% of the pilot&#x27;s income for life and in return provides many important services. These services include certification (required on many ships and lines), legal services and bail bonds, mailboxes with forwarding, hiring and personnel services and records, and in larger localities a Guild Hall with lounges, bars and/or cafes. Each Guild Hall has a Guild Master.

The Guild certified Pilot Classes:
* &quot;3rd Class&quot;: base level, qualified to work within system and orbit, operating ships not above Class B.
* &quot;2nd Class&quot;: mid-level, qualified to lift any ship to Class AA within system and orbit.
* &quot;1st Class&quot;: a.k.a., Jump Pilot, qualified to fly interplanetary space via &quot;Jump&quot; hyperspace technology.
* &quot;Master&quot;: one able to perform all aspects of piloting with excellence. This grade may undertake to train and test any of the lower three levels.

First Class Jump Pilots are awarded and wear a Pilot&#x27;s leather jacket. This heavy-duty garment, with many internal pockets, is both a sign of rank and protection against weather and misadventure. Only Jump Pilots wear a Pilot&#x27;s Jacket; this is not by law, but tends to be enforced through &quot;social pressure&quot; which may become physical.

In &quot;I Dare&quot;, Pat Rin is given a rating of &quot;1st Class S,&quot; S for &quot;small,&quot; until the pilot has enough flight time logged on the larger ships.

Master Pilots may train and certify pilots. All Liaden Scout Pilots are of Master Class. A pilot in training will be granted &quot;provisional&quot; status in grade as the student advances.

== Awards and recognition ==

==Fan fiction==
Lee and Miller strongly oppose any fan fiction written in the Liaden universe. &quot;We built our universes, and our characters; they are our intellectual property; and they are not toys lying about some virtual sandbox for other kids to pick up and modify at their whim. Steve and I do not sanction fanfic written in our universes; any such work that exists, exists without our permission, and certainly without our support.&quot;

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6539426" start="0" end="15" title="Liaden universe" label="Liaden Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="37" end="52" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q4260664" start="76" end="86" title="Sharon Lee (writer)" label="Sharon Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4293514" start="91" end="103" title="Steve Miller (science fiction writer)" label="Steve Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q468478" start="141" end="152" title="space opera" label="space opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q858330" start="154" end="161" title="Romance novel" label="romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q8261" start="242" end="247" title="novel" label="novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558308" start="256" end="264" title="chapbook" label="chapbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q193162" start="1870" end="1876" title="Usenet" label="Usenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558308" start="2154" end="2162" title="chapbook" label="chapbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q984966" start="2500" end="2511" title="Mass market" label="mass-market"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562301" start="2524" end="2531" title="Del Rey Books" label="Del Rey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6810321" start="2581" end="2594" title="Meisha Merlin Publishing" label="Meisha Merlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q536795" start="2704" end="2713" title="Ace Books" label="Ace Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q799732" start="2853" end="2863" title="Baen Books" label="Baen Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329919" start="3574" end="3584" title="Progenitor" label="Progenitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5579340" start="4509" end="4526" title="Golden Duck Awards" label="Hal Clement Award"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4952" end="4975" title="#Forthcoming" label="&amp;quot;Forthcoming&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q41374" start="10496" end="10507" title="incarnation" label="incarnation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4841271" start="12082" end="12095" title="webscriptions" label="webscriptions"/>
<link wikidata="Q38142" start="13388" end="13404" title="Japanese Samurai" label="Japanese samurai"/>
<link wikidata="Q651658" start="17639" end="17647" title="shipping" label="shipping"/>
<link wikidata="Q26643" start="17652" end="17660" title="commerce" label="commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278" start="17708" end="17723" title="political party" label="political party"/>
<link wikidata="Q370330" start="17986" end="17992" title="convoy" label="convoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18550" start="18284" end="18289" title="mafia" label="mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q223044" start="25674" end="25680" title="turtle" label="turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q146" start="26945" end="26948" title="cat" label="cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q332102" start="27096" end="27106" title="paranormal" label="paranormal"/>
<link wikidata="Q116701448" start="28225" end="28231" title="empath" label="empath"/>
<link wikidata="Q11395" start="28248" end="28261" title="domestication" label="domestication"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382596" start="28438" end="28451" title="Rusty Hevelin" label="Rusty Hevelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385709" start="28783" end="28791" title="seedling" label="seedling"/>
<link wikidata="Q461524" start="37219" end="37230" title="fan fiction" label="fan fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q25397095" start="37396" end="37403" title="Sandbox game" label="sandbox"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="444355" wikidata="Q770363" url="?curid=444355" title="Húrin">
<text>Húrin is a fictional character in the Middle-earth legendarium of J. R. R. Tolkien. He is introduced in &quot;The Silmarillion&quot; as a hero of Men during the First Age, said to be the greatest warrior of both the Edain (Men of Númenor and their descendants) and all Men in Middle-earth. His actions, however, bring catastrophe and ruin to his family and to the people of Beleriand.

Scholars have remarked the power and grimness of the tale. Tom Shippey calls the scene where Húrin is freed after 28 years by the Dark Lord Morgoth the &quot;lyric core&quot; of the tale of the fall of Gondolin. Christopher Garbowski comments that when Húrin cries aloud, revealing the hidden entrance to Gondolin, the effect is quite unlike that of &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot;. Helen Lasseter Freeh comments on the version in &quot;Unfinished Tales&quot; where Húrin and Morgoth discuss luck and fate in Middle-earth. Shippey remarks that Tolkien often provides double explanations of events throughout his Middle-earth writings, so that their cause could be luck, but could equally be fate, the will of the godlike Valar.

== Fictional history ==



Húrin is the elder son of Galdor of the House of Hador and Hareth of the Men of Haladin, who are Edain; his younger brother is Huor. They live with their uncle Haldir in Dor-lómin in Beleriand, and join a war party against the Orcs. The brothers are cut off from their company and chased by Orcs in the Vale of Sirion. The Vala Ulmo, Lord of Waters, causes a mist to arise from the river, and they escape. Two Eagles bring them to the hidden Elvish city of Gondolin. King Turgon welcomes them, remembering Ulmo&#x27;s prophecy that the House of Hador will aid Gondolin in its time of need. Turgon&#x27;s nephew Maeglin urges that they not be allowed to leave, but Turgon overrides him; swearing secrecy, they return to Dor-lómin.

Morgoth&#x27;s orcs attack Hithlum, killing Húrin&#x27;s father; Húrin chases the Orcs away and becomes the Lord of his people. He marries Morwen, who bears him a son, Túrin, and a daughter, Nienor. Húrin rides his horse Arroch, &#x27;Noble horse&#x27;, to battle alongside his brother. In the midst of battle he meets Turgon again. Losing the battle, Húrin and Huor take a stand, allowing Turgon to escape. Huor is killed, but Húrin fights until he is buried under a mountain of Orcs and Trolls. Gothmog Lord of Balrogs brings him to Morgoth&#x27;s fortress, Angband. Morgoth tries to force Húrin to reveal where Gondolin is. When Húrin refuses, Morgoth curses him along with his kin and puts him on a high mountain peak in chains, and lets him see and hear from the seat the evils that will befall his son and daughter, but not the good they will do. Húrin is embittered to learn that his children, both under a dragon-spell, marry each other, conceive a child, and commit suicide.

After twenty-eight years of imprisonment and the death of his children, Morgoth releases Húrin: &quot;He had grown grim to look upon: his hair and beard were white and long, but there was a fell light in his eyes. He walked unbowed, and yet carried a great black staff; but he was girt with a sword.&quot; He is brought to his old homelands, but enemies are living there. Seven outlaws join Húrin; they go to the Vale of Sirion. Húrin abandons his followers and seeks the entrance to Gondolin, but it is closed, and Turgon does not wish to allow him in. Húrin cries out against Turgon, revealing the location of Gondolin to Morgoth&#x27;s spies, and leaves. Too late, Turgon changes his mind and sends Eagles, but they do not find Húrin.

Húrin travels to the forest of Brethil where his son and daughter died, and meets Morwen at their grave, just before she dies. In anger and despair he seeks out the Folk of Haleth, blaming them for the deaths of his wife and children; a revolt ensues, killing the last Haladin. Hardang the Chieftain of Brethil fears and imprisons Húrin. A leader, Manthor, sets the people against Hardang; they kill him. Manthor too is killed; he asks Húrin: &quot;Was not this your true errand, Man of the North: to bring ruin upon us to weigh against thine own?&quot;

Húrin and the outlaws go to Nargothrond. They take the dragon&#x27;s gold from the dwarf who had claimed it, to avenge his family. They bring the treasure, including the dwarves&#x27; necklace, the Nauglamír, to Doriath; they insult Thingol by giving the necklace as payment for his care of Húrin&#x27;s kin. This brings a curse on Doriath, leading to its downfall. Melian the Maia, queen of Doriath, uses kind words to reach Húrin&#x27;s clouded mind. Húrin sees that all his deeds have only aided Morgoth. A broken man, he drowns himself in the sea, ending the life of the &quot;mightiest of the warriors of mortal men&quot;.

== Descent of Húrin ==
== Analysis ==

=== Effects ===

The Tolkien scholar Tom Shippey writes that the &quot;lyric core&quot; of the story of the fall of Gondolin, the source of narrative dynamism amidst all the description and genealogy in &quot;The Silmarillion&quot;, is the scene where Húrin is set free after 28 years imprisoned by Morgoth. In his view, &quot;everything in this scene is emblematic&quot;; the sun sets behind the Mountains of Shadow, standing for the coming catastrophe, but &quot;the real sunset is in Húrin&#x27;s heart&quot;. The dynamism is revealed, Shippey writes, by asking who is at fault on this occasion: is it Húrin, for despair, or Turgon, for being suspicious? Shippey comments that to answer fully would be to retell &quot;the whole unhappy story of Middle-earth.&quot; He explains that the matter hinges on &quot;a conflict of kinship&quot;; Húrin remembers from many years earlier how he suffered to help Turgon; but though Turgon knows Húrin&#x27;s situation, the royal Elf &quot;refuses to trust the man who saved him once&quot;, and does not relent until it is too late. It is thus vital to the scene, and to the whole story, that the reader appreciates why Húrin goes into this emotional sunset; and that in turn requires the reader to know about his kinship with Turgon, from the family tree. 

Christopher Garbowski writes in the &quot;J.R.R. Tolkien Encyclopedia&quot; that the depiction of Húrin in &quot;The War of the Jewels&quot;, crying aloud in the wilderness by the hidden entrance to Gondolin, creates a very different and far less optimistic and effect to that of &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot;, which had already been written. The Vala Manwe sends an eagle to Turgon for help, but the account seems, writes Garbowski, to allow no time for the message to arrive. He calls Shippey&#x27;s description of the scene, a &quot;posed tableau&quot;, apt.

=== Tolkien&#x27;s choices ===

Alex Lewis, writing in &quot;Mythlore&quot;, asserts that Tolkien introduced a historical bias into the tale of Húrin&#x27;s coming to Gondolin. He suggests that Tolkien chose to favour Turgon at the expense of Maeglin, because Turgon was a direct ancestor of Elrond. Since in Tolkien&#x27;s view ancestry indicated character, that meant that Turgon had to be spared the blame for the fall of Gondolin – Húrin had to take this blame in his place. Lewis comments that the long version in &quot;The Book of Lost Tales&quot; differs markedly from the account in &quot;The Silmarillion&quot; here. He notes that Tolkien started to revise the tale but never completed the revision. Lewis asserts, too, that &quot;Hurin was a far better tactician than Fingon or Turgon. He had the best idea of keeping the high-ground advantage&quot;, putting this down to Tolkien&#x27;s bias in favour of Elves over Men.

David Greenman, also in &quot;Mythlore&quot;, proposes a classical influence on Tolkien. He describes the sad tale of Húrin as &quot;Aristotelian Epic-Tragedy&quot;, as defined in the &quot;Poetics&quot; in terms of Aristotelian elements such as &quot;plot, ... spectacle, language, character, ... reversal, and catharsis&quot;.

The attorney Douglas Kane, writing in &quot;Tolkien Studies&quot;, discusses Húrin&#x27;s trial as described in &quot;The Wanderings of Húrin&quot;, published in &quot;The War of the Jewels&quot;. He assaults Hardang with a stool; he is drugged and put on trial; Manthor advises him. Húrin &quot;falsely charges&quot; the people of Brethil with failing to help Morwen. Kane calls the tale &quot;some of Tolkien&#x27;s most incisive political commentary&quot;, citing &quot;Húrin&#x27;s cold comfort to Manthor on his deathbed&quot;: telling Manthor that his friendship &quot;was rooted in self-interest&quot;, as he hoped to &quot;use his defense of Húrin to further his own ambition to become the Chieftain.&quot;

=== Fate and free will ===

The Tolkien scholar Helen Lasseter Freeh notes that the longer version of the tale of Túrin Turambar in &quot;Unfinished Tales&quot; (the &quot;Narn&quot;) contains a dialogue between Morgoth and Húrin about fate and providence. Despite his imprisonment, Húrin insists that Morgoth cannot control everything. While Morgoth does not directly contradict this, he says he will spread a &quot;cloud of Doom&quot; on everyone Húrin loves, and &quot;wherever they go, evil shall arise&quot;. Túrin lives a life of disaster, in which Freeh sees the hand of fate, which threatens to overwhelm Túrin&#x27;s free will. Shippey comments that Morgoth is one of the Valar, whose power in the world appears as luck, or chance, or fate. Terrible things in the &quot;Narn&quot; seem to be coincidences; but, writes Shippey, Tolkien often gives double explanations of these events, one fate, one just accident.

== See also ==

* &quot;The Children of Húrin&quot;, a novel assembled by Christopher Tolkien from his father&#x27;s fragmentary manuscripts
* The Lay of the Children of Húrin, an early alliterative poem telling of the tragic life of Húrin&#x27;s son Túrin.

== References ==

===Primary===

===Secondary===
===Sources===
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q770363" start="0" end="5" title="Húrin" label="Húrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q79734" start="38" end="50" title="Middle-earth" label="Middle-earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q81738" start="51" end="62" title="legendarium" label="legendarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q892" start="66" end="82" title="J. R. R. Tolkien" label="J. R. R. Tolkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q79762" start="110" end="126" title="The Silmarillion" label="The Silmarillion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621322" start="146" end="149" title="Man (Middle-earth)" label="Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267028" start="161" end="170" title="First Age" label="First Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621322" start="216" end="221" title="Edain" label="Edain"/>
<link wikidata="Q211686" start="230" end="237" title="Númenor" label="Númenor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451581" start="374" end="383" title="Beleriand" label="Beleriand"/>
<link wikidata="Q95120" start="445" end="456" title="Tom Shippey" label="Tom Shippey"/>
<link wikidata="Q80453" start="526" end="533" title="Morgoth" label="Morgoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q340515" start="580" end="596" title="fall of Gondolin" label="fall of Gondolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15228" start="742" end="763" title="The Lord of the Rings" label="The Lord of the Rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q309019" start="825" end="841" title="Unfinished Tales" label="Unfinished Tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q116980764" start="880" end="909" title="luck and fate in Middle-earth" label="luck and fate in Middle-earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q123358649" start="932" end="974" title="Tolkien&amp;#x27;s ambiguity" label="Tolkien often provides double explanations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621322" start="1241" end="1246" title="Edain" label="Edain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451581" start="1327" end="1336" title="Beleriand" label="Beleriand"/>
<link wikidata="Q194061" start="1371" end="1375" title="Orc (Middle-earth)" label="Orcs"/>
<link wikidata="Q78493" start="1467" end="1471" title="Vala (Middle-earth)" label="Vala"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292021" start="1554" end="1560" title="Eagle (Middle-earth)" label="Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q203904" start="1586" end="1592" title="Elves in Middle-earth" label="Elvish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154417" start="1601" end="1609" title="Gondolin" label="Gondolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154417" start="1616" end="1622" title="Turgon of Gondolin" label="Turgon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154417" start="1755" end="1762" title="Maeglin" label="Maeglin"/>
<link wikidata="Q80453" start="1875" end="1882" title="Morgoth" label="Morgoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451581" start="1902" end="1909" title="Hithlum" label="Hithlum"/>
<link wikidata="Q572434" start="2043" end="2048" title="Túrin Turambar" label="Túrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q572434" start="2066" end="2072" title="Nienor" label="Nienor"/>
<link wikidata="Q899421" start="2364" end="2370" title="Troll (Middle-earth)" label="Trolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q716204" start="2388" end="2394" title="Balrog" label="Balrog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451581" start="2435" end="2442" title="Angband (Middle-earth)" label="Angband"/>
<link wikidata="Q331651" start="2663" end="2695" title="The Children of Húrin" label="will befall his son and daughter"/>
<link wikidata="Q10737" start="2850" end="2857" title="suicide" label="suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154417" start="3344" end="3352" title="Gondolin" label="Gondolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q340515" start="3446" end="3480" title="The Fall of Gondolin" label="revealing the location of Gondolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451581" start="4182" end="4193" title="Nargothrond" label="Nargothrond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451581" start="4366" end="4373" title="Doriath (Middle-earth)" label="Doriath"/>
<link wikidata="Q734128" start="4387" end="4394" title="Thingol" label="Thingol"/>
<link wikidata="Q753788" start="4520" end="4526" title="Melian (Middle-earth)" label="Melian"/>
<link wikidata="Q719506" start="4531" end="4535" title="Maia (Middle-earth)" label="Maia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3592629" start="4843" end="4858" title="Tolkien research" label="Tolkien scholar"/>
<link wikidata="Q95120" start="4859" end="4870" title="Tom Shippey" label="Tom Shippey"/>
<link wikidata="Q340515" start="4930" end="4946" title="fall of Gondolin" label="fall of Gondolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q97274144" start="5012" end="5021" title="Tolkien&amp;#x27;s Middle-earth family trees" label="genealogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q82951" start="6164" end="6191" title="J.R.R. Tolkien Encyclopedia" label="J.R.R. Tolkien Encyclopedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q503921" start="6235" end="6256" title="The War of the Jewels" label="The War of the Jewels"/>
<link wikidata="Q15228" start="6408" end="6429" title="The Lord of the Rings" label="The Lord of the Rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q78493" start="6478" end="6483" title="Manwë (Middle-earth)" label="Manwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q92550" start="6750" end="6758" title="Mythlore" label="Mythlore"/>
<link wikidata="Q208426" start="6981" end="6987" title="Elrond" label="Elrond"/>
<link wikidata="Q115819904" start="6995" end="7046" title="Ancestry as guide to character in Tolkien&amp;#x27;s legendarium" label="in Tolkien&amp;#x27;s view ancestry indicated character"/>
<link wikidata="Q340401" start="7214" end="7236" title="The Book of Lost Tales" label="The Book of Lost Tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q79762" start="7286" end="7302" title="The Silmarillion" label="The Silmarillion"/>
<link wikidata="Q217190" start="7467" end="7473" title="Fingon" label="Fingon"/>
<link wikidata="Q117468754" start="7678" end="7708" title="Tolkien and the classical world" label="classical influence on Tolkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q80930" start="7754" end="7779" title="Aristotelian tragedy" label="Aristotelian Epic-Tragedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q835023" start="7811" end="7818" title="Poetics" label="Poetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q40348" start="7955" end="7963" title="lawyer" label="attorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779252" start="7995" end="8010" title="Tolkien Studies" label="Tolkien Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q503921" start="8069" end="8092" title="The Wanderings of Húrin" label="The Wanderings of Húrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q503921" start="8119" end="8140" title="The War of the Jewels" label="The War of the Jewels"/>
<link wikidata="Q78493" start="9348" end="9353" title="Valar" label="Valar"/>
<link wikidata="Q116980764" start="9391" end="9415" title="Luck and fate in Middle-earth" label="luck, or chance, or fate"/>
<link wikidata="Q123358649" start="9517" end="9542" title="Tolkien&amp;#x27;s ambiguity" label="gives double explanations"/>
<link wikidata="Q331651" start="9614" end="9635" title="The Children of Húrin" label="The Children of Húrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q340607" start="9733" end="9765" title="The Lay of the Children of Húrin" label="The Lay of the Children of Húrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397862" start="9776" end="9793" title="Alliterative verse" label="alliterative poem"/>
<link wikidata="Q572434" start="9841" end="9846" title="Túrin Turambar" label="Túrin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="444368" wikidata="Q198815" url="?curid=444368" title="Goat cheese">
<text>Goat cheese, goat&#x27;s cheese or  ( ; from the French with the same meaning) is cheese made from goat&#x27;s milk. Goats were among the first animals to be domesticated for producing food. Goat cheese is made around the world with a variety of recipes, giving many different styles of cheeses, from fresh and soft to aged and hard.

== Properties ==

=== History ===
Goats produce high-quality, nutrient-rich milk under even the most difficult environments, making them valuable to arid or mountainous areas where cattle and sheep cannot survive. In addition, like all animal products, goat milk is heavily influenced by what the goats are eating. Because goats have hardy digestive systems, they tend to eat many bitter plants that more delicate animals such as cows and horses will not. Goats were one of the earliest animals domesticated to suit human needs—more specifically milk production—going back to 8,000 BC, 10,000 years ago. Goat cheese has been made at least as far back as 5,000 BC; the first documented proof of humans making cheese of any kind dates to 7,500 years ago in Poland.

=== Nutritional value ===
Goat milk has higher proportions of medium-chain fatty acids, such as caproic and caprylic, which contribute to the characteristic tart/&quot;goat&quot; flavor of the cheese. They also make goat milk and cheeses more easily digestible.

Goat milk, and therefore goat cheeses, contain anti-inflammatory enzymes, probiotics, antioxidants, proteins, and lipids and help maintain a healthy metabolism. These fatty acids take their name from the Latin for &#x27;goat&#x27;, . They are also high in calcium, vitamins A and K, phosphorus, thiamin, and niacin. Overall, the consumption of per day of cheese (both control and enriched), within the context of a balanced hypocaloric diet and recommendations for physical activity, was effective for the reduction of body weight, body mass index and waist circumference.

=== Process ===
Goat cheese is made like other cheeses. The milk is filtered to remove unwanted impurities or deposits. A curdling starter agent is added, which can be rennet, or one or more starter bacteria that affect the curds&#x27; size and eventually the cheese&#x27;s consistency. Some examples of starters are &quot;Lactococcus lactis lactis, L. l. cremoris&quot;, and &quot;Streptococcus thermophilus.&quot; Next, the cheese is molded and separated from the whey (the uncurdled liquid part of the milk). The curds are then molded, dried, flavored, and cured. Any variations in this process—the type of starter, the time or pressure of the draining, the temperature and duration of the curing process—can change the texture (soft, semihard, hard) and the flavor.

== Regional varieties ==

===Asia===
==== China ====
* is a fresh goat cheese from Yunnan Province, resembling the Indian &quot;paneer,&quot; a cow&#x27;s cheese.
* &quot;Shosha&quot; is a pungent cheese and staple food in Tibetan cuisine of the Tibet Autonomous Region that is often made from animals suited to the climate, such as goat and yak.

==== Japan ====
* cheese is a goat cheese made in Japan. is the Japanese word for goat.

==== Philippines ====
* &quot;Kesong puti&quot; is a Filipino soft, unaged, white cheese made from unskimmed carabao milk and salt curdled with vinegar, citrus juices, or sometimes rennet. It can also be made with goat or cow milk. It has a mild salty and tart flavor. When an acidifying agent is used, it resembles &quot;queso blanco&quot; or &quot;paneer&quot;. When rennet is used, it resembles buffalo mozzarella. The name, also spelled &quot;quesong puti&quot;, is Tagalog for &quot;white cheese&quot;) and is its name in the provinces of Laguna and Bulacan. In Cavite, it is known as &quot;kesilyo &quot;(also &quot;kasilyo &quot;or &quot;quesillo&quot;); while in northern Cebu, it is known as &quot;queseo &quot;or &quot;kiseyo&quot;.

==== Western Asia ====
* Yeghegnadzor goat cheese from Armenia.
* Akkawi cheese (, also Akawi, Akawieh and Ackawi) is a white brine cheese named after the city of Akka (Acre, present-day Israel).
* Darfyieh is a flavorful cheese that comes specifically from baladi goats and is treated as a delicacy in Dargyieh.
* Djamid or Jameed is an unripened, hard cheese with a salt encrusted rind popular in Jordan and Syria.
* Jibneh Arabieh () (also jibni) is a soft white cheese found all over the Middle East. It is particularly popular in the Persian Gulf region. The cheese has a mild taste similar to feta but less salty. The heritage of the product started with Bedouins using goat or sheep milk; however, current practice is to use cow&#x27;s milk to make the cheese. Jibneh Arabieh is used for cooking, or simply as a table cheese.
* Labneh is consumed in many parts of the world. It is primarily produced in Egypt, Israel, Lebanon, Syria, Palestine and Jordan but also throughout much of the Middle-east. It can be served with olive-oil, or seasoned with mint, eaten with salad or as dessert.
* Nabulsi cheese Nabulsi or naboulsi is one of a number of Palestinian white brined cheeses made in the Middle East and Palestine. Its name refers to its place of origin, Nablus and it is well known throughout the West Bank and surrounding regions. Nabulsi, along with Akkawi cheese, is one of the principal cheeses consumed in Jordan. It is produced primarily from sheep milk; alternatively, goat&#x27;s milk may be used.
* Circassian cheese ( , &quot;adygeyskiy syr&quot;, is a cheese found across the North Caucasus, the Levant and other areas with a Circassian diaspora. The cheese is prepared with raw cow, sheep and/or goats milk (Adyghean cheese - only with cow milk) and molded into a wooden basket.
* Circassian smoked cheese is a smoked low-fat Circassian cheese, especially produced in the eastern Marmara region of Turkey. It is light yellow or cream-colored with a thick crust. After curdling and straining, the bottom and top of the cheese are salted and it is smoked with pinewood or thick pitch pine in smoking rooms. This process makes the cheese both more flavorful and more long-lasting.

===Europe===
==== Balkans ====
* Sirene cheese (; ; ; /) also known as &quot;white brine sirene&quot; () is a type of brined cheese made in the Balkans (South-Eastern Europe), especially popular in Bulgaria, Serbia, Montenegro, Bosnia and Herzegovina, North Macedonia, Romania, Albania, Greece and also in Israel and Lebanon. It is made of the milk of goats, sheep, or cows, or a mixture of these.
==== Cyprus ====
* Anari (, ) is a fresh mild whey cheese produced in Cyprus. Although much less known than other Cypriot cheeses (e.g. halloumi), it gained popularity following publicity.
* Halloumi or haloumi (, ) is a traditional Cypriot cheese made from a mixture of goat&#x27;s and sheep&#x27;s milk, and sometimes also cow&#x27;s milk.

==== Denmark ====
* Rosa mundo.
** Fenna mundo, Flora mundo, Geta mundo, Vita mundo. 
* Cumulu blue.

There are many different goat cheeses made in Denmark.

==== Finland ====
* Leipäjuusto (bread cheese) or juustoleipä (; or brödost), also known in the United States as Finnish squeaky cheese, is a Finnish fresh cheese traditionally made from cow&#x27;s beestings, rich milk from a cow that has recently calved. Reindeer or even goat milk can also be used. Commercially available versions are typically made from cow&#x27;s milk, and they lack some of the colour and flavour because of this. The cheese originally comes from Southern Ostrobothnia, Northern Finland, and Kainuu.

==== France ====

France produces a great number of goat milk cheeses, especially in the Loire Valley and Poitou.

* Chevre is a soft, creamy, melt-in-mouth cheese that can have a fruity taste to it. It is usually covered in a light colored rind or skin. It is not aged for very long. It is sometimes served hot as chèvre chaud.
** Banon cheese, Bucheron, Cabécou, Cathare, Chabis, Chaubier, Chavroux, Chabichou, Chevrotin, Clochette, Couronne Lochoise, Crottin de Chavignol, Faisselle, Montrachet (Burgundy), Montrachet Bourgogne, Pélardon, Picodon, Pouligny Saint-Pierre, Pouligny-Saint-Pierre cheese, Rigotte de Condrieu, Rocamadour, Sainte-Maure de Touraine, Selles-sur-Cher cheese, Chabichou du Poitou, Valençay, and Pyramide.

==== Greece ====
* Feta is made primarily of ewe&#x27;s milk, with up to 30% of goat milk. Sheep (≥70%) and goat per PDO; similar cheeses may contain cow or buffalo milk.
* Mizithra or myzithra is a whey cheese which can be produced from the whey left over from goat cheeses. It is served either fresh or dried.
* Anthotyros () or (Anthotyro in modern Greek, &quot;flowery cheese&quot;) is a traditional fresh cheese is a whey cheese using the whey from Kefalotyri or Graviera production and can be made from milk from goats, sheep or a combination. There are dry Anthotyros and fresh Anthotyros. Dry Anthotyros is a matured cheese similar to Mizithra. Anthotyros is made with milk and whey milk. It is served fresh or dried. Anthotyros is produced in Greece, commonly in Thrace, Macedonia, the Ionian Islands and Crete.
* Manouri () is a Greek semi-soft, fresh white mixed milk-whey cheese made from goat or sheep milk. It is produced primarily in Thessalia and Macedonia in central and northern Greece.
* Formaela () is a hard cheese produced exclusively in Arachova, Greece. It is famous throughout Greece and has been registered in the European Union as a protected designation of origin since 1996. Formaela is prepared mainly from sheep&#x27;s milk or goat&#x27;s milk, has a hard and cohesive shell and is a light yellow color, without holes.
* Kasseri or Kaşar (Greek: κασέρι, Turkish: kaşar is a medium-hard or hard pale yellow cheese made from pasteurised or unpasteurised sheep milk and at most 20% goat&#x27;s milk. Kasseri is of semi-hard to hard consistency, smooth rather than crumbly, chewy, and with a hard rind. It belongs to the pasta filata family of cheeses, which includes fresh cheeses like mozzarella and aged ones like Provolone or Caciocavallo. Kasseri is a protected designation of origin, according to which the cheese must be made in the Greek provinces of Thessaly, Macedonia, Lesbos, or Xanthi, but a similar type of cheese is found in Turkey, Romania, and the Balkans, where it is known as kashkaval. The same cheese is made with cow&#x27;s milk, but in that case it cannot be legally sold as kasseri in the EU and is instead sold under names that are particular to each producer.
* Kefalotyri or kefalotiri (, ) is a hard, salty white cheese made from sheep milk or goat&#x27;s milk (or both) in Greece and Cyprus. A similar cheese Kefalograviera, also made from sheep or goat milk (or both), is sometimes sold outside Greece and Cyprus as Kefalotyri. Depending on the mixture of milk used in the process the color can vary between yellow and white.
* Xynomizithra or xynomyzithra () is a Greek whey cheese with some added milk; it is a sour variant of Mizithra, and made from ewes&#x27; and/or goats&#x27; milk. The proportion of full-cream milk is about 15%.
* Xynotyro or Xynotyri is an unpasteurized whey cheese from Greece made from sheep&#x27;s milk or goat&#x27;s milk, with a hard and flaky consistency, a pungent aroma and a yogurt-like sweet and sour taste. &quot;Xynotyri&quot; means &quot;sour cheese&quot; in Greek. Traditionally, the cheese is drained and cured in reed baskets or allowed to mature in bags made of animal skin. Cow&#x27;s milk is not utilized in the production.

==== Ireland ====
* Ardagh Castle.
* Ardsallagh Goat Farm a lot of different Irish cheese.
* Clonmore Cheese.
* Cooleeney Farmhouse Cheese.
* Corleggy Cheese.
* Gleann Gabhra.
* Glyde Farm Produce Irish cheese.
* St Tola.
* Tullyboy.

==== Italy ====

* Caprino is a term encompassing at least 33 different goat milk cheeses produced in Italy, equivalent to the French chèvre
*Acidino (tr. &quot;slightly acid&quot;), produced in Veneto
*Agrì di Valtorta, produced in Lombardy
*Formaggio di capra di Lagundo (or Algunder Ziegenkäse), produced in South Tyrol
*Canestrato di Moliterno Stagionato in Fondaco, produced mixing sheep and goat milk in Apulia and Basilicata
*Casu axedu (also called Frughe, Frue or Merca) produced in Sardinia
*Cavrin (or Cevrin) di Coazze, produced in Piedmont
*Ircano, produced in Sardinia
*Salignon, a smoked cheese produced in the lower Aosta Valley
*Mozzarella made of Italian Mediterranean buffalo traditionally; cattle cows in all 167 Italian regions; in some areas also sheep and goat
*Ricotta is produced from the whey that from cheesemaking and whey cheese made from sheep, cow, goat, or Italian water buffalo milk whey left over from the production of other cheeses. &quot;Ricotta&quot; means &#x27;re-cooked&#x27;, and is made by reheating the whey, until the clotted cheese curds rise to the top, where they are skimmed and molded.
* Robiola is an Italian soft-ripened cheese of the Stracchino family. It is from the Langhe region and made with varying proportions of cow&#x27;s, goat&#x27;s, and sheep&#x27;s milk. One theory is that the cheese gets its name from the town of Robbio in the province of Pavia; another that the name comes from the word rubeole (ruddy) because of the color of the seasoned rind. Varieties of Robiola are produced across Piedmont from the provinces of Cuneo, Asti and Alessandria and into Lombardy. It is one of the specialties of the Aosta Valley.
*Caciotta, from the Tuscan , is a type of cheese produced in Italy from the milk of cows, sheep, goats, or water buffalo. Cacciotta has more than a dozen variations.
**Caciotta marchigiana.
*Bastardo del Grappa is a traditional cheese produced in the foothills of Monte Grappa massif and in the provinces of Treviso, Belluno, and Vicenza, in Italy. Bastardo del Grappa is a product related genuinely to the area of Monte Grappa massif and around Borso del Grappa, Crespano del Grappa, Paderno del Grappa, Possagno, Cavaso del Tomba, Alano di Piave, Quero, Feltre, Seren del Grappa, Arsiè, Cismon del Grappa, San Nazario, Solan, Pove del Grappa, and Romano d&#x27;Ezzelino.

==== Malta ====

* A ġbejna is a small goat&#x27;s- or sheep&#x27;s-milk cheese. Various types are found which include; fresh (friski or tal-ilma), sundried (moxxa, bajda or ta&#x27; Għawdex), salt cured (maħsula), peppered (tal-bżar) and seasoned (imħawra).
** Gbejna friska - a fresh cheeselet similar to ricotta in texture - native to Maltese Islands.
** Gbejna tal bzar - same as above but aged and coated in black pepper - native to Maltese Islands.
** Gbejna mghoxxa - same as the fresh cheeslet but left to air dry - native to Maltese Islands.

==== Netherlands ====
* The Westerkwartier, the region west of the city of Groningen, has a relatively large concentration of organic goat-cheese farms. Well known goat cheeses from this region are Machedoux and Quiorio, brie-like cheeses served in restaurants all over the Netherlands and in Belgium and northern Germany. In other parts of the Netherlands, goat cheese is usually made in the Gouda style.

==== Norway ====
* Geitost, which means &quot;goat cheese&quot;, is brown and made from goat milk and whey. Other brown cheeses, such as Brunost (&quot;Brown cheese&quot;), may also be made from cow milk whey, goat milk whey or a combination.
* Snøfrisk is a fresh goat milk cheese, often made with added flavorings.

==== Portugal ====
* Castelo Branco is a Portuguese goat milk cheese. Castelo Branco (Portuguese: Queijo de Castelo Branco) is a cheese named after the city of the same name in Portugal, the main city of the district where it is produced. Since 1996 Castelo Branco cheese has had a Protected designation of origin (PDO), being one of the three &quot;Beira Baixa cheeses&quot; (PDO) (Portuguese: &quot;Queijos da Beira Baixa DOP&quot;). The cheese is made from goat or sheep milk, and has a soft texture. Typically, the cheese takes 40 days to mature when made with goat&#x27;s milk, and 50 days when made with ewe&#x27;s milk. The fat content is around 45% and the cheese is usually a close-to-white colour.
* Trás-os-Montes, (Portuguese: Queijo de Cabra Transmontano) is a goat milk cheese from Alto Trás-os-Montes, Norte Region, Portugal.
* Santarém cheese is a goat cheese from Portugal produced in several different regions, most notably in the Santarém district and in Serra de Santo António in the Ribatejo province of Portugal.

==== Russia ====
* Adygeisky cheese is made from sheep&#x27;s, goat&#x27;s, or cow&#x27;s whole milk.

==== Serbia ====
* Pule cheese or magareći sir, is a Serbian cheese made from 60% Balkan donkey milk and 40% goat milk.

==== Spain ====
* Mató is a Catalan fresh cheese made from cow&#x27;s or goat&#x27;s milk.
* Garrotxa is a firm goat cheese originally from Garrotxa in northern Catalonia.
* Nevat, a soft-ripened goat cheese from Catalonia.
* Cabrales cheese (Spanish: Queso de Cabrales) is a blue cheese made in the artisan tradition by rural dairy farmers in Asturias, Spain. This cheese can be made from pure, unpasteurized cow&#x27;s milk or blended in the traditional manner with goat and/or sheep milk, which lends the cheese a stronger, spicier flavor. All of the milk used in the production of Cabrales must come exclusively from herds raised in a small zone of production in Asturias, in the mountains of the Picos de Europa.
* Majorero cheese is a goat milk cheese from the Canary Island of Fuerteventura.
* Payoyo cheese (Spanish: queso payoyo or &quot;queso de cabra payoya) is a type of cheese made from the milk of Payoya goats and Merina grazalemeña sheep in Villaluenga del Rosario and other areas of the Sierra de Grazalema, Spain. It began production in 1997 and has become a staple of Spanish delicatessen.
* Picón Bejes-Tresviso is a blue cheese from Cantabria, in the north of Spain. It has been protected under Denominación de Origen (DO) legislation since 1994, prior to which it was traditionally known as Picón de Tresviso and Queso Picón de Bejes. The designated area centers in the Liébana valley and production is restricted to the municipalities of Potes, Pesaguero, Cabezón de Liébana, Camaleño, Cillorigo de Liébana, Peñarrubia, Tresviso and Vega de Liébana.

==== Turkey ====

* Tulum cheese is a goat cheese made in Turkey. () is a traditional Turkish goat cheese ripened in a goatskin casing, called tulum in Turkish. Due to its unique flavor, it is preferred as meze to rakı in Turkey.
* Sepet cheese and Kaşar cheese are produced from goat milk and marketed as Goat Sepet cheese and Goat Kaşar cheese.
* Sutdiyari &#x27;white cheese&#x27; is a cheese produced from sheep, cow, or goat milk.
* Beyaz peynir &#x27;white cheese&#x27; is a brined cheese produced from sheep, cow, or goat milk.
** Ezine Cheese, originating from Ezine, Çanakkale, is a type of Beyaz Peynir including at least 40% goat milk according to the geographical protection rules.
* Dolaz cheese is a traditional cheese produced from whey by nomad (Karakoyunlu, Hayta, Honamlı, Sarıkeçili Yörüks) in the Lakes region (Isparta, Afyon and Antalya) in Turkey. It is generally made from ewe&#x27;s and goat&#x27;s milk.
* Kars gravyer cheese is a Turkish cheese similar to Gruyère. It is usually made with pure cow&#x27;s milk or a mixture of cow and goat&#x27;s milk.
* Van herbed cheese () is a type of cheese made out of sheep&#x27;s or cow&#x27;s milk. Ripened cheese varieties containing herbs are traditional in Turkey and have been manufactured for more than 200 years in the east and southeast of the country.

==== Ukraine ====
* Bryndza (from Romanian brânză cheese) is a sheep milk cheese made across much of East-Central Europe, primarily in or around the Carpathian Mountains of Slovakia, Ukraine, Romania and southern Poland. Bryndza cheese is creamy white in appearance, known for its characteristic strong smell and taste. The cheese is white, tangy, crumbly and slightly moist. It has characteristic odor and flavor with a notable taste of butyric acid. The overall flavor sensation begins slightly mild, then goes strong and finally fades to a salty finish. Recipes differ slightly across countries. This cheese can also be made with goat milk or cow milk.

==== United Kingdom ====
* Harbourne Blue.
* Pantysgawn is a Welsh goat milk cheese.
* Capricorn is a Somerset goat milk cheese.
* Gevrik is a goat&#x27;s milk cheese from Cornwall. The word gevrik means &#x27;little goat&#x27; in Cornish.
* Tesyn is a smoked goat&#x27;s milk cheese from Cornwall. Tesyn means &#x27;cake&#x27; in Cornish.

===Americas===
==== Canada ====
* Bouq Émissaire.
* Chèvre noir.

=== North and South America ===

==== Mexico ====
* Añejo cheese (Queso Añejo).
* Asadero cheese.
* Cotija cheese.
* Fresco cheese (Queso Fresco).
* Manchego cheese.
* Quesillo Oaxaca cheese.

==== United States ====

* Capricious (cheese) is an aged goat&#x27;s milk cheese made by the Achadinha Cheese Company in Petaluma, California.
* Humboldt Fog is a mold-ripened goat cheese with a central line of edible white ash made in California by Cypress Grove Chevre.
* Kunik is produced at Nettle Meadow Goat Farm in Thurman, New York, and made from goat and Jersey cow milk blend, mold-ripened with similar properties to Brie.

==== Venezuela ====
* In Venezuela, specifically in the states of Falcón, Lara and the population of San Jose de Turgua in Miranda state, many types of goat cheese are produced using traditional methods. A variety of artisanal cheeses are manufactured by smaller producers.

===Australian and Oceanian===
==== Australia ====
* Buche Noir is freshly pressed curd from the Sydney region.

===Africa===
==== Egypt ====

* Domiati cheese, also referred to as white cheese ( &quot;&quot;  ), is a soft white salty cheese made primarily in Egypt, but also in Sudan and other Middle Eastern countries. Typically made from buffalo milk, cow milk, or a mixture, it can also be made from other milks, such as sheep, goat or camel milk. It is the most common Egyptian cheese. Unlike feta and other white cheeses, salt is added directly to the milk, before rennet is added. It is named after the seaport city of Damietta (دمياط).
* Testouri cheese is a cheese made from sheep milk or goat milk. It is often shaped like an orange, and is eaten fresh and lightly salted. Testouri cheese is popular in North Africa and the Near East. Testouri is popular in East Africa and was introduced by the Ottomans after the 15th century.

==== South Africa ====
* Bettie Bok an African cheese from South Africa.
* Assegai is an Asiago-type cheese from South Africa. It originates from Foxenburg, South Africa. It is commonly eaten as a table cheese with crackers.

== References in films and TV shows ==
* In the &quot;PAW Patrol&quot; episode &quot;Pups Save the Cheese Goat,&quot; two robots called Digi and Tal take the phrase of this type literally, and make a goat made of its cheese.
** The entire episode also references this type of cheese, phrase and real life.

== See also ==

* List of goat milk cheeses
* List of cheeses
* List of goat dishes
* White cheese

== References ==

== External links ==
* Goat Dairy Foods from the University of California, Davis Dairy Research and Information Center</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q198815" start="0" end="11" title="Goat cheese" label="Goat cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q198815" start="13" end="31" title="Goat cheese" label="goat&amp;#x27;s cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q198815" start="35" end="35" title="Goat cheese" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="49" end="55" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q10943" start="82" end="88" title="cheese" label="cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418287" start="99" end="115" title="Goat milk" label="goat&amp;#x27;s milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q61476" start="1174" end="1184" title="fatty acid" label="fatty acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q422597" start="1195" end="1202" title="Hexanoic acid" label="caproic"/>
<link wikidata="Q409564" start="1207" end="1215" title="caprylic acid" label="caprylic"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="1566" end="1571" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q326900" start="2104" end="2110" title="rennet" label="rennet"/>
<link wikidata="Q133598" start="2259" end="2277" title="Lactococcus lactis" label="Lactococcus lactis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041276" start="2318" end="2344" title="Streptococcus thermophilus" label="Streptococcus thermophilus"/>
<link wikidata="Q185009" start="2402" end="2406" title="whey" label="whey"/>
<link wikidata="Q43194" start="2790" end="2805" title="Yunnan Province" label="Yunnan Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139546" start="2835" end="2841" title="paneer" label="paneer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16968944" start="2872" end="2890" title="Shosha (cheese)" label="&amp;quot;Shosha&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q736427" start="2915" end="2926" title="staple food" label="staple food"/>
<link wikidata="Q922990" start="2930" end="2945" title="Tibetan cuisine" label="Tibetan cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q17269" start="2953" end="2976" title="Tibet Autonomous Region" label="Tibet Autonomous Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q13408062" start="3049" end="3052" title="yak" label="yak"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="3105" end="3110" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6395121" start="3174" end="3185" title="Kesong puti" label="Kesong puti"/>
<link wikidata="Q34057" start="3614" end="3621" title="Tagalog language" label="Tagalog"/>
<link wikidata="Q13840" start="3688" end="3694" title="Laguna (province)" label="Laguna"/>
<link wikidata="Q13755" start="3699" end="3706" title="Bulacan" label="Bulacan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13785" start="3711" end="3717" title="Cavite" label="Cavite"/>
<link wikidata="Q13786" start="3824" end="3828" title="Cebu" label="Cebu"/>
<link wikidata="Q399" start="3943" end="3950" title="Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095467" start="3954" end="3960" title="Akkawi" label="Akkawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q10943" start="4354" end="4360" title="cheese" label="cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="4380" end="4391" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q2218629" start="4427" end="4446" title="Arab states of the Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf region"/>
<link wikidata="Q182760" start="4487" end="4491" title="feta" label="feta"/>
<link wikidata="Q180688" start="4549" end="4556" title="Bedouin" label="Bedouin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934" start="4564" end="4568" title="goat" label="goat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736146" start="4572" end="4582" title="sheep milk" label="sheep milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q830" start="4620" end="4623" title="cow" label="cow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147190" start="4723" end="4729" title="Labneh" label="Labneh"/>
<link wikidata="Q927451" start="4985" end="4999" title="Nabulsi cheese" label="Nabulsi cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q201190" start="5042" end="5053" title="Palestinian Arabs" label="Palestinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q10943" start="5067" end="5073" title="cheese" label="cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="5087" end="5098" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q23792" start="5103" end="5112" title="Palestine (region)" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q214178" start="5154" end="5160" title="Nablus" label="Nablus"/>
<link wikidata="Q36678" start="5197" end="5206" title="West Bank" label="West Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095467" start="5252" end="5265" title="Akkawi cheese" label="Akkawi cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="5311" end="5317" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736146" start="5349" end="5359" title="sheep milk" label="sheep milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934" start="5376" end="5380" title="goat" label="goat"/>
<link wikidata="Q37736" start="5487" end="5501" title="North Caucasus" label="North Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="5507" end="5513" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4058033" start="5537" end="5556" title="Circassian diaspora" label="Circassian diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q6812442" start="5738" end="5755" title="Circassian cheese" label="Circassian cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q155583" start="5792" end="5806" title="Marmara region" label="Marmara region"/>
<link wikidata="Q5620025" start="6209" end="6222" title="brined cheese" label="brined cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="6235" end="6242" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418287" start="6435" end="6448" title="Goat milk" label="milk of goats"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736146" start="6450" end="6455" title="Sheep milk" label="sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915" start="6460" end="6464" title="Dairy cattle" label="cows"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669426" start="6508" end="6513" title="Anari cheese" label="Anari"/>
<link wikidata="Q3546121" start="6524" end="6529" title="Fresh cheese" label="fresh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1943539" start="6535" end="6546" title="whey cheese" label="whey cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="6559" end="6565" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q549793" start="6625" end="6633" title="halloumi" label="halloumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q549793" start="6680" end="6688" title="Halloumi" label="Halloumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q245932" start="6722" end="6729" title="Cypriot cuisine" label="Cypriot"/>
<link wikidata="Q10943" start="6730" end="6736" title="cheese" label="cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418287" start="6760" end="6771" title="goat milk" label="goat&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736146" start="6776" end="6793" title="sheep&amp;#x27;s milk" label="sheep&amp;#x27;s milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q8495" start="6814" end="6829" title="cow&amp;#x27;s milk" label="cow&amp;#x27;s milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238358" start="7010" end="7021" title="Leipäjuusto" label="Leipäjuusto"/>
<link wikidata="Q10943" start="7146" end="7152" title="cheese" label="cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q192746" start="7188" end="7197" title="beestings" label="beestings"/>
<link wikidata="Q17006995" start="7246" end="7254" title="Reindeer cheese" label="Reindeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418287" start="7263" end="7272" title="goat milk" label="goat milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5692" start="7459" end="7480" title="Southern Ostrobothnia" label="Southern Ostrobothnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5694" start="7504" end="7510" title="Kainuu" label="Kainuu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050483" start="7602" end="7614" title="Loire Valley" label="Loire Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q954076" start="7619" end="7625" title="Poitou" label="Poitou"/>
<link wikidata="Q65589417" start="7828" end="7840" title="chèvre chaud" label="chèvre chaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q772326" start="7845" end="7857" title="Banon cheese" label="Banon cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q4982700" start="7859" end="7867" title="Bucheron" label="Bucheron"/>
<link wikidata="Q954122" start="7869" end="7876" title="Cabécou" label="Cabécou"/>
<link wikidata="Q2941782" start="7878" end="7885" title="Cathare" label="Cathare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2947274" start="7887" end="7893" title="Chabis" label="Chabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5088031" start="7895" end="7903" title="Chaubier" label="Chaubier"/>
<link wikidata="Q958233" start="7905" end="7913" title="Chavroux" label="Chavroux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058296" start="7915" end="7924" title="Chabichou" label="Chabichou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071353" start="7926" end="7935" title="Chevrotin" label="Chevrotin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134769" start="7937" end="7946" title="Clochette cheese" label="Clochette"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165362" start="7948" end="7965" title="Couronne Lochoise" label="Couronne Lochoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q249873" start="7967" end="7987" title="Crottin de Chavignol" label="Crottin de Chavignol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064619" start="7989" end="7998" title="Faisselle" label="Faisselle"/>
<link wikidata="Q965981" start="8045" end="8053" title="Pélardon" label="Pélardon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245576" start="8055" end="8062" title="Picodon" label="Picodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q616668" start="8064" end="8085" title="Pouligny Saint-Pierre" label="Pouligny Saint-Pierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q640839" start="8087" end="8115" title="Pouligny-Saint-Pierre cheese" label="Pouligny-Saint-Pierre cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089007" start="8117" end="8136" title="Rigotte de Condrieu" label="Rigotte de Condrieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q768189" start="8138" end="8148" title="Rocamadour (cheese)" label="Rocamadour"/>
<link wikidata="Q652628" start="8150" end="8174" title="Sainte-Maure de Touraine" label="Sainte-Maure de Touraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249172" start="8176" end="8198" title="Selles-sur-Cher cheese" label="Selles-sur-Cher cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058296" start="8200" end="8209" title="Chabichou" label="Chabichou"/>
<link wikidata="Q659277" start="8221" end="8229" title="Valençay (cheese)" label="Valençay"/>
<link wikidata="Q182760" start="8265" end="8269" title="Feta" label="Feta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235430" start="8419" end="8427" title="Mizithra" label="Mizithra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3618553" start="8560" end="8570" title="Anthotyros" label="Anthotyros"/>
<link wikidata="Q10943" start="8656" end="8662" title="cheese" label="cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361289" start="8700" end="8710" title="Kefalotyri" label="Kefalotyri"/>
<link wikidata="Q94017" start="8714" end="8722" title="Graviera" label="Graviera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235430" start="8889" end="8897" title="Mizithra" label="Mizithra"/>
<link wikidata="Q185009" start="8932" end="8936" title="whey" label="whey"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="8998" end="9004" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q41741" start="9018" end="9024" title="Thrace" label="Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q81734" start="9026" end="9035" title="Macedonia (Greece)" label="Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q170295" start="9041" end="9055" title="Ionian Islands" label="Ionian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="9060" end="9065" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q94606" start="9069" end="9076" title="Manouri" label="Manouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q8495" start="9120" end="9124" title="milk" label="milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q185009" start="9125" end="9129" title="whey" label="whey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934" start="9147" end="9151" title="goat" label="goat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736146" start="9155" end="9165" title="sheep milk" label="sheep milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q166919" start="9195" end="9204" title="Thessalia" label="Thessalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q81734" start="9209" end="9218" title="Macedonia (Greece)" label="Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243181" start="9253" end="9261" title="Formaela" label="Formaela"/>
<link wikidata="Q624641" start="9306" end="9314" title="Arachova" label="Arachova"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="9316" end="9322" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="9386" end="9400" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q13439060" start="9406" end="9437" title="protected designation of origin" label="protected designation of origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736146" start="9483" end="9500" title="sheep&amp;#x27;s milk" label="sheep&amp;#x27;s milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418287" start="9504" end="9520" title="goat&amp;#x27;s milk" label="goat&amp;#x27;s milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q532726" start="9598" end="9605" title="Kasseri" label="Kasseri"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="9616" end="9621" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="9631" end="9638" title="Turkish language" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736146" start="9729" end="9739" title="sheep milk" label="sheep milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934" start="9756" end="9760" title="goat" label="goat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412505" start="9894" end="9906" title="pasta filata" label="pasta filata"/>
<link wikidata="Q14088" start="9960" end="9970" title="mozzarella" label="mozzarella"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900114" start="9990" end="9999" title="Provolone" label="Provolone"/>
<link wikidata="Q293037" start="10003" end="10015" title="Caciocavallo" label="Caciocavallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q13439060" start="10030" end="10061" title="protected designation of origin" label="protected designation of origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q166919" start="10132" end="10140" title="Thessaly" label="Thessaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q81734" start="10142" end="10151" title="Macedonia (Greece)" label="Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q128087" start="10153" end="10159" title="Lesbos" label="Lesbos"/>
<link wikidata="Q210296" start="10164" end="10170" title="Xanthi" label="Xanthi"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="10213" end="10219" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="10221" end="10228" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="10238" end="10245" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7220270" start="10268" end="10277" title="kashkaval" label="kashkaval"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="10386" end="10388" title="EU" label="EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361289" start="10461" end="10471" title="Kefalotyri" label="Kefalotyri"/>
<link wikidata="Q10943" start="10514" end="10520" title="cheese" label="cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736146" start="10531" end="10541" title="sheep milk" label="sheep milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934" start="10545" end="10549" title="goat" label="goat"/>
<link wikidata="Q8495" start="10557" end="10561" title="milk" label="milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="10575" end="10581" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="10586" end="10592" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232535" start="10611" end="10625" title="Kefalograviera" label="Kefalograviera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221061" start="10831" end="10843" title="Xynomizithra" label="Xynomizithra"/>
<link wikidata="Q744027" start="10868" end="10873" title="Greek cuisine" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1943539" start="10874" end="10885" title="whey cheese" label="whey cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235430" start="10932" end="10940" title="Mizithra" label="Mizithra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736146" start="10956" end="10959" title="sheep milk" label="ewe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934" start="10974" end="10978" title="goat" label="goat"/>
<link wikidata="Q8045571" start="11042" end="11050" title="Xynotyro" label="Xynotyro"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787790" start="11493" end="11506" title="Ardagh Castle Cheese" label="Ardagh Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4788283" start="11510" end="11530" title="Ardsallagh Goat Farm" label="Ardsallagh Goat Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5135053" start="11566" end="11581" title="Clonmore Cheese" label="Clonmore Cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167429" start="11585" end="11611" title="Cooleeney Farmhouse Cheese" label="Cooleeney Farmhouse Cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q5170904" start="11615" end="11630" title="Corleggy Cheese" label="Corleggy Cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q5567390" start="11634" end="11647" title="Gleann Gabhra" label="Gleann Gabhra"/>
<link wikidata="Q17115879" start="11651" end="11669" title="Glyde Farm Produce" label="Glyde Farm Produce"/>
<link wikidata="Q7595588" start="11686" end="11693" title="St Tola" label="St Tola"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11697" end="11705" title="Tullyboy" label="Tullyboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183966" start="11727" end="11734" title="Caprino (cheese)" label="Caprino"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="11810" end="11815" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243" start="11903" end="11909" title="Veneto" label="Veneto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210" start="11941" end="11949" title="Lombardy" label="Lombardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q419942" start="11973" end="11980" title="Algund" label="Lagundo"/>
<link wikidata="Q15124" start="12019" end="12030" title="South Tyrol" label="South Tyrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q52609" start="12046" end="12055" title="Moliterno" label="Moliterno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1447" start="12118" end="12124" title="Apulia" label="Apulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452" start="12129" end="12139" title="Basilicata" label="Basilicata"/>
<link wikidata="Q9298" start="12232" end="12238" title="Coazze" label="Coazze"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216" start="12252" end="12260" title="Piedmont" label="Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="12282" end="12290" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1222" start="12340" end="12352" title="Aosta Valley" label="Aosta Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q14088" start="12354" end="12364" title="Mozzarella" label="Mozzarella"/>
<link wikidata="Q216781" start="12493" end="12500" title="Ricotta" label="Ricotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q15631263" start="12846" end="12853" title="Robiola" label="Robiola"/>
<link wikidata="Q3546121" start="12868" end="12872" title="Soft cheese" label="soft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2826073" start="12873" end="12880" title="Cheese ripening" label="ripened"/>
<link wikidata="Q10943" start="12881" end="12887" title="cheese" label="cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q432440" start="12895" end="12905" title="Stracchino" label="Stracchino"/>
<link wikidata="Q19865" start="12929" end="12935" title="Langhe" label="Langhe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736146" start="13009" end="13026" title="sheep milk" label="sheep&amp;#x27;s milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q39849" start="13089" end="13095" title="Robbio" label="Robbio"/>
<link wikidata="Q16231" start="13103" end="13120" title="province of Pavia" label="province of Pavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216" start="13264" end="13272" title="Piedmont" label="Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q15091" start="13295" end="13300" title="province of Cuneo" label="Cuneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q15099" start="13302" end="13306" title="province of Asti" label="Asti"/>
<link wikidata="Q15097" start="13311" end="13322" title="province of Alessandria" label="Alessandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210" start="13332" end="13340" title="Lombardy" label="Lombardy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13355" end="13370" title="Aosta Valley#Cuisine" label="the specialties"/>
<link wikidata="Q1222" start="13378" end="13390" title="Aosta Valley" label="Aosta Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5016036" start="13393" end="13401" title="Caciotta" label="Caciotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990745" start="13412" end="13418" title="Tuscan language" label="Tuscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q10943" start="13434" end="13440" title="cheese" label="cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q8495" start="13468" end="13472" title="milk" label="milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q830" start="13476" end="13479" title="cow" label="cow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736146" start="13482" end="13487" title="sheep milk" label="sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934" start="13489" end="13493" title="goat" label="goat"/>
<link wikidata="Q42710" start="13499" end="13512" title="domestic buffalo" label="water buffalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3748119" start="13583" end="13602" title="Bastardo del Grappa" label="Bastardo del Grappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q10943" start="13620" end="13626" title="cheese" label="cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q701820" start="13656" end="13668" title="Monte Grappa" label="Monte Grappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q16292" start="13700" end="13707" title="province of Treviso" label="Treviso"/>
<link wikidata="Q16126" start="13709" end="13716" title="province of Belluno" label="Belluno"/>
<link wikidata="Q16316" start="13722" end="13729" title="province of Vicenza" label="Vicenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q29381" start="13838" end="13854" title="Borso del Grappa" label="Borso del Grappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q47036" start="13856" end="13875" title="Crespano del Grappa" label="Crespano del Grappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q46521" start="13877" end="13895" title="Paderno del Grappa" label="Paderno del Grappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q29369" start="13897" end="13905" title="Possagno" label="Possagno"/>
<link wikidata="Q29391" start="13907" end="13923" title="Cavaso del Tomba" label="Cavaso del Tomba"/>
<link wikidata="Q39897" start="13925" end="13939" title="Alano di Piave" label="Alano di Piave"/>
<link wikidata="Q40082" start="13941" end="13946" title="Quero, Veneto" label="Quero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465" start="13948" end="13954" title="Feltre" label="Feltre"/>
<link wikidata="Q40799" start="13956" end="13972" title="Seren del Grappa" label="Seren del Grappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q41020" start="13974" end="13979" title="Arsiè" label="Arsiè"/>
<link wikidata="Q46297" start="13981" end="13998" title="Cismon del Grappa" label="Cismon del Grappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q46878" start="14000" end="14011" title="San Nazario, Veneto" label="San Nazario"/>
<link wikidata="Q462766" start="14013" end="14018" title="Solan" label="Solan"/>
<link wikidata="Q46457" start="14020" end="14035" title="Pove del Grappa" label="Pove del Grappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q46277" start="14041" end="14063" title="Romano d&amp;#x27;Ezzelino" label="Romano d&amp;#x27;Ezzelino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8079998" start="14087" end="14093" title="ġbejna" label="ġbejna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783654" start="14646" end="14660" title="Westerkwartier" label="Westerkwartier"/>
<link wikidata="Q749" start="14693" end="14702" title="Groningen (city)" label="Groningen"/>
<link wikidata="Q593675" start="15011" end="15016" title="Gouda cheese" label="Gouda"/>
<link wikidata="Q629718" start="15044" end="15051" title="Geitost" label="Geitost"/>
<link wikidata="Q629718" start="15162" end="15169" title="Brunost" label="Brunost"/>
<link wikidata="Q58730" start="15270" end="15278" title="Snøfrisk" label="Snøfrisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083019" start="15364" end="15378" title="Castelo Branco cheese" label="Castelo Branco"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="15384" end="15394" title="Portugal" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="15429" end="15439" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q10943" start="15472" end="15478" title="cheese" label="cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q373720" start="15507" end="15516" title="Castelo Branco, Portugal" label="same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q273529" start="15551" end="15559" title="District of Castelo Branco" label="district"/>
<link wikidata="Q13439060" start="15625" end="15656" title="Protected designation of origin" label="Protected designation of origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418287" start="15803" end="15807" title="Goat milk" label="goat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736146" start="15811" end="15821" title="sheep milk" label="sheep milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q9065233" start="16053" end="16067" title="Queijo de Cabra Transmontano" label="Trás-os-Montes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="16070" end="16080" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q443584" start="16139" end="16158" title="Alto Trás-os-Montes Subregion" label="Alto Trás-os-Montes"/>
<link wikidata="Q27662" start="16160" end="16172" title="Norte Region, Portugal" label="Norte Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="16174" end="16182" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3472801" start="16186" end="16201" title="Santarém cheese" label="Santarém cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="16224" end="16232" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q244510" start="16292" end="16300" title="Santarém (district)" label="Santarém"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118847" start="16317" end="16339" title="Serra de Santo António" label="Serra de Santo António"/>
<link wikidata="Q7259285" start="16501" end="16512" title="Pule cheese" label="Pule cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117456" start="16621" end="16625" title="Mató" label="Mató"/>
<link wikidata="Q5705" start="16631" end="16638" title="Catalonia" label="Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q830" start="16662" end="16665" title="cow" label="cow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524082" start="16696" end="16704" title="Garrotxa cheese" label="Garrotxa"/>
<link wikidata="Q10932" start="16743" end="16751" title="Garrotxa" label="Garrotxa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246822" start="16829" end="16844" title="Cabrales cheese" label="Cabrales cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="16846" end="16853" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q746471" start="16879" end="16890" title="blue cheese" label="blue cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q4801204" start="16903" end="16910" title="Artisan cheese" label="artisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q637776" start="16930" end="16935" title="dairy" label="dairy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3934" start="16947" end="16955" title="Asturias" label="Asturias"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="16957" end="16962" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q830" start="17013" end="17016" title="cow" label="cow"/>
<link wikidata="Q8495" start="17024" end="17028" title="milk" label="milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934" start="17071" end="17075" title="goat" label="goat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736146" start="17083" end="17093" title="sheep milk" label="sheep milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3934" start="17270" end="17278" title="Asturias" label="Asturias"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141172" start="17304" end="17319" title="Picos de Europa" label="Picos de Europa"/>
<link wikidata="Q473202" start="17323" end="17338" title="Majorero" label="Majorero cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q192534" start="17387" end="17400" title="Fuerteventura" label="Fuerteventura"/>
<link wikidata="Q9065238" start="17404" end="17417" title="Payoyo cheese" label="Payoyo cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="17419" end="17426" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q10943" start="17486" end="17492" title="cheese" label="cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q5738499" start="17515" end="17526" title="Payoya goat" label="Payoya goat"/>
<link wikidata="Q651765" start="17532" end="17556" title="Merino" label="Merina grazalemeña sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q650598" start="17560" end="17583" title="Villaluenga del Rosario" label="Villaluenga del Rosario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755037" start="17607" end="17626" title="Sierra de Grazalema" label="Sierra de Grazalema"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="17628" end="17633" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3231410" start="17698" end="17710" title="delicatessen" label="delicatessen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243017" start="17714" end="17734" title="Picón Bejes-Tresviso" label="Picón Bejes-Tresviso"/>
<link wikidata="Q746471" start="17740" end="17751" title="blue cheese" label="blue cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3946" start="17757" end="17766" title="Cantabria" label="Cantabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="17784" end="17789" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139487" start="17819" end="17841" title="Denominación de Origen" label="Denominación de Origen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1787325" start="17995" end="18002" title="Liébana" label="Liébana"/>
<link wikidata="Q919035" start="18064" end="18069" title="Potes" label="Potes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649407" start="18071" end="18080" title="Pesaguero" label="Pesaguero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606045" start="18082" end="18100" title="Cabezón de Liébana" label="Cabezón de Liébana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443934" start="18102" end="18110" title="Camaleño" label="Camaleño"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443976" start="18112" end="18132" title="Cillorigo de Liébana" label="Cillorigo de Liébana"/>
<link wikidata="Q924915" start="18134" end="18144" title="Peñarrubia, Cantabria" label="Peñarrubia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623031" start="18146" end="18154" title="Tresviso" label="Tresviso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614822" start="18159" end="18174" title="Vega de Liébana" label="Vega de Liébana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183584" start="18197" end="18209" title="Tulum cheese" label="Tulum cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="18235" end="18241" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="18263" end="18270" title="Turkey" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q818674" start="18383" end="18387" title="meze" label="meze"/>
<link wikidata="Q638290" start="18391" end="18395" title="rakı" label="rakı"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897605" start="18615" end="18627" title="Beyaz peynir" label="Beyaz peynir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017752" start="18746" end="18762" title="Ezine, Çanakkale" label="Ezine, Çanakkale"/>
<link wikidata="Q170056" start="18979" end="18985" title="Yörüks" label="Yörüks"/>
<link wikidata="Q171031" start="19008" end="19015" title="Isparta" label="Isparta"/>
<link wikidata="Q166824" start="19017" end="19022" title="Afyon" label="Afyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6487" start="19027" end="19034" title="Antalya" label="Antalya"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="19039" end="19045" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368" start="19073" end="19076" title="sheep" label="ewe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934" start="19088" end="19092" title="goat" label="goat"/>
<link wikidata="Q16852388" start="19108" end="19127" title="Kars gravyer cheese" label="Kars gravyer cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q10943" start="19141" end="19147" title="cheese" label="cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376488" start="19159" end="19166" title="Gruyère cheese" label="Gruyère"/>
<link wikidata="Q8495" start="19197" end="19212" title="Milk" label="cow&amp;#x27;s milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418287" start="19237" end="19253" title="Goat milk" label="goat&amp;#x27;s milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q10943" start="19291" end="19297" title="cheese" label="cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736146" start="19310" end="19315" title="sheep milk" label="sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q830" start="19326" end="19329" title="cow" label="cow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913" start="19539" end="19547" title="Romanian language" label="Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736146" start="19568" end="19578" title="sheep milk" label="sheep milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q10943" start="19579" end="19585" title="cheese" label="cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288" start="19654" end="19674" title="Carpathian Mountains" label="Carpathian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="19678" end="19686" title="Slovakia" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="19688" end="19695" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="19697" end="19704" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="19718" end="19724" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q193213" start="19943" end="19955" title="butyric acid" label="butyric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418287" start="20138" end="20147" title="goat milk" label="goat milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q8495" start="20151" end="20159" title="cow milk" label="cow milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5654906" start="20189" end="20203" title="Harbourne Blue" label="Harbourne Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3362437" start="20207" end="20217" title="Pantysgawn" label="Pantysgawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="20223" end="20228" title="Wales" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4950063" start="20537" end="20551" title="Bouq Émissaire" label="Bouq Émissaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5118915" start="20555" end="20566" title="Chèvre noir" label="Chèvre noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q17182822" start="20789" end="20808" title="Capricious (cheese)" label="Capricious (cheese)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20856" end="20880" title="Achadinha Cheese Company" label="Achadinha Cheese Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q3143234" start="20908" end="20920" title="Humboldt Fog" label="Humboldt Fog"/>
<link wikidata="Q5200335" start="21013" end="21033" title="Cypress Grove Chevre" label="Cypress Grove Chevre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6444680" start="21037" end="21042" title="Kunik cheese" label="Kunik"/>
<link wikidata="Q193411" start="21190" end="21194" title="Brie" label="Brie"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="21222" end="21231" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q202071" start="21263" end="21269" title="estado Falcón" label="Falcón"/>
<link wikidata="Q205796" start="21271" end="21275" title="estado Lara" label="Lara"/>
<link wikidata="Q191174" start="21320" end="21327" title="estado Miranda" label="Miranda"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21524" end="21534" title="Buche Noir" label="Buche Noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290273" start="21616" end="21630" title="Domiati cheese" label="Domiati cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="21731" end="21736" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049" start="21750" end="21755" title="Sudan" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="21766" end="21790" title="Middle Eastern countries" label="Middle Eastern countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7705939" start="22117" end="22125" title="Testouri" label="Testouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q10943" start="22138" end="22144" title="cheese" label="cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736146" start="22155" end="22165" title="sheep milk" label="sheep milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934" start="22169" end="22173" title="goat" label="goat"/>
<link wikidata="Q8495" start="22174" end="22178" title="milk" label="milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q13191" start="22207" end="22213" title="orange (fruit)" label="orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="22284" end="22296" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q48214" start="22305" end="22314" title="Near East" label="Near East"/>
<link wikidata="Q27407" start="22339" end="22350" title="East Africa" label="East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359535" start="22377" end="22385" title="Ottoman Turks" label="Ottomans"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22436" end="22446" title="Bettie Bok" label="Bettie Bok"/>
<link wikidata="Q15106029" start="22691" end="22701" title="PAW Patrol" label="PAW Patrol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22722" end="22747" title="List of PAW Patrol episodes#Season_10_(2023–24)" label="Pups Save the Cheese Goat"/>
<link wikidata="Q48803462" start="22962" end="22987" title="List of goat milk cheeses" label="List of goat milk cheeses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455981" start="22990" end="23005" title="List of cheeses" label="List of cheeses"/>
<link wikidata="Q25036573" start="23008" end="23027" title="List of goat dishes" label="List of goat dishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q123160832" start="23030" end="23042" title="White cheese" label="White cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q129421" start="23111" end="23142" title="University of California, Davis" label="University of California, Davis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="444369" wikidata="Q1022995" url="?curid=444369" title="CBS Radio">
<text>CBS Radio was a radio broadcasting company and radio network operator owned by CBS Corporation and founded in 1928, with consolidated radio station groups owned by CBS and Westinghouse Broadcasting/Group W since the 1920s, and Infinity Broadcasting since the 1970s. The broadcasting company was sold to Entercom (now known as Audacy, Inc.) on November 17, 2017.

Although CBS&#x27;s involvement in radio dates back to the establishment of the original CBS Radio Network in 1927, the most recent radio division was formed by the 1997 acquisition of Infinity Broadcasting by CBS owner Westinghouse.In 1999, Infinity became a division of the original Viacom; in 2005, Viacom spun CBS and Infinity Broadcasting back into a separate company, and the division was renamed CBS Radio. It was the last radio group left to be tied to a major broadcast television network, as NBC divested its radio interests in the 1980s, and ABC sold off its division to Citadel Broadcasting (now part of Cumulus Media) in 2007.

== Early origins ==
CBS Radio is one of the oldest units within CBS Corporation, and has been around since 1928. However, the actual CBS Radio Network (now CBS News Radio) was launched in 1927, when CBS itself was known as United Independent Broadcasters. Columbia Records later joined in and that company was renamed the Columbia Phonographic Broadcasting System. In September 1927, Columbia Records sold the company to William S. Paley and in 1928, Paley streamlined the corporate name to Columbia Broadcasting System.

In 1940, Paley also joined forces with the journalist Edmund Chester at CBS Radio and Nelson Rockefeller at the Department of State&#x27;s Office of the Coordinator of Inter-American Affairs to launch the imaginative Network of the Americas (La Cadena de Las Americas) in 1942. This innovative radio network beamed both news and cultural programming live to North and South America in support of cultural diplomacy and Pan Americanism in accordance with President Franklin Roosevelt&#x27;s Good Neighbor policy during World War II.

== History ==
The company that would become CBS Radio was founded in 1972 as Infinity Broadcasting Corporation by Michael A. Wiener and Gerald Carrus, with the acquisition of KOME, an FM radio station that served the San Francisco Bay Area. It became a publicly traded company twice, in 1986, and again in 1992.

Westinghouse Electric Corporation acquired CBS, Inc. in 1995 and then acquired Infinity Broadcasting in 1997. Westinghouse, which produced the first radio broadcast on November 2, 1920, with KDKA in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, would later change its name to the original CBS Corporation, and reorganize all of its radio properties (including its own Group W stations), as well as its outdoor advertising business, under the Infinity Broadcasting Corporation name. Westinghouse acquired American Radio Systems in September 1997. In 2000, CBS Corporation was merged into Viacom. On December 31, 2005, Viacom spun out its motion picture and cable television assets, with the remainder maintained as the second CBS Corporation. In anticipation of this, Infinity Broadcasting was reorganized as CBS Radio.

In August 2006, CBS Radio announced the sale of its 15 radio stations in Cincinnati, Ohio; Memphis, Tennessee; Austin, Texas; and Rochester, New York to Entercom Communications. This group deal was granted FCC approval in mid-November 2007 after it faced regulatory review and numerous challenges for over a year, and officially closed on November 30. Several other stations, most in smaller markets, were also sold to companies like Border Media Partners and Peak Media Corporation.

On April 30, 2008, CBS Radio and AOL entered a partnership (following the dissolution of partnership between AOL and XM Satellite Radio due to the change in Internet royalty rates). The AOL Radio player powered by CBS Radio featured over 200 CBS Radio stations, along with over 200 AOL Radio stations, combining two of the largest online radio networks and giving millions of listeners unlimited and free access to a diverse array of music and programming including news, sports and talk. These stations were folded into the AOL Radio mobile app.

In 2008, CBS started the process of paring down its station holdings, with a particular focus on ridding itself of stations in mid-sized markets, and markets where there are no television stations for synergistic advantages. On July 31, 2008, CBS Radio announced that it would sell 50 more radio stations in 12 mid-size markets. however some companies like RBC Capital Markets said CBS Radio is a &quot;melting icecube&quot; and that CBS Corporation would be better off selling the entire radio unit rather than &quot;waiting a couple of years and selling the rest for less.&quot;

On December 15, 2008, CBS Radio and Clear Channel Communications reached an agreement to swap seven stations. In this deal, Clear Channel acquired WQSR in Baltimore, Maryland, KBKS in Seattle, Washington, KLTH and KXJM in Portland, Oregon, and KQJK in Sacramento, California; and CBS Radio would get KHMX and KLOL in Houston, Texas. The deal closed on April 1, 2009. On December 20, 2008, CBS Radio announced that it would sell the entire Denver cluster (this includes three radio stations) to Wilks Broadcasting for $19.5 Million, including KIMN, KWOF, and KXKL-FM.

On August 10, 2009, CBS Radio announced that it would sell the entire Portland cluster (this includes four radio stations) to Alpha Broadcasting for $40 Million. The stations included in the sale are KCMD, KINK, KUFO, and KUPL.

On February 4, 2010, all CBS Radio stations, as well as AOL Radio and Yahoo! Music Radio restricted all non U.S. listeners from streaming online content. CBS Radio redirected to sister property Last.fm. In July 2010, CBS Radio launched Radio.com.

2011 saw the biggest AC format removal of the company dropping AC for hot adult contemporary on Washington, D.C.&#x27;s WIAD in March, followed by New York City&#x27;s WWFS on October 12 (both in the Eastern Time Zone). On August 1, WCFS-FM Chicago removed its AC format for all-news to simulcast WBBM (AM). By November 2011, WLTE in Minneapolis/St. Paul removed the AC format for Christmas music, only to transition to country music as KMNB on December 26.

On April 9, 2012, CBS Radio announced that it was selling its West Palm Beach cluster of stations to Palm Beach Broadcasting for $50 Million.

On December 1, 2014, CBS Radio traded 14 stations—its Charlotte, North Carolina and Tampa Bay clusters as well as WIP (now WTEL (AM)) in Philadelphia—to Beasley Broadcast Group in exchange for WRDW-FM (now WTDY-FM) and WXTU in Philadelphia and WKIS, WPOW, and WQAM in Miami.

In May 2016, Judge Percy Anderson ruled in favor of CBS Radio in a lawsuit filed by ABS Entertainment over the use of pre-1972 sound recordings, which are subject to common law state copyright and not federal law, on CBS Radio&#x27;s oldies stations. ABS argued that because pre-1972 works are not subject to federal copyright, they are not subject to the federal laws providing compulsory licenses for performing the recordings on terrestrial radio and via non-interactive digital streams, and require permission. CBS, however, argued that it did not play pre-1972 sound recordings, but remastered versions of recordings published from compilations with copyrights registered after 1972, making them separate works subject to federal copyright and eligible for compulsory licenses. The court ruled that the remastered recordings contained &quot;multiple kinds of creative authorship, such as adjustments of equalization, sound editing and channel assignment&quot;, with a level of creativity suitable enough to generate a new copyright.

=== Merger with Entercom ===
On March 15, 2016, CBS Corporation CEO Leslie Moonves stated that the company was exploring strategic alternatives that could result in the sale or spin-off of CBS Radio. Cumulus Media had been named as one of the potential buyers. In July 2016, CBS Radio filed for a planned IPO, which would have spun off the subsidiary as a separate, publicly traded company. On February 2, 2017, CBS Radio announced that it had agreed to merge with Entercom, at the time the fourth-largest radio broadcaster in the United States; the sale was to be conducted using a Reverse Morris Trust so that it would be tax-free. To comply with federal ownership limits Entercom had plans to divest 14 stations.

The transaction closed on November 17, 2017, ending the era of network-owned radio stations in America involving the original Big Three (ABC, NBC, and CBS). ABC, however, still owned a few stations outside its original network at the time, primarily under the ESPN Radio umbrella. Following the purchase, Entercom became the second-largest owner of radio stations in the United States in terms of revenue, with a total of 244 stations, and operations in 23 of the top 25 markets.

The CBS News Radio and CBS Sports Radio networks were not included in the sale. However, CBS Sports Radio was continued to be broadcast by Entercom stations that carried its national programming. Hosts and employees of CBS Sports Radio (which has since rebranded as Infinity Sports Network) are now employees of Audacy, Inc. (formerly Entercom).

==Radio Brands and Programming==
=== Howard Stern and Free FM ===

From 1985 to 2005, Infinity/CBS Radio was the home of controversial and top-rated talk show host Howard Stern, who left for subscription-based satellite radio due to increasing FCC and station censorship. In January 2006, rock star David Lee Roth, Rover&#x27;s Morning Glory, and talk show host Adam Carolla replaced Stern in most major radio markets, and CBS Radio launched its new &quot;Free FM&quot; hot talk format in many of these markets. Roth&#x27;s show was cancelled four months later and CBS Radio announced that Opie and Anthony of XM Radio would replace Roth on the stations that carried him, despite the irony that the two were fired after the sex act controversy inside of St. Patrick&#x27;s Cathedral, New York. Adam Carolla&#x27;s show was also later canceled.

On February 28, 2006, CBS Radio announced it had filed a lawsuit against Stern, his agent Don Buchwald, and Sirius, arguing that Stern promoted Sirius &quot;to enrich himself unfairly&quot;. It also claimed that Stern &quot;repeatedly and willfully&quot; breached his contract with CBS, &quot;misappropriated millions of dollars worth [of airtime]&quot; for his own benefit and &quot;fraudulently concealed&quot; his performance-related interests in Sirius stock. The suit, filed in New York State Court, sought compensatory and punitive damages. Stern anticipated the suit, and earlier that day, prior to CBS&#x27; announcement, held a press conference, discussing how CBS added to the media attention, even booking him for appearances on &quot;Late Show with David Letterman&quot; and &quot;60 Minutes&quot;. &quot;I made them millions of dollars,&quot; Stern argued. &quot;If I was hurting them, why did they keep me on the air for fourteen months? How can you have it both ways?&quot; When a settlement was announced on May 26, 2006, Sirius gained exclusive rights to Stern&#x27;s back catalogue of radio broadcasts at WXRK from November 1985 to December 2005, totalling almost 23,000 hours. The rights, costing Sirius approximately $2 million, equates to approximately $87 per-hour of tape.

, the Free FM branding has been discontinued in all markets, and no former Free FM station continues to have a hot talk format. The only remaining show still on air is The Sports Junkies on WJFK 106.7 FM DC. All other shows broke up or were canceled. Some, including The Big O &amp; Dukes Show and The Mike O&#x27;Meara Show, have been reborn as podcasts.

=== Jack FM ===

CBS Radio owned the majority of stations in the United States that broadcast the Jack FM format, a radio format that incorporates all types of popular music from the mid-50s to the present. These included stations in Los Angeles, Dallas, Seattle, Minneapolis and many other cities. New York City, Chicago and Houston had Jack FM stations, too; the New York City station, WCBS-FM has reverted to its traditional oldies format, and Jack (which had been renamed ToNY) was carried on its HD2 subchannel.

=== AMP Radio ===

CBS Radio owned &quot;AMP Radio&quot;, a branding created by KROQ-FM program director Kevin Weatherly and APD John Michael on the HD2 channel of KCBS-FM. Much like its competitor Kiss FM, AMP broadcasts contemporary hit radio/top 40 music. In February 2009, the first AMP station was launched in Los Angeles under the callsign KAMP-FM. Over the years, CBS Radio expanded the AMP brand and the CHR/Top 40 format to its stations in Detroit, Boston, Orlando, New York City, Philadelphia, and lastly Dallas. Since the Entercom acquisition in November 2017, all the stations in the aforementioned markets, except for the Los Angeles flagship station, gradually flipped formats. By 2021, the AMP Radio branding was discontinued.

=== Major League Baseball ===


CBS Radio was the largest broadcaster of local Major League Baseball broadcasts. In 2005 and 2007 respectively, CBS dropped the St. Louis Cardinals from KMOX and the Pittsburgh Pirates from KDKA, ending two long relationships between the teams and their flagship stations. However, KMOX reacquired the Cardinals&#x27; broadcast rights in 2011, and KDKA&#x27;s FM sister all-sports station acquired the Pirates&#x27; broadcast rights in 2012, in addition to New York Yankees games being renewed on WCBS after the conclusion of the 2011 season, they would have the rights until the end of the 2013 season.

CBS&#x27;s WFAN is the flagship station of the New York Yankees (they had broadcast the Mets until 2014) and WSCR is the flagship station of the Chicago Cubs. In Philadelphia, WPHT, a frequency that had been the longtime home of the Philadelphia Phillies before parting ways after the 2001 season, reacquired the team&#x27;s broadcast rights in 2005. As of 2012, those games are now simulcast on sister station WIP-FM. KRLD-FM in Dallas was the flagship station for the Texas Rangers before the 2011 season.

In 2015, the Chicago Cubs moved its radio broadcasts to CBS property WBBM (AM) from its longtime home of WGN (AM). That same year, the Baltimore Orioles began its second stint on all-sports WJZ-FM, four years after it was moved back to its traditional home of WBAL (AM). In 2016, the Cubs rights moved to sister station WSCR as part of a pre-arrangement in the 2015 agreement where WSCR would take over airing games after letting the rights to the Chicago White Sox go after the 2015 season (which now broadcast on WGN (AM)).

==All-news radio stations==
Prior to the merger with Entercom, CBS Radio operated nearly all of the all-news radio stations in the United States.

They included:
* KCBS (AM) in San Francisco
* KMOX in St. Louis (partial all-news)
* KNX (AM), KNX-FM in Los Angeles
* KRLD (AM) in Dallas (partial all-news)
* KYW (AM) in Philadelphia
* WBBM (AM) in Chicago
* WBZ (AM) in Boston
* WCBS (AM) in New York
* WINS (AM) in New York
* WWJ (AM) in Detroit

As part of the merger and in order to comply with FCC Regulations, CBS Radio divested WBZ and ownership of that station was transferred to iHeartMedia.

==See also==
* List of broadcast stations owned by CBS Radio
* Westinghouse Broadcasting (Group W), the broadcasting unit of Westinghouse.
* Infinity Broadcasting Corporation, the company before its reorganization by Westinghouse.
* Radio.com
* Last.fm

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1022995" start="0" end="9" title="CBS Radio" label="CBS Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q950380" start="79" end="94" title="CBS Corporation" label="CBS Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988935" start="172" end="205" title="Westinghouse Broadcasting" label="Westinghouse Broadcasting/Group W"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150752" start="227" end="248" title="Infinity Broadcasting" label="Infinity Broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380195" start="326" end="338" title="Audacy, Inc." label="Audacy, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q2931046" start="452" end="469" title="CBS Radio Network" label="CBS Radio Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150752" start="548" end="569" title="Infinity Broadcasting" label="Infinity Broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q632404" start="583" end="595" title="Westinghouse Electric Corporation" label="Westinghouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088127" start="648" end="654" title="Viacom (1952–2005)" label="Viacom"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="865" end="868" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="916" end="919" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2974368" start="945" end="965" title="Citadel Broadcasting" label="Citadel Broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5194189" start="979" end="992" title="Cumulus Media" label="Cumulus Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931046" start="1160" end="1174" title="CBS News Radio" label="CBS News Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="1260" end="1276" title="Columbia Records" label="Columbia Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288608" start="1425" end="1441" title="William S. Paley" label="William S. Paley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339224" start="1580" end="1594" title="Edmund Chester" label="Edmund Chester"/>
<link wikidata="Q11237" start="1612" end="1630" title="Nelson Rockefeller" label="Nelson Rockefeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q3282896" start="1665" end="1716" title="Office of the Coordinator of Inter-American Affairs" label="Office of the Coordinator of Inter-American Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q353979" start="1922" end="1940" title="cultural diplomacy" label="cultural diplomacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140451" start="1945" end="1960" title="Pan Americanism" label="Pan Americanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="1990" end="2008" title="Franklin Roosevelt" label="Franklin Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515876" start="2016" end="2036" title="Good Neighbor policy" label="Good Neighbor policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6828100" start="2173" end="2190" title="Michael A. Wiener" label="Michael A. Wiener"/>
<link wikidata="Q16998639" start="2234" end="2238" title="KOME" label="KOME"/>
<link wikidata="Q213205" start="2276" end="2298" title="San Francisco Bay Area" label="San Francisco Bay Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q632404" start="2372" end="2405" title="Westinghouse Electric Corporation" label="Westinghouse Electric Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718482" start="2563" end="2567" title="KDKA (AM)" label="KDKA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="2571" end="2595" title="Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania" label="Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988935" start="2720" end="2727" title="Westinghouse Broadcasting" label="Group W"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088127" start="2939" end="2945" title="Viacom (1971–2005)" label="Viacom"/>
<link wikidata="Q214346" start="2976" end="2984" title="Viacom (2005–2019)" label="spun out"/>
<link wikidata="Q950380" start="3066" end="3092" title="CBS Corporation" label="the second CBS Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q43196" start="3245" end="3261" title="Cincinnati, Ohio" label="Cincinnati, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q16563" start="3263" end="3281" title="Memphis, Tennessee" label="Memphis, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q16559" start="3283" end="3296" title="Austin, Texas" label="Austin, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q49218" start="3302" end="3321" title="Rochester, New York" label="Rochester, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380195" start="3325" end="3348" title="Entercom Communications" label="Entercom Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q128831" start="3378" end="3381" title="FCC" label="FCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4835996" start="3606" end="3627" title="Border Media Partners" label="Border Media Partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q27585" start="3690" end="3693" title="AOL" label="AOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q492058" start="3774" end="3792" title="XM Satellite Radio" label="XM Satellite Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653145" start="4182" end="4191" title="AOL Radio" label="AOL Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q17112366" start="4562" end="4581" title="RBC Capital Markets" label="RBC Capital Markets"/>
<link wikidata="Q14692474" start="4934" end="4938" title="WQSR" label="WQSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="4942" end="4951" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q6325948" start="4963" end="4967" title="KBKS" label="KBKS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="4971" end="4990" title="Seattle, Washington" label="Seattle, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q14708986" start="4992" end="4996" title="KLTH" label="KLTH"/>
<link wikidata="Q6341247" start="5001" end="5005" title="KXJM" label="KXJM"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106" start="5009" end="5025" title="Portland, Oregon" label="Portland, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6336222" start="5031" end="5035" title="KYRV" label="KQJK"/>
<link wikidata="Q18013" start="5039" end="5061" title="Sacramento, California" label="Sacramento, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q6330238" start="5087" end="5091" title="KHMX" label="KHMX"/>
<link wikidata="Q6332913" start="5096" end="5100" title="KLOL" label="KLOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="5104" end="5118" title="Houston, Texas" label="Houston, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="5226" end="5232" title="Denver" label="Denver"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5281" end="5299" title="Wilks Broadcasting" label="Wilks Broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q6330899" start="5329" end="5333" title="KIMN" label="KIMN"/>
<link wikidata="Q6340768" start="5335" end="5339" title="KKSE-FM" label="KWOF"/>
<link wikidata="Q6341261" start="5345" end="5352" title="KXKL-FM" label="KXKL-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106" start="5425" end="5433" title="Portland, Oregon" label="Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16999083" start="5481" end="5499" title="Alpha Broadcasting" label="Alpha Broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q6339515" start="5555" end="5559" title="KUFO (AM)" label="KCMD"/>
<link wikidata="Q6330945" start="5561" end="5565" title="KINK" label="KINK"/>
<link wikidata="Q6341287" start="5567" end="5571" title="KXL-FM" label="KUFO"/>
<link wikidata="Q6339693" start="5577" end="5581" title="KUPL" label="KUPL"/>
<link wikidata="Q183718" start="5778" end="5785" title="Last.fm" label="Last.fm"/>
<link wikidata="Q55397258" start="5820" end="5829" title="Radio.com" label="Radio.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q378988" start="5902" end="5924" title="hot adult contemporary" label="hot adult contemporary"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="5928" end="5944" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q7950544" start="5952" end="5956" title="WIAD" label="WIAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="5979" end="5992" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957237" start="6000" end="6004" title="WWFS" label="WWFS"/>
<link wikidata="Q941023" start="6032" end="6049" title="Eastern Time Zone" label="Eastern Time Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7947750" start="6065" end="6072" title="WCFS-FM" label="WCFS-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="6073" end="6080" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q7947006" start="6129" end="6138" title="WBBM (AM)" label="WBBM (AM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q36091" start="6166" end="6177" title="Minneapolis" label="Minneapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q28848" start="6178" end="6186" title="St. Paul, Minnesota" label="St. Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443316" start="6213" end="6228" title="Christmas music" label="Christmas music"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="6252" end="6265" title="country music" label="country music"/>
<link wikidata="Q6333729" start="6269" end="6273" title="KMNB" label="KMNB"/>
<link wikidata="Q16565" start="6488" end="6513" title="Charlotte, North Carolina" label="Charlotte, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2828677" start="6518" end="6527" title="Tampa Bay Area" label="Tampa Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950867" start="6557" end="6566" title="WTEL (AM)" label="WTEL (AM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="6571" end="6583" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4876829" start="6587" end="6610" title="Beasley Broadcast Group" label="Beasley Broadcast Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q15995599" start="6640" end="6647" title="WTDY-FM" label="WTDY-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957876" start="6653" end="6657" title="WXTU" label="WXTU"/>
<link wikidata="Q7951693" start="6678" end="6682" title="WKIS" label="WKIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7954419" start="6684" end="6688" title="WPOW" label="WPOW"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564778" start="6694" end="6698" title="WQAM" label="WQAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="6702" end="6707" title="Miami" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q16123390" start="6723" end="6743" title="Percy Anderson (judge)" label="Judge Percy Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153557" start="6876" end="6902" title="common law copyright" label="common law state copyright"/>
<link wikidata="Q231646" start="7089" end="7107" title="compulsory license" label="compulsory license"/>
<link wikidata="Q707401" start="7681" end="7702" title="Threshold of originality" label="a level of creativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6531032" start="7817" end="7831" title="Leslie Moonves" label="Leslie Moonves"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380195" start="8214" end="8222" title="Entercom" label="Entercom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318197" start="8332" end="8352" title="Reverse Morris Trust" label="Reverse Morris Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q4906538" start="8592" end="8601" title="Big Three (American television)" label="Big Three"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="8603" end="8606" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="8608" end="8611" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="8617" end="8620" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046168" start="8726" end="8736" title="ESPN Radio" label="ESPN Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009272" start="8970" end="8986" title="CBS Sports Radio" label="CBS Sports Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009272" start="9213" end="9236" title="Infinity Sports Network" label="Infinity Sports Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380195" start="9259" end="9271" title="Audacy, Inc." label="Audacy, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q348603" start="9458" end="9470" title="Howard Stern" label="Howard Stern"/>
<link wikidata="Q128831" start="9538" end="9541" title="FCC" label="FCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q313992" start="9593" end="9607" title="David Lee Roth" label="David Lee Roth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371670" start="9609" end="9635" title="Rover&amp;#x27;s Morning Glory" label="Rover&amp;#x27;s Morning Glory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119" start="9656" end="9668" title="Adam Carolla" label="Adam Carolla"/>
<link wikidata="Q348603" start="9678" end="9683" title="Howard Stern" label="Stern"/>
<link wikidata="Q5499819" start="9750" end="9757" title="Free FM" label="Free FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q502319" start="9764" end="9772" title="hot talk" label="hot talk"/>
<link wikidata="Q313992" start="9806" end="9810" title="David Lee Roth" label="Roth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098140" start="9884" end="9900" title="Opie and Anthony" label="Opie and Anthony"/>
<link wikidata="Q492058" start="9904" end="9912" title="XM Radio" label="XM Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q624556" start="10048" end="10086" title="St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s Cathedral, New York" label="St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s Cathedral, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q308922" start="10651" end="10663" title="Compensatory damages" label="compensatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q285466" start="10668" end="10684" title="punitive damages" label="punitive damages"/>
<link wikidata="Q858778" start="10885" end="10915" title="Late Show with David Letterman" label="Late Show with David Letterman"/>
<link wikidata="Q247869" start="10932" end="10942" title="60 Minutes" label="60 Minutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431439" start="11262" end="11266" title="WINS-FM" label="WXRK"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="11858" end="11871" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332952" start="11891" end="11898" title="Jack FM" label="Jack FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q373342" start="11953" end="11966" title="popular music" label="popular music"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="12040" end="12046" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="12048" end="12055" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q36091" start="12057" end="12068" title="Minneapolis" label="Minneapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="12119" end="12126" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7947634" start="12181" end="12188" title="WCBS-FM" label="WCBS-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q6326583" start="12475" end="12482" title="KCBS-FM" label="KCBS-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q6331116" start="12509" end="12516" title="KISS-FM (brand)" label="Kiss FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q427487" start="12533" end="12562" title="contemporary hit radio" label="contemporary hit radio/top 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="13133" end="13154" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q504309" start="13214" end="13233" title="St. Louis Cardinals" label="St. Louis Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q653772" start="13252" end="13270" title="Pittsburgh Pirates" label="Pittsburgh Pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q15230024" start="13446" end="13474" title="KDKA-FM" label="FM sister all-sports station"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="13543" end="13559" title="New York Yankees" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106511" start="13702" end="13706" title="WFAN (AM)" label="WFAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="13738" end="13754" title="New York Yankees" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q692417" start="13779" end="13783" title="Mets" label="Mets"/>
<link wikidata="Q7955545" start="13800" end="13804" title="WSCR" label="WSCR"/>
<link wikidata="Q246782" start="13836" end="13848" title="Chicago Cubs" label="Chicago Cubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7954308" start="13867" end="13871" title="WPHT" label="WPHT"/>
<link wikidata="Q650840" start="13924" end="13945" title="Philadelphia Phillies" label="Philadelphia Phillies"/>
<link wikidata="Q280675" start="14102" end="14108" title="WIP-FM" label="WIP-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q6336831" start="14110" end="14117" title="KRLD-FM" label="KRLD-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q329816" start="14161" end="14174" title="Texas Rangers (baseball)" label="Texas Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q246782" start="14213" end="14225" title="Chicago Cubs" label="Chicago Cubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7947006" start="14269" end="14278" title="WBBM (AM)" label="WBBM (AM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949870" start="14305" end="14313" title="WGN (AM)" label="WGN (AM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q650816" start="14335" end="14352" title="Baltimore Orioles" label="Baltimore Orioles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7951474" start="14390" end="14396" title="WJZ-FM" label="WJZ-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946969" start="14460" end="14469" title="WBAL (AM)" label="WBAL (AM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q335169" start="14648" end="14665" title="Chicago White Sox" label="Chicago White Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949870" start="14715" end="14723" title="WGN (AM)" label="WGN (AM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3416935" start="14827" end="14835" title="all-news" label="all-news"/>
<link wikidata="Q6326585" start="14891" end="14900" title="KCBS (AM)" label="KCBS (AM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6333790" start="14920" end="14924" title="KMOX" label="KMOX"/>
<link wikidata="Q6334702" start="14959" end="14967" title="KNX (AM)" label="KNX (AM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6325114" start="14969" end="14975" title="KNX-FM" label="KNX-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q6336833" start="14993" end="15002" title="KRLD (AM)" label="KRLD (AM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15231900" start="15034" end="15042" title="KYW (AM)" label="KYW (AM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7947006" start="15061" end="15070" title="WBBM (AM)" label="WBBM (AM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7947580" start="15084" end="15092" title="WBZ (AM)" label="WBZ (AM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450606" start="15105" end="15114" title="WCBS (AM)" label="WCBS (AM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564690" start="15129" end="15138" title="WINS (AM)" label="WINS (AM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564859" start="15153" end="15161" title="WWJ (AM)" label="WWJ (AM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q477993" start="15313" end="15324" title="iHeartMedia" label="iHeartMedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608300" start="15342" end="15387" title="List of broadcast stations owned by CBS Radio" label="List of broadcast stations owned by CBS Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988935" start="15390" end="15425" title="Westinghouse Broadcasting" label="Westinghouse Broadcasting (Group W)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150752" start="15468" end="15501" title="Infinity Broadcasting Corporation" label="Infinity Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q55397258" start="15560" end="15569" title="Radio.com" label="Radio.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q183718" start="15572" end="15579" title="Last.fm" label="Last.fm"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="444371" wikidata="Q575314" url="?curid=444371" title="Antigenic shift">
<text>Antigenic shift is the process by which two or more different strains of a virus, or strains of two or more different viruses, combine to form a new subtype having a mixture of the surface antigens of the two or more original strains. The term is often applied specifically to influenza, as that is the best-known example, but the process is also known to occur with other viruses, such as visna virus in sheep. Antigenic shift is a specific case of reassortment or viral shift that confers a phenotypic change.

Antigenic shift is contrasted with antigenic drift, which is the natural mutation over time of known strains of influenza (or other things, in a more general sense) which may lead to a loss of immunity, or in vaccine mismatch. Antigenic drift occurs in all types of influenza including influenza A, influenza B and influenza C. Antigenic shift, however, occurs only in influenza A because it infects more than just humans. Affected species include other mammals and birds, giving influenza A the opportunity for a major reorganization of surface antigens. Influenza B and C principally infect humans, minimizing the chance that a reassortment will change its phenotype drastically.

In the 1940s, Maurice Hilleman discovered antigenic shift, which is important for the emergence of new viral pathogens as it is a pathway that viruses may follow to enter a new niche.

==Role in the transmission of influenza viruses from non-human animals to people==
Influenza A viruses are found in many different animals, including ducks, chickens, pigs, humans, whales, horses, and seals. Influenza B viruses circulate widely principally among humans, though it has recently been found in seals. Flu strains are named after their types of hemagglutinin and neuraminidase surface proteins (of which there are 18 and 9 respectively), so they will be called, for example, H3N2 for type-3 hemagglutinin and type-2 neuraminidase. Some strains of avian influenza (from which all other strains of influenza A are believed to stem) can infect pigs or other mammalian hosts. When two different strains of influenza infect the same cell simultaneously, their protein capsids and lipid envelopes are removed, exposing their RNA, which is then transcribed to mRNA. The host cell then forms new viruses that combine their antigens; for example, H3N2 and H5N1 can form H5N2 this way. Because the human immune system has difficulty recognizing the new influenza strain, it may be highly dangerous, and result in a new pandemic.

Influenza viruses which have undergone antigenic shift have caused the Asian Flu pandemic of 1957, the Hong Kong Flu pandemic of 1968, and the Swine Flu scare of 1976. Until recently, such combinations were believed to have caused the infamous Spanish flu outbreak of 1918 which killed 40~100 million people worldwide. However, more recent research suggests the 1918 pandemic was caused by the antigenic drift of a fully avian virus to a form that could infect humans efficiently. The most recent 2009 H1N1 outbreak was a result of antigenic shift and reassortment between human, avian, and swine viruses.

== Role of pigs in Influenza antigenic shift ==
Pigs are especially important in antigenic shift of influenza viruses. Because pigs can be infected with strains of influenza that infect various other species of animals, they act as &#x27;mixing pots&#x27; for the virus. When multiple virus strains, such as a duck and human influenza strain, infect the same pig, antigenic shift is likely to occur. While most of the virus strains resulting from this will be dead-end strains, a few have the potential to become pandemic viruses.

== See also ==
* Coinfection
* Antigenic variation

== Notes ==
==Further reading==

== External links ==
* Superflu: Antigenic shift in Influenza</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q575314" start="0" end="15" title="Antigenic shift" label="Antigenic shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q808" start="75" end="80" title="virus" label="virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q103537" start="189" end="196" title="antigen" label="antigen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840" start="277" end="286" title="influenza" label="influenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q51928610" start="390" end="401" title="visna virus" label="visna virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004399" start="450" end="462" title="reassortment" label="reassortment"/>
<link wikidata="Q104053" start="493" end="503" title="phenotypic" label="phenotypic"/>
<link wikidata="Q575258" start="548" end="563" title="antigenic drift" label="antigenic drift"/>
<link wikidata="Q42918" start="586" end="594" title="mutation" label="mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q834390" start="799" end="810" title="influenzavirus A" label="influenza A"/>
<link wikidata="Q51916573" start="812" end="823" title="Influenzavirus B" label="influenza B"/>
<link wikidata="Q51916591" start="828" end="839" title="Influenzavirus C" label="influenza C"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="967" end="973" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="979" end="983" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004399" start="1143" end="1155" title="reassortment" label="reassortment"/>
<link wikidata="Q104053" start="1172" end="1181" title="phenotype" label="phenotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q983898" start="1210" end="1226" title="Maurice Hilleman" label="Maurice Hilleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q170065" start="1305" end="1313" title="pathogen" label="pathogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q172861" start="1373" end="1378" title="Ecological niche" label="niche"/>
<link wikidata="Q834390" start="1464" end="1475" title="Influenza A" label="Influenza A"/>
<link wikidata="Q19161" start="1739" end="1752" title="hemagglutinin" label="hemagglutinin"/>
<link wikidata="Q409485" start="1757" end="1770" title="neuraminidase" label="neuraminidase"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="1779" end="1786" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q830465" start="2157" end="2163" title="capsid" label="capsid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11367" start="2169" end="2174" title="lipid" label="lipid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11053" start="2213" end="2216" title="RNA" label="RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q188928" start="2247" end="2251" title="mRNA" label="mRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059" start="2388" end="2401" title="immune system" label="immune system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434550" start="2585" end="2594" title="Asian Flu" label="Asian Flu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069785" start="2617" end="2630" title="Hong Kong Flu" label="Hong Kong Flu"/>
<link wikidata="Q36855" start="2657" end="2666" title="Swine Flu" label="Swine Flu"/>
<link wikidata="Q178275" start="2758" end="2769" title="Spanish flu" label="Spanish flu"/>
<link wikidata="Q575258" start="2908" end="2923" title="antigenic drift" label="antigenic drift"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243018" start="3670" end="3681" title="Coinfection" label="Coinfection"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774739" start="3684" end="3703" title="Antigenic variation" label="Antigenic variation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="444372" wikidata="Q201189" url="?curid=444372" title="Hjalmar Johansen">
<text>Fredrik Hjalmar Johansen (15 May 1867 – 3 January 1913) was a Norwegian polar explorer. He participated on the first and third &quot;Fram&quot; expeditions. He shipped out with the Fridtjof Nansen expedition in 1893–1896, and accompanied Nansen to notch a new Farthest North record near the North Pole. Johansen also participated in the expedition of Roald Amundsen to the South Pole in 1910–1912.

==Early life==
Born at Skien in Telemark county, Norway. He was the son of Jens Johansen (1838–88) and Maren Pedersdatter (1838–1907). He was the second eldest son in a family of five children. He attended Royal Frederick University (now University of Oslo) to study law in Christiania (now Oslo). However, he performed poorly at law school, due to a low attendance of lectures. At the age of 21, Johansen&#x27;s father died, prompting him to leave law school. After dropping out of school, Hjalmar briefly worked in an office job at Bratsberg. However, by that time he had already made his mark as an athlete; he was an excellent skier and gymnast. In gymnastics he became Norwegian champion in 1885 in Fredrikshald and world champion in 1889 in Paris.

==Exploring expeditions==

===Arctic===
Johansen joined Nansen&#x27;s polar expedition with &quot;Fram&quot; in 1893; he had to take the position of stoker, as the others were filled. After &quot;Fram&quot; froze fast, he became an assistant to Sigurd Scott-Hansen (1868–1937) with his meteorologic studies. Johansen was an expert dog driver. Using skis and sled dogs, Johansen accompanied Nansen on their joint closest approach to the North Pole, 86 degrees 14 minutes north, in 1895. On their way home, Johansen and Nansen were forced to spend the winter on Franz Josef Land because of severe damage to their kayaks when crossing open channels in the ice. During the expedition, Johansen once fell through the ice and was barely saved by Nansen, and also received a blow on his head from a polar bear.
On the return of the Nansen parties to Norway, Johansen and other members of the crew of the &quot;Fram&quot; were celebrated as heroes. Johansen was promoted to captain in the Norwegian infantry at the garrison in Tromsø. However he drank heavily and in 1907 he was asked to resign his position in the army. Between the years 1907 to 1909, Johansen participated in four expeditions to Svalbard.

===Antarctica===
In 1910 he was one of Amundsen&#x27;s men on the &quot;Fram&quot; and in Antarctica. Amundsen and his men, racing for the South Pole with Robert Falcon Scott, started out for the South Pole too early in the season and had to return to base camp at the Bay of Whales.

Johansen had disagreed with the early start and had to rescue a less experienced member of the party, Kristian Prestrud, from freezing to death on the return journey. Amundsen had taken the best dogsled and sped off towards the camp without regard for his men as a storm approached. As a result, Prestrud and Johansen had no tent or cooking equipment to melt snow and had no choice but to press on for the camp in a blizzard with extreme windchill (−50 °C) and a dangerous descent towards the base camp.

Johansen had saved Prestrud from death and carried him to the base camp. However, the mishap enraged Amundsen. Upon their return to the Bay of Whales, Johansen quarrelled with Amundsen in front of the other men; Amundsen reacted to the argument by dismissing Johansen from the party heading for the South Pole. He further disciplined Johansen by ordering him to subordinate himself to Prestrud, and ordering the two men to embark on a minor expedition towards King Edward VII Land while the other members of the main expedition resumed their trek towards the Pole.

The Amundsen party successfully reached the South Pole and reunited with the subsidiary party. On the expedition&#x27;s landfall in Tasmania Amundsen dismissed Johansen from the &quot;Fram&quot;, paid him off, and ordered him to return separately to Norway. Once Johansen had left Amundsen&#x27;s party, the triumphant leader made the entire remaining crew sign a paper that stated that they were to keep quiet about the whole expedition. Amundsen was to have the sole right of writing about it in his soon-to-be-published book. After returning separately to Norway, Johansen found that he was never to be credited by Amundsen for any contribution to the expedition, including his heroic rescue of Prestrud.

Johansen was awarded the South Pole Medal (&quot;Sydpolsmedaljen&quot;), the Royal Norwegian award instituted by King Haakon VII in 1912 to reward participants in Roald Amundsen&#x27;s South Pole expedition. However, Johansen had resumed drinking alcohol, became clinically depressed and in 1913 committed suicide. His wife Hilda Øvrum (1868–1956) and their four children survived him.

==Legacy==
After his death, Johansen&#x27;s reputation largely drifted into obscurity. In 1997, however, biographer Ragnar Kvam, Jr. published a biography of the forgotten explorer, &quot;Den tredje mann: Beretningen om Hjalmar Johansen &quot;. As a result of this and other work, Johansen&#x27;s place in the story of Norwegian polar exploration is being rehabilitated.

In 2005, the International Hydrographic Organization officially approved the proposal by American arctic scientist Jonathan E. Snow to name Hjalmar Johansen Seamount, a newly discovered volcanic edifice on the floor of the Arctic Ocean northwest of Svalbard. The location is 82 degrees, 57 minutes N, 3 degrees, 40 minutes W. The top of the undersea mountain lies at a water depth of 1075 metres.

Johansen was portrayed by Knut Ørvig in the 1968 film &quot;Bare et liv – historien om Fridtjof Nansen&quot;, by Toralv Maurstad in the 1985 miniseries &quot;The Last Place on Earth&quot;, and by Fridtjov Såheim in the 2019 film &quot;Amundsen&quot;.

==References==
==Other sources==
* Hjalmar Johansen (1899) Nansen in the North&quot; (Ward, Lock and Co Limited, London)
*Ragnar Kvam (1997) &quot;Den tredje mann: Beretningen om Hjalmar Johansen&quot; (Oslo: Gyldendal) </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q201189" start="0" end="24" title="Hjalmar Johansen" label="Fredrik Hjalmar Johansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q110283" start="133" end="137" title="Fram (ship)" label="Fram"/>
<link wikidata="Q72292" start="181" end="196" title="Fridtjof Nansen" label="Fridtjof Nansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964751" start="197" end="207" title="Nansen&amp;#x27;s Fram expedition" label="expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706394" start="260" end="274" title="Farthest North" label="Farthest North"/>
<link wikidata="Q934" start="291" end="301" title="North Pole" label="North Pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q926" start="351" end="365" title="Roald Amundsen" label="Roald Amundsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q933" start="373" end="383" title="South Pole" label="South Pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q2272" start="422" end="427" title="Skien" label="Skien"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254" start="431" end="439" title="Telemark" label="Telemark"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="448" end="454" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q486156" start="637" end="655" title="University of Oslo" label="University of Oslo"/>
<link wikidata="Q585" start="690" end="694" title="Oslo" label="Oslo"/>
<link wikidata="Q326827" start="1040" end="1047" title="Artistic gymnastics" label="gymnast"/>
<link wikidata="Q109042" start="1103" end="1115" title="Halden" label="Fredrikshald"/>
<link wikidata="Q28997" start="1512" end="1521" title="sled dogs" label="sled dogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q185018" start="1714" end="1730" title="Franz Josef Land" label="Franz Josef Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q179246" start="1765" end="1770" title="kayak" label="kayak"/>
<link wikidata="Q33609" start="1946" end="1956" title="polar bear" label="polar bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q19100" start="2120" end="2127" title="Captain (land)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="2145" end="2153" title="infantry" label="infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q26087" start="2173" end="2179" title="Tromsø" label="Tromsø"/>
<link wikidata="Q25231" start="2344" end="2352" title="Svalbard" label="Svalbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q51" start="2445" end="2455" title="Antarctica" label="Antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="Q102527" start="2510" end="2529" title="Robert Falcon Scott" label="Robert Falcon Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q999005" start="2624" end="2637" title="Bay of Whales" label="Bay of Whales"/>
<link wikidata="Q631831" start="2742" end="2759" title="Kristian Prestrud" label="Kristian Prestrud"/>
<link wikidata="Q933" start="3444" end="3454" title="South Pole" label="South Pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253855" start="3605" end="3625" title="King Edward VII Land" label="King Edward VII Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q34366" start="3843" end="3851" title="Tasmania" label="Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444211" start="4445" end="4461" title="South Pole Medal" label="South Pole Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q154927" start="4538" end="4548" title="Haakon VII" label="Haakon VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="4683" end="4703" title="clinical depression" label="clinically depressed"/>
<link wikidata="Q17024070" start="4923" end="4939" title="Ragnar Kvam, Jr." label="Ragnar Kvam, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q25231" start="5428" end="5436" title="Svalbard" label="Svalbard"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5603" end="5613" title=":no:Knut %C3%98rvig" label="Knut Ørvig"/>
<link wikidata="Q4860305" start="5637" end="5679" title="Bare et liv – historien om Fridtjof Nansen" label="Bare et liv – historien om Fridtjof Nansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772281" start="5690" end="5705" title="Toralv Maurstad" label="Toralv Maurstad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3328825" start="5735" end="5758" title="The Last Place on Earth" label="The Last Place on Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4430142" start="5773" end="5788" title="Fridtjov Såheim" label="Fridtjov Såheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q61718985" start="5812" end="5820" title="Amundsen (film)" label="Amundsen"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="444381" wikidata="Q1625" url="?curid=444381" title="J. Sigfrid Edström">
<text>Johannes Sigfrid Edström (11 November 1870 – 18 March 1964) was a Swedish industrialist, chairman of the Sweden-America Foundation, and fourth president of the International Olympic Committee.

==Early life==
Edström was born in the tiny village of Morlanda, on the island of Orust, Bohuslän. He studied at Chalmers University of Technology in Gothenburg, where he graduated in 1891, and continued studying at ETH Zürich in Switzerland, and the United States. In his youth, he was a top sprinter, capable of finishing the 100 m in 11 seconds. He was the director of the Gothenburg trams from 1900 to 1903, where he was in charge of electrifying them, and of the electrotechnical company ASEA from 1903 to 1933, and president of ASEA&#x27;s board from 1934 until 1939.

Edström was involved in Swedish sports administration, and helped organise the 1912 Summer Olympics in Stockholm. During the Olympics, the International Amateur Athletics Federation (IAAF) was established, and Edström was elected its first president, a position that he held until 1946.

==President of the IOC==
He became a member of the International Olympic Committee (IOC) in 1920, and after holding a position on the Executive Committee, became vice-president in 1931. When IOC president Henri de Baillet-Latour died in 1942, Edström was the acting president until the end of World War II, when he was formally elected president. He played an important role in reviving the Olympic Movement after the war. In 1952, he retired from this position and was succeeded by Avery Brundage.

In 1931, Edström was involved in the controversial decision to ban Finnish runner Paavo Nurmi from competing at the 1932 Los Angeles Olympics, as he saw Nurmi as a professional athlete despite the fact that in April 1932 the Finnish Athletics Federation ruled in favor of Nurmi, finding no evidence for the allegations of professionalism. Less than three days before the 10,000 m, a special commission of the IAAF, consisting of the same seven members that had suspended Nurmi, rejected the Finn&#x27;s entries and barred him from competing in Los Angeles. Sigfrid Edström, president of the IAAF and chairman of its executive council, stated that the full congress of the IAAF, which was scheduled to start the next day, could not reinstate Nurmi for the Olympics but merely review the phases and political angles related to the case. The AP called this &quot;one of the slickest political maneuvers in international athletic history&quot;, and wrote that the Games would now be &quot;like Hamlet without the celebrated Dane in the cast.&quot; Thousands protested against the action in Helsinki. Details of the case were not released to the press, but the evidence against Nurmi was believed be the sworn statements from German race promoters that Nurmi had received $250–500 per race when running in Germany in autumn 1931. The statements were produced by Karl Ritter von Halt, after Edström had sent him increasingly threatening letters warning that if evidence against Nurmi were not provided he would be &quot;unfortunately obliged to take stringent action against the German Athletics Association.&quot; This affected Finland&#x27;s relationship to Sweden negatively as Paavo Nurmi was considered a Finnish national hero. Nurmi finally got his revenge during 1952 Olympic Games in Helsinki when he brought the Olympic torch to the opening ceremony in the stadium and received a standing ovation in front of Edström.

Edström died in Stockholm on 18 March 1964.

==Published works==

== References ==
===Works cited===

==External links==
* International Olympic Committee profiles for presidents
* International Olympic Committee article 
* Yttergren, Leif. 2006 J. Sigfrid Edstrøm and the Nurmi Affair of 1932: The Struggle of the Amateur Fundamentalists Against Professionalism in the Olympic Movement. Proceedings of Eighth International Symposium for Olympic Research, 2006 pp. 111–126</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1625" start="0" end="24" title="J. Sigfrid Edström" label="Johannes Sigfrid Edström"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="66" end="73" title="Sweden" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7654547" start="105" end="130" title="Sweden-America Foundation" label="Sweden-America Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241513" start="143" end="191" title="president of the International Olympic Committee" label="president of the International Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q338752" start="249" end="257" title="Morlanda" label="Morlanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q974760" start="276" end="281" title="Orust" label="Orust"/>
<link wikidata="Q209523" start="283" end="291" title="Bohuslän" label="Bohuslän"/>
<link wikidata="Q836805" start="307" end="340" title="Chalmers University of Technology" label="Chalmers University of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q25287" start="344" end="354" title="Gothenburg" label="Gothenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q11942" start="410" end="420" title="ETH Zürich" label="ETH Zürich"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="424" end="435" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="445" end="458" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297227" start="570" end="585" title="Gothenburg tram" label="Gothenburg tram"/>
<link wikidata="Q52665" start="687" end="691" title="ASEA" label="ASEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q8118" start="848" end="868" title="1912 Summer Olympics" label="1912 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="872" end="881" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158" start="908" end="950" title="International Association of Athletics Federations" label="International Amateur Athletics Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q40970" start="1108" end="1139" title="International Olympic Committee" label="International Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q314193" start="1262" end="1285" title="Henri de Baillet-Latour" label="Henri de Baillet-Latour"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1350" end="1362" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q155928" start="1540" end="1554" title="Avery Brundage" label="Avery Brundage"/>
<link wikidata="Q101942" start="1639" end="1650" title="Paavo Nurmi" label="Paavo Nurmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8143" start="1673" end="1698" title="1932 Los Angeles Olympics" label="1932 Los Angeles Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3628871" start="1928" end="1936" title="Athletics at the 1932 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s 10,000 metres" label="10,000 m"/>
<link wikidata="Q877659" start="2914" end="2934" title="Karl Ritter von Halt" label="Karl Ritter von Halt"/>
<link wikidata="Q487066" start="3130" end="3158" title="Deutscher Leichtathletik-Verband" label="German Athletics Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="3495" end="3504" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="444384" wikidata="Q476226" url="?curid=444384" title="Moinești">
<text>Moinești (; ) is a city in Bacău County, Western Moldavia, Romania, with a population of 19,728 . Its name is derived from the Romanian-language word &quot;moină&quot;, which means &quot;fallow&quot; or &quot;light rain&quot;. Moinești once had a large Jewish community, and in 1899 about half of the population was Jewish; in Jewish contexts the name is often given as &quot;Mojnescht&quot; or &quot;Monesht&quot;. The city administers one village, Găzărie.

==Location==
The city is situated in the foothills of the Tarcău Mountains, at an altitude of , on the banks of the river Tazlăul Sărat. It is located in the northwestern part of Bacău County, west of the county seat, Bacău.

Moinești is crossed by national road , which connects it to Bacău (where it ends in DN2) and to nearby Comănești (where it ends in ).

==History==
First mentioned in 1467, the locality was listed among the Moldavian villages on the &quot;Bawer map&quot; of 1783. A &quot;târg&quot; was first attested in this location in 1832; it had 188 houses and 588 inhabitants.

In 1921, Moinești was designated a &quot;comună urbană&quot; (&quot;urban commune&quot;), with its own coat of arms and local administration, but a step short of being considered a city. It became a municipality in 2002. The 2011 census counted 20,855 inhabitants. At the 2021 census, the city had a population of 19,728.

There are two secondary schools in Moinești: the Spiru Haret Theoretical High School and the Grigore Cobălcescu Technical College.

==Economy==
The area around Moinești is rich in natural resources such as petroleum, natural gas, salt, and timber. From the 1950s to the 1980s, Moinești experienced a steady economic growth thanks to the large petroleum extracting industry. After 1990, however, following the nationwide industry privatization, Moinești&#x27;s economy changed dramatically, at some points reaching level of unemployment of over 20%.

==Dada monument==
In 1996, a monument was built in the town in honor of Tristan Tzara, the Moinești-born founder of Dadaism. It was created from concrete and steel by the German-Romanian sculptor Ingo Glass It is 25 meters long, 2.6 meters wide, and 10 meters high and it weighs 120 tons.

==Tourism==
Tourist attractions in Moinești include: Băi Park (with healing mineral waters), Pine Tree Park, Ghindaru Hill (where archaeologists discovered artefacts of the pre-Cucuteni culture, over 5,000 years old), the Dada Monument (dedicated to Tristan Tzara), Cetățuia (Dacian fortified city archaeologically certified), and the Jewish Cemetery (where the oldest tombstone with recognisable text dates back to 1692).

==People==
* Alexandru Barna (born 1993), footballer
* Robert Căruță (born 1996), footballer
* Lăcrămioara Filip (born 1973), gymnast
* Vasile Gherasim (1950 – 2020), politician
* Alexandru Margină (born 1993), footballer
* Nestor Rateș (born 1933), journalist, Head of Romanian Desk of Radio Free Europe 1989, 1994–2002
* Moses Rosen (1912 – 1994), Chief Rabbi of Romania from 1948 to 1994
* (1854 – 1938), born Moșe David Iancovici, early Zionist and founder of Rosh Pinna
* Tristan Tzara (1896 – 1963), writer and founder of Dada

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q476226" start="0" end="8" title="Moinești" label="Moinești"/>
<link wikidata="Q640364" start="19" end="23" title="municipiu" label="city"/>
<link wikidata="Q179779" start="27" end="39" title="Bacău County" label="Bacău County"/>
<link wikidata="Q209754" start="41" end="57" title="Western Moldavia" label="Western Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="59" end="66" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913" start="127" end="144" title="Romanian language" label="Romanian-language"/>
<link wikidata="Q191258" start="187" end="193" title="Crop rotation" label="fallow"/>
<link wikidata="Q696662" start="253" end="259" title="History of the Jews in Romania" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q523065" start="518" end="534" title="Tarcău Mountains" label="Tarcău Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q7690463" start="582" end="595" title="Tazlăul Sărat" label="Tazlăul Sărat"/>
<link wikidata="Q10737004" start="678" end="683" title="Bacău" label="Bacău"/>
<link wikidata="Q10858152" start="709" end="722" title="Roads in Romania" label="national road"/>
<link wikidata="Q845893" start="770" end="773" title="DN2" label="DN2"/>
<link wikidata="Q756590" start="789" end="798" title="Comănești" label="Comănești"/>
<link wikidata="Q10957559" start="892" end="900" title="Moldavia" label="Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7862115" start="957" end="961" title="târg" label="târg"/>
<link wikidata="Q640364" start="1252" end="1264" title="Municipalities of Romania" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q12181933" start="1278" end="1289" title="2011 Romanian census" label="2011 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q106566382" start="1325" end="1336" title="2021 Romanian census" label="2021 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="1582" end="1591" title="petroleum" label="petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="1593" end="1604" title="natural gas" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370714" start="1616" end="1622" title="Lumber" label="timber"/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="1805" end="1818" title="privatization" label="privatization"/>
<link wikidata="Q16409" start="1998" end="2011" title="Tristan Tzara" label="Tristan Tzara"/>
<link wikidata="Q6034" start="2042" end="2049" title="Dadaism" label="Dadaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q105162" start="2122" end="2132" title="Ingo Glass" label="Ingo Glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162419" start="2393" end="2409" title="Cucuteni–Trypillia culture" label="Cucuteni culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q50414495" start="2653" end="2668" title="Alexandru Barna" label="Alexandru Barna"/>
<link wikidata="Q45311142" start="2695" end="2708" title="Robert Căruță" label="Robert Căruță"/>
<link wikidata="Q6711598" start="2735" end="2752" title="Lăcrămioara Filip" label="Lăcrămioara Filip"/>
<link wikidata="Q24525349" start="2776" end="2791" title="Vasile Gherasim" label="Vasile Gherasim"/>
<link wikidata="Q28673257" start="2820" end="2837" title="Alexandru Margină" label="Alexandru Margină"/>
<link wikidata="Q12736519" start="2864" end="2876" title="Nestor Rateș" label="Nestor Rateș"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900747" start="2963" end="2974" title="Moses Rosen" label="Moses Rosen"/>
<link wikidata="Q133485" start="2996" end="3001" title="Rabbi" label="Rabbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q525649" start="3104" end="3114" title="Rosh Pinna" label="Rosh Pinna"/>
<link wikidata="Q16409" start="3117" end="3130" title="Tristan Tzara" label="Tristan Tzara"/>
<link wikidata="Q6034" start="3168" end="3172" title="Dada" label="Dada"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="444387" wikidata="Q419220" url="?curid=444387" title="Juvenile hormone">
<text>Juvenile hormones (JHs) are a group of acyclic sesquiterpenoids that regulate many aspects of insect physiology. The first discovery of a JH was by Vincent Wigglesworth. JHs regulate development, reproduction, diapause, and polyphenisms.

In insects, JH (formerly neotenin) refers to a group of hormones, which ensure growth of the larva, while preventing metamorphosis. Because of their rigid exoskeleton, insects grow in their development by successively shedding their exoskeleton (a process known as molting).

Juvenile hormones are secreted by a pair of endocrine glands behind the brain called the corpora allata. JHs are also important for the production of eggs in female insects.

JH was isolated in 1965 by Karel Sláma and Carroll Williams and the first molecular structure of a JH was solved in 1967.

Most insect species contain only juvenile growth hormone (JH) III. To date JH 0, JH I, and JH II have been identified only in the Lepidoptera (butterflies and moths). The form JHB3 (JH III bisepoxide) appears to be the most important JH in the Diptera, or flies. Certain species of crustaceans have been shown to produce and secrete methyl farnesoate, which is juvenile hormone III lacking the epoxide group. Methyl farnesoate is believed to play a role similar to that of JH in crustaceans.

Being a sesquiterpenoid, JH chemical structure differs significantly from the structure of other animal hormones. Some JH analogs have been found in conifers.

==Control of development==
The primary control of juvenile hormone is by 1) the stimulation of the corpora allata by allatotropins short peptides which bind to G-protein coupled receptors, which signal the glands to produce JH, and 2), the inhibition of JH production by allatostatins. These fall into three classes: allatostatin A, allatostatin B, and allatostatin C (for a review of these control mechanisms see: Stay and Woodhead 1993). Secondary control of the JH titre found in the haemolymph of the developing insect is metabolic inactivation of JH by JH-specific esterase and juvenile hormone epoxide hydrolase. During ecdysis the form of the old cuticle laid down before the next moult is controlled by the JH level in the insect. JH maintains a juvenile state. The level gradually decreases during the development of the insect, allowing it to proceed to successive instars with each molt.

This has been demonstrated in various studies, most prominently that by V. B. Wigglesworth in 1960s. In this study, two adult &quot;Rhodnius&quot; had their blood systems linked, ensuring that the JH titre in both would be equal. One was a third instar &quot;Rhodnius&quot;, the other was a fourth instar. When the corpora allata of the third instar insect were removed, the level of JH was equal in both insects to that in the fourth instar animal, and hence both proceeded to the fifth instar at the next moult. When the fourth instar &quot;Rhodnius&quot; had its corpora allata removed, both contained a third instar level of JH and hence one proceeded to instar four, and the other remained at this instar.

Generally, the removal of the corpora allata from juveniles will result in a diminutive adult at the next moult. Implantation of corpora allata into last larval instars will boost JH levels and hence produce a supernumerary (extra) juvenile instar etc.

==In honey bees==

There is a complex interaction between JH, the hormone ecdysone and vitellogenin. In the development stage, as long as there is enough JH, the ecdysone promotes larva-to-larva molts. With lower amounts of JH, ecdysone promotes pupation. Complete absence of JH results in formation of the adult.
In adult honey bees, JH and Vitellogenin titers in general show an inverse pattern.

JH titers in worker honey bees progressively increase through the first 15 or so days of the worker&#x27;s life before the onset of foraging.
During the first 15 days, workers perform tasks inside the hive, such as nursing larvae, constructing comb, and cleaning cells. JH titers peak around day 15; workers this age guard, remove dead bees from the colony, and fan at the colony entrance to cool the nest. Aggressiveness of guard bees is correlated with their blood JH levels. Even though guards have high JH levels, their ovaries are relatively undeveloped. Although, JH does not activate foraging. Rather it is involved in controlling the pace at which bees develop into foragers.

Vitellogenin titers are high at the beginning of adult life and slowly decrease.

JH has been known to be involved in the queen-worker caste differentiation during the larval stage. The unique negative relationship between JH and Vitellogenin may be important to the understanding of queen longevity.

== In Lepidoptera ==
JH in many butterfly and moth species are necessary for the production and release of the sex pheromone by females. Experiments conducted in &quot;Mythimna unipuncta&quot; (true armyworm moth) and &quot;Agrotis ipsilon&quot; (black cutworm moth) have shown that removing the corpus allata, which secretes JH, stops all release of sex pheromone. Furthermore, JH is important for ovarian development. In the black cutworm, it was shown that JH is also necessary in males for pheromone responsiveness. JH has also been shown to be transferred from the male to the female &quot;Heliothis virescens&quot; during copulation.

==Forms==

* Methyl farnesoate
** CAS methyl (2E,6E)-3,7,11-trimethyl-2,6,10-dodecatrienoate
** Formula: C16H26O2
* Juvenile hormone 0 (found in Lepidoptera)
** CAS methyl (2E,6E)-10R,11S-(oxiranyl)-3,7-diethyl-11-methyl-2,6-tridecadienoate
** Formula: C19H32O3
* Juvenile hormone I (found in Lepidoptera)
** CAS methyl (2E,6E)-10R,11S-(oxiranyl)-7-ethyl-3,11-dimethyl-2,6-tridecadienoate
** Formula: C18H30O3
* Juvenile hormone II (found in Lepidoptera)
** CAS methyl (2E,6E)-10R,11S-(oxiranyl)-3,7,11-trimethyl-2,6-tridecadienoate
** Formula: C17H28O3
** CAS methyl (2E,6E)-10R-(oxiranyl)-3,7,11-trimethyl-2,6-dodecadienoate
** Formula: C16H26O3
* Juvenile hormone JHB3 (found in diptera)
** CAS methyl (2E,6E)-6S,7S,10R-(dioxiranyl)-3,7,11-trimethyl-2-dodecaenoate
** Formula: C16H26O4

==Use as an insecticide==
Synthetic analogues of the juvenile hormone, juvenile hormone mimics, are used as an insecticide, preventing the larvae from developing into adult insects. JH itself is expensive to synthesize and is unstable in light. At high levels of JH, larvae can still molt, but the result will only be a bigger larva, not an adult. Thus the insect&#x27;s reproductive cycle is broken. One JH analogue, methoprene, is approved by the WHO for use in drinking water cisterns to control mosquito larvae due to its exceptionally low toxicity (LD50 &gt;35,000 mg/kg in the rat).

==Regulation==
Juvenile hormone is produced in the corpora allata of insects. JH will disperse throughout the haemolymph and act on responsive tissues. JH is principally degraded by the enzymes juvenile-hormone esterase (JHE) or juvenile hormone epoxide hydrolase (JHEH). JHE and JHEH both lead to suppression of JH signaling and response. Tissues responsive to JH may produce one or both of these enzymes.

JH stimulates the accessory glands of adult males, promoting gland growth and the production of accessory gland secretion. Yolk production (vitellogenesis) in female ovaries is also stimulated by JH action. JH may also regulate reproductive behaviour in both sexes.

==Metabolism==
Juvenile hormone&#x27;s activity is destroyed by two enzymes. JH esterase cleaves the methyl ester giving JH acid. JH acid is attached by JH epoxide hydrolase, which converts the epoxide group to a diol. The order of cleavage depends on the order of insect. In the Lepidoptera, the order is as given here; ester cleavage preceding epoxide hydration. Either one terminates the activity of the hormone. JH diol acid, the product of both enzymes, is acted on by JH diol kinase to increase the solubility for excretion.

==Biosynthesis==
The biosynthesis of JH is similar to that of cholesterol in animals. There are considerable differences between the biosynthesis of the homo-isoprenoid JHs found almost exclusively in Lepidoptera, as opposed to the isoprenoids JH III, JH III bisepoxide, and methyl farnesoate found in other insects.

Cholesterol biosynthesis has been exhaustively studied in animals. All steps occur in the cytosol. The starting material is citrate, which is exported by the mitochondrion when metabolic fuels are high. It is converted into acetyl-CoA, ADP, CO2, and oxaloacetate by ATP-citrate lyase, together with ATP and CoASH as substrates. Three acetyl-CoAs are converted into HMG-CoA by the cytosolic isoforms of thiolase and 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA synthase. The HMG-CoA is then reduced by NADPH to mevalonate by HMG-CoA reductase, the rate controlling enzyme of cholesterol biosynthesis. This enzyme has 8 helical domains anchoring it in the Golgi membrane of the ER; the catalytic domain is in the cytosol. It is strongly inhibited by the statins, a class of drugs based on a mold metabolite which, at least at one time, were the largest selling class of drugs in the world. Mevalonate is acted of by a series of 3 kinases to give the highly labile 1,2-diphosphomevalonate-3-phosphate, which is acted on by a lyase to give phosphate, CO2, and isopentenyl diphosphate. Isopentenyl diphosphate isomerase converts the latter to the less stable dimethylallyl diphosphate. Farnesyl diphosphate synthase takes one DMAPP and two IPP to give the C15 metabolite farnesyl diphosphate. There are a large number of additional steps to generate cholesterol from IPP, the ubiquitous precursor of all isoprenoids.

It appears that the biosynthesis of JH III is identical to that of cholesterol, from production of IPP to FPP, although there appear to be no studies on export of citrate or other metabolites from the mitochondrion into the cytosol, or formation of acetyl-CoA. The enzymes of this pathway were first studied in &quot;Manduca sexta&quot;, which produces both homoisoprenoid and isoprenoid (JHIII) JHs. 

Very early on propionate was shown to incorporate very highly efficiently into JH II and JH I in cell free extracts of &quot;M. sexta]&quot; corpora allata. Mevalonate and acetate also incorporate into JH I, II, JH III from &quot;M. sexta&quot;, albeit far less efficiently that propionate. Jennings et al. showed that homomevalonate incorporates into JH II in &quot;M. sexta&quot;. Baker identified 3-hydroxy-3-ethylglutarate and 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutarate from the same enzyme source incubated with acetyl and propionyl-CoA. Lee et al. showed that the same source of enzymes efficiently make both mevalonate and its 3-ethyl homolog, homomevalonate. Bergot showed that the mevalonate and homomevalonate produced by these enzymes has the same 3S optical isomer configuration as the vertebrate enzymes. Baker showed that isopentenyl diphosphate, and its homolog, 3-ethyl-butenyl diphosphate (homoisopentenyl diphosphate) are metabolized to their corresponding allyic diphosphates, DMAPP and homoDMAPP (3-ethyl-3-methylallyl diphosphate). The latter is required for biosynthesis of JH I, JH II, and 4-methylJH I. 2 units of homoDMAPP are required for JH I and 4methyl JH I biosynthesis, and one for JH II biosynthesis.

All parts of the carbon skeleton comes from IPP. Then an enzyme prenyl transferase/farnesyl diphosphate synthase binds IPP, strips the diphosphate off it to give an allylic carbocation, and adds this to an IPP to give geranyl diphosphate (C10). Then it does the same thing to geranyl diphosphate, giving farnesyl diphosphate (C15). This reaction appears to be the only known enzymatic reaction involving the coupling of two molecules with a carbocation. The free electron pair adds to the double bond of IPP, also isomerizing IPP so that the product is an allylic diphosphate. Thus, this part of the isoprenoid pathway appears nearly identical with that of cholesterol with the exception of the insect specific homoisoprenoid units.
NAD+-dependent farnesol dehydrogenase, a corpora allata enzyme involved in juvenile hormone synthesis showed that the same source of enzymes efficiently make both mevalonate and its 3-ethyl homolog, homomevalonate. 

Absolute configuration of homomevalonate and 3-hydroxy-3-ethylglutaryl and 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme a, produced by cell-free extracts of insect corpora allata. A cautionary note on prediction of absolute stereochemistry based on liquid chromatographic elution order of diastereomeric derivatives. showed that the mevalonate and homomevalonate produced by these enzymes has the same 3S optical isomer configuration as the vertebrate enzymes showed that isopentenyl diphosphate, and its homolog, 3-ethyl-butenyl diphosphate (homoisopentenyl diphosphate) are metabolized to their corresponding allyic diphosphates, DMAPP and homoDMAPP (3-ethyl-3-methylallyl diphosphate). The latter is required for biosynthesis of JH I, JH II, and 4-methylJH I. 2 units of homoDMAPP are required for JH I and 4methyl JH I biosynthesis, and one for JH II biosynthesis. 

However, at this point these pathways diverge. While the vast majority of farnesyl diphosphate is converted into ultimately cholesterol in animals, in insects it is apparently acting on by a diphosphatase to give farnesol, which in turn is acted on by an NAD+ dependent enzyme, farnesol/farnesal dehydrogenase in &quot;M. sexta&quot; to give farnesoic acid. Subsequent work has shown that the enzyme is highly specific for trans allylic alcohols with at least three isoprene units, and to also be present in mosquitoes.

The next steps of JH biosynthesis differ between orders. In Lepidoptera and mosquitoes farnesoic acid or its homologs is epoxidized by a P450 dependent farnesoic acid methyl epoxidase, then it is methylated by a JH acid methyl transferase In most orders, farnesoic acid is methylated by farensoic acid methyl transferase, and then is epoxidized by a P450 dependent methyl transferas.

A recent publication by Nouzova et al. (2015) shows that allatostatin C, the peptide which inhibits JH production by the corpora allata, blocks the transport of citrate out of the mitochondrion in &quot;Aedes aegypti&quot;. This is a very logical control mechanism for JH biosynthesis.

== See also ==

* Insect growth regulator
* Neoteny

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* Wigglesworth, VB. (1964) The hormonal regulation of growth and reproduction in insects. Adv. Insect Physiol. 2: 247-336
* Wigglesworth, VB. (1939) The Principles of Insect Physiology. Cambridge University Press. Cambridge.
* Berger and Dubrovsky (2005) Juvenile Hormone Molecular Actions and Interactions During Development of Drosophila. Vitamins and Hormones. 73:172-215</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q419220" start="0" end="17" title="Juvenile hormone" label="Juvenile hormones"/>
<link wikidata="Q419220" start="19" end="22" title="Juvenile hormone" label="JHs"/>
<link wikidata="Q80218" start="47" end="62" title="sesquiterpenoid" label="sesquiterpenoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q6037231" start="94" end="111" title="insect physiology" label="insect physiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7932110" start="148" end="168" title="Vincent Wigglesworth" label="Vincent Wigglesworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q913288" start="210" end="218" title="diapause" label="diapause"/>
<link wikidata="Q3770571" start="224" end="235" title="polyphenism" label="polyphenism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390" start="242" end="248" title="insect" label="insect"/>
<link wikidata="Q419220" start="264" end="272" title="Juvenile hormone" label="neotenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11364" start="295" end="302" title="hormone" label="hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q129270" start="332" end="337" title="larva" label="larva"/>
<link wikidata="Q33753" start="356" end="369" title="Metamorphosis (biology)" label="metamorphosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q381084" start="504" end="511" title="molting" label="molting"/>
<link wikidata="Q84230" start="537" end="545" title="secretion" label="secreted"/>
<link wikidata="Q324663" start="559" end="574" title="endocrine gland" label="endocrine gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073" start="587" end="592" title="brain" label="brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081643" start="604" end="618" title="corpus allatum" label="corpora allata"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046638" start="733" end="749" title="Carroll Williams" label="Carroll Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q911331" start="764" end="783" title="molecular structure" label="molecular structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q28319" start="943" end="954" title="Lepidoptera" label="Lepidoptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q25312" start="1057" end="1064" title="Diptera" label="Diptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q25364" start="1095" end="1106" title="crustaceans" label="crustaceans"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1146" end="1163" title="methyl farnesoate" label="methyl farnesoate"/>
<link wikidata="Q408028" start="1207" end="1220" title="epoxide group" label="epoxide group"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1403" end="1418" title="hormone#Chemical classes of hormones" label="animal hormones"/>
<link wikidata="Q132825" start="1455" end="1462" title="conifer" label="conifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q38173" start="1626" end="1652" title="G-protein coupled receptor" label="G-protein coupled receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4731177" start="1737" end="1749" title="allatostatin" label="allatostatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q485675" start="1953" end="1963" title="haemolymph" label="haemolymph"/>
<link wikidata="Q24769591" start="2049" end="2083" title="juvenile hormone epoxide hydrolase" label="juvenile hormone epoxide hydrolase"/>
<link wikidata="Q13389887" start="2092" end="2099" title="ecdysis" label="ecdysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2179631" start="2341" end="2347" title="instar" label="instar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7932110" start="2438" end="2456" title="Vincent Wigglesworth" label="V. B. Wigglesworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3429622" start="2498" end="2506" title="Rhodnius" label="Rhodnius"/>
<link wikidata="Q108709" start="3155" end="3165" title="diminutive" label="diminutive"/>
<link wikidata="Q139085" start="3406" end="3414" title="ecdysone" label="ecdysone"/>
<link wikidata="Q76498889" start="3419" end="3431" title="vitellogenin" label="vitellogenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q102857" start="3655" end="3664" title="honey bee" label="honey bee"/>
<link wikidata="Q76498889" start="3674" end="3686" title="Vitellogenin" label="Vitellogenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q627153" start="3744" end="3761" title="Worker bee" label="worker honey bees"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467165" start="3863" end="3871" title="forage (honey bee)" label="foraging"/>
<link wikidata="Q165107" start="3932" end="3936" title="Beehive (beekeeping)" label="hive"/>
<link wikidata="Q167377" start="4833" end="4842" title="pheromone" label="pheromone"/>
<link wikidata="Q310072" start="4886" end="4904" title="Mythimna unipuncta" label="Mythimna unipuncta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093329" start="4942" end="4957" title="Agrotis ipsilon" label="Agrotis ipsilon"/>
<link wikidata="Q113687177" start="5313" end="5332" title="Heliothis virescens" label="Heliothis virescens"/>
<link wikidata="Q911173" start="5393" end="5396" title="Chemical Abstracts Service" label="CAS"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5397" end="5451" title="methyl (2E,6E)-3,7,11-trimethyl-2,6,10-dodecatrienoate" label="methyl (2E,6E)-3,7,11-trimethyl-2,6,10-dodecatrienoate"/>
<link wikidata="Q911173" start="5520" end="5523" title="Chemical Abstracts Service" label="CAS"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5524" end="5599" title="methyl (2E,6E)-10R,11S-(oxiranyl)-3,7-diethyl-11-methyl-2,6-tridecadienoate" label="methyl (2E,6E)-10R,11S-(oxiranyl)-3,7-diethyl-11-methyl-2,6-tridecadienoate"/>
<link wikidata="Q911173" start="5668" end="5671" title="Chemical Abstracts Service" label="CAS"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5672" end="5747" title="methyl (2E,6E)-10R,11S-(oxiranyl)-7-ethyl-3,11-dimethyl-2,6-tridecadienoate" label="methyl (2E,6E)-10R,11S-(oxiranyl)-7-ethyl-3,11-dimethyl-2,6-tridecadienoate"/>
<link wikidata="Q911173" start="5817" end="5820" title="Chemical Abstracts Service" label="CAS"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5821" end="5891" title="methyl (2E,6E)-10R,11S-(oxiranyl)-3,7,11-trimethyl-2,6-tridecadienoate" label="methyl (2E,6E)-10R,11S-(oxiranyl)-3,7,11-trimethyl-2,6-tridecadienoate"/>
<link wikidata="Q911173" start="5916" end="5919" title="Chemical Abstracts Service" label="CAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q911173" start="6053" end="6056" title="Chemical Abstracts Service" label="CAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q6037222" start="6220" end="6243" title="Insect growth regulator" label="juvenile hormone mimics"/>
<link wikidata="Q181322" start="6260" end="6271" title="insecticide" label="insecticide"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6506" end="6538" title="Insect#Reproduction and development" label="insect&amp;#x27;s reproductive cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329841" start="6567" end="6577" title="methoprene" label="methoprene"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="6598" end="6601" title="WHO" label="WHO"/>
<link wikidata="Q838858" start="6628" end="6635" title="cistern" label="cistern"/>
<link wikidata="Q7367" start="6648" end="6656" title="mosquito" label="mosquito"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081643" start="6790" end="6804" title="corpora allata" label="corpora allata"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="6925" end="6932" title="enzymes" label="enzymes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6318905" start="6933" end="6958" title="juvenile-hormone esterase" label="juvenile-hormone esterase"/>
<link wikidata="Q24769591" start="6968" end="7002" title="juvenile hormone epoxide hydrolase" label="juvenile hormone epoxide hydrolase"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7165" end="7181" title="Insect physiology#Reproductive system" label="accessory glands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937033" start="7287" end="7301" title="vitellogenesis" label="vitellogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q24782380" start="8666" end="8674" title="thiolase" label="thiolase"/>
<link wikidata="Q954845" start="9002" end="9009" title="statins" label="statins"/>
<link wikidata="Q417403" start="9306" end="9329" title="isopentenyl diphosphate" label="isopentenyl diphosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q417398" start="9404" end="9429" title="dimethylallyl diphosphate" label="dimethylallyl diphosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q25113781" start="9431" end="9460" title="Farnesyl diphosphate synthase" label="Farnesyl diphosphate synthase"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699676" start="9516" end="9536" title="farnesyl diphosphate" label="farnesyl diphosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q159683" start="9826" end="9833" title="citrate" label="citrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q39572" start="9864" end="9877" title="mitochondrion" label="mitochondrion"/>
<link wikidata="Q220599" start="9887" end="9894" title="cytosol" label="cytosol"/>
<link wikidata="Q715317" start="9912" end="9922" title="acetyl-CoA" label="acetyl-CoA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366539" start="9980" end="9993" title="Manduca sexta" label="Manduca sexta"/>
<link wikidata="Q422956" start="10080" end="10090" title="propionate" label="propionate"/>
<link wikidata="Q241678" start="10223" end="10233" title="Mevalonate" label="Mevalonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q212527" start="10238" end="10245" title="acetate" label="acetate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640914" start="10579" end="10592" title="propionyl-CoA" label="propionyl-CoA"/>
<link wikidata="Q241678" start="10666" end="10676" title="mevalonate" label="mevalonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q899274" start="11302" end="11317" title="carbon skeleton" label="carbon skeleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q241678" start="12559" end="12569" title="mevalonate" label="mevalonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q60194891" start="13310" end="13318" title="farnesol" label="farnesol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148004" start="14206" end="14219" title="Aedes aegypti" label="Aedes aegypti"/>
<link wikidata="Q6037222" start="14308" end="14331" title="Insect growth regulator" label="Insect growth regulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q603178" start="14334" end="14341" title="Neoteny" label="Neoteny"/>
<link wikidata="Q912887" start="14568" end="14594" title="Cambridge University Press" label="Cambridge University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q312154" start="14711" end="14721" title="Drosophila" label="Drosophila"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="444393" wikidata="Q6577374" url="?curid=444393" title="List of MPs elected in the 1945 United Kingdom general election">
<text>This is a complete list of members of Parliament elected to the Parliament of the United Kingdom at the 1945 general election, held on 5 July 1945. See also, Constituency election results in the 1945 United Kingdom general election. 324 MPs were elected for the first time which is the record turnover of new members as of 2024.

Notable newcomers to the House of Commons included Michael Stewart, George Brown, Hartley Shawcross, Barbara Castle, Bessie Braddock, Richard Crossman, Michael Foot, George Thomas, George Wigg, Woodrow Wyatt, Harold Wilson, James Callaghan, Hugh Gaitskell, Derick Heathcoat-Amory and Selwyn Lloyd.

==Composition==
This diagram show the composition of the parties in the 1945 general election.

Note: This is not the official seating plan of the House of Commons, which has five rows of benches on each side, with the government party to the right of the speaker and opposition parties to the left, but with room for only around two-thirds of MPs to sit at any one time.
The Commons Chamber was hit by bombs and the roof of Westminster Hall was set on fire. The fire service said that it would be impossible to save both, so it was decided to concentrate on saving the Hall.
The Commons Chamber was entirely destroyed by the fire which spread to the Members&#x27; Lobby and caused the ceiling to collapse. By the following morning, all that was left of the Chamber was a smoking shell. As the Commons Chamber was totally destroyed and the Lords Chamber was damaged, both Houses moved to the Church House annexe and sat there from 13 May.
From late June 1941 until October 1950, the Commons met in the Lords Chamber, while the Lords met in the Robing Room (a fact which was kept secret during the war).



° &quot;Sir Edward Campbell died on 17 July and Leslie Pym died on 18 July before the poll was announced. By-elections were held in the autumn&quot;
× The sitting MP for Hull, Central, Walter Windsor, died during the election campaign. Mark Hewitson was elected in a postponed poll in August.

== By-elections ==
See the list of United Kingdom by-elections.

==Changes==

*1946 – Ernest Millington (Chelmsford) joins Labour Party from Common Wealth Party
*1947 – Campbell Stephen (Glasgow, Camlachie) joins Labour Party from Independent Labour Party shortly before death
*1947 – John McGovern (Glasgow, Shettleston) joins Labour Party from Independent Labour Party
*1947 – Tom Horabin (North Cornwall) joins Labour Party from Liberal Party
*1948 – James Carmichael (Glasgow, Bridgeton) joins Labour Party from Independent Labour Party (last ILP MP)
*March 1948 – John Mackie (Galloway) rejoins Conservative Party having been deselected in 1945 (stood as an Independent Unionist in 1945 election)
*1948 – Ivor Thomas (Keighley) defects from the Labour Party to the Conservative Party over iron and steel nationalisation
*1948 – Alfred Edwards (Middlesbrough East) defects from the Labour Party to the Conservative Party over iron and steel nationalisation
*1948 – John Platts-Mills (Finsbury) expelled from Labour Party over opposition to foreign policy and support for Italian Socialist Party; sits as Labour Independent
*May 1949 – Konni Zilliacus (Gateshead) expelled from Labour Party over opposition to NATO and foreign policy; sits as Labour Independent
*May 1949 – Leslie Solley (Thurrock) expelled from Labour Party over opposition to NATO and foreign policy; sits as Labour Independent
*May 1949 – Lester Hutchinson (Manchester, Rusholme) expelled from Labour Party over opposition to NATO and foreign policy; sits as Labour Independent
*1949 – Konni Zilliacus (Gateshead) breaks with Labour Independent Group over their support for Stalin against Tito

==See also==
* 1945 United Kingdom general election
* List of parliaments of the United Kingdom
* List of United Kingdom by-elections (1931–1950)
* List of MPs for constituencies in Wales (1945–1950)

==References==
== Further reading ==
* &quot;The Times House of Commons 1945&quot; (1945), &quot;The Times&quot;, London.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="27" end="48" title="members of Parliament" label="members of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="64" end="96" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="Parliament of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q918397" start="104" end="125" title="1945 United Kingdom general election" label="1945 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q28401562" start="158" end="231" title="Constituency election results in the 1945 United Kingdom general election" label="Constituency election results in the 1945 United Kingdom general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q78851988" start="323" end="327" title="2024 United Kingdom general election" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="355" end="371" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q333773" start="381" end="396" title="Michael Stewart, Baron Stewart of Fulham" label="Michael Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q334073" start="398" end="410" title="George Brown, Baron George-Brown" label="George Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q334142" start="412" end="429" title="Hartley Shawcross, Baron Shawcross" label="Hartley Shawcross"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883936" start="431" end="445" title="Barbara Castle" label="Barbara Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3363355" start="447" end="462" title="Bessie Braddock" label="Bessie Braddock"/>
<link wikidata="Q328681" start="464" end="480" title="Richard Crossman" label="Richard Crossman"/>
<link wikidata="Q332419" start="482" end="494" title="Michael Foot" label="Michael Foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q333919" start="496" end="509" title="George Thomas, 1st Viscount Tonypandy" label="George Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508595" start="511" end="522" title="George Wigg" label="George Wigg"/>
<link wikidata="Q8033220" start="524" end="537" title="Woodrow Wyatt" label="Woodrow Wyatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q128956" start="539" end="552" title="Harold Wilson" label="Harold Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9576" start="554" end="569" title="James Callaghan" label="James Callaghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q337380" start="571" end="585" title="Hugh Gaitskell" label="Hugh Gaitskell"/>
<link wikidata="Q334287" start="587" end="609" title="Derick Heathcoat-Amory" label="Derick Heathcoat-Amory"/>
<link wikidata="Q333080" start="614" end="626" title="Selwyn Lloyd" label="Selwyn Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="1005" end="1020" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="Commons Chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q114004148" start="1054" end="1070" title="Westminster Hall" label="Westminster Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="1469" end="1482" title="House of Lords" label="Lords Chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q7526533" start="1747" end="1762" title="Sir Edward Campbell, 1st Baronet" label="Edward Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6531084" start="1783" end="1793" title="Leslie Pym" label="Leslie Pym"/>
<link wikidata="Q7966439" start="1920" end="1934" title="Walter Windsor" label="Walter Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6768019" start="1971" end="1984" title="Mark Hewitson" label="Mark Hewitson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2056" end="2091" title="List of United Kingdom by-elections (1931 - 1950)#38th Parliament (1945–1950)" label="list of United Kingdom by-elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q333383" start="2115" end="2132" title="Ernest Millington" label="Ernest Millington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153505" start="2170" end="2189" title="Common Wealth Party" label="Common Wealth Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5028149" start="2198" end="2214" title="Campbell Stephen" label="Campbell Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507913" start="2260" end="2284" title="Independent Labour Party" label="Independent Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6247816" start="2314" end="2327" title="John McGovern (politician)" label="John McGovern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507913" start="2375" end="2399" title="Independent Labour Party" label="Independent Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7816231" start="2408" end="2419" title="Tom Horabin" label="Tom Horabin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6131039" start="2483" end="2499" title="James Carmichael (British politician)" label="James Carmichael"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507913" start="2545" end="2569" title="Independent Labour Party" label="Independent Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6246262" start="2598" end="2609" title="John Mackie (Scottish Unionist politician)" label="John Mackie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528561" start="2739" end="2750" title="Ivor Bulmer-Thomas" label="Ivor Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4722619" start="2862" end="2876" title="Alfred Edwards (politician)" label="Alfred Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q6253031" start="2998" end="3015" title="John Platts-Mills" label="John Platts-Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412304" start="3168" end="3183" title="Konni Zilliacus" label="Konni Zilliacus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6531148" start="3306" end="3319" title="Leslie Solley" label="Leslie Solley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6531882" start="3441" end="3458" title="Lester Hutchinson" label="Lester Hutchinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412304" start="3588" end="3603" title="Konni Zilliacus" label="Konni Zilliacus"/>
<link wikidata="Q918397" start="3712" end="3748" title="1945 United Kingdom general election" label="1945 United Kingdom general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245440" start="3751" end="3792" title="List of parliaments of the United Kingdom" label="List of parliaments of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6601528" start="3795" end="3842" title="List of United Kingdom by-elections (1931–1950)" label="List of United Kingdom by-elections (1931–1950)"/>
<link wikidata="Q130388811" start="3845" end="3896" title="List of MPs for constituencies in Wales (1945–1950)" label="List of MPs for constituencies in Wales (1945–1950)"/>
</links>
</doc>
