<doc id="144638" wikidata="Q129029" url="?curid=144638" title="Bhopal disaster">
<text>On the night of 2–3 December 1984, over 500,000 people in the vicinity of the Union Carbide India Limited pesticide plant in Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh, India were exposed to the highly toxic gas methyl isocyanate, in what is considered the world&#x27;s worst industrial disaster. A government affidavit in 2006 stated that the leak caused 558,125 injuries, including 38,478 temporary partial injuries and approximately 3,900 severely and permanently disabling injuries. Estimates vary on the death toll, with the official number of immediate deaths being 2,259. Others estimate that 8,000 died within two weeks, and another 8,000 or more have since died from gas-related diseases. In 2008, the Government of Madhya Pradesh paid compensation to the family members of 3,787 victims killed in the gas release, and to 574,366 injured victims.

The owner of the factory, Union Carbide India Limited (UCIL), was majority-owned by the Union Carbide Corporation (UCC) of the United States, with Indian government-controlled banks and the Indian public holding a 49.1 percent stake. In 1989, UCC paid $470 million (equivalent to $ in ) to settle litigation stemming from the disaster. In 1994, UCC sold its stake in UCIL to Eveready Industries India Limited (EIIL), which subsequently merged with McLeod Russel (India) Ltd. Eveready ended clean-up on the site in 1998, when it terminated its 99-year lease and turned over control of the site to the state government of Madhya Pradesh. Dow Chemical Company purchased UCC in 2001, seventeen years after the disaster.

Civil and criminal cases filed in the United States against UCC and Warren Anderson, chief executive officer of the UCC at the time of the disaster, were dismissed and redirected to Indian courts on multiple occasions between 1986 and 2012, as the US courts focused on UCIL being a standalone entity of India. Civil and criminal cases were also filed in the District Court of Bhopal, India, involving UCC, UCIL, and Anderson. In June 2010, seven Indian nationals who were UCIL employees in 1984, including the former UCIL chairman Keshub Mahindra, were convicted in Bhopal of causing death by negligence and sentenced to two years&#x27; imprisonment and a fine of about $2,000 each, the maximum punishment allowed by Indian law. All were released on bail shortly after the verdict. An eighth former employee was also convicted, but died before the judgement was passed.
==Background==
The UCIL factory was built in 1969 to produce the pesticide Sevin (UCC&#x27;s brand name for carbaryl) using methyl isocyanate (MIC) as an intermediate. An MIC production plant was added to the UCIL site in 1979. The chemical process employed in the Bhopal plant had methylamine reacting with phosgene to form MIC, which was in turn reacted with 1-naphthol to form the final product, carbaryl. Another manufacturer, Bayer, also used this MIC-intermediate process at the chemical plant once owned by UCC at Institute, West Virginia in the United States.

After the Bhopal plant was built, other manufacturers (including Bayer) produced carbaryl without MIC, though at a greater manufacturing cost. UCIL&#x27;s process differed from the MIC-free routes used elsewhere, in which the same raw materials were combined in a different manufacturing order, with phosgene initially reacting with naphthol to form a chloroformate ester, which was later reacted with methylamine. In the early 1980s, although the demand for pesticides had fallen, production continued leading to an accumulation of unused MIC at the Bhopal site.

===Earlier leaks===
In 1976, two local trade unions complained of pollution within the plant. In 1981, a worker was accidentally splashed with phosgene as he was carrying out a maintenance job of the plant&#x27;s pipes. In a panic, he removed his gas mask and inhaled a large amount of toxic phosgene gas, leading to his death 72 hours later. Following these events, journalist Rajkumar Keswani began investigating and published his findings in Bhopal&#x27;s local paper &quot;Rapat,&quot; in which he urged &quot;Wake up, people of Bhopal, you are on the edge of a volcano.&quot;

In January 1982, a phosgene leak exposed 24 workers, all of whom were admitted to a hospital. None of the workers had been ordered to wear protective equipment. One month later in February 1982, an MIC leak affected 18 workers. In August 1982, a chemical engineer came into contact with liquid MIC, resulting in burns over 30% of his body. In October 1982, there was another MIC leak. In attempting to stop the leak, the MIC supervisor suffered severe chemical burns and two other workers were severely exposed to the gases. During 1983 and 1984, there were leaks of MIC, chlorine, monomethylamine, phosgene, and carbon tetrachloride, sometimes in combination.

==Leakage and its effects==

=== Liquid MIC storage ===
The Bhopal UCIL facility housed three underground liquid MIC storage tanks: E610, E611, and E619. In the months leading up to the December leak, liquid MIC production was in progress and being used to fill these tanks. UCC safety regulations specified that no one tank should be filled more than 50% (about 30 tons) with liquid MIC. Each tank was pressurized with inert nitrogen gas. This pressurization allowed liquid MIC to be pumped out of each tank as needed and also kept impurities and moisture out of the tanks.

In late October 1984, tank E610 lost the ability to effectively contain most of its nitrogen gas pressure, which meant that the liquid MIC contained within could not be pumped out. At the time of this failure, tank E610 contained 42 tons of liquid MIC. Shortly after this failure, MIC production was halted at the Bhopal facility, and parts of the plant were shut down for maintenance. Maintenance included the shutdown of the plant&#x27;s flare tower so that a corroded pipe could be repaired. With the flare tower still rendered useless, production of carbaryl was resumed in late November using MIC stored in the two tanks still in service. An attempt to re-establish pressure in tank E610 on 1 December failed, so the 42 tons of liquid MIC contained within still could not be pumped out of it.

===Gas leak===

By early December 1984, most of the plant&#x27;s MIC related safety systems were malfunctioning and many valves and lines were in poor condition. In addition, several vent gas scrubbers had been out of service, as well as the steam boiler intended to clean the pipes. During the late evening hours of 2 December 1984, water was believed to have entered tank E610 via a side pipe during attempts to unclog it. The tank still contained the 42 tons of MIC that had been there since late October. The introduction of water into the tank resulted in a runaway exothermic reaction, which was accelerated by contaminants, high ambient temperatures, and various other factors such as the presence of iron from corroding non-stainless steel pipelines. The pressure in tank E610, although initially nominal at at 10:30 p.m., reached as of 11 p.m. Two different senior refinery employees assumed the reading was instrumentation malfunction. By 11:30 p.m., workers in the MIC area were feeling the effects of minor exposure to MIC gas and began to look for a leak. One was found by 11:45 p.m. and reported to the MIC supervisor on duty at the time. The decision was made to address the problem after a 12:15 a.m. tea break, and in the meantime, employees were instructed to continue looking for leaks. The problem was discussed by MIC area employees during the break.

When the tea break concluded at 12:40 a.m., the reaction in tank E610 escalated to a critical state at an alarming speed within five minutes. Temperatures in the tank were off the scale, maxed out beyond , and the pressure in the tank was indicated at . One employee witnessed a concrete slab above tank E610 crack as the emergency relief valve burst open, and pressure in the tank continued to increase to , despite atmospheric venting of toxic MIC gas having begun. Direct atmospheric venting should have been prevented or at least partially mitigated by at least three safety devices which were malfunctioning, not in use, insufficiently sized, or otherwise rendered inoperable:

* A refrigeration system meant to cool tanks containing liquid MIC had been shut down in January 1982 and the freon had been removed in June 1984. Since the MIC storage system assumed refrigeration, its high temperature alarm, set to sound at had long since been disconnected, and tank storage temperatures ranged between and 
* A flare tower to burn the MIC gas as it escaped, which had had a connecting pipe removed for maintenance, was improperly sized to neutralise a leak of the size produced by tank E610.
* A vent gas scrubber which had been deactivated at the time and was in &#x27;standby&#x27; mode, and similarly had insufficient caustic soda and power to safely stop a leak of the magnitude produced.

About 30 tonnes of MIC escaped from the tank into the atmosphere in 45 to 60 minutes. This would increase to 40 tonnes within two hours. The gases were blown in a southeast direction over Bhopal.

A UCIL employee triggered the plant&#x27;s alarm system at 12:50 a.m. as the concentration of gas in and around the plant became difficult to tolerate. Activation of the system triggered two siren alarms: one that specifically sounded inside the UCIL plant itself and a second directed to the exterior which would alert the general public and the city of Bhopal. The two siren systems had been decoupled from one another in 1982, so that it was possible to leave the factory warning siren on while the public one remained inactive. This is what had occurred; the public siren briefly sounded at 12:50 a.m. and was quickly turned off, as per company procedure meant to avoid alarming the public around the factory over inconsequential leaks. Workers, meanwhile, evacuated the UCIL plant, travelling upwind.

Bhopal&#x27;s superintendent of police was informed via telephone by a town inspector that residents of the neighbourhood of Chola (about 2 km from the plant) were fleeing a gas leak at approximately 1 a.m. Calls to the UCIL plant by police between 1:25 and 2:10 a.m. elicited assurances twice that &quot;everything is OK&quot;, and on the last attempt made, &quot;we don&#x27;t know what has happened, sir&quot;. With the lack of timely information exchange between UCIL and Bhopal authorities, the city&#x27;s Hamidia Hospital was first told that the gas leak was suspected to be ammonia, then later phosgene. Finally, they received an updated report that it was &quot;MIC&quot; (rather than &quot;methyl isocyanate&quot;), which hospital staff had never heard of, had no antidote for, and knew no immediate information about.

The MIC gas leak emanating from tank E610 petered out at approximately 2 a.m. Fifteen minutes later, the plant&#x27;s public siren was sounded for an extended period of time after having been quickly silenced an hour and a half earlier. Some minutes after the public siren sounded, a UCIL employee walked to a police control room to both inform them of the leak (their first acknowledgement that one had ever occurred in the first place), and said that the leak had been plugged. Most city residents who were exposed to the MIC gas were first made aware of the leak by exposure to the gas itself, or by opening their doors to investigate commotion, rather than having been instructed to shelter in place or to evacuate before the arrival of the gas in the first place.

===Acute effects===
The initial effects of exposure were coughing, severe eye irritation, a feeling of suffocation, burning in the respiratory tract, blepharospasm, breathlessness, stomach pains, and vomiting. People alerted by these symptoms fled from the plant. Those who ran inhaled more than those in vehicles. Owing to their height, children and other residents of shorter stature inhaled higher concentrations, as methyl isocyanate gas is approximately twice as dense as air and in an open environment has a tendency to fall toward the ground.

Thousands of people had died by the following morning. Primary causes of deaths were choking, reflexogenic circulatory collapse, and pulmonary oedema. Findings during autopsies revealed changes not only in the lungs but also cerebral oedema, tubular necrosis of the kidneys, fatty degeneration of the liver, and necrotising enteritis. The individuals who did not die suffered from cancer, blindness, loss of livelihood, and financial strain.

=== Gas cloud composition ===
Apart from MIC, based on laboratory simulation conditions, the gas cloud most likely also contained chloroform, dichloromethane, hydrogen chloride, methylamine, dimethylamine, trimethylamine, and carbon dioxide that was either present in the tank or was produced in the storage tank when MIC, chloroform, and water reacted. The gas cloud, composed mainly of materials denser than air, stayed close to the ground and spread in a southeast direction affecting the nearby communities. The chemical reactions may have produced a liquid or solid aerosol.
Laboratory investigations by CSIR and UCC scientists failed to demonstrate the presence of hydrogen cyanide.

===Immediate aftermath===

In the immediate aftermath, the plant was closed to outsiders (including UCC) by the Indian government, which subsequently failed to make data public, contributing to the confusion. The initial investigation was conducted entirely by the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) and the Central Bureau of Investigation. The UCC chairman and CEO Warren Anderson, together with a technical team, immediately travelled to India. Upon arrival, Anderson was placed under house arrest and urged by the Indian government to leave the country within 24 hours. Union Carbide organized a team of international medical experts, as well as supplies and equipment, to work with the local Bhopal medical community, and the UCC technical team began assessing the cause of the gas leak.

The health care system immediately became overloaded. In the severely affected areas, nearly 70% of doctors were underqualified. Medical staff were unprepared for the thousands of casualties. Doctors and hospitals were not aware of proper treatment methods for MIC gas inhalation.

There were mass funerals and cremations. Photographer Pablo Bartholomew, on commission with press agency Rapho, took an iconic colour photograph of a burial on 4 December, &quot;Bhopal gas disaster girl.&quot; Another photographer present, Raghu Rai, took a black and white photo. The photographers did not ask for the identity of the father or child as she was buried and no relative has since confirmed it. As such, the identity of the girl remains unknown. Both photos became symbolic of the suffering of victims of the Bhopal disaster, and Bartholomew went on to win the 1985 World Press Photo of the Year.

Within a few days, trees in the vicinity became barren, and bloated animal carcasses had to be disposed of. 170,000 people were treated at hospitals and temporary dispensaries, and 2,000 buffalo, goats, and other animals were collected and buried. Supplies, including food, became scarce owing to suppliers&#x27; safety fears. Fishing was prohibited, causing further supply shortages.

Lacking any safe alternative, on 16 December, tanks 611 and 619 were emptied of the remaining MIC by reactivating the plant and continuing the manufacture of pesticide. Despite safety precautions such as having water-carrying helicopters continually overflying the plant, this led to a second mass evacuation from Bhopal. The Government of India passed the &quot;Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster Act&quot; that gave the government rights to represent all victims, whether or not in India. Complaints of lack of information or misinformation were widespread. An Indian government spokesman said, &quot;Carbide is more interested in getting information from us than in helping our relief work&quot;.

Formal statements were issued that air, water, vegetation, and foodstuffs were safe, but people were warned not to consume fish. The number of children exposed to the gases was at least 200,000. Within weeks, the State Government established a number of hospitals, clinics, and mobile units in the gas-affected area to treat the victims. S. Ravi Rajan (Prof. Environmental Studies, U.C. Santa Cruz) outlines the financially driven undertones of the company&#x27;s actions. UCC had participated in decades of previous instances of &quot;environmental negligence in every part of the world&quot;, directing its &quot;responsibility… to its shareholders&quot;, and numerous dealings with local and international political and economic powers. The company&#x27;s response to the Bhopal accident was what Rajan describes as a &quot;campaign of erasure&quot;, meaning the transfer of liability and responsibility of the cause of the gas leak, the event itself, and the aftermath. Rajan then argues that this type of response is to be expected &quot;according to [the] established cultural practice&quot; within large corporations such as UCC. Since UCC absolved itself from the situation, the Indian government was the next institution that was looked to by the people of Bhopal, but they had also not prepared for such an event. The government&#x27;s attempts at short and long-term plans failed in successfully aiding victims and instead &quot;created an ecology of opportunity… built largely at the expense of the victims.&quot;

==Subsequent legal action==

Legal proceedings involving UCC, the United States and Indian governments, local Bhopal authorities, and the disaster victims started immediately after the catastrophe. The Indian Government passed the Bhopal Gas Leak Act in March 1985, allowing the Government of India to act as the legal representative for victims of the disaster, leading to the beginning of legal proceedings. Initial lawsuits were generated in the United States federal court system. On 17 April 1985, Federal District court judge John F. Keenan (overseeing one lawsuit) suggested that &quot;&#x27;fundamental human decency&#x27; required Union Carbide to provide between $5 million and $10 million to immediately help the injured&quot; and suggested the money could be quickly distributed through the International Red Cross. UCC, on the notion that doing so did not constitute an admission of liability and the figure could be credited toward any future settlement or judgement, offered a $5 million relief fund two days later. The Indian government turned down the offer.

In March 1986, UCC proposed a settlement figure, endorsed by plaintiffs&#x27; U.S. attorneys, of that would, according to the company, &quot;generate a fund for Bhopal victims of between over 20 years&quot;. In May, litigation was transferred from the United States to Indian courts by a U.S. District Court ruling. Following an appeal of this decision, the U.S. Court of Appeals affirmed the transfer in November 1986, judging that UCIL was a &quot;separate entity, owned, managed and operated exclusively by Indian citizens in India&quot;.

The Government of India refused the offer from Union Carbide, and claimed US$. The Indian Supreme Court told both sides to come to an agreement and &quot;start with a clean slate&quot; in November 1988. Eventually, in an out-of-court settlement reached in February 1989, Union Carbide agreed to pay US$ for damages caused in the Bhopal disaster. The amount was immediately paid.

Throughout 1990, the Indian Supreme Court heard appeals against the settlement. In October 1991, the Supreme Court upheld the original , dismissing any other outstanding petitions that challenged the original decision. The Court ordered the Indian government &quot;to purchase, out of settlement fund, a group medical insurance policy to cover 100,000 persons who may later develop symptoms&quot; and cover any shortfall in the settlement fund. It also requested UCC and its subsidiary UCIL &quot;voluntarily&quot; fund a hospital in Bhopal, at an estimated , to specifically treat victims of the Bhopal disaster. The company agreed to this.

===Post-settlement activity===

In 1991, the local Bhopal authorities charged Anderson, who had retired in 1986, with manslaughter, a crime that carries a maximum penalty of 10 years in prison. He was declared a fugitive from justice by the Chief Judicial Magistrate of Bhopal on 1 February 1992 for failing to appear at the court hearings in a culpable homicide case in which he was named the chief defendant. Orders were passed to the Government of India to press for an extradition from the United States. The United States declined to extradite him citing a lack of evidence.

The U.S. Supreme Court refused to hear an appeal of the decision of the lower federal courts in October 1993 against allowing victims of the Bhopal disaster to seek damages in a U.S. court.

In 2004, the Indian Supreme Court ordered the Indian government to release any remaining settlement funds to victims. And in September 2006, the Welfare Commission for Bhopal Gas Victims announced that all original compensation claims and revised petitions had been &quot;cleared&quot;.

In 2006, the Second Circuit Court of Appeals in New York City upheld the dismissal of remaining claims in the case of &quot;Bano v. Union Carbide Corporation&quot;. This move blocked plaintiffs&#x27; motions for class certification and claims for property damages and remediation. In the view of UCC, &quot;the ruling reaffirms UCC&#x27;s long-held positions and finally puts to rest—both procedurally and substantively—the issues raised in the class action complaint first filed against Union Carbide in 1999 by Haseena Bi and several organisations representing the residents of Bhopal&quot;.

In June 2010, seven former employees of UCIL, all Indian nationals and many in their 70s, were convicted of causing death by negligence: Keshub Mahindra, former non-executive chairman of Union Carbide India Limited; V. P. Gokhale, managing director; Kishore Kamdar, vice-president; J. Mukund, works manager; S. P. Choudhary, production manager; K. V. Shetty, plant superintendent; and S. I. Qureshi, production assistant. They were each sentenced to two years&#x27; imprisonment and fined . All were released on bail shortly after the verdict.

A US federal class action litigation, &quot;Sahu v. Union Carbide and Warren Anderson&quot;, was filed in 1999 under the U.S. Alien Torts Claims Act (ATCA), which provides for civil remedies for &quot;crimes against humanity&quot;. It sought damages for personal injury, medical monitoring and injunctive relief in the form of clean-up of the drinking water supplies for residential areas near the Bhopal plant. The lawsuit was dismissed in 2012 and the subsequent appeal was denied.

Warren Anderson, then 92 years old, died on 29 September 2014.

On 14 March 2023 Indian Supreme Court dismissed curative petition for enhanced compensation.

==Long-term effects==
In 2018, &quot;The Atlantic&quot; called it the &quot;world&#x27;s worst industrial disaster&quot;. Lawyers, academics and journalists have described the disaster as an ecocide.

===Long-term health effects===
Some data about the health effects are still not available. The Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) was forbidden to publish health effect data until 1994.

A total of 36 wards were marked by the authorities as being &quot;gas affected&quot;, affecting a population of 520,000. Of these, 200,000 were below 15 years of age, and 3,000 were pregnant women. The official immediate death toll was 2,259, and in 1991, 3,928 deaths had been officially certified. The Sambhavna clinic &quot;estimates 8,000 deaths during the first weeks, and another 8,000 since then&quot;.

The government of Madhya Pradesh confirmed a total of 3,787 deaths related to the gas release.

Later, the affected area was expanded to include 700,000 citizens. A government affidavit in 2006 stated the leak caused 558,125 injuries including 38,478 temporary partial injuries and approximately 3,900 severely and permanently disabling injuries.

A cohort of 80,021 exposed people was registered, along with a control group, a cohort of 15,931 people from areas not exposed to MIC. Nearly every year since 1986, they have answered the same questionnaire. It shows excess mortality and morbidity in the exposed group. Bias and confounding factors cannot be excluded from the study. Because of migration and other factors, 75% of the cohort is lost, as the ones who move out are not followed.

A number of clinical studies are performed. The quality varies, but the different reports support each other. Studied and reported long-term health effects are:
* Eyes: Chronic conjunctivitis, scars on cornea, corneal opacities, early cataracts
* Respiratory tracts: Obstructive and/or restrictive disease, pulmonary fibrosis, aggravation of tuberculosis and chronic bronchitis
* Neurological system: Impairment of memory, finer motor skills, numbness, etc.
* Psychological problems: Post traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
* Children&#x27;s health: Peri- and neonatal death rates increased. Failure to grow, intellectual impairment, etc.

Missing or insufficient fields for research are female reproduction, chromosomal aberrations, cancer, immune deficiency, neurological sequelae, post traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and children born after the disaster. Late cases that might never be highlighted are respiratory insufficiency, cardiac insufficiency (cor pulmonale), cancer and tuberculosis. Bhopal now has high rates of birth defects and records a miscarriage rate 7x higher than the national average.

A 2014 report in &quot;Mother Jones&quot; quotes a &quot;spokesperson for the Bhopal Medical Appeal, which runs free health clinics for survivors&quot; as saying &quot;An estimated 120,000 to 150,000 survivors still struggle with serious medical conditions including nerve damage, growth problems, gynaecological disorders, respiratory issues, birth defects, and elevated rates of cancer and tuberculosis.&quot;

===Health care===
The Government of India had focused primarily on increasing the hospital-based services for gas victims; thus, hospitals had been built after the disaster. When UCC wanted to sell its shares in UCIL, it was directed by the Supreme Court to finance a 500-bed hospital for the medical care of the survivors. Thus, Bhopal Memorial Hospital and Research Centre (BMHRC) was inaugurated in 1998 and was obliged to give free care for survivors for eight years. BMHRC was a 350-bedded super speciality hospital where heart surgery and hemodialysis were done. There was a dearth of gynaecology, obstetrics and paediatrics. Eight mini-units (outreach health centres) were started and free health care for gas victims was to be offered until 2006. The management had also faced problems with strikes, and the quality of the health care being disputed. Sambhavna Trust is a charitable trust, registered in 1995, that gives modern as well as ayurvedic treatments to gas victims, free of charge.

===Environmental rehabilitation===
When the factory was closed in 1986, pipes, drums and tanks were sold. The MIC and the Sevin plants are still there, as are storages of different residues. Isolation material is falling down and spreading. The area around the plant was used as a dumping area for hazardous chemicals. In 1982 tube wells in the vicinity of the UCIL factory had to be abandoned and tests in 1989 performed by UCC&#x27;s laboratory revealed that soil and water samples collected near the factory and inside the plant were toxic to fish. Several other studies had also shown polluted soil and groundwater in the area. Reported polluting compounds include 1-naphthol, naphthalene, Sevin, tarry residue, toxic organochlorines, volatile organochlorine compounds, mercury, chromium, copper, nickel, lead, hexachloroethane, hexachlorobutadiene, and the pesticide HCH (Hexachlorocyclohexane).

In order to provide safe drinking water to the population around the UCIL factory, the government of Madhya Pradesh proposed a water-supply improvement scheme. In December 2008, the Madhya Pradesh High Court decided that the toxic waste should be incinerated at Ankleshwar in Gujarat, which was met by protests from activists all over India. On 8 June 2012, the centre for incineration of toxic Bhopal waste agreed to pay to dispose of UCIL chemical plants&#x27; waste in Germany. On 9 August 2012, Supreme court directed the Union and Madhya Pradesh Governments to take immediate steps for disposal of toxic waste lying around and inside the factory within six months.

A U.S. court rejected the lawsuit blaming UCC for causing soil and water pollution around the site of the plant and ruled that responsibility for remedial measures or related claims rested with the State Government and not with UCC. In 2005, the state government invited various Indian architects to enter their &quot;concept for development of a memorial complex for Bhopal gas tragedy victims at the site of Union Carbide&quot;. In 2011, a conference was held on the site, with participants from European universities which was aimed for the same.

===Occupational and habitation rehabilitation===
Thirty-three of the 50 planned work-sheds for gas victims started. All except one was closed down by 1992. In 1986, the MP government invested in the Special Industrial Area Bhopal. One hundred and fifty-two of the planned 200 work sheds were built and in 2000, 16 were partially functioning. It was estimated that 50,000 persons need alternative jobs, and that less than 100 gas victims had found regular employment under the government&#x27;s scheme. The government also planned 2,486 flats in two- and four-story buildings in what is called the &quot;widow&#x27;s colony&quot; outside Bhopal. The water did not reach the upper floors and it was not possible to keep cattle which was their primary occupation. Infrastructure like buses, schools, etc. were missing for at least a decade.

===Economic rehabilitation===
Immediate relieves were decided two days after the tragedy. Relief measures commenced in 1985 when food was distributed for a short period along with ration cards. Madhya Pradesh government&#x27;s finance department allocated for victim relief in July 1985. Widow pension of /per month (later ) was provided. The government also decided to pay to families with monthly income or less. As a result of the interim relief, more children were able to attend school, more money was spent on treatment and food, and housing also eventually improved. From 1990 interim relief of was paid to everyone in the family who was born before the disaster.

The final compensation, including interim relief for personal injury, was for the majority . For death claims, the average sum paid out was . Each claimant was to be categorised by a doctor. In court, the claimants were expected to prove &quot;beyond reasonable doubt&quot; that death or injury in each case was attributable to exposure. In 1992, 44 percent of the claimants still had to be medically examined.

By the end of October 2003, according to the Bhopal Gas Tragedy Relief and Rehabilitation Department, compensation had been awarded to 554,895 people for injuries received and 15,310 survivors of those killed. The average amount to families of the dead was $2,200.

In 2007, 1,029,517 cases were registered and decided. The number of awarded cases was 574,304 and the number of rejected cases was 455,213. Total compensation awarded was . On 24 June 2010, the Union Cabinet of the Government of India approved a aid package which would be funded by Indian taxpayers through the government.

===Other impacts===
In 1985, Henry Waxman, an American politician, called for a U.S. government inquiry into the Bhopal disaster, which resulted in U.S. legislation regarding the accidental release of toxic chemicals in the United States.

==Causes==
There are two main lines of argument involving the disaster. The &quot;corporate negligence&quot; point of view argues that the disaster was caused by a potent combination of under-maintained and decaying facilities, a weak attitude towards safety, and an under-trained workforce, culminating in worker actions that inadvertently enabled water to penetrate the MIC tanks in the absence of properly working safeguards.

The &quot;worker sabotage&quot; point of view, held by Union Carbide, argues that it was not physically possible for the water to enter the tank without concerted human effort, and that extensive testimony and engineering analysis leads to a conclusion that water entered the tank when a rogue individual employee hooked a water hose directly to an empty valve on the side of the tank. This point of view further argues that the Indian government took extensive actions to hide this possibility in order to attach blame to UCC.

Theories differ as to how the water entered the tank. At the time, workers were cleaning out a clogged pipe with water about from the tank. They claimed that they were not told to isolate the tank with a pipe slip-blind plate. The operators assumed that owing to bad maintenance and leaking valves, it was possible for the water to leak into the tank.

This water entry route could not be reproduced despite strenuous efforts by motivated parties. UCC claims that a &quot;disgruntled worker&quot; deliberately connecting a hose to a pressure gauge connection was the real cause.

Early the next morning, a UCIL manager asked the instrument engineer to replace the gauge. UCIL&#x27;s investigation team found no evidence of the necessary connection; the investigation was totally controlled by the government, denying UCC investigators access to the tank or interviews with the operators.

===Corporate negligence===

This point of view argues that management (and to some extent, local government) underinvested in safety, which allowed for a dangerous working environment to develop. Factors cited include the filling of the MIC tanks beyond recommended levels, poor maintenance after the plant ceased MIC production at the end of 1984, allowing several safety systems to be inoperable due to poor maintenance, and switching off safety systems to save money— including the MIC tank refrigeration system which could have mitigated the disaster severity, and non-existent catastrophe management plans. Other factors identified by government inquiries included undersized safety devices and the dependence on manual operations. Specific plant management deficiencies that were identified include the lack of skilled operators, reduction of safety management, insufficient maintenance, and inadequate emergency action plans.

====Underinvestment====

Underinvestment is cited as contributing to a dangerous environment. In attempts to reduce expenses, $1.25 million worth of cuts were placed upon the plant, which affected the factory&#x27;s employees and their conditions. Kurzman argues that &quot;cuts ... meant less stringent quality control and thus looser safety rules. A pipe leaked? Don&#x27;t replace it, employees said they were told ... MIC workers needed more training? They could do with less. Promotions were halted, seriously affecting employee morale and driving some of the most skilled ... elsewhere&quot;. Workers were forced to use English manuals, even though only a few had a grasp of the language.

Subsequent research highlights a gradual deterioration of safety practices in regard to the MIC, which had become less relevant to plant operations. By 1984, only six of the original 12 operators were still working with MIC and the number of supervisory personnel had also been halved. No maintenance supervisor was placed on the night shift and instrument readings were taken every two hours, rather than the previous and required one-hour readings. Workers made complaints about the cuts through their union but were ignored. One employee was fired after going on a 15-day hunger strike. Seventy percent of the plant&#x27;s employees were fined before the disaster for refusing to deviate from the proper safety regulations under pressure from the management.

In addition, some observers, such as those writing in the Trade Environmental Database (TED) Case Studies as part of the Mandala Project from American University, have pointed to &quot;serious communication problems and management gaps between Union Carbide and its Indian operation&quot;, characterised by &quot;the parent hands-off approach to its overseas operation&quot; and &quot;cross-cultural barriers&quot;.

====Adequacy of equipment and regulations====

The factory was not well equipped to handle the gas created by the sudden addition of water to the MIC tank. The MIC tank alarms had not been working for four years and there was only one manual back-up system, compared to a four-stage system used in the United States. The flare tower and several vent gas scrubbers had been out of service for five months before the disaster. Only one gas scrubber was operating: it could not treat such a large amount of MIC with sodium hydroxide (caustic soda), which would have brought the concentration down to a safe level. The flare tower could only handle a quarter of the gas that leaked in 1984, and moreover it was out of order at the time of the accident. To reduce energy costs, the refrigeration system was idle. The MIC was kept at 20 degrees Celsius, not the 4.5 degrees advised by the manual. Even the steam boiler, intended to clean the pipes, was non-operational for unknown reasons. Slip-blind plates that would have prevented water from pipes being cleaned from leaking into the MIC tanks if the valves had been faulty were not installed and their installation had been omitted from the cleaning checklist. As MIC is water-soluble, deluge guns were in place to contain escaping gases from the stack. The water pressure was too weak for the guns to spray high enough to reach the gas which would have reduced the concentration of escaping gas significantly. In addition to it, carbon steel valves were used at the factory, even though they were known to corrode when exposed to acid.

According to the operators, the MIC tank pressure gauge had been malfunctioning for roughly a week. Other tanks were used, rather than repairing the gauge. The build-up in temperature and pressure is believed to have affected the magnitude of the gas release. UCC admitted in their own investigation report that most of the safety systems were not functioning on the night of 3 December 1984. The design of the MIC plant, following government guidelines, was &quot;Indianized&quot; by UCIL engineers to maximise the use of indigenous materials and products. Mumbai-based Humphreys and Glasgow Consultants Pvt. Ltd., were the main consultants, Larsen &amp; Toubro fabricated the MIC storage tanks, and Taylor of India Ltd. provided the instrumentation. In 1998, during civil action suits in India, it emerged that the plant was not prepared for problems. No action plans had been established to cope with accidents of this magnitude. This included not informing local authorities of the quantities or dangers of chemicals used and manufactured at Bhopal.

====Safety audits====
Safety audits were done every year in the US and European UCC plants, but only every two years in other parts of the world. Before a &quot;Business Confidential&quot; safety audit by UCC in May 1982, the senior officials of the corporation were well aware of &quot;a total of 61 hazards, 30 of them major and 11 minor in the dangerous phosgene/methyl isocyanate units&quot; in Bhopal. In the 1982 audit, it was indicated that worker performance was below standards. Ten major concerns were listed. UCIL prepared an action plan, but UCC never sent a follow-up team to Bhopal. Many of the items in the 1982 report were temporarily fixed, but by 1984, conditions had again deteriorated. In September 1984, an internal UCC report on the West Virginia plant in the United States revealed a number of defects and malfunctions. It warned that &quot;a runaway reaction could occur in the MIC unit storage tanks, and that the planned response would not be timely or effective enough to prevent catastrophic failure of the tanks&quot;. This report was never forwarded to the Bhopal plant, although the main design was the same.

====Impossibility of the &quot;negligence&quot;====

According to the &quot;Corporate Negligence&quot; argument, workers had been cleaning out pipes with water nearby. This water was diverted due to a combination of improper maintenance, leaking and clogging, and eventually ended up in the MIC storage tank. Indian scientists also suggested that additional water might have been introduced as a &quot;back-flow&quot; from a defectively designed vent-gas scrubber. None of these theoretical routes of entry were ever successfully demonstrated during tests by the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) and UCIL engineers.

A Union Carbide commissioned analysis conducted by Arthur D. Little claims that the Negligence argument was impossible for several tangible reasons:
# The pipes being used by the nearby workers were only in diameter and were physically incapable of producing enough hydraulic pressure to raise the water more than that would have been necessary to enable the water to &quot;backflow&quot; into the MIC tank.
# A key intermediate valve would have had to be open for the Negligence argument to apply. This valve was &quot;tagged&quot; closed, meaning that it had been inspected and found to be closed. While it is possible for open valves to clog over time, the only way a closed valve allows penetration is if there is leakage, and 1985 tests carried out by the government of India found this valve to be non-leaking.
# In order for water to have reached the MIC tank from the pipe-cleaning area, it would have had to flow through a significant network of pipes ranging from in diameter, before rising and flowing into the MIC tank. Had this occurred, most of the water that was in those pipes at the time the tank had its critical reaction would have remained in those pipes, as there was no drain for them. Investigation by the Indian government in 1985 revealed that the pipes were bone dry.

===Employee sabotage===
Now owned by Dow Chemical Company, Union Carbide maintains a website dedicated to the tragedy and claims that the accident was the result of sabotage, stating that sufficient safety systems were in place and operative to prevent the intrusion of water.

The Union Carbide-commissioned Arthur D. Little report concluded that it was likely that a single employee secretly and deliberately introduced a large amount of water into the MIC tank by removing a meter and connecting a water hose directly to the tank through the metering port.

UCC claims the plant staff falsified numerous records to distance themselves from the accident and absolve themselves of blame, and that the Indian government impeded its investigation and declined to prosecute the employee responsible, presumably because it would weaken its allegations of negligence by Union Carbide.

The evidence advanced by UCC, alleged to support this hypothesis:
# A key witness testified that when he entered the control room at 12:15 am, prior to the disaster, the &quot;atmosphere was tense and quiet&quot;.
# Another key witness (the &quot;instrument supervisor&quot;) testified that when he arrived at the scene immediately following the accident, he noticed that the local pressure indicator on the critical Tank 610 was missing, and that he had found a hose lying next to the empty manhead created by the missing pressure indicator, and that the hose had had water running out of it. (This testimony was corroborated by other witnesses.)
# Graphological analysis revealed major attempts to alter logfiles and destroy log evidence.
# Other logfiles show that the control team had attempted to purge one ton of material out of Tank 610 immediately prior to the disaster. An attempt was then made to cover up this transfer via log alteration. Water is heavier than MIC, and the transfer line is attached to the bottom of the tank. The Arthur D. Little report concludes from this that the transfer was an effort to transfer water out of Tank 610 that had been discovered there.
# Second-hand and third-hand recounting of events yielded two accounts that corroborated UCC&#x27;s conspiracy hypothesis; an operator from a different unit stated that after the release, two MIC operators had told him that water had entered the tank through a pressure gauge. One employee stated that &quot;he had been told by a close friend of one of the MIC operators that water had entered through a tube that had been connected to the tank.&quot; This had been allegedly discovered by the other MIC operators who then tried to open and close valves to prevent the release.

The Little report argues that this evidence demonstrates that the following chronology took place:
* At 10:20 pm, the tank was at normal pressure, indicating the absence of water.
* At 10:45 pm, a shift change took place, after which the MIC storage area &quot;would be completely deserted&quot;. During this period, a &quot;disgruntled operator entered the storage area and hooked up one of the readily available rubber water hoses to Tank 610, with the intention of contaminating and spoiling the tank&#x27;s contents.&quot;
* Water began to flow, beginning the chemical reaction that caused the disaster.
* After midnight, control room operators noticed the pressure rising and realized there was a problem with Tank 610. They discovered the water connection and decided to transfer one ton of the contents out to try to remove the water. The MIC release then occurred.
* The cover-up activities discovered during the investigation then took place.
* After over 30 years, in November 2017, S. P. Choudhary, former MIC production manager, claimed in court that the disaster was not an accident but the result of a sabotage that claimed thousands of lives.
Choudhary&#x27;s counsel, Anirban Roy, argued that the theory of design defects was floated by the central government in its endeavour to protect the victims of the tragedy. Everyone else involved in investigating the case &quot;just toed the line of the central government. ... The government and the CBI suppressed the actual truth and saved the real perpetrators of the crime.&quot;
Roy argued to the district court that M. L. Verma, a disgruntled plant operator at odds with senior management, was behind the sabotage. The counsel argued there were discrepancies in statements given by persons operating the plant at that time, but the central agency decided against a proper investigation in order to characterize the event as a mishap and not sabotage. He alleged that Verma was unhappy with Choudhary and Mukund.

==Additional Union Carbide actions==
The corporation denied the claim that valves on the tank were malfunctioning and claimed that documented evidence gathered after the accident showed the valve closest to the plant&#x27;s water-washing operation was closed and leak-tight. Furthermore, process safety systems had prevented water from entering the tank by accident. Carbide states that all safety concerns identified in 1982 were allayed before 1984 and had nothing to do with the accident.

The company admitted that safety systems in place would not have been able to prevent a chemical reaction of such magnitude from causing a leak. According to Carbide, &quot;in designing the plant&#x27;s safety systems, a chemical reaction of this magnitude was not factored in&quot; because &quot;the tank&#x27;s gas storage system was designed to automatically prevent such a large amount of water from being inadvertently introduced into the system&quot; and &quot;process safety systems—in place and operational—would have prevented water from entering the tank by accident&quot;. Instead, they claim that &quot;employee sabotage—not faulty design or operation—was the cause of the tragedy&quot;.

Tactical response

The company stresses the immediate action taken after the disaster and its continued commitment to helping the victims. On 4 December, the day following the leak, Union Carbide sent material aid and several international medical experts to assist the medical facilities in Bhopal.

Financial response

The primary financial restitution paid by UCC was negotiated in 1989, when the Indian Supreme Court approved a settlement of US$470 million (₹1,055 crore; equivalent to $ in ). This amount was immediately paid by UCC to the Indian government. The company states that the restitution paid &quot;was $120 million more than plaintiffs&#x27; lawyers had told U.S. courts was fair&quot; and that the Indian Supreme Court stated in its opinion that &quot;compensation levels under the settlement were far greater than would normally be payable under Indian law.&quot;

In the immediate aftermath of the disaster, Union Carbide states on its website that it donated $2 million to the Indian prime minister&#x27;s immediate disaster relief fund on 11 December 1984. The corporation established the Employees&#x27; Bhopal Relief Fund in February 1985, which raised more than for immediate relief. According to Union Carbide, in August 1987, they made an additional in humanitarian interim relief available.

Union Carbide stated that it also undertook several steps to provide continuing aid to the victims of the Bhopal disaster, including the sale of its 50.9% interest in UCIL in April 1992 and establishment of a charitable trust to contribute to the building of a local hospital. The sale was finalised in November 1994. Construction began in October 1995 and the hospital opened in 2001. The company provided a fund of around from sale of its UCIL stock. In 1991, the trust had amounted to approximately . The hospital specialized in the treatment of heart, lung and eye problems. UCC also provided a $2.2 million grant to Arizona State University to establish a vocational-technical center in Bhopal, which was opened, but was later closed by the state government. They also donated $5 million to the Indian Red Cross after the disaster. They also developed a Responsible Care system with other members of the chemical industry as a response to the Bhopal crisis, which was designed to help prevent such an event in the future.

===Charges against UCC and UCIL employees===
UCC chairman and CEO Warren Anderson was arrested and released on bail by the Madhya Pradesh Police in Bhopal on 7 December 1984. Anderson was taken to UCC&#x27;s house after which he was released six hours later on $2,100 bail and flown out on a government plane. These actions were allegedly taken under the direction of then chief secretary of the state, who was possibly instructed from the chief minister&#x27;s office, who himself flew out of Bhopal immediately. Later in 1987, the Indian government summoned Anderson, eight other executives and two company affiliates to appear in Indian court on homicide charges. In response, Union Carbide said the company is not under Indian jurisdiction.

In May 1988, Indian businessman J. R. D. Tata wrote a confidential letter to the then Prime Minister, Rajiv Gandhi, conveying Henry Kissinger&#x27;s concern about delay in reaching a settlement. At the time, Kissinger was an adviser to Union Carbide and other US corporations. Rajiv Gandhi indicated that he would consider Kissinger&#x27;s advice. Bharatiya Janata Party claimed that Rajiv Gandhi, protected Warren Anderson in a secret political deal with President Ronald Reagan to pardon Adil Shahryar.

Dow was a named respondent in cases arising from Union Carbide&#x27;s business in Bhopal.

==Ongoing contamination==

Chemicals abandoned at the plant continue to leak and pollute the groundwater. Whether the chemicals pose a health hazard is disputed. Contamination at the site and surrounding area was not caused by the gas leakage. The area around the plant was used as a dumping ground for hazardous chemicals and by 1982 water wells in the vicinity of the UCIL factory had to be abandoned. UCC states that &quot;after the incident, UCIL began clean-up work at the site under the direction of Indian central and state government authorities&quot;. The work was continued from 1994 by Eveready Industries India, Limited (EIIL) who was UCIL&#x27;s successor. In 1998, the Madhya Pradesh State Government, which owned and had been leasing the property to EIIL, cancelled the lease, took over the facility and assumed all accountability for the site, including the completion of any remediation.

UCC&#x27;s laboratory tests in 1989 revealed that soil and water samples collected from near the factory were toxic to fish. Twenty-one areas inside the plant were reported to be highly polluted. In 1991 the municipal authorities declared that water from over 100 wells was hazardous for health if used for drinking. In 1994 it was reported that 21% of the factory premises were seriously contaminated with chemicals. Beginning in 1999, studies made by Greenpeace and others from soil, groundwater, well water and vegetables from the residential areas around UCIL and from the UCIL factory area show contamination with a range of toxic heavy metals and chemical compounds. Substances found, according to the reports, are 1-Naphthol, naphthalene, Sevin, tarry residues, organochlorines, mercury, chromium, copper, nickel, lead, hexachlorethane, hexachlorobutadiene, pesticide HCH, volatile organic compounds and halo-organics. Many of these contaminants were also found in breast milk of women living near the area.
Soil tests were conducted by Greenpeace in 1999. One sample (IT9012) from &quot;sediment collected from drain under former Sevin plant&quot; showed mercury levels to be at &quot;20,000 and times&quot; higher than expected levels. Organochlorine compounds at elevated levels were also present in groundwater collected from (sample IT9040) a depth &quot;bore-hole within the former UCIL site&quot;. This sample was obtained from a source posted with a warning sign which read &quot;Water unfit for consumption&quot;.
Chemicals that have been linked to various forms of cancer were also discovered, as well as trichloroethylene, known to impair foetal development, at 50 times above safety limits specified by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). In 2002, an inquiry by Fact-Finding Mission on Bhopal found a number of toxins, including mercury, lead, 1,3,5 trichlorobenzene, dichloromethane and chloroform, in nursing women&#x27;s breast milk.

A 2004 BBC Radio 5 broadcast reported the site is contaminated with toxic chemicals including hexachlorocyclohexane and mercury, held in open containers or loose on the ground. A drinking water sample from a well near the site had levels of contamination 500 times higher than the maximum limits recommended by the World Health Organization. In 2009, the Centre for Science and Environment, a Delhi-based pollution monitoring lab, released test results showing pesticide groundwater contamination up to three kilometres from the factory. Also in 2009, the BBC took a water sample from a frequently used hand pump, located just north of the plant. The sample, tested in UK, was found to contain 1,000 times the World Health Organization&#x27;s recommended maximum amount of carbon tetrachloride, which causes liver and kidney damage, and is &quot;possibly carcinogenic to humans&quot;.

In 2010, a British photojournalist ventured into the abandoned UCIL factory to investigate allegations of abandoned, leaking toxins. He was hospitalized in Bhopal for a week after he was exposed to chemicals. Doctors at the Sambhavna Clinic treated him with oxygen, painkillers and anti-inflammatories following a severe respiratory reaction to toxic dust inside the factory.

In October 2011, the Institute of Environmental Management and Assessment published an article and video by two British environmental scientists, showing the current state of the plant, landfill and solar evaporation ponds and calling for renewed international efforts to provide the necessary skills to clean up the site and contaminated groundwater.

On December 3, 2024, the 40th anniversary of the incident, Madhya Pradesh High Court ruled that the site must be cleaned up in the next month. Despite protests against a plan to incinerate the hazardous waste in Pithampur, on January 1, 2025, an overnight caravan of a dozen semi trucks with police escort, a quick-response team, fire engines and ambulances delivered 377 tons of waste to Pithampur Industrial Area for incineration. Despite promises that the several hundred tons of toxic waste will be processed safely and responsibly, protests continued in Pithampur.

==Popular culture==

===Novels===

* Amulya Malladi&#x27;s 2002 novel &quot;A Breath of Fresh Air&quot; relates the story of a mother and son who develop health issues as a result of exposure to gas at Bhopal. The book is based on Malladi&#x27;s recollections of Bhopal during the accident.
* Indra Sinha released &quot;Animal&#x27;s People&quot; in 2007. The novel tells the story of a boy who is born with a spinal condition due to effects of the gas. The book was shortlisted for the Man Booker Prize.
* Arundhati Roy&#x27;s 2017 novel &quot;The Ministry of Utmost Happiness&quot; which deals with many contemporary political issues in India, also features several characters still dealing with the aftermath of the gas leak.
* Annie Murray&#x27;s novel &quot;Mother and Child&quot; (2019) is partly set in post-disaster Bhopal.

===Films and television===

* &quot;Bhopal Express&quot;, 1999 film.
* &quot;Bhopal Nightmare&quot; (2011), the sixth episode of season 4 of the television docudrama series &quot;Seconds from Disaster&quot;.
* In 2014, to coincide with the 30th anniversary of the disaster, the historical drama &quot;&quot; was released, starring Martin Sheen as Union Carbide CEO Warren Anderson, Kal Penn, and Mischa Barton.
* &quot;The Railway Men: The Untold Story of Bhopal 1984&quot; starring KK Menon, R Madhavan, Divyendu Sharma and Babil Khan is a four-part web series that was released on 18 November 2023 on Netflix.

==Activism==
=== Local ===

Since 1984, individual activists have played a role in the aftermath of the tragedy. The best-known is Satinath Sarangi (Sathyu), a metallurgic engineer who arrived at Bhopal the day after the leakage. He founded several activist groups, as well as Sambhavna Trust, the clinic for gas affected patients, where he is the manager. Other activists include Rashida Bee and Champa Devi Shukla, who received the Goldman Prize in 2004, Abdul Jabbar and Rachna Dhingra. Soon after the accident, other representatives from different activist groups arrived. The activists worked on organising the gas victims, which led to violent repression from the police and the government.

Numerous actions have been taken: demonstrations, sit-ins, hunger strikes, marches combined with pamphlets, books, and articles. Every anniversary, actions are performed. Often these include marches around Old Bhopal, ending with burning an effigy of Warren Anderson.

When government aid was ineffective, activist groups such as Zahreeli Gas Khand Sangharsh Morcha (Poisonous Gas-Event Struggle Front) mobilized. Morcha was heterogenous in its membership, including gas victims, volunteers from smaller towns, and middle-class activists from large cities. Morcha outlined a four-pronged approach: 1) counter governmental and company efforts to remove the disaster from the press 2) mobilize gas victims 3) present alternatives to governmental programs 4) establish a larger network of organization to debate more systemic issues. Morcha took a revolutionary approach but lacked constructive engagement with the state. Afterwards the Bhopal Gas-Affected Women&#x27;s Trade Union formed. BGPMUS protested the closing of a sewing center and saw effective action.

=== International ===
Cooperation with international NGOs including Pesticide Action Network UK and Greenpeace started soon after the tragedy. One of the earliest reports is the Trade Union report from ILO 1985.

In 1992, a session of the Permanent Peoples&#x27; Tribunal on Industrial Hazards and Human Rights took place in Bhopal, and in 1996, the &quot;Charter on Industrial Hazards and Human Rights&quot; was adopted.

In 1994, the International Medical Commission on Bhopal (IMCB) met in Bhopal. Their work contributed to long-term health effects being officially recognised.

=== Organisations ===

More than 14 different NGOs were immediately engaged and 15 international, national and local organisations have been engaged including:

* International Campaign for Justice in Bhopal (ICJB), coordinates international activities
* Bhopal Medical Appeal, collects funds for the Sambhavna Trust
* Sambhavna Trust or Bhopal People&#x27;s Health and Documentation Clinic. Provides medical care for gas affected patients and those living in water-contaminated area
* Chingari Trust, provides medical care for children being born in Bhopal with malformations and brain damages
* Students for Bhopal, based in the United States
* International Medical Commission on Bhopal, provided medical information 1994–2000
* Bhopal Gas Peedit Mahila-Stationery Karmachari Sangh
* Bhopal Gas Peedit Mahila Udyog Sangthan

===Settlement fund hoax===

On 3 December 2004, the twentieth anniversary of the disaster, a man falsely claiming to be a Dow representative named Jude Finisterra was interviewed on BBC World News. He claimed that the company had agreed to clean up the site and compensate those harmed in the accident, by liquidating Union Carbide for . Dow quickly issued a statement saying that they had no employee by that name—that he was an impostor, not affiliated with Dow, and that his claims were a hoax. The BBC later broadcast a correction and an apology.

Jude Finisterra was actually Andy Bichlbaum, a member of the activist prankster group The Yes Men. In 2002, The Yes Men issued a fake press release explaining why Dow refused to take responsibility for the disaster and started up a website, at &quot;DowEthics.com&quot;, designed to look like the real Dow website, but containing false information.

===Monitoring of activists===
The Stratfor email leak revealed that Dow Chemical had engaged Stratfor to spy on the public and personal lives of activists involved in the Bhopal disaster, including the Yes Men. E-mails to Dow representatives from hired security analysts list the YouTube videos liked, Twitter and Facebook posts made and the public appearances of these activists. Journalists, filmmakers and authors who were investigating Bhopal and covering the issue of ongoing contamination, such as Jack Laurenson and Max Carlson, were also placed under surveillance. Stratfor released a statement condemning the revelation by Wikileaks while neither confirming nor denying the accuracy of the reports and would only state that it had acted within the bounds of the law. Dow Chemical also refrained to comment on the matter.

Ingrid Eckerman, a member of the International Medical Commission on Bhopal, has been denied a visa to visit India.

==See also==

* List of industrial disasters
* System accident
* Environmental racism
* Ludhiana gas leak

==References==
==Sources==
* Main author Chouhan was an operator at the plant. Contains many technical details.
* Review Written by a retired former employee of UCC who was a member of the investigation committee. Includes several original documents including correspondence between UCIL and the Ministries of the Government of India.
* 
* 
* 
==Further reading==
* 
* Essay for MPH. A short overview, 57 pages, 82 references.
* 
* 
* US, India. Reprinting and annotating landmark writing from across the years.
* In: Down to Earth
* London: The Institution of Chemical Engineers Conference on Preventing Major Chemical Accidents
* [In Swedish]
* 
* 
===Union Carbide Corporation===
* 
* Bhopal Methyl Isocyanate Incident. Investigation Team Report. Union Carbide Corporation, Danbury, CT (1985).
* Presence of Toxic Ingredients in Soil/Water Samples Inside Plant Premises. Union Carbide Corporation, US (1989).
==External links==

* International Campaign for Justice in Bhopal
* Bhopal Medical Appeal
* Bhopal Gas Tragedy Relief &amp; Rehabilitation Department at the Government of Madhya Pradesh
* Bhopal Information Center, Union Carbide
* India Environmental Portal Updated news on Bhopal Gas Disaster
* Bhopal:Anatomy of a Crisis by Paul Shrivastava, Paul Chapman Publishing, 1987, </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7885457" start="78" end="105" title="Union Carbide India Limited" label="Union Carbide India Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q80989" start="125" end="131" title="Bhopal" label="Bhopal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188" start="133" end="147" title="Madhya Pradesh" label="Madhya Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="149" end="154" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q274160" start="182" end="187" title="Toxicity" label="toxic"/>
<link wikidata="Q410431" start="192" end="209" title="methyl isocyanate" label="methyl isocyanate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="237" end="275" title="List of accidents and disasters by death toll#Industrial" label="world&amp;#x27;s worst industrial disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589237" start="691" end="719" title="Government of Madhya Pradesh" label="Government of Madhya Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q908553" start="925" end="950" title="Union Carbide Corporation" label="Union Carbide Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q852998" start="1064" end="1069" title="Stakeholder (corporate)" label="stake"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416941" start="1212" end="1245" title="Eveready Industries India" label="Eveready Industries India Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q18127937" start="1285" end="1310" title="McLeod Russel" label="McLeod Russel (India) Ltd"/>
<link wikidata="Q855639" start="1473" end="1493" title="Dow Chemical Company" label="Dow Chemical Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q222249" start="1554" end="1559" title="Civil law (common law)" label="Civil"/>
<link wikidata="Q146491" start="1564" end="1578" title="Criminal law" label="criminal cases"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398144" start="1622" end="1637" title="Warren Anderson (American businessman)" label="Warren Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283311" start="1912" end="1926" title="District courts of India" label="District Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q6395072" start="2085" end="2100" title="Keshub Mahindra" label="Keshub Mahindra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973852" start="2271" end="2281" title="Law of India" label="Indian law"/>
<link wikidata="Q415090" start="2532" end="2540" title="carbaryl" label="carbaryl"/>
<link wikidata="Q410431" start="2548" end="2565" title="methyl isocyanate" label="methyl isocyanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q409304" start="2706" end="2717" title="methylamine" label="methylamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q189090" start="2732" end="2740" title="phosgene" label="phosgene"/>
<link wikidata="Q408876" start="2785" end="2795" title="1-naphthol" label="1-naphthol"/>
<link wikidata="Q152051" start="2855" end="2860" title="Bayer" label="Bayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6039090" start="2945" end="2969" title="Institute, West Virginia" label="Institute, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6753108" start="3116" end="3134" title="manufacturing cost" label="manufacturing cost"/>
<link wikidata="Q3252152" start="3326" end="3334" title="naphthol" label="naphthol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746231" start="3345" end="3358" title="chloroformate" label="chloroformate"/>
<link wikidata="Q101487" start="3359" end="3364" title="ester" label="ester"/>
<link wikidata="Q131656" start="3452" end="3461" title="pesticide" label="pesticide"/>
<link wikidata="Q98113925" start="3805" end="3813" title="Elastomeric respirator" label="gas mask"/>
<link wikidata="Q19668626" start="3936" end="3952" title="Rajkumar Keswani" label="Rajkumar Keswani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333024" start="4279" end="4299" title="Personal protective equipment" label="protective equipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q688" start="4712" end="4720" title="chlorine" label="chlorine"/>
<link wikidata="Q409304" start="4722" end="4737" title="Methylamine" label="monomethylamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q225045" start="4753" end="4773" title="carbon tetrachloride" label="carbon tetrachloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="5228" end="5240" title="Nitrogen" label="nitrogen gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="5462" end="5474" title="Nitrogen" label="nitrogen gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q319873" start="5818" end="5829" title="Gas flare" label="flare tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q137056" start="5840" end="5848" title="Corrosion" label="corroded"/>
<link wikidata="Q943331" start="6360" end="6378" title="Scrubber" label="vent gas scrubbers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6740" end="6767" title="Thermal runaway#Chemical engineering" label="runaway exothermic reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q12858303" start="8343" end="8348" title="freon" label="freon"/>
<link wikidata="Q102769" start="8874" end="8886" title="Sodium hydroxide" label="caustic soda"/>
<link wikidata="Q17027547" start="10463" end="10479" title="Hamidia Hospital" label="Hamidia Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087" start="10533" end="10540" title="ammonia" label="ammonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11352741" start="11468" end="11484" title="shelter in place" label="shelter in place"/>
<link wikidata="Q883863" start="11701" end="11714" title="blepharospasm" label="blepharospasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q178061" start="12209" end="12229" title="circulatory collapse" label="circulatory collapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q857667" start="12235" end="12251" title="pulmonary oedema" label="pulmonary oedema"/>
<link wikidata="Q41482" start="12269" end="12278" title="autopsy" label="autopsies"/>
<link wikidata="Q979168" start="12327" end="12342" title="cerebral oedema" label="cerebral oedema"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425407" start="12344" end="12360" title="tubular necrosis" label="tubular necrosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6058862" start="12377" end="12408" title="Fatty liver" label="fatty degeneration of the liver"/>
<link wikidata="Q854353" start="12426" end="12435" title="enteritis" label="enteritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q172275" start="12675" end="12685" title="chloroform" label="chloroform"/>
<link wikidata="Q421748" start="12687" end="12702" title="dichloromethane" label="dichloromethane"/>
<link wikidata="Q211086" start="12704" end="12721" title="hydrogen chloride" label="hydrogen chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q408022" start="12736" end="12749" title="dimethylamine" label="dimethylamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q423953" start="12751" end="12765" title="trimethylamine" label="trimethylamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="12771" end="12785" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q104541" start="13116" end="13123" title="aerosol" label="aerosol"/>
<link wikidata="Q26075" start="13216" end="13232" title="hydrogen cyanide" label="hydrogen cyanide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2767140" start="13347" end="13364" title="Government of India" label="Indian government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519967" start="13500" end="13545" title="Council of Scientific and Industrial Research" label="Council of Scientific and Industrial Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053734" start="13561" end="13592" title="Central Bureau of Investigation" label="Central Bureau of Investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398144" start="13619" end="13634" title="Warren Anderson (American businessman)" label="Warren Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q320994" start="13740" end="13752" title="house arrest" label="house arrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q207315" start="14357" end="14366" title="cremation" label="cremation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3725131" start="14382" end="14399" title="Pablo Bartholomew" label="Pablo Bartholomew"/>
<link wikidata="Q3419570" start="14433" end="14438" title="Rapho (agency)" label="Rapho"/>
<link wikidata="Q924901" start="14568" end="14577" title="Raghu Rai" label="Raghu Rai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935928" start="14908" end="14937" title="World Press Photo of the Year" label="World Press Photo of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047293" start="16399" end="16414" title="University of California, Santa Cruz" label="U.C. Santa Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q16091234" start="18076" end="18090" title="John F. Keenan" label="John F. Keenan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641851" start="18979" end="19000" title="United States courts of appeals" label="U.S. Court of Appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q213380" start="19247" end="19267" title="Supreme Court of India" label="Indian Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q213380" start="19565" end="19585" title="Indian Supreme Court" label="Indian Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q113993418" start="20428" end="20453" title="Chief Judicial Magistrate Court" label="Chief Judicial Magistrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q149086" start="20541" end="20549" title="homicide" label="homicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q210603" start="20660" end="20671" title="extradition" label="extradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="20772" end="20790" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q250479" start="21260" end="21291" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit" label="Second Circuit Court of Appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q160070" start="21967" end="21977" title="negligence" label="negligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413080" start="22508" end="22535" title="Alien Tort Statute" label="U.S. Alien Torts Claims Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542536" start="23067" end="23079" title="The Atlantic" label="The Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q296486" start="23221" end="23228" title="ecocide" label="ecocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q291019" start="23326" end="23360" title="Indian Council of Medical Research" label="Indian Council of Medical Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589237" start="23840" end="23868" title="government of Madhya Pradesh" label="government of Madhya Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q454263" start="24012" end="24021" title="affidavit" label="affidavit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303415" start="24186" end="24192" title="cohort (statistics)" label="cohort"/>
<link wikidata="Q58702" start="24401" end="24417" title="mortality rate" label="excess mortality"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24422" end="24431" title="Disease#Morbidity" label="morbidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q742736" start="24454" end="24458" title="Bias" label="Bias"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125472" start="24463" end="24481" title="confounding factor" label="confounding factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q167844" start="24806" end="24820" title="conjunctivitis" label="conjunctivitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q21110038" start="24839" end="24856" title="Corneal opacity" label="corneal opacities"/>
<link wikidata="Q127724" start="24858" end="24873" title="Cataract" label="early cataracts"/>
<link wikidata="Q13400765" start="24876" end="24893" title="Respiratory tract" label="Respiratory tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q32446" start="24936" end="24954" title="pulmonary fibrosis" label="pulmonary fibrosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="24971" end="24983" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q173022" start="24996" end="25006" title="bronchitis" label="bronchitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q46627" start="25052" end="25070" title="Fine motor skill" label="finer motor skills"/>
<link wikidata="Q202387" start="25113" end="25150" title="Post-traumatic stress disorder" label="Post traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297155" start="25177" end="25181" title="Prenatal development" label="Peri"/>
<link wikidata="Q998" start="25187" end="25195" title="Infant" label="neonatal"/>
<link wikidata="Q28693" start="25682" end="25693" title="miscarriage" label="miscarriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q851510" start="25760" end="25772" title="Mother Jones (magazine)" label="Mother Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q7409037" start="27009" end="27024" title="Sambhavna Trust" label="Sambhavna Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q11190" start="27079" end="27085" title="modern medicine" label="modern"/>
<link wikidata="Q132325" start="27097" end="27106" title="ayurvedic" label="ayurvedic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426365" start="27478" end="27487" title="tube well" label="tube well"/>
<link wikidata="Q408876" start="27820" end="27830" title="1-naphthol" label="1-naphthol"/>
<link wikidata="Q179724" start="27832" end="27843" title="naphthalene" label="naphthalene"/>
<link wikidata="Q415090" start="27845" end="27850" title="Carbaryl" label="Sevin"/>
<link wikidata="Q186209" start="27852" end="27865" title="tar" label="tarry residue"/>
<link wikidata="Q426809" start="27873" end="27887" title="organochlorine" label="organochlorine"/>
<link wikidata="Q925" start="27925" end="27932" title="mercury (element)" label="mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q725" start="27934" end="27942" title="chromium" label="chromium"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="27944" end="27950" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q744" start="27952" end="27958" title="nickel" label="nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="27960" end="27964" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q415988" start="27966" end="27982" title="hexachloroethane" label="hexachloroethane"/>
<link wikidata="Q416393" start="27984" end="28003" title="hexachlorobutadiene" label="hexachlorobutadiene"/>
<link wikidata="Q424459" start="28028" end="28049" title="Hexachlorocyclohexane" label="Hexachlorocyclohexane"/>
<link wikidata="Q588924" start="28315" end="28325" title="Ankleshwar" label="Ankleshwar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188" start="30308" end="30322" title="Madhya Pradesh" label="Madhya Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q960484" start="31658" end="31671" title="Union Cabinet" label="Union Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2767140" start="31679" end="31698" title="Government of India" label="Government of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q776941" start="31818" end="31830" title="Henry Waxman" label="Henry Waxman"/>
<link wikidata="Q168000" start="36412" end="36431" title="American University" label="American University"/>
<link wikidata="Q102769" start="37200" end="37216" title="sodium hydroxide" label="sodium hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q338513" start="37921" end="37931" title="deluge gun" label="deluge gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q638231" start="38916" end="38935" title="Larsen &amp;amp; Toubro" label="Larsen &amp;amp; Toubro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053734" start="41032" end="41063" title="Central Bureau of Investigation" label="Central Bureau of Investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q709066" start="41142" end="41158" title="Arthur D. Little" label="Arthur D. Little"/>
<link wikidata="Q855639" start="42423" end="42443" title="Dow Chemical Company" label="Dow Chemical Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q670897" start="50145" end="50169" title="Arizona State University" label="Arizona State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q16237727" start="50324" end="50340" title="Indian Red Cross" label="Indian Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145910" start="50383" end="50399" title="Responsible Care" label="Responsible Care"/>
<link wikidata="Q2767140" start="51085" end="51102" title="Indian government" label="Indian government"/>
<link wikidata="Q149086" start="51201" end="51209" title="homicide" label="homicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q468334" start="51330" end="51343" title="J. R. D. Tata" label="J. R. D. Tata"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593" start="51400" end="51412" title="Rajiv Gandhi" label="Rajiv Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q66107" start="51424" end="51446" title="Henry Kissinger" label="Henry Kissinger&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q10230" start="51646" end="51668" title="Bharatiya Janata Party" label="Bharatiya Janata Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="51764" end="51777" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51788" end="51801" title="Mohammad Yunus (diplomat)#Adil Shahryar" label="Adil Shahryar"/>
<link wikidata="Q161598" start="51988" end="51999" title="groundwater" label="groundwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q81307" start="53254" end="53264" title="Greenpeace" label="Greenpeace"/>
<link wikidata="Q43483" start="53300" end="53310" title="Water well" label="well water"/>
<link wikidata="Q910267" start="53681" end="53706" title="volatile organic compound" label="volatile organic compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q407936" start="54423" end="54440" title="trichloroethylene" label="trichloroethylene"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="54527" end="54563" title="United States Environmental Protection Agency" label="U.S. Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q925" start="54661" end="54668" title="mercury (element)" label="mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q411921" start="54682" end="54698" title="trichlorobenzene" label="trichlorobenzene"/>
<link wikidata="Q421748" start="54700" end="54715" title="dichloromethane" label="dichloromethane"/>
<link wikidata="Q172275" start="54720" end="54730" title="chloroform" label="chloroform"/>
<link wikidata="Q795588" start="54777" end="54788" title="BBC Radio 5 Live" label="BBC Radio 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q424459" start="54864" end="54885" title="hexachlorocyclohexane" label="hexachlorocyclohexane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="55085" end="55110" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062570" start="55125" end="55159" title="Centre for Science and Environment" label="Centre for Science and Environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7409037" start="55880" end="55896" title="Sambhavna clinic" label="Sambhavna Clinic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2548346" start="56598" end="56607" title="Pithampur" label="Pithampur"/>
<link wikidata="Q4748952" start="56994" end="57008" title="Amulya Malladi" label="Amulya Malladi"/>
<link wikidata="Q530130" start="57250" end="57261" title="Indra Sinha" label="Indra Sinha"/>
<link wikidata="Q4764735" start="57277" end="57297" title="Animal&amp;#x27;s People" label="Animal&amp;#x27;s People"/>
<link wikidata="Q160082" start="57444" end="57460" title="Man Booker Prize" label="Man Booker Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q212801" start="57464" end="57477" title="Arundhati Roy" label="Arundhati Roy"/>
<link wikidata="Q28127551" start="57502" end="57534" title="The Ministry of Utmost Happiness" label="The Ministry of Utmost Happiness"/>
<link wikidata="Q61365820" start="57688" end="57700" title="Annie Murray (writer)" label="Annie Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749710" start="57826" end="57840" title="Bhopal Express (film)" label="Bhopal Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q6349504" start="57902" end="57927" title="List of Seconds from Disaster episodes" label="sixth episode of season 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140582" start="57969" end="57990" title="Seconds from Disaster" label="Seconds from Disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q184572" start="58121" end="58133" title="Martin Sheen" label="Martin Sheen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398144" start="58155" end="58170" title="Warren Anderson (American businessman)" label="Warren Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q220536" start="58172" end="58180" title="Kal Penn" label="Kal Penn"/>
<link wikidata="Q207458" start="58186" end="58199" title="Mischa Barton" label="Mischa Barton"/>
<link wikidata="Q123385912" start="58209" end="58257" title="The Railway Men" label="The Railway Men: The Untold Story of Bhopal 1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q6380219" start="58273" end="58281" title="Kay Kay Menon" label="KK Menon"/>
<link wikidata="Q729982" start="58283" end="58293" title="R. Madhavan" label="R Madhavan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284717" start="58295" end="58310" title="Divyenndu" label="Divyendu Sharma"/>
<link wikidata="Q116971377" start="58315" end="58325" title="Babil Khan" label="Babil Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q526877" start="58341" end="58351" title="web series" label="web series"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="58393" end="58400" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q7426222" start="58534" end="58550" title="Satinath Sarangi" label="Satinath Sarangi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11467" start="58563" end="58583" title="Metallurgic engineering" label="metallurgic engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7409037" start="58680" end="58695" title="Sambhavna Trust" label="Sambhavna Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506625" start="58837" end="58850" title="Goldman Prize" label="Goldman Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q107266830" start="58860" end="58872" title="Abdul Jabbar Khan (activist)" label="Abdul Jabbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q16216522" start="58877" end="58891" title="Rachna Dhingra" label="Rachna Dhingra"/>
<link wikidata="Q191355" start="59160" end="59174" title="hunger strikes" label="hunger strikes"/>
<link wikidata="Q20899864" start="59342" end="59348" title="effigy" label="effigy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398144" start="59352" end="59367" title="Warren Anderson (American businessman)" label="Warren Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q81307" start="60263" end="60273" title="Greenpeace" label="Greenpeace"/>
<link wikidata="Q574461" start="60402" end="60434" title="Permanent Peoples&amp;#x27; Tribunal" label="Permanent Peoples&amp;#x27; Tribunal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6051966" start="60599" end="60641" title="International Medical Commission on Bhopal" label="International Medical Commission on Bhopal"/>
<link wikidata="Q17056724" start="60908" end="60952" title="International Campaign for Justice in Bhopal" label="International Campaign for Justice in Bhopal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7409037" start="61064" end="61079" title="Sambhavna Trust" label="Sambhavna Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q7627963" start="61342" end="61361" title="Students for Bhopal" label="Students for Bhopal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6051966" start="61392" end="61434" title="International Medical Commission on Bhopal" label="International Medical Commission on Bhopal"/>
<link wikidata="Q208491" start="61755" end="61769" title="BBC World News" label="BBC World News"/>
<link wikidata="Q3159997" start="62154" end="62168" title="Jacques Servin" label="Andy Bichlbaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547127" start="62211" end="62222" title="The Yes Men" label="The Yes Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q4626847" start="62509" end="62528" title="Stratfor email leak" label="Stratfor email leak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165036" start="62568" end="62576" title="Stratfor" label="Stratfor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547127" start="62677" end="62684" title="Yes Men" label="Yes Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q6051966" start="63339" end="63381" title="International Medical Commission on Bhopal" label="International Medical Commission on Bhopal"/>
<link wikidata="Q170404" start="63401" end="63405" title="Visa (document)" label="visa"/>
<link wikidata="Q627843" start="63439" end="63467" title="List of industrial disasters" label="List of industrial disasters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2328179" start="63470" end="63485" title="System accident" label="System accident"/>
<link wikidata="Q2491965" start="63488" end="63508" title="Environmental racism" label="Environmental racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q118116127" start="63511" end="63528" title="Ludhiana gas leak" label="Ludhiana gas leak"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303034" start="64048" end="64061" title="Down To Earth (magazine)" label="Down to Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7153589" start="64769" end="64785" title="Paul Shrivastava" label="Paul Shrivastava"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="144640" wikidata="Q1271867" url="?curid=144640" title="Another Thin Man">
<text>Another Thin Man is a 1939 American detective film directed by W. S. Van Dyke, the third of six in the &quot;Thin Man&quot; series. It again stars William Powell and Myrna Loy as Nick and Nora Charles and is based on Dashiell Hammett&#x27;s Continental Op story &quot;The Farewell Murder&quot;. The Charles&#x27; son Nicky Jr. is introduced for the first time. The cast includes their terrier Asta, Virginia Grey, Otto Kruger, C. Aubrey Smith, Ruth Hussey, Nat Pendleton, Patric Knowles, Sheldon Leonard, Tom Neal, Phyllis Gordon and Marjorie Main. Shemp Howard, later of The Three Stooges, appears in an uncredited role as Wacky.

The film was unable to be called &quot;Return of the Thin Man&quot; because The Thin Man from the original film was &quot;completely dead&quot; according to newspapers in 1939. It was followed by &quot;Shadow of the Thin Man&quot; (1941).

==Plot==
Nick and Nora Charles are back in New York with Asta and their son Nicky Jr. They are invited by Colonel Burr MacFay to spend the weekend at his house on Long Island. MacFay, the former business partner of Nora&#x27;s father and the administrator of her fortune, desperately wants Nick to put his well-known detective skills to work, as he has been receiving death threats from a shady character named Phil Church. When MacFay is killed, Church seems to be the obvious suspect, but Nick is skeptical, suspecting more than a simple murder. MacFay&#x27;s housekeeper, his adopted daughter, and various hangers-on all may have had an interest in killing him.

==Cast==
* William Powell as Nick Charles
* Myrna Loy as Nora Charles
* Virginia Grey as Lois MacFay
* Otto Kruger as Assistant District Attorney Van Slack
* C. Aubrey Smith as Colonel Burr MacFay
* Ruth Hussey as Dorothy Walters, Charles&#x27; nanny
* Nat Pendleton as Lieutenant Guild
* Patric Knowles as Dudley Horn, Lois&#x27;s fiancé
* Tom Neal as Freddie Coleman, MacFay&#x27;s secretary
* Phyllis Gordon as Mrs. Isabella Bellam, MacFay&#x27;s housekeeper
* Sheldon Leonard as Phil Church
* Don Costello as Diamond Back Vogel
* Harry Bellaver as Creeps
* Muriel Hutchison as Smitty
* Abner Biberman as Dum-Dum
* Marjorie Main as Mrs. Dolley
* Shemp Howard as Wacky (uncredited)
* The Afro-Cuban dance team of René and Estela, headliners at the Havana-Madrid Club in New York City, is featured in the floor show at the West Indies Club.

==Reception==
The film review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes show&#x27;s the film score to be 85% based on reviews from 20 professional critics.

According to Frank S. Nugent, &quot;this third of the trademarked Thin Men takes its murders as jauntily as ever, confirms our impression that matrimony need not be too serious a business, and provides as light an entertainment as any holiday-amusement seeker is likely to find&quot;.

&quot;Another Thin Man&quot; is the third of six feature films based on the characters of Nick and Nora Charles:
* &quot;The Thin Man&quot; (1934)
* &quot;After the Thin Man&quot; (1936)
* &quot;Another Thin Man&quot; (1939)
* &quot;Shadow of the Thin Man&quot; (1941)
* &quot;The Thin Man Goes Home&quot; (1944)
* &quot;Song of the Thin Man&quot; (1947)

==Box office==
&quot;Another Thin Man&quot; grossed a domestic and foreign total of $2,223,000: $1,523,000 from the U.S. and Canada and $700,000 elsewhere. It returned a profit of $394,000.

==References==
==External links==
* &quot;Another Thin Man&quot; at AllMovie
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1200678" start="36" end="50" title="detective film" label="detective film"/>
<link wikidata="Q547078" start="63" end="77" title="W. S. Van Dyke" label="W. S. Van Dyke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198497" start="103" end="123" title="The Thin Man (film)" label="&amp;quot;Thin Man&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q105960" start="147" end="161" title="William Powell" label="William Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q105941" start="166" end="175" title="Myrna Loy" label="Myrna Loy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6041980" start="179" end="200" title="Nick and Nora Charles" label="Nick and Nora Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q186335" start="217" end="233" title="Dashiell Hammett" label="Dashiell Hammett"/>
<link wikidata="Q2568029" start="241" end="255" title="The Continental Op" label="Continental Op"/>
<link wikidata="Q6819212" start="393" end="397" title="Skippy (dog)" label="Asta"/>
<link wikidata="Q273118" start="399" end="412" title="Virginia Grey" label="Virginia Grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q204013" start="414" end="425" title="Otto Kruger" label="Otto Kruger"/>
<link wikidata="Q552813" start="427" end="442" title="C. Aubrey Smith" label="C. Aubrey Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q295679" start="444" end="455" title="Ruth Hussey" label="Ruth Hussey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288004" start="457" end="470" title="Nat Pendleton" label="Nat Pendleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q206113" start="472" end="486" title="Patric Knowles" label="Patric Knowles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545340" start="488" end="503" title="Sheldon Leonard" label="Sheldon Leonard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530819" start="505" end="513" title="Tom Neal" label="Tom Neal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3381855" start="515" end="529" title="Phyllis Gordon" label="Phyllis Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q445018" start="534" end="547" title="Marjorie Main" label="Marjorie Main"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287517" start="549" end="561" title="Shemp Howard" label="Shemp Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q949161" start="572" end="589" title="The Three Stooges" label="The Three Stooges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196637" start="834" end="856" title="Shadow of the Thin Man" label="Shadow of the Thin Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q18438" start="1035" end="1046" title="Long Island" label="Long Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q105960" start="1549" end="1563" title="William Powell" label="William Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q105941" start="1582" end="1591" title="Myrna Loy" label="Myrna Loy"/>
<link wikidata="Q273118" start="1610" end="1623" title="Virginia Grey" label="Virginia Grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q204013" start="1641" end="1652" title="Otto Kruger" label="Otto Kruger"/>
<link wikidata="Q552813" start="1696" end="1711" title="C. Aubrey Smith" label="C. Aubrey Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q295679" start="1737" end="1748" title="Ruth Hussey" label="Ruth Hussey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288004" start="1791" end="1804" title="Nat Pendleton" label="Nat Pendleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q206113" start="1827" end="1841" title="Patric Knowles" label="Patric Knowles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530819" start="1879" end="1887" title="Tom Neal" label="Tom Neal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3381855" start="1934" end="1948" title="Phyllis Gordon" label="Phyllis Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545340" start="2002" end="2017" title="Sheldon Leonard" label="Sheldon Leonard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292457" start="2035" end="2047" title="Don Costello" label="Don Costello"/>
<link wikidata="Q11012959" start="2072" end="2086" title="Harry Bellaver" label="Harry Bellaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q61940969" start="2099" end="2115" title="Muriel Hutchison" label="Muriel Hutchison"/>
<link wikidata="Q129386" start="2128" end="2142" title="Abner Biberman" label="Abner Biberman"/>
<link wikidata="Q445018" start="2156" end="2169" title="Marjorie Main" label="Marjorie Main"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287517" start="2187" end="2199" title="Shemp Howard" label="Shemp Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491832" start="2404" end="2421" title="review aggregator" label="review aggregator"/>
<link wikidata="Q974386" start="2544" end="2559" title="Frank S. Nugent" label="Frank S. Nugent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6041980" start="2585" end="2605" title="Nick and Nora Charles" label="trademarked Thin Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198497" start="2938" end="2950" title="The Thin Man (film)" label="The Thin Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271874" start="2972" end="2990" title="After the Thin Man" label="After the Thin Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196637" start="3050" end="3072" title="Shadow of the Thin Man" label="Shadow of the Thin Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198499" start="3094" end="3116" title="The Thin Man Goes Home" label="The Thin Man Goes Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q120626" start="3138" end="3158" title="Song of the Thin Man" label="Song of the Thin Man"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="144645" wikidata="Q603216" url="?curid=144645" title="Antonio Margheriti">
<text>Antonio Margheriti (19 September 1930 – 4 November 2002), also known under the pseudonyms Anthony M. Dawson and Antony Daisies (&quot;daisies&quot; is &quot;margherite&quot; in Italian), was an Italian filmmaker. Margheriti worked in many different genres in the Italian film industry, and was known for his sometimes derivative but often stylish and entertaining science fiction, sword and sandal, horror/giallo, Eurospy, Spaghetti Western, Vietnam War and action movies that were released to a wide international audience. He died in 2002.

==Early life and career==
Antonio Margheriti was born in Rome on 19 September 1930. Margheriti was the son of a railroad engineer and began his film career in 1950 working with Mario Serandrei. He then began making short documentaries beginning with &quot;Vecchia Roma&quot; in 1953. In 1954, Margheriti was credited with special effects in films such as Pino Mercanti&#x27;s &quot;I cinque dell&#x27;Adamello&quot; and &quot;La notte che la terra tremo&quot;. By 1955 he was credited in screenplays such as &quot;Classe di ferro&quot;.

==Directing==
Margheriti grew up reading science fiction comics, and when he was offered the film &quot;Space-Men&quot;, he signed on as director. He followed up this film with &quot;Battle of the Worlds&quot; starring actor Claude Rains, which was in turn followed by &quot;The Golden Arrow&quot; with Tab Hunter and some more &quot;peplum&quot;-style films such as &quot;The Fall of Rome&quot; and &quot;Giants of Rome&quot;. Other genres tackled in the 1960s included horror—&quot;Castle of Blood&quot;, &quot;The Long Hair of Death&quot; and &quot;The Virgin of Nuremberg&quot; and the Eurospy films: &quot;Bob Fleming... Mission Casablanca&quot; and &quot;Operazione Goldman&quot;.

Margheriti then returned to science fiction with his &quot;Gamma I&quot; series, originally filmed for the Italian television series &quot;Fantascienza&quot; but afterwards released theatrically. Margheriti followed these films with some westerns, including &quot;Take a Hard Ride&quot; and &quot;And God Said to Cain&quot;.

In the 1980s, Margheriti created films following the success of &quot;Platoon&quot; and &quot;Raiders of the Lost Ark&quot;, such as &quot;The Last Hunter&quot; and &quot;Hunters of the Golden Cobra&quot;, which both starred David Warbeck. Warbeck also starred in &quot;Tiger Joe&quot;, a film overshadowed by tragedy when Margheriti&#x27;s long time cinematographer, Riccardo Pallottini, died in a plane crash while attempting to get the film&#x27;s last shot.

He delved into the genre of films inspired by &quot;The Wild Geese&quot; with &quot;Code Name: Wild Geese&quot; and &quot;Commando Leopard&quot; starring Lewis Collins as well as &quot;Conan the Barbarian&quot; (1982) with &quot;Yor, the Hunter from the Future&quot;, which was shot in Turkey and was picked up by Columbia Pictures for an American release to 1400 theaters.

Margheriti died on 4 November 2002.

==Style==
Margheriti&#x27;s specialty in films was low budget efforts that fell into genres such as action and science fiction. To make films in short amounts of time, Margheriti applied techniques such as shooting with several cameras simultaneously, allowing him to record master shots, close-ups, and more. This often led him to light films very carefully, and allowed him to create several films per year.

==Partial filmography==
:Note: The films listed as N/A are not necessarily chronological.
==Legacy==
In the documentary on the Image DVD release of his film &quot;Cannibal Apocalypse&quot;, Margheriti proudly mentioned that it was Quentin Tarantino&#x27;s favorite among his films. In Tarantino&#x27;s film &quot;Inglourious Basterds&quot;, Eli Roth&#x27;s character Donny Donowitz uses &quot;Antonio Margheriti&quot; as an alias in an undercover operation at the cinema screening of &quot;Stolz der Nation&quot;. There is also a reference in Tarantino&#x27;s film, &quot;Once Upon a Time in Hollywood&quot;. In said film, Leonardo DiCaprio portrays the fictional actor Rick Dalton, who goes to Italy in 1969 to film Spaghetti Westerns, including one spy thriller directed by Margheriti titled &quot;Operazione Dyn-o-mite&quot;.

==References==
===Footnotes===
===Sources===
* 
* 
* 
* 


==External links==
*Stefano Bigliardi, &quot;Mr. Superinvisible&#x27;s Potion: Science, Scientists and Technology in Antonio Margheriti&#x27;s Films,&quot; &quot;Simulteanea. A Journal of Italian Media and Pop Culture - Rivista di media e cultura popolare in Italia&quot;, Vol. 2, N. 1. 
* Article at Senses of Cinema
* Thesis on Margheriti</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q603216" start="0" end="18" title="Antonio Margheriti" label="Antonio Margheriti"/>
<link wikidata="Q603216" start="90" end="107" title="Antonio Margheriti" label="Anthony M. Dawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q603216" start="112" end="126" title="Antonio Margheriti" label="Antony Daisies"/>
<link wikidata="Q50001" start="194" end="201" title="Italians" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q932586" start="202" end="211" title="filmmaker" label="filmmaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q201658" start="249" end="255" title="film genre" label="genres"/>
<link wikidata="Q471839" start="364" end="379" title="science fiction film" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433443" start="381" end="397" title="sword and sandal" label="sword and sandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q200092" start="399" end="405" title="horror film" label="horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332055" start="406" end="412" title="giallo" label="giallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3677202" start="414" end="421" title="Eurospy" label="Eurospy"/>
<link wikidata="Q212781" start="423" end="440" title="Spaghetti Western" label="Spaghetti Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q3745434" start="442" end="453" title="Vietnam War film" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q188473" start="458" end="464" title="Action film" label="action"/>
<link wikidata="Q456251" start="720" end="735" title="Mario Serandrei" label="Mario Serandrei"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095959" start="898" end="911" title="Pino Mercanti" label="Pino Mercanti"/>
<link wikidata="Q16564395" start="925" end="952" title="I cinque dell&amp;#x27;Adamello" label="I cinque dell&amp;#x27;Adamello"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="969" end="996" title="La notte che la terra tremo" label="La notte che la terra tremo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3965802" start="1185" end="1194" title="Space-Men" label="Space-Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q4873046" start="1264" end="1284" title="Battle of the Worlds" label="Battle of the Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q318734" start="1306" end="1318" title="Claude Rains" label="Claude Rains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198745" start="1356" end="1372" title="The Golden Arrow (1962 film)" label="The Golden Arrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q725395" start="1384" end="1394" title="Tab Hunter" label="Tab Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433443" start="1415" end="1421" title="peplum (film genre)" label="peplum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3793682" start="1454" end="1470" title="The Fall of Rome (film)" label="The Fall of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3790855" start="1487" end="1501" title="Giants of Rome" label="Giants of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2253504" start="1565" end="1580" title="Castle of Blood" label="Castle of Blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3212910" start="1594" end="1616" title="The Long Hair of Death" label="The Long Hair of Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q600730" start="1633" end="1656" title="The Virgin of Nuremberg" label="The Virgin of Nuremberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3677202" start="1671" end="1683" title="Eurospy film" label="Eurospy film"/>
<link wikidata="Q3602338" start="1692" end="1725" title="Bob Fleming... Mission Casablanca" label="Bob Fleming... Mission Casablanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484012" start="1742" end="1760" title="Operazione Goldman" label="Operazione Goldman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1908" end="1920" title="Fantascienza" label="Fantascienza"/>
<link wikidata="Q21590660" start="2007" end="2015" title="Western (genre)" label="westerns"/>
<link wikidata="Q934535" start="2033" end="2049" title="Take a Hard Ride" label="Take a Hard Ride"/>
<link wikidata="Q881316" start="2066" end="2086" title="And God Said to Cain" label="And God Said to Cain"/>
<link wikidata="Q190643" start="2165" end="2172" title="Platoon (film)" label="Platoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q174284" start="2189" end="2212" title="Raiders of the Lost Ark" label="Raiders of the Lost Ark"/>
<link wikidata="Q3819856" start="2234" end="2249" title="The Last Hunter" label="The Last Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430461" start="2266" end="2293" title="Hunters of the Golden Cobra" label="Hunters of the Golden Cobra"/>
<link wikidata="Q630643" start="2320" end="2333" title="David Warbeck" label="David Warbeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754053" start="2365" end="2374" title="Tiger Joe (film)" label="Tiger Joe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2463" end="2482" title="Riccardo Pallottini" label="Riccardo Pallottini"/>
<link wikidata="Q64211" start="2610" end="2624" title="The Wild Geese" label="The Wild Geese"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2642" end="2663" title="Code Name: Wild Geese" label="Code Name: Wild Geese"/>
<link wikidata="Q963933" start="2680" end="2696" title="Commando Leopard" label="Commando Leopard"/>
<link wikidata="Q712332" start="2712" end="2725" title="Lewis Collins" label="Lewis Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q309003" start="2743" end="2762" title="Conan the Barbarian (1982 film)" label="Conan the Barbarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307030" start="2787" end="2818" title="Yor, the Hunter from the Future" label="Yor, the Hunter from the Future"/>
<link wikidata="Q186941" start="2872" end="2889" title="Columbia Pictures" label="Columbia Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772" start="3612" end="3629" title="Quentin Tarantino" label="Quentin Tarantino"/>
<link wikidata="Q153723" start="3694" end="3714" title="Inglourious Basterds" label="Inglourious Basterds"/>
<link wikidata="Q358714" start="3722" end="3730" title="Eli Roth" label="Eli Roth"/>
<link wikidata="Q47300912" start="3953" end="3982" title="Once Upon a Time in Hollywood" label="Once Upon a Time in Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q38111" start="4004" end="4021" title="Leonardo DiCaprio" label="Leonardo DiCaprio"/>
<link wikidata="Q47300912" start="4051" end="4062" title="Rick Dalton" label="Rick Dalton"/>
<link wikidata="Q212781" start="4098" end="4115" title="Spaghetti Western" label="Spaghetti Western"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="144647" wikidata="Q35953" url="?curid=144647" title="MAN SE">
<text>MAN SE (abbreviation of &quot;Maschinenfabrik Augsburg-Nürnberg&quot;, ) was a manufacturing and engineering company based in Munich, Germany. Its primary output was commercial vehicles and diesel engines through its MAN Truck &amp; Bus and MAN Latin America divisions, and participation in the manufacturer Sinotruk.

MAN SE was majority-owned by Traton, the heavy commercial vehicle subsidiary of automaker Volkswagen AG, until August 2021 when Traton completed a squeeze-out of all remaining shareholders and formally merged MAN SE into Traton SE, meaning the former subsidiaries of MAN SE were now directly owned by Traton, and MAN SE ceased to exist.

==History==
===Foundation===
MAN traces its origins back to 1758, when the &quot;St. Antony&quot; ironworks commenced operation in Oberhausen, as the first heavy-industry enterprise in the Ruhr region. In 1808, the three ironworks &quot;St. Antony&quot;, &quot;Gute Hoffnung&quot; (English: &quot;Good Hope&quot;), and &quot;Neue Essen&quot; (English: &quot;New Forges&quot;) merged, to form the Hüttengewerkschaft und Handlung Jacobi (English: &quot;Jacobi Iron And Steel Works Union And Trading Company&quot;), Oberhausen, which was later renamed Gutehoffnungshütte (GHH).

In 1840, German engineer Ludwig Sander founded in Augsburg the first predecessor enterprise of MAN in Southern Germany: the &quot;Sander&#x27;sche Maschinenfabrik&quot;. It firstly became the &quot;C. Reichenbach&#x27;sche Maschinenfabrik&quot;, which was named after the pioneer of printing machines Carl August Reichenbach, and later on the &quot;Maschinenfabrik Augsburg&quot;.
The branch &quot;Süddeutsche Brückenbau A.G.&quot; (MAN-Werk Gustavsburg) was founded when the company in 1859 was awarded the contract for the construction of the railway bridge over the Rhine at Mainz.

In 1898, the companies &quot;Maschinenbau-AG Nürnberg&quot; (founded 1841) and &quot;Maschinenfabrik Augsburg AG&quot; (founded 1840) merged to form &quot;Vereinigte Maschinenfabrik Augsburg und Maschinenbaugesellschaft Nürnberg A.G., Augsburg&quot; (&quot;United Machine Works Augsburg and Nuremberg Ltd.&quot;). In 1908, the company was renamed &quot;Maschinenfabrik Augsburg Nürnberg AG&quot;, or in short, M·A·N.

While the focus initially remained on ore mining and iron production in the Ruhr region, mechanical engineering became the dominating branch of business in Augsburg and Nuremberg. Under the direction of Heinrich von Buz, &quot;Maschinenfabrik Augsburg&quot; grew from a medium-sized business of 400 employees into a major enterprise with a workforce of 12,000 by 1913.

Locomotion, propulsion, and steel building were the big components of this phase. The early predecessors of MAN were responsible for numerous technological innovations. The success of the early MAN entrepreneurs and engineers such as Heinrich Gerber, was based on a great openness towards new technologies. They constructed the Wuppertal monorail (&quot;Wuppertaler Schwebebahn&quot;) and the first spectacular steel bridges such as the Großhesseloher Brücke in Munich in 1857 and the Müngsten railway bridge between 1893 and 1897.

The invention of the rotary printing press allowed the copious printing of books and newspapers, and since 1893, Rudolf Diesel puzzled for four years with future MAN engineers in a laboratory in Augsburg until his first diesel engine was completed and fully functional.

During 1921, the majority of MAN was taken over by the Gutehoffnungshütte Actienverein für Bergbau und Hüttenbetrieb, Sterkrade (GHH), (founded 1873).
Through well-directed equities and acquisitions of processing industries, e.g., Deutsche Werft (1918), Ferrostaal (1921), Deggendorfer Werft und Eisenbau (1924), MAN advanced to a nationwide operating enterprise, with a workforce of 52,000 by 1921. MAN also produced tractors by the name MAN Ackerdiesel (1938-1962). The decision for tractor production was made due to increasing demand from eastern Germany.

===Crisis and World War II===
At the same time, the GHH&#x27;s economic situation worsened. The causes for this were, among others, the reparations after World War I, the occupation of the Ruhr region and the world economic crisis. In only two years, the number of MAN employees sank from 14,000 in 1929/30 to 7,400 in 1931/32. While the civil business was largely collapsing, the military business increased with the armament under the National Socialist regime. GHH/MAN enterprises supplied finished tanks, diesel engines for submarines and surface craft, and cylinders for projectiles and artillery of every description. Although MAN produced experimental diesel engines for tanks (Panzers), Maybach enjoyed a &quot;de facto&quot; monopoly on the design and manufacture of all tank and half-track engines, which were water-cooled, four-stroke gasoline motors. No diesel engines were installed in production armoured fighting vehicles during the war. MAN also produced gun parts, including Mauser Karabiner 98k rifle bolts. MAN&#x27;s Waffenamt code was WaA53, and ordnance code was &quot;coc&quot;.

The MAN works in Augsburg, which produced diesel engines for U-boats and surface craft, and the MAN works in Nuremberg, which built 40% of Germany&#x27;s Panther tanks, were often the target of massive Allied bombing attacks during World War II.

===Postwar period===
After the end of World War II, the allies split up the GHH group. A vertical integration, in which mining, iron, and steel production are consolidated, was not allowed anymore. The &quot;Gutehoffnungshütte&quot;, together with the MAN firms of Southern Germany, therefore concentrated on engineering, plant construction, commercial vehicles, and printing machines. This process has been supported by strategic acquisitions and dispositions; one of the most important was the take-over of the truck and bus division of the commercial vehicles manufacturer Büssing (1971), the disposition of the shares of the shipyard Deutsche Werft (1966/67), and the acquisition of the printing machine producer Faber&amp;Schleicher, as well as its fusion to MAN Roland Druckmaschinen AG (1979).

In 1980, MAN took control of Burmeister &amp; Wain, the Danish company that had been a world leader in design and construction of large diesel engines for large ships.

In 1982/83, the &quot;Gutehoffnungshütte&quot; plunged into a deep corporate crisis. The enterprise suffered from the late effects of the second oil crisis and a bad economic situation. This was particularly displayed by the dramatic downturn of the commercial vehicle sales figures. Besides external factors, the chief course of these problems was the obsolete company structure with extensive cross-subsidisation between the divisions. At this time, the former director of GHH presented a reclamation concept that envisioned a complete consolidation of the subsidiary with the holding company. This concept encountered great resistance with GHH&#x27;s major shareholders Allianz AG and Commerzbank. The media speculated about a &quot;Bavarian conspiracy&quot; against the management in Oberhausen.

In 1986, with Klaus Götte, the group got a new company structure and became a contractual group with an economically independent division at several locations. This was also attended by the transferring of the MAN headquarters from Oberhausen to Munich, and by the new company name, MAN AG.

Rudolf Rupprecht repelled a takeover attempt in 2003. Furthermore, the disposition of the 50% share of the SMS Group and the strengthening of the turbomachinery division through the takeover of Sulzer Turbo induced MAN&#x27;s focusing process.

In 2006, MAN entered into an agreement with Indian company Force Motors to establish a 50:50 joint venture for the production of trucks and buses in India for the domestic and export markets. The joint venture established a truck manufacturing plant in Pithampur, Madhya Pradesh, and launched its first truck for the Indian market in 2007. At the end of 2011, MAN bought out the stake of its Indian partner, and its operations in India became a wholly owned subsidiary of MAN in early 2012. MAN ended production and sales in India and sold the Pithampur plant back to Force Motors in 2018.

In September 2006, MAN produced an offer for the take-over of the Swedish competitor Scania AB. The European Commission approved the takeover on 14 December. Nevertheless, MAN voluntarily withdrew the offer on 23 January 2007, after Scania&#x27;s major shareholders Volkswagen AG and the influential Wallenberg family had declined the offer. On 24 December 2008, MAN published to possess further stock options of Scania and to therefore maintain more than 20% of the voting rights. As of October 2019, MAN SE still owns 17.37% of the voting rights in Scania, with the remainder of Scania being directly owned by Volkswagen Group&#x27;s heavy commercial vehicle subsidiary, Traton SE.

In 2008, the MAN group celebrated its 250th anniversary with numerous events, such as exhibitions in several museums, a vintage car tour with the motto &quot;MAN on the road again&quot;, and a great anniversary gala. At the beginning of December 2008, MAN took over Volkswagen&#x27;s Brazilian truck and bus operation, Volkswagen Caminhões e Ônibus, putting the division under the control of MAN Latin America. Therewith, MAN now is a market leader in Brazil, with a market share of 30%.

Since May 2009, the group is incorporated as European corporation MAN SE. In July 2009, MAN published to merge the two divisions, MAN Turbo and MAN Diesel, into one business area called Power Engineering. In addition, the group contracted a strategic partnership with Chinese truck manufacturer Sinotruk, purchasing 25% + 1 share of the company.
In the course of this focusing process, many smaller subsidiaries and divisions have been sold.

In 2009, investigators of the Munich Prosecutor&#x27;s Office uncovered a corruption affair, in which MAN had been bribing business partners and governments in over 20 countries from 2001 to 2007, to get large orders for buses and trucks. MAN CEO Håkan Samuelsson and other board members had to resign. The board of directors appointed Dr.-Ing. Georg Pachta-Reyhofen, the former CEO of MAN Diesel, as successor. On 17 December 2009, Pachta-Reyhofen was assigned as speaker of the board and CEO of MAN SE by the board of directors.

===Takeover by Volkswagen===
In July 2011, Volkswagen AG acquired a 55.9% voting stake and 53.7% of the share capital in MAN SE. Pending regulatory approval, Volkswagen planned to merge MAN and Scania AB to create Europe&#x27;s largest truck maker. The combined trucks group is planned to save about 400 million euros per year, mainly by bundling procurement. Regulatory approval was granted, and the takeover was completed in November 2011.

In April 2012, MAN SE announced that Volkswagen had increased its interest to a 73.0% voting stake and 71.08% of the share capital.

On 6 June 2012, Volkswagen AG announced that it had increased its share of voting rights in MAN SE to 75.03%, paving the way for a domination agreement to be put in place.

From January 2019, MAN&#x27;s Power Engineering division, made up of MAN Energy Solutions (formerly MAN Diesel and Turbo) and MAN SE&#x27;s 76% stake in RENK AG were sold to the Volkswagen Group, leaving MAN SE as the holding company for commercial vehicle units, MAN Truck &amp; Bus, and MAN Latin America, under the responsibility of Volkswagen&#x27;s subsidiary, Traton SE.

In March 2019, MAN SE announced that 94.36% of its shares were held by Traton.

In February 2020, Traton announced that it intends to merge MAN SE with Traton to simplify the latter&#x27;s overall structure. As a result of the merger, MAN Truck &amp; Bus, Scania AB, and Volkswagen Caminhões e Ônibus will become wholly owned, direct subsidiaries of Traton.

In September 2020, the company announced that it will be cutting over 9,500 job positions at its MAN Truck &amp; Bus division, as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic economic effects. The company made the move to generate €1.8 billion of cost savings by 2023.

== Legal issues ==
In 2011, a former manager in the company was charged with bribery of Turkmen state officials in exchange for project contracts in 2002. The trial began in Munich in 2019 after a delay of the initial trial set for 2016. The MAN manager was suspected in giving 8.4 million euros in bribes in 2002–2007 to the head of the state-owned Turkmennebit company, Saparmammet Veliev.

==See also==

* ERF
* Gräf &amp; Stift
* ÖAF
* Voith
* ZF Friedrichshafen

==References==
==External links==

* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q35953" start="0" end="6" title="MAN SE" label="MAN SE"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749" start="46" end="54" title="Augsburg" label="Augsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090" start="55" end="63" title="Nuremberg" label="Nürnberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="126" end="132" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q708667" start="217" end="236" title="MAN Truck &amp;amp; Bus" label="MAN Truck &amp;amp; Bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622651" start="241" end="258" title="MAN Latin America" label="MAN Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q995970" start="308" end="316" title="Sinotruk (Hong Kong)" label="Sinotruk"/>
<link wikidata="Q28228137" start="348" end="354" title="Traton" label="Traton"/>
<link wikidata="Q156578" start="409" end="422" title="Volkswagen Group" label="Volkswagen AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411624" start="466" end="477" title="squeeze-out" label="squeeze-out"/>
<link wikidata="Q731112" start="521" end="527" title="Mergers and acquisitions" label="merged"/>
<link wikidata="Q2838" start="788" end="798" title="Oberhausen" label="Oberhausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q151993" start="846" end="850" title="Ruhr" label="Ruhr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749" start="1283" end="1291" title="Augsburg" label="Augsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="1802" end="1807" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720" start="1811" end="1816" title="Mainz" label="Mainz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090" start="1864" end="1872" title="Nuremberg" label="Nürnberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q151993" start="2313" end="2324" title="Ruhr region" label="Ruhr region"/>
<link wikidata="Q76403" start="2841" end="2856" title="Heinrich Gerber (civil engineer)" label="Heinrich Gerber"/>
<link wikidata="Q256964" start="2961" end="2984" title="Wuppertal Schwebebahn" label="Wuppertaler Schwebebahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="3069" end="3075" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q257027" start="3092" end="3115" title="Müngsten Bridge" label="Müngsten railway bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q12674" start="3253" end="3266" title="Rudolf Diesel" label="Rudolf Diesel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749" start="3335" end="3343" title="Augsburg" label="Augsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q174174" start="3360" end="3373" title="diesel engine" label="diesel engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q687013" start="4108" end="4119" title="World War I reparations" label="reparations"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="4126" end="4137" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="4409" end="4427" title="Nazi Party" label="National Socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437188" start="4657" end="4664" title="Panzers" label="Panzers"/>
<link wikidata="Q55617501" start="4667" end="4674" title="List of WWII Maybach engines" label="Maybach"/>
<link wikidata="Q191801" start="4806" end="4817" title="four-stroke engine" label="four-stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q130368" start="4882" end="4907" title="armoured fighting vehicle" label="armoured fighting vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q166203" start="4964" end="4970" title="Mauser" label="Mauser"/>
<link wikidata="Q60134" start="4971" end="4984" title="Karabiner 98k" label="Karabiner 98k"/>
<link wikidata="Q655369" start="5009" end="5018" title="Waffenamt" label="Waffenamt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749" start="5092" end="5100" title="Augsburg" label="Augsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q428661" start="5136" end="5142" title="U-boat" label="U-boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090" start="5184" end="5193" title="Nuremberg" label="Nuremberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q151960" start="5229" end="5241" title="Panther tank" label="Panther tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="5307" end="5319" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q784898" start="5898" end="5905" title="Büssing" label="Büssing"/>
<link wikidata="Q265004" start="6086" end="6114" title="Manroland" label="MAN Roland Druckmaschinen AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016699" start="6153" end="6174" title="Burmeister &amp;amp; Wain" label="Burmeister &amp;amp; Wain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436646" start="7690" end="7702" title="Force Motors" label="Force Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="7780" end="7785" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q2548346" start="7884" end="7893" title="Pithampur" label="Pithampur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188" start="7895" end="7909" title="Madhya Pradesh" label="Madhya Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q219960" start="8307" end="8316" title="Scania AB" label="Scania AB"/>
<link wikidata="Q156578" start="8488" end="8501" title="Volkswagen AG" label="Volkswagen AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q246" start="9173" end="9183" title="Volkswagen" label="Volkswagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622651" start="9226" end="9255" title="Volkswagen Caminhões e Ônibus" label="Volkswagen Caminhões e Ônibus"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="9359" end="9365" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q659651" start="9540" end="9550" title="MAN Diesel" label="MAN Diesel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3952867" start="9691" end="9699" title="China National Heavy Duty Truck Group" label="Sinotruk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092499" start="9876" end="9900" title="Staatsanwaltschaft" label="Prosecutor&amp;#x27;s Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881126" start="11189" end="11209" title="MAN Energy Solutions" label="MAN Energy Solutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q708667" start="11384" end="11403" title="MAN Truck &amp;amp; Bus" label="MAN Truck &amp;amp; Bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="12003" end="12020" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q874" start="12204" end="12211" title="Turkmenistan" label="Turkmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6692367" start="12466" end="12478" title="Türkmennebit" label="Turkmennebit"/>
<link wikidata="Q473611" start="12525" end="12528" title="ERF (truck manufacturer)" label="ERF"/>
<link wikidata="Q694690" start="12531" end="12547" title="Gräf &amp;amp; Stift" label="Gräf &amp;amp; Stift"/>
<link wikidata="Q293615" start="12550" end="12553" title="ÖAF" label="ÖAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q126944" start="12556" end="12561" title="Voith" label="Voith"/>
<link wikidata="Q136119" start="12564" end="12582" title="ZF Friedrichshafen" label="ZF Friedrichshafen"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="144649" wikidata="Q38710" url="?curid=144649" title="Icelandic Sheepdog">
<text>The Icelandic Sheepdog (, ), is an Icelandic breed of dog of Nordic Spitz type. It derives from dogs brought to Iceland by Viking settlers in the ninth century; it is both similar and closely related to the Buhund of Norway and the Vallhund and Norrbottenpets of Sweden, which derive from the same ancestral stock.

It is the only dog breed indigenous to Iceland. Its traditional uses include herding of both sheep and horses.

== History ==

The Icelandic Sheepdog is one of very few breeds of dog for which claims of ancient origin are demonstrably supported by both archaeological and written evidence. It derives from dogs brought to Iceland by Viking colonists from 874 onward; these are thought to have been from the same ancestral stock which gave rise to the modern Buhund of Norway and Vallhund of Sweden.

As a result of commerce with Iceland in the Middle Ages, the dog became fairly well known in other European countries including England and France; an early description dates to 1492. It is mentioned by John Caius in his writings on dogs in 1570, and by William Shakespeare in &quot;Henry V&quot;, thought to date from about 1599. In his &quot;Account of &quot;Island&quot;, alias &quot;Ice-land&quot;; in the Year 1662&quot;, published posthumously, Sir Thomas Browne wrote: &quot;... they bring another sort over, Headed like a Fox, which they say are bred betwixt Dogs and Foxes; these are desired by the Shepherds of this Country&quot;.

The or Iceland Dog was both discussed and illustrated in the fifth volume of the &quot;Histoire Naturelle&quot; of Georges-Louis Leclerc, Comte de Buffon, published in 1755. In 1788 it was classified by Johann Friedrich Gmelin as a species, &quot;Canis islandicus&quot;.

Plague and canine distemper destroyed over 75% of the breed in the late nineteenth century, leading to a ban on the importation of dogs to Iceland. The purebred Icelandic Sheepdog was again bordering extinction in the late twentieth century.

A national kennel club, the or Icelandic Kennel Club, was formed in 1969; at its first dog show, at Hveragerði in 1973, twenty-three of the sixty dogs shown were of this breed. In 1979 a breed society was established, the or Icelandic Sheepdog Breed Club. In 1994 the Alþingi (national parliament) determined that the Icelandic Sheepdog was part of the cultural heritage of the country, and should be protected as a national breed. In 1996 an international breed association, the Icelandic Sheepdog International Cooperation, was formed; it has ten European member kennel clubs (including that of Iceland), plus the American Kennel Club.

The breed was definitively accepted by the Fédération Cynologique Internationale in 1972, and was recognised by the American Kennel Club in 2010.

In 2015, registrations in the Nordic countries were: 137 in Iceland; 100 in Denmark; 44 in Finland; 35 in Norway; and 76 in Sweden. In 2022 the total number registered world-wide was approximately .

== Characteristics ==
It is a muscular and hardy dog, and moves with ease over the rough terrain of rural Iceland. Weights are commonly in the range , with heights at the withers of about for dogs and a few centimetres less for bitches. The coat is thick and provides good protection from the weather; there are two distinct types: short-haired and long-haired. It may be light, tan or fawn, ranging from milky-white, cream-colour to a reddish brown; or black, chocolate-brown or grey. White and light markings, often extensive, occur with all colours; light, tan and grey animals may have a black mask. Dogs may be expected to live for some twelve to fifteen years.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q38710" start="4" end="22" title="Icelandic Sheepdog" label="Icelandic Sheepdog"/>
<link wikidata="Q39367" start="45" end="50" title="dog breed" label="breed"/>
<link wikidata="Q854787" start="61" end="73" title="spitz" label="Nordic Spitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q38672" start="74" end="78" title="Dog type" label="type"/>
<link wikidata="Q12567" start="123" end="129" title="Viking" label="Viking"/>
<link wikidata="Q38478" start="207" end="213" title="Buhund" label="Buhund"/>
<link wikidata="Q39075" start="232" end="240" title="Vallhund" label="Vallhund"/>
<link wikidata="Q38925" start="245" end="259" title="Norrbottenspets" label="Norrbottenpets"/>
<link wikidata="Q38967" start="393" end="400" title="herding dog" label="herding"/>
<link wikidata="Q12567" start="649" end="655" title="Viking" label="Viking"/>
<link wikidata="Q38478" start="774" end="780" title="Buhund" label="Buhund"/>
<link wikidata="Q39075" start="795" end="803" title="Vallhund" label="Vallhund"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="860" end="871" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227536" start="1019" end="1029" title="John Caius" label="John Caius"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="1070" end="1089" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q495954" start="1099" end="1106" title="Henry V (play)" label="Henry V"/>
<link wikidata="Q313925" start="1271" end="1284" title="Thomas Browne" label="Thomas Browne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138032" start="1545" end="1563" title="Histoire Naturelle" label="Histoire Naturelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q229264" start="1573" end="1611" title="Georges-Louis Leclerc, Comte de Buffon" label="Georges-Louis Leclerc, Comte de Buffon"/>
<link wikidata="Q57230" start="1661" end="1684" title="Johann Friedrich Gmelin" label="Johann Friedrich Gmelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="1690" end="1697" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q217519" start="1730" end="1736" title="Bubonic plague" label="Plague"/>
<link wikidata="Q601037" start="1741" end="1757" title="canine distemper" label="canine distemper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210008" start="1984" end="1995" title="kennel club" label="kennel club"/>
<link wikidata="Q627933" start="2060" end="2068" title="dog show" label="dog show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025701" start="2073" end="2083" title="Hveragerði" label="Hveragerði"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000059" start="2160" end="2173" title="breed society" label="breed society"/>
<link wikidata="Q131279" start="2241" end="2248" title="Alþingi" label="Alþingi"/>
<link wikidata="Q210272" start="2326" end="2343" title="cultural heritage" label="cultural heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q38216" start="2589" end="2609" title="American Kennel Club" label="American Kennel Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q38603" start="2655" end="2692" title="Fédération Cynologique Internationale" label="Fédération Cynologique Internationale"/>
<link wikidata="Q493456" start="3130" end="3137" title="withers" label="withers"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="144652" wikidata="Q632814" url="?curid=144652" title="Riemannian manifold">
<text>In differential geometry, a Riemannian manifold is a geometric space on which many geometric notions such as distance, angles, length, volume, and curvature are defined. Euclidean space, the formula_1-sphere, hyperbolic space, and smooth surfaces in three-dimensional space, such as ellipsoids and paraboloids, are all examples of Riemannian manifolds. Riemannian manifolds are named after German mathematician Bernhard Riemann, who first conceptualized them.

Formally, a Riemannian metric (or just a metric) on a smooth manifold is a choice of inner product for each tangent space of the manifold. A Riemannian manifold is a smooth manifold together with a Riemannian metric. The techniques of differential and integral calculus are used to pull geometric data out of the Riemannian metric. For example, integration leads to the Riemannian distance function, whereas differentiation is used to define curvature and parallel transport.

Any smooth surface in three-dimensional Euclidean space is a Riemannian manifold with a Riemannian metric coming from the way it sits inside the ambient space. The same is true for any submanifold of Euclidean space of any dimension. Although John Nash proved that every Riemannian manifold arises as a submanifold of Euclidean space, and although some Riemannian manifolds are naturally exhibited or defined in that way, the idea of a Riemannian manifold emphasizes the intrinsic point of view, which defines geometric notions directly on the abstract space itself without referencing an ambient space. In many instances, such as for hyperbolic space and projective space, Riemannian metrics are more naturally defined or constructed using the intrinsic point of view. Additionally, many metrics on Lie groups and homogeneous spaces are defined intrinsically by using group actions to transport an inner product on a single tangent space to the entire manifold, and many special metrics such as constant scalar curvature metrics and Kähler–Einstein metrics are constructed intrinsically using tools from partial differential equations.

Riemannian geometry, the study of Riemannian manifolds, has deep connections to other areas of math, including geometric topology, complex geometry, and algebraic geometry. Applications include physics (especially general relativity and gauge theory), computer graphics, machine learning, and cartography. Generalizations of Riemannian manifolds include pseudo-Riemannian manifolds, Finsler manifolds, and sub-Riemannian manifolds.

== History ==

In 1827, Carl Friedrich Gauss discovered that the Gaussian curvature of a surface embedded in 3-dimensional space only depends on local measurements made within the surface (the first fundamental form). This result is known as the Theorema Egregium (&quot;remarkable theorem&quot; in Latin).

A map that preserves the local measurements of a surface is called a local isometry. Call a property of a surface an intrinsic property if it is preserved by local isometries and call it an extrinsic property if it is not. In this language, the Theorema Egregium says that the Gaussian curvature is an intrinsic property of surfaces.

Riemannian manifolds and their curvature were first introduced non-rigorously by Bernhard Riemann in 1854. However, they would not be formalized until much later. In fact, the more primitive concept of a smooth manifold was first explicitly defined only in 1913 in a book by Hermann Weyl.

Élie Cartan introduced the Cartan connection, one of the first concepts of a connection. Levi-Civita defined the Levi-Civita connection, a special connection on a Riemannian manifold. 

Albert Einstein used the theory of pseudo-Riemannian manifolds (a generalization of Riemannian manifolds) to develop general relativity. Specifically, the Einstein field equations are constraints on the curvature of spacetime, which is a 4-dimensional pseudo-Riemannian manifold.

== Definition ==

=== Riemannian metrics and Riemannian manifolds ===
Let formula_2 be a smooth manifold. For each point formula_3, there is an associated vector space formula_4 called the tangent space of formula_2 at formula_6. Vectors in formula_4 are thought of as the vectors tangent to formula_2 at formula_6.

However, formula_4 does not come equipped with an inner product, a measuring stick that gives tangent vectors a concept of length and angle. This is an important deficiency because calculus teaches that to calculate the length of a curve, the length of vectors tangent to the curve must be defined. A Riemannian metric puts a measuring stick on every tangent space. 

A &quot;Riemannian metric&quot; formula_11 on formula_2 assigns to each formula_6 a positive-definite inner product formula_14 in a smooth way (see the section on regularity below). This induces a norm formula_15 defined by formula_16. A smooth manifold formula_2 endowed with a Riemannian metric formula_11 is a &quot;Riemannian manifold&quot;, denoted formula_19. A Riemannian metric is a special case of a metric tensor.

A Riemannian metric is not to be confused with the distance function of a metric space, which is also called a metric.

====The Riemannian metric in coordinates====
If formula_20 are smooth local coordinates on formula_2, the vectors
: formula_22
form a basis of the vector space formula_4 for any formula_24. Relative to this basis, one can define the Riemannian metric&#x27;s components at each point formula_6 by
: formula_26.
These formula_27 functions formula_28 can be put together into an formula_29 matrix-valued function on formula_30. The requirement that formula_31 is a positive-definite inner product then says exactly that this matrix-valued function is a symmetric positive-definite matrix at formula_6.

In terms of the tensor algebra, the Riemannian metric can be written in terms of the dual basis formula_33 of the cotangent bundle as
: formula_34

==== Regularity of the Riemannian metric ====
The Riemannian metric formula_11 is &quot;continuous&quot; if its components formula_28 are continuous in any smooth coordinate chart formula_37 The Riemannian metric formula_11 is &quot;smooth&quot; if its components formula_39 are smooth in any smooth coordinate chart. One can consider many other types of Riemannian metrics in this spirit, such as Lipschitz Riemannian metrics or measurable Riemannian metrics.

There are situations in geometric analysis in which one wants to consider non-smooth Riemannian metrics. See for instance (Gromov 1999) and (Shi and Tam 2002). However, in this article, formula_11 is assumed to be smooth unless stated otherwise.

==== Musical isomorphism ====
In analogy to how an inner product on a vector space induces an isomorphism between a vector space and its dual given by formula_41, a Riemannian metric induces an isomorphism of bundles between the tangent bundle and the cotangent bundle. Namely, if formula_11 is a Riemannian metric, then
: formula_43
is a isomorphism of smooth vector bundles from the tangent bundle formula_44 to the cotangent bundle formula_45.

=== Isometries ===
An isometry is a function between Riemannian manifolds which preserves all of the structure of Riemannian manifolds. If two Riemannian manifolds have an isometry between them, they are called &quot;isometric&quot;, and they are considered to be the same manifold for the purpose of Riemannian geometry.

Specifically, if formula_19 and formula_47 are two Riemannian manifolds, a diffeomorphism formula_48 is called an &quot;isometry&quot; if formula_49, that is, if
: formula_50
for all formula_51 and formula_52 For example, translations and rotations are both isometries from Euclidean space (to be defined soon) to itself.

One says that a smooth map formula_53 not assumed to be a diffeomorphism, is a &quot;local isometry&quot; if every formula_51 has an open neighborhood formula_30 such that formula_56 is an isometry (and thus a diffeomorphism).

=== Volume ===
An oriented formula_1-dimensional Riemannian manifold formula_19 has a unique formula_1-form formula_60 called the &quot;Riemannian volume form&quot;. The Riemannian volume form is preserved by orientation-preserving isometries. The volume form gives rise to a measure on formula_2 which allows measurable functions to be integrated. If formula_2 is compact, the &quot;volume of formula_2&quot; is formula_64.

== Examples ==
=== Euclidean space ===

Let formula_65 denote the standard coordinates on formula_66 The (canonical) &quot;Euclidean metric&quot; formula_67 is given by
: formula_68
or equivalently
: formula_69
or equivalently by its coordinate functions
: formula_70 where formula_71 is the Kronecker delta
which together form the matrix
: formula_72
The Riemannian manifold formula_73 is called &quot;Euclidean space&quot;.

=== Submanifolds ===


Let formula_19 be a Riemannian manifold and let formula_75 be an immersed submanifold or an embedded submanifold of formula_2. The pullback formula_77 of formula_11 is a Riemannian metric on formula_79, and formula_80 is said to be a &quot;Riemannian submanifold&quot; of formula_19.

In the case where formula_82, the map formula_75 is given by formula_84 and the metric formula_77 is just the restriction of formula_11 to vectors tangent along formula_79. In general, the formula for formula_77 is
: formula_89
where formula_90 is the pushforward of formula_91 by formula_92

Examples:
* The formula_1-sphere
*: formula_94
:is a smooth embedded submanifold of Euclidean space formula_95. The Riemannian metric this induces on formula_96 is called the &quot;round metric&quot; or &quot;standard metric&quot;.
* Fix real numbers formula_97. The ellipsoid
*:formula_98
:is a smooth embedded submanifold of Euclidean space formula_99.
* The graph of a smooth function formula_100 is a smooth embedded submanifold of formula_101 with its standard metric.
* If formula_19 is not simply connected, there is a covering map formula_103, where formula_104 is the universal cover of formula_2. This is an immersion (since it is locally a diffeomorphism), so formula_104 automatically inherits a Riemannian metric. By the same principle, any smooth covering space of a Riemannian manifold inherits a Riemannian metric.

On the other hand, if formula_79 already has a Riemannian metric formula_108, then the immersion (or embedding) formula_75 is called an &quot;isometric immersion&quot; (or &quot;isometric embedding&quot;) if formula_110. Hence isometric immersions and isometric embeddings are Riemannian submanifolds.

=== Products ===
Let formula_19 and formula_47 be two Riemannian manifolds, and consider the product manifold formula_113. The Riemannian metrics formula_11 and formula_115 naturally put a Riemannian metric formula_116 on formula_117 which can be described in a few ways.
* Considering the decomposition formula_118 one may define
*: formula_119
* If formula_120 is a smooth coordinate chart on formula_2 and formula_122 is a smooth coordinate chart on formula_79, then formula_124 is a smooth coordinate chart on formula_125 Let formula_126 be the representation of formula_11 in the chart formula_120 and let formula_129 be the representation of formula_115 in the chart formula_122. The representation of formula_116 in the coordinates formula_133 is
*:formula_134 where formula_135

For example, consider the formula_1-torus formula_137. If each copy of formula_138 is given the round metric, the product Riemannian manifold formula_139 is called the &quot;flat torus&quot;. As another example, the Riemannian product formula_140, where each copy of formula_141 has the Euclidean metric, is isometric to formula_142 with the Euclidean metric.

=== Positive combinations of metrics ===
Let formula_143 be Riemannian metrics on formula_144 If formula_145 are any positive smooth functions on formula_2, then formula_147 is another Riemannian metric on formula_144

== Every smooth manifold admits a Riemannian metric ==
Theorem: Every smooth manifold admits a (non-canonical) Riemannian metric.

This is a fundamental result. Although much of the basic theory of Riemannian metrics can be developed using only that a smooth manifold is a locally Euclidean topological space, for this result it is necessary to use that smooth manifolds are Hausdorff and paracompact. The reason is that the proof makes use of a partition of unity. 
Let formula_149 be a smooth manifold and formula_150 a locally finite atlas so that formula_151 are open subsets and formula_152 are diffeomorphisms. Such an atlas exists because the manifold is paracompact.

Let formula_153 be a differentiable partition of unity subordinate to the given atlas, i.e. such that formula_154 for all formula_155.

Define a Riemannian metric formula_11 on formula_2 by
: formula_158
where
:formula_159
Here formula_67 is the Euclidean metric on formula_142 and formula_162 is its pullback along formula_163. While formula_164 is only defined on formula_165, the product formula_166 is defined and smooth on formula_2 since formula_154. It takes the value 0 outside of formula_165. Because the atlas is locally finite, at every point the sum contains only finitely many nonzero terms, so the sum converges. It is straightforward to check that formula_11 is a Riemannian metric.
An alternative proof uses the Whitney embedding theorem to embed formula_2 into Euclidean space and then pulls back the metric from Euclidean space to formula_2. On the other hand, the Nash embedding theorem states that, given any smooth Riemannian manifold formula_173 there is an embedding formula_174 for some formula_79 such that the pullback by formula_176 of the standard Riemannian metric on formula_177 is formula_178 That is, the entire structure of a smooth Riemannian manifold can be encoded by a diffeomorphism to a certain embedded submanifold of some Euclidean space. Therefore, one could argue that nothing can be gained from the consideration of abstract smooth manifolds and their Riemannian metrics. However, there are many natural smooth Riemannian manifolds, such as the set of rotations of three-dimensional space and hyperbolic space, of which any representation as a submanifold of Euclidean space will fail to represent their remarkable symmetries and properties as clearly as their abstract presentations do.

== Metric space structure ==
An &quot;admissible curve&quot; is a piecewise smooth curve formula_179 whose velocity formula_180 is nonzero everywhere it is defined. The nonnegative function formula_181 is defined on the interval formula_182 except for at finitely many points. The length formula_183 of an admissible curve formula_179 is defined as
: formula_185
The integrand is bounded and continuous except at finitely many points, so it is integrable. For &quot;formula_19&quot; a connected Riemannian manifold, define formula_187 by
: formula_188
Theorem: formula_189 is a metric space, and the metric topology on formula_189 coincides with the topology on formula_2.
In verifying that formula_189 satisfies all of the axioms of a metric space, the most difficult part is checking that formula_193 implies formula_194. Verification of the other metric space axioms is omitted.

There must be some precompact open set around &quot;p&quot; which every curve from &quot;p&quot; to &quot;q&quot; must escape. By selecting this open set to be contained in a coordinate chart, one can reduce the claim to the well-known fact that, in Euclidean geometry, the shortest curve between two points is a line. In particular, as seen by the Euclidean geometry of a coordinate chart around &quot;p&quot;, any curve from &quot;p&quot; to &quot;q&quot; must first pass though a certain &quot;inner radius.&quot; The assumed continuity of the Riemannian metric &quot;g&quot; only allows this &quot;coordinate chart geometry&quot; to distort the &quot;true geometry&quot; by some bounded factor.

To be precise, let formula_120 be a smooth coordinate chart with formula_196 and formula_197 Let formula_198 be an open subset of formula_30 with formula_200 By continuity of formula_11 and compactness of formula_202 there is a positive number formula_203 such that formula_204 for any formula_205 and any formula_206 where formula_207 denotes the Euclidean norm induced by the local coordinates. Let &quot;R&quot; denote formula_208.
Now, given any admissible curve formula_209 from &quot;p&quot; to &quot;q&quot;, there must be some minimal formula_210 such that formula_211 clearly formula_212

The length of formula_213 is at least as large as the restriction of formula_213 to formula_215 So
: formula_216
The integral which appears here represents the Euclidean length of a curve from 0 to formula_217, and so it is greater than or equal to &quot;R&quot;. So we conclude formula_218

The observation about comparison between lengths measured by &quot;g&quot; and Euclidean lengths measured in a smooth coordinate chart, also verifies that the metric space topology of formula_189 coincides with the original topological space structure of formula_2. 
Although the length of a curve is given by an explicit formula, it is generally impossible to write out the distance function formula_221 by any explicit means. In fact, if formula_2 is compact, there always exist points where formula_223 is non-differentiable, and it can be remarkably difficult to even determine the location or nature of these points, even in seemingly simple cases such as when formula_19 is an ellipsoid.

If one works with Riemannian metrics that are merely continuous but possibly not smooth, the length of an admissible curve and the Riemannian distance function are defined exactly the same, and, as before, formula_189 is a metric space and the metric topology on formula_189 coincides with the topology on formula_2.

=== Diameter ===
The &quot;diameter&quot; of the metric space formula_189 is
: formula_229
The Hopf–Rinow theorem shows that if formula_189 is complete and has finite diameter, it is compact. Conversely, if formula_189 is compact, then the function formula_223 has a maximum, since it is a continuous function on a compact metric space. This proves the following.
: If formula_189 is complete, then it is compact if and only if it has finite diameter.
This is not the case without the completeness assumption; for counterexamples one could consider any open bounded subset of a Euclidean space with the standard Riemannian metric. It is also not true that &quot;any&quot; complete metric space of finite diameter must be compact; it matters that the metric space came from a Riemannian manifold.

== Connections, geodesics, and curvature ==

=== Connections ===
An (affine) connection is an additional structure on a Riemannian manifold that defines differentiation of one vector field with respect to another. Connections contain geometric data, and two Riemannian manifolds with different connections have different geometry.

Let formula_234 denote the space of vector fields on formula_2. An &quot;(affine) connection&quot;
: formula_236
on formula_2 is a bilinear map
formula_238 such that
# For every function formula_239, formula_240
# The product rule formula_241 holds.
The expression formula_242 is called the &quot;covariant derivative of formula_243 with respect to formula_244&quot;.

=== Levi-Civita connection ===
Two Riemannian manifolds with different connections have different geometry. Thankfully, there is a natural connection associated to a Riemannian manifold called the Levi-Civita connection.

A connection formula_245 is said to &quot;preserve the metric&quot; if
: formula_246
A connection formula_245 is &quot;torsion-free&quot; if
: formula_248
where formula_249 is the Lie bracket.

A &quot;Levi-Civita connection&quot; is a torsion-free connection that preserves the metric. Once a Riemannian metric is fixed, there exists a unique Levi-Civita connection. Note that the definition of preserving the metric uses the regularity of formula_11.

=== Covariant derivative along a curve ===

If formula_179 is a smooth curve, a &quot;smooth vector field along formula_213&quot; is a smooth map formula_253 such that formula_254 for all formula_255. The set formula_256 of smooth vector fields along formula_213 is a vector space under pointwise vector addition and scalar multiplication. One can also pointwise multiply a smooth vector field along formula_213 by a smooth function formula_259:
: formula_260 for formula_261

Let formula_244 be a smooth vector field along formula_213. If formula_264 is a smooth vector field on a neighborhood of the image of formula_213 such that formula_266, then formula_264 is called an &quot;extension of formula_244&quot;.

Given a fixed connection formula_245 on formula_2 and a smooth curve formula_179, there is a unique operator formula_272, called the &quot;covariant derivative along formula_213&quot;, such that:
# formula_274
# formula_275
# If formula_264 is an extension of formula_244, then formula_278.

=== Geodesics ===

Geodesics are curves with no intrinsic acceleration. Equivalently, geodesics are curves that locally take the shortest path between two points. They are the generalization of straight lines in Euclidean space to arbitrary Riemannian manifolds. An ant living in a Riemannian manifold walking straight ahead without making any effort to accelerate or turn would trace out a geodesic.

Fix a connection formula_245 on formula_2. Let formula_179 be a smooth curve. The &quot;acceleration of formula_213&quot; is the vector field formula_283 along formula_213. If formula_285 for all formula_286, formula_213 is called a &quot;geodesic&quot;.

For every formula_3 and formula_289, there exists a geodesic formula_290 defined on some open interval formula_291 containing 0 such that formula_292 and formula_293. Any two such geodesics agree on their common domain. Taking the union over all open intervals formula_291 containing 0 on which a geodesic satisfying formula_292 and formula_293 exists, one obtains a geodesic called a &quot;maximal geodesic&quot; of which every geodesic satisfying formula_292 and formula_293 is a restriction.

Every curve formula_179 that has the shortest length of any admissible curve with the same endpoints as formula_213 is a geodesic (in a unit-speed reparameterization).

==== Examples ====

* The nonconstant maximal geodesics of the Euclidean plane formula_301 are exactly the straight lines. This agrees with the fact from Euclidean geometry that the shortest path between two points is a straight line segment.
* The nonconstant maximal geodesics of formula_302 with the round metric are exactly the great circles. Since the Earth is approximately a sphere, this means that the shortest path a plane can fly between two locations on Earth is a segment of a great circle.

=== Hopf–Rinow theorem ===


The Riemannian manifold formula_2 with its Levi-Civita connection is &quot;geodesically complete&quot; if the domain of every maximal geodesic is formula_304. The plane formula_301 is geodesically complete. On the other hand, the punctured plane formula_306 with the restriction of the Riemannian metric from formula_301 is not geodesically complete as the maximal geodesic with initial conditions formula_308, formula_309 does not have domain formula_141.

The Hopf–Rinow theorem characterizes geodesically complete manifolds.

Theorem: Let formula_19 be a connected Riemannian manifold. The following are equivalent:
* The metric space formula_189 is complete (every formula_221-Cauchy sequence converges),
* All closed and bounded subsets of formula_2 are compact,
* formula_2 is geodesically complete.

=== Parallel transport ===

In Euclidean space, all tangent spaces are canonically identified with each other via translation, so it is easy to move vectors from one tangent space to another. Parallel transport is a way of moving vectors from one tangent space to another along a curve in the setting of a general Riemannian manifold. Given a fixed connection, there is a unique way to do parallel transport.

Specifically, call a smooth vector field formula_316 along a smooth curve formula_213 &quot;parallel along formula_213&quot; if formula_319 identically. Fix a curve formula_179 with formula_292 and formula_322. to parallel transport a vector formula_289 to a vector in formula_324 along formula_213, first extend formula_91 to a vector field parallel along formula_213, and then take the value of this vector field at formula_328.

The images below show parallel transport induced by the Levi-Civita connection associated to two different Riemannian metrics on the punctured plane formula_329. The curve the parallel transport is done along is the unit circle. In polar coordinates, the metric on the left is the standard Euclidean metric formula_330, while the metric on the right is formula_331. This second metric has a singularity at the origin, so it does not extend past the puncture, but the first metric extends to the entire plane.

Warning: This is parallel transport on the punctured plane &quot;along&quot; the unit circle, not parallel transport &quot;on&quot; the unit circle. Indeed, in the first image, the vectors fall outside of the tangent space to the unit circle.

=== Riemann curvature tensor ===
The Riemann curvature tensor measures precisely the extent to which parallel transporting vectors around a small rectangle is not the identity map. The Riemann curvature tensor is 0 at every point if and only if the manifold is locally isometric to Euclidean space.

Fix a connection formula_245 on formula_2. The &quot;Riemann curvature tensor&quot; is the map formula_334 defined by
:formula_335
where formula_336 is the Lie bracket of vector fields. The Riemann curvature tensor is a formula_337-tensor field.

=== Ricci curvature tensor ===
Fix a connection formula_245 on formula_2. The Ricci curvature tensor is
: formula_340
where formula_341 is the trace. The Ricci curvature tensor is a covariant 2-tensor field.

==== Einstein manifolds ====
The Ricci curvature tensor formula_342 plays a defining role in the theory of Einstein manifolds, which has applications to the study of gravity. A (pseudo-)Riemannian metric formula_11 is called an &quot;Einstein metric&quot; if &quot;Einstein&#x27;s equation&quot;
: formula_344 for some constant formula_203
holds, and a (pseudo-)Riemannian manifold whose metric is Einstein is called an &quot;Einstein manifold&quot;. Examples of Einstein manifolds include Euclidean space, the formula_1-sphere, hyperbolic space, and complex projective space with the Fubini-Study metric.

=== Scalar curvature ===
== Constant curvature and space forms ==
A Riemannian manifold is said to have &quot;constant curvature&quot; if every sectional curvature equals the number . This is equivalent to the condition that, relative to any coordinate chart, the Riemann curvature tensor can be expressed in terms of the metric tensor as
:formula_347
This implies that the Ricci curvature is given by and the scalar curvature is , where is the dimension of the manifold. In particular, every Riemannian manifold of constant curvature is an Einstein manifold, thereby having constant scalar curvature. As found by Bernhard Riemann in his 1854 lecture introducing Riemannian geometry, the locally-defined Riemannian metric
:formula_348
has constant curvature . Any two Riemannian manifolds of the same constant curvature are locally isometric, and so it follows that any Riemannian manifold of constant curvature can be covered by coordinate charts relative to which the metric has the above form.

A &quot;Riemannian space form&quot; is a Riemannian manifold with constant curvature which is additionally connected and geodesically complete. A Riemannian space form is said to be a &quot;spherical space form&quot; if the curvature is positive, a &quot;Euclidean space form&quot; if the curvature is zero, and a &quot;hyperbolic space form&quot; or &quot;hyperbolic manifold&quot; if the curvature is negative. In any dimension, the sphere with its standard Riemannian metric, Euclidean space, and hyperbolic space are Riemannian space forms of constant curvature , , and respectively. Furthermore, the Killing–Hopf theorem says that any simply-connected spherical space form is homothetic to the sphere, any simply-connected Euclidean space form is homothetic to Euclidean space, and any simply-connected hyperbolic space form is homothetic to hyperbolic space.

Using the covering manifold construction, any Riemannian space form is isometric to the quotient manifold of a simply-connected Riemannian space form, modulo a certain group action of isometries. For example, the isometry group of the -sphere is the orthogonal group . Given any finite subgroup thereof in which only the identity matrix possesses as an eigenvalue, the natural group action of the orthogonal group on the -sphere restricts to a group action of , with the quotient manifold inheriting a geodesically complete Riemannian metric of constant curvature . Up to homothety, every spherical space form arises in this way; this largely reduces the study of spherical space forms to problems in group theory. For instance, this can be used to show directly that every even-dimensional spherical space form is homothetic to the standard metric on either the sphere or real projective space. There are many more odd-dimensional spherical space forms, although there are known algorithms for their classification. The list of three-dimensional spherical space forms is infinite but explicitly known, and includes the lens spaces and the Poincaré dodecahedral space.

The case of Euclidean and hyperbolic space forms can likewise be reduced to group theory, based on study of the isometry group of Euclidean space and hyperbolic space. For example, the class of two-dimensional Euclidean space forms includes Riemannian metrics on the Klein bottle, the Möbius strip, the torus, the cylinder , along with the Euclidean plane. Unlike the case of two-dimensional spherical space forms, in some cases two space form structures on the same manifold are not homothetic. The case of two-dimensional hyperbolic space forms is even more complicated, having to do with Teichmüller space. In three dimensions, the Euclidean space forms are known, while the geometry of hyperbolic space forms in three and higher dimensions remains an area of active research known as hyperbolic geometry.

== Riemannian metrics on Lie groups ==

=== Left-invariant metrics on Lie groups ===
Let be a Lie group, such as the group of rotations in three-dimensional space. Using the group structure, any inner product on the tangent space at the identity (or any other particular tangent space) can be transported to all other tangent spaces to define a Riemannian metric. Formally, given an inner product on the tangent space at the identity, the inner product on the tangent space at an arbitrary point is defined by
:formula_349
where for arbitrary , is the left multiplication map sending a point to . Riemannian metrics constructed this way are &quot;left-invariant&quot;; right-invariant Riemannian metrics could be constructed likewise using the right multiplication map instead.

The Levi-Civita connection and curvature of a general left-invariant Riemannian metric can be computed explicitly in terms of , the adjoint representation of , and the Lie algebra associated to . These formulas simplify considerably in the special case of a Riemannian metric which is &quot;bi-invariant&quot; (that is, simultaneously left- and right-invariant). All left-invariant metrics have constant scalar curvature.

Left- and bi-invariant metrics on Lie groups are an important source of examples of Riemannian manifolds. Berger spheres, constructed as left-invariant metrics on the special unitary group SU(2), are among the simplest examples of the collapsing phenomena, in which a simply-connected Riemannian manifold can have small volume without having large curvature. They also give an example of a Riemannian metric which has constant scalar curvature but which is not Einstein, or even of parallel Ricci curvature. Hyperbolic space can be given a Lie group structure relative to which the metric is left-invariant. Any bi-invariant Riemannian metric on a Lie group has nonnegative sectional curvature, giving a variety of such metrics: a Lie group can be given a bi-invariant Riemannian metric if and only if it is the product of a compact Lie group with an abelian Lie group.

=== Homogeneous spaces ===

A Riemannian manifold is said to be &quot;homogeneous&quot; if for every pair of points and in , there is some isometry of the Riemannian manifold sending to . This can be rephrased in the language of group actions as the requirement that the natural action of the isometry group is transitive. Every homogeneous Riemannian manifold is geodesically complete and has constant scalar curvature.

Up to isometry, all homogeneous Riemannian manifolds arise by the following construction. Given a Lie group with compact subgroup which does not contain any nontrivial normal subgroup of , fix any complemented subspace of the Lie algebra of within the Lie algebra of . If this subspace is invariant under the linear map for any element of , then -invariant Riemannian metrics on the coset space are in one-to-one correspondence with those inner products on which are invariant under for every element of . Each such Riemannian metric is homogeneous, with naturally viewed as a subgroup of the full isometry group.

The above example of Lie groups with left-invariant Riemannian metrics arises as a very special case of this construction, namely when is the trivial subgroup containing only the identity element. The calculations of the Levi-Civita connection and the curvature referenced there can be generalized to this context, where now the computations are formulated in terms of the inner product on , the Lie algebra of , and the direct sum decomposition of the Lie algebra of into the Lie algebra of and . This reduces the study of the curvature of homogeneous Riemannian manifolds largely to algebraic problems. This reduction, together with the flexibility of the above construction, makes the class of homogeneous Riemannian manifolds very useful for constructing examples.

=== Symmetric spaces ===
A connected Riemannian manifold is said to be &quot;symmetric&quot; if for every point of there exists some isometry of the manifold with as a fixed point and for which the negation of the differential at is the identity map. Every Riemannian symmetric space is homogeneous, and consequently is geodesically complete and has constant scalar curvature. However, Riemannian symmetric spaces also have a much stronger curvature property not possessed by most homogeneous Riemannian manifolds, namely that the Riemann curvature tensor and Ricci curvature are parallel. Riemannian manifolds with this curvature property, which could loosely be phrased as &quot;constant Riemann curvature tensor&quot; (not to be confused with constant curvature), are said to be &quot;locally symmetric&quot;. This property nearly characterizes symmetric spaces; Élie Cartan proved in the 1920s that a locally symmetric Riemannian manifold which is geodesically complete and simply-connected must in fact be symmetric.

Many of the fundamental examples of Riemannian manifolds are symmetric. The most basic include the sphere and real projective spaces with their standard metrics, along with hyperbolic space. The complex projective space, quaternionic projective space, and Cayley plane are analogues of the real projective space which are also symmetric, as are complex hyperbolic space, quaternionic hyperbolic space, and Cayley hyperbolic space, which are instead analogues of hyperbolic space. Grassmannian manifolds also carry natural Riemannian metrics making them into symmetric spaces. Among the Lie groups with left-invariant Riemannian metrics, those which are bi-invariant are symmetric.

Based on their algebraic formulation as special kinds of homogeneous spaces, Cartan achieved an explicit classification of symmetric spaces which are &quot;irreducible&quot;, referring to those which cannot be locally decomposed as product spaces. Every such space is an example of an Einstein manifold; among them only the one-dimensional manifolds have zero scalar curvature. These spaces are important from the perspective of Riemannian holonomy. As found in the 1950s by Marcel Berger, any Riemannian manifold which is simply-connected and irreducible is either a symmetric space or has Riemannian holonomy belonging to a list of only seven possibilities. Six of the seven exceptions to symmetric spaces in Berger&#x27;s classification fall into the fields of Kähler geometry, quaternion-Kähler geometry, G2 geometry, and Spin(7) geometry, each of which study Riemannian manifolds equipped with certain extra structures and symmetries. The seventh exception is the study of &#x27;generic&#x27; Riemannian manifolds with no particular symmetry, as reflected by the maximal possible holonomy group.

== Infinite-dimensional manifolds ==

The statements and theorems above are for finite-dimensional manifolds—manifolds whose charts map to open subsets of formula_350 These can be extended, to a certain degree, to infinite-dimensional manifolds; that is, manifolds that are modeled after a topological vector space; for example, Fréchet, Banach, and Hilbert manifolds.

=== Definitions ===
Riemannian metrics are defined in a way similar to the finite-dimensional case. However, there is a distinction between two types of Riemannian metrics:
* A &quot;weak Riemannian metric&quot; on formula_2 is a smooth function formula_352 such that for any formula_353 the restriction formula_354 is an inner product on formula_355
* A &quot;strong Riemannian metric&quot; on formula_2 is a weak Riemannian metric such that formula_357 induces the topology on formula_358. If formula_11 is a strong Riemannian metric, then formula_2 must be a Hilbert manifold.

=== Examples ===
* If formula_361 is a Hilbert space, then for any formula_362 one can identify formula_363 with formula_364 The metric formula_365 for all formula_366 is a strong Riemannian metric.
* Let formula_367 be a compact Riemannian manifold and denote by formula_368 its diffeomorphism group. The latter is a smooth manifold (see here) and in fact, a Lie group. Its tangent bundle at the identity is the set of smooth vector fields on formula_144 Let formula_370 be a volume form on formula_144 The &quot;formula_372 weak Riemannian metric on formula_368&quot;, denoted formula_374, is defined as follows. Let formula_375 formula_376 Then for formula_377,
*:formula_378.

=== Metric space structure ===
Length of curves and the Riemannian distance function formula_379 are defined in a way similar to the finite-dimensional case. The distance function formula_221, called the &quot;geodesic distance&quot;, is always a pseudometric (a metric that does not separate points), but it may not be a metric. In the finite-dimensional case, the proof that the Riemannian distance function separates points uses the existence of a pre-compact open set around any point. In the infinite case, open sets are no longer pre-compact, so the proof fails.
* If formula_11 is a strong Riemannian metric on formula_2, then formula_221 separates points (hence is a metric) and induces the original topology.
* If formula_11 is a weak Riemannian metric, formula_221 may fail to separate points. In fact, it may even be identically 0. For example, if formula_367 is a compact Riemannian manifold, then the formula_372 weak Riemannian metric on formula_368 induces vanishing geodesic distance.

=== Hopf–Rinow theorem ===
In the case of strong Riemannian metrics, one part of the finite-dimensional Hopf–Rinow still holds. 

Theorem: Let formula_367 be a strong Riemannian manifold. Then metric completeness (in the metric formula_221) implies geodesic completeness.

However, a geodesically complete strong Riemannian manifold might not be metrically complete and it might have closed and bounded subsets that are not compact. Further, a strong Riemannian manifold for which all closed and bounded subsets are compact might not be geodesically complete.

If formula_11 is a weak Riemannian metric, then no notion of completeness implies the other in general.

== See also ==

* Smooth manifold
* Riemannian geometry
* Finsler manifold
* Sub-Riemannian manifold
* Pseudo-Riemannian manifold
* Metric tensor
* Hermitian manifold
* Symplectic manifold
* Kahler manifold
* Einstein manifold
== References ==

=== Notes ===

=== Sources ===
* 
*
* 
*
* 
* 


== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q188444" start="3" end="24" title="differential geometry" label="differential geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q632814" start="28" end="47" title="Riemannian manifold" label="Riemannian manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q8087" start="53" end="68" title="geometric space" label="geometric space"/>
<link wikidata="Q17295" start="170" end="185" title="Euclidean space" label="Euclidean space"/>
<link wikidata="Q306610" start="191" end="207" title="N-sphere" label="formula_1-sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878538" start="209" end="225" title="hyperbolic space" label="hyperbolic space"/>
<link wikidata="Q2502381" start="231" end="245" title="smooth surface" label="smooth surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q190046" start="283" end="292" title="ellipsoid" label="ellipsoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q192768" start="298" end="308" title="paraboloid" label="paraboloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q203920" start="342" end="351" title="manifold" label="manifolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q42299" start="411" end="427" title="Bernhard Riemann" label="Bernhard Riemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q632814" start="473" end="490" title="Riemannian manifold" label="Riemannian metric"/>
<link wikidata="Q632814" start="502" end="508" title="Riemannian manifold" label="metric"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552958" start="515" end="530" title="smooth manifold" label="smooth manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q214159" start="546" end="559" title="inner product" label="inner product"/>
<link wikidata="Q909601" start="569" end="582" title="tangent space" label="tangent space"/>
<link wikidata="Q149972" start="696" end="730" title="differential and integral calculus" label="differential and integral calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3888851" start="1083" end="1096" title="Ambient space (mathematics)" label="ambient space"/>
<link wikidata="Q125539" start="1123" end="1134" title="submanifold" label="submanifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q128736" start="1181" end="1190" title="John Forbes Nash Jr." label="John Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q877775" start="1594" end="1610" title="projective space" label="projective space"/>
<link wikidata="Q622679" start="1738" end="1748" title="Lie groups" label="Lie groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324364" start="1753" end="1770" title="homogeneous space" label="homogeneous space"/>
<link wikidata="Q288465" start="1807" end="1820" title="group actions" label="group actions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406245" start="1934" end="1966" title="Yamabe problem" label="constant scalar curvature metric"/>
<link wikidata="Q6453393" start="1972" end="1994" title="Kähler–Einstein metric" label="Kähler–Einstein metric"/>
<link wikidata="Q271977" start="2043" end="2073" title="partial differential equations" label="partial differential equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q761383" start="2076" end="2095" title="Riemannian geometry" label="Riemannian geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939186" start="2187" end="2205" title="geometric topology" label="geometric topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2137810" start="2207" end="2223" title="complex geometry" label="complex geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q180969" start="2229" end="2247" title="algebraic geometry" label="algebraic geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="2270" end="2277" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="2290" end="2308" title="general relativity" label="general relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q214850" start="2313" end="2325" title="gauge theory" label="gauge theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600677" start="2328" end="2345" title="computer graphics" label="computer graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2539" start="2347" end="2363" title="machine learning" label="machine learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q42515" start="2369" end="2380" title="cartography" label="cartography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510587" start="2430" end="2456" title="pseudo-Riemannian manifold" label="pseudo-Riemannian manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q2498782" start="2459" end="2475" title="Finsler manifold" label="Finsler manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q7630587" start="2482" end="2505" title="sub-Riemannian manifold" label="sub-Riemannian manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722" start="2533" end="2553" title="Carl Friedrich Gauss" label="Carl Friedrich Gauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q945953" start="2574" end="2592" title="Gaussian curvature" label="Gaussian curvature"/>
<link wikidata="Q939725" start="2702" end="2724" title="first fundamental form" label="first fundamental form"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048874" start="2755" end="2772" title="Theorema Egregium" label="Theorema Egregium"/>
<link wikidata="Q740207" start="2886" end="2900" title="local isometry" label="local isometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q42299" start="3233" end="3249" title="Bernhard Riemann" label="Bernhard Riemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552958" start="3356" end="3371" title="smooth manifold" label="smooth manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q71029" start="3427" end="3439" title="Hermann Weyl" label="Hermann Weyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q274639" start="3442" end="3453" title="Élie Cartan" label="Élie Cartan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068049" start="3469" end="3486" title="Cartan connection" label="Cartan connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q521075" start="3519" end="3529" title="Connection (vector bundle)" label="connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q353438" start="3531" end="3542" title="Tullio Levi-Civita" label="Levi-Civita"/>
<link wikidata="Q548675" start="3555" end="3577" title="Levi-Civita connection" label="Levi-Civita connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="3628" end="3643" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510587" start="3663" end="3689" title="pseudo-Riemannian manifold" label="pseudo-Riemannian manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="3745" end="3763" title="general relativity" label="general relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q273711" start="3783" end="3807" title="Einstein field equations" label="Einstein field equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q133327" start="3844" end="3853" title="spacetime" label="spacetime"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552958" start="3998" end="4013" title="smooth manifold" label="smooth manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q909601" start="4098" end="4111" title="tangent space" label="tangent space"/>
<link wikidata="Q214159" start="4276" end="4289" title="inner product" label="inner product"/>
<link wikidata="Q7233276" start="4678" end="4695" title="positive-definite" label="positive-definite"/>
<link wikidata="Q757269" start="5003" end="5016" title="metric tensor" label="metric tensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q180953" start="5093" end="5105" title="metric space" label="metric space"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664315" start="5209" end="5226" title="local coordinates" label="local coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q339011" start="5689" end="5698" title="symmetric matrix" label="symmetric"/>
<link wikidata="Q77601250" start="5699" end="5716" title="positive-definite matrix" label="positive-definite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296021" start="5755" end="5769" title="tensor algebra" label="tensor algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297777" start="5824" end="5834" title="dual basis" label="dual basis"/>
<link wikidata="Q652707" start="6285" end="6294" title="Lipschitz continuity" label="Lipschitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q516776" start="6317" end="6327" title="Measurable function" label="measurable"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535474" start="6373" end="6391" title="geometric analysis" label="geometric analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q752487" start="6733" end="6737" title="dual vector space" label="dual"/>
<link wikidata="Q746550" start="6825" end="6839" title="tangent bundle" label="tangent bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142143" start="6848" end="6864" title="cotangent bundle" label="cotangent bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q658429" start="6950" end="6970" title="smooth vector bundle" label="smooth vector bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058314" start="7442" end="7456" title="diffeomorphism" label="diffeomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q781415" start="8011" end="8025" title="Volume form" label="formula_1-form"/>
<link wikidata="Q192276" start="8194" end="8201" title="Measure (mathematics)" label="measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q381892" start="8283" end="8290" title="Compact space" label="compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q192826" start="8636" end="8651" title="Kronecker delta" label="Kronecker delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q125539" start="8859" end="8879" title="immersed submanifold" label="immersed submanifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q125539" start="8886" end="8906" title="embedded submanifold" label="embedded submanifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q978505" start="8925" end="8933" title="Pullback (differential geometry)" label="pullback"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969983" start="9331" end="9342" title="pushforward (differential)" label="pushforward"/>
<link wikidata="Q306610" start="9388" end="9404" title="N-sphere" label="formula_1-sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q190046" start="9639" end="9648" title="ellipsoid" label="ellipsoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q182598" start="9733" end="9738" title="Graph_of_a_function" label="graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q332648" start="9949" end="9964" title="universal cover" label="universal cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q332648" start="10126" end="10147" title="smooth covering space" label="smooth covering space"/>
<link wikidata="Q980509" start="10346" end="10365" title="isometric immersion" label="isometric immersion"/>
<link wikidata="Q980509" start="10382" end="10401" title="isometric embedding" label="isometric embedding"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10600" end="10616" title="Manifold#Cartesian_products" label="product manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q12510" start="11320" end="11335" title="N-torus" label="formula_1-torus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12510" start="11468" end="11478" title="flat torus" label="flat torus"/>
<link wikidata="Q326908" start="12249" end="12258" title="Hausdorff space" label="Hausdorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q970119" start="12263" end="12274" title="paracompact" label="paracompact"/>
<link wikidata="Q191690" start="12320" end="12338" title="partition of unity" label="partition of unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q643300" start="12396" end="12410" title="locally finite collection" label="locally finite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303310" start="12411" end="12416" title="atlas (topology)" label="atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q191690" start="12586" end="12604" title="partition of unity" label="partition of unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q978505" start="12851" end="12859" title="pullback (differential geometry)" label="pullback"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306095" start="13278" end="13303" title="Whitney embedding theorem" label="Whitney embedding theorem"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13433" end="13455" title="Nash embedding theorems#Ck embedding theorem" label="Nash embedding theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q978505" start="13586" end="13594" title="pullback (differential geometry)" label="pullback"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256500" start="14039" end="14082" title="3D rotation group" label="set of rotations of three-dimensional space"/>
<link wikidata="Q180953" start="14861" end="14873" title="metric space" label="metric space"/>
<link wikidata="Q180953" start="14883" end="14898" title="metric topology" label="metric topology"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15007" end="15031" title="Metric space#Definition" label="axioms of a metric space"/>
<link wikidata="Q180953" start="17674" end="17686" title="metric space" label="metric space"/>
<link wikidata="Q180953" start="17695" end="17710" title="metric topology" label="metric topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q131598137" start="17790" end="17810" title="Diameter of a metric space" label="&amp;quot;diameter&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094241" start="17864" end="17882" title="Hopf–Rinow theorem" label="Hopf–Rinow theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q848569" start="17912" end="17920" title="Complete metric space" label="complete"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371213" start="18634" end="18653" title="affine connection" label="(affine) connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q186247" start="18934" end="18947" title="vector fields" label="vector fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q548675" start="19464" end="19486" title="Levi-Civita connection" label="Levi-Civita connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q5478310" start="19669" end="19680" title="Lie bracket of vector fields" label="Lie bracket"/>
<link wikidata="Q213488" start="20969" end="20978" title="Geodesics" label="Geodesics"/>
<link wikidata="Q146657" start="22605" end="22618" title="great circles" label="great circles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533982" start="22881" end="22902" title="geodesically complete" label="geodesically complete"/>
<link wikidata="Q112601269" start="23036" end="23051" title="punctured plane" label="punctured plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094241" start="23268" end="23286" title="Hopf–Rinow theorem" label="Hopf–Rinow theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q848569" start="23459" end="23467" title="Complete metric space" label="complete"/>
<link wikidata="Q217847" start="23487" end="23502" title="Cauchy sequence" label="Cauchy sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814838" start="23805" end="23823" title="Parallel transport" label="Parallel transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q112601269" start="24588" end="24603" title="punctured plane" label="punctured plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q62494" start="24687" end="24704" title="Polar coordinate system" label="polar coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q855112" start="25562" end="25586" title="Riemann curvature tensor" label="Riemann curvature tensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5478310" start="25665" end="25693" title="Lie bracket of vector fields" label="Lie bracket of vector fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195879" start="25834" end="25856" title="Ricci curvature tensor" label="Ricci curvature tensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309313" start="26072" end="26089" title="Einstein manifold" label="Einstein manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q11412" start="26131" end="26138" title="gravity" label="gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2538404" start="26516" end="26540" title="complex projective space" label="complex projective space"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333764" start="26550" end="26569" title="Fubini-Study metric" label="Fubini-Study metric"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250422" start="26682" end="26700" title="constant curvature" label="constant curvature"/>
<link wikidata="Q855622" start="26716" end="26735" title="sectional curvature" label="sectional curvature"/>
<link wikidata="Q855112" start="26836" end="26860" title="Riemann curvature tensor" label="Riemann curvature tensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q757269" start="26894" end="26907" title="metric tensor" label="metric tensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195879" start="26946" end="26961" title="Ricci curvature" label="Ricci curvature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147161" start="26982" end="26998" title="scalar curvature" label="scalar curvature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309313" start="27113" end="27130" title="Einstein manifold" label="Einstein manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q42299" start="27186" end="27202" title="Bernhard Riemann" label="Bernhard Riemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q740207" start="27396" end="27413" title="local isometry" label="locally isometric"/>
<link wikidata="Q4381552" start="27578" end="27599" title="space form" label="Riemannian space form"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491995" start="27677" end="27686" title="connected space" label="connected"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533982" start="27691" end="27712" title="geodesically complete" label="geodesically complete"/>
<link wikidata="Q7576696" start="27760" end="27780" title="spherical space form" label="spherical space form"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619102" start="27927" end="27946" title="hyperbolic manifold" label="hyperbolic manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q6407842" start="28175" end="28195" title="Killing–Hopf theorem" label="Killing–Hopf theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q332648" start="28446" end="28463" title="covering space" label="covering manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q17098482" start="28524" end="28541" title="quotient manifold" label="quotient manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783179" start="28686" end="28702" title="orthogonal group" label="orthogonal group"/>
<link wikidata="Q466109" start="28722" end="28730" title="subgroup" label="subgroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q193794" start="28757" end="28772" title="identity matrix" label="identity matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q190524" start="28789" end="28799" title="eigenvalue" label="eigenvalue"/>
<link wikidata="Q17098482" start="28907" end="28924" title="quotient manifold" label="quotient manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q874429" start="29137" end="29149" title="group theory" label="group theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2597317" start="29309" end="29330" title="real projective space" label="real projective space"/>
<link wikidata="Q2470499" start="29556" end="29566" title="lens space" label="lens space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502277" start="29576" end="29603" title="Poincaré dodecahedral space" label="Poincaré dodecahedral space"/>
<link wikidata="Q23638" start="29873" end="29885" title="Klein bottle" label="Klein bottle"/>
<link wikidata="Q226843" start="29891" end="29903" title="Möbius strip" label="Möbius strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q12510" start="29909" end="29914" title="torus" label="torus"/>
<link wikidata="Q34132" start="29920" end="29928" title="cylinder" label="cylinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2400539" start="30197" end="30214" title="Teichmüller space" label="Teichmüller space"/>
<link wikidata="Q209306" start="30394" end="30413" title="hyperbolic geometry" label="hyperbolic geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q622679" start="30510" end="30519" title="Lie group" label="Lie group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256500" start="30533" end="30578" title="3D rotation group" label="group of rotations in three-dimensional space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017106" start="31327" end="31349" title="adjoint representation" label="adjoint representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q664495" start="31363" end="31374" title="Lie algebra" label="Lie algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4447641" start="31724" end="31737" title="Berger sphere" label="Berger sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q684363" start="31785" end="31806" title="special unitary group" label="special unitary group"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145943" start="31853" end="31863" title="collapsing manifold" label="collapsing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309313" start="32079" end="32087" title="Einstein metric" label="Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887083" start="32443" end="32460" title="compact Lie group" label="compact Lie group"/>
<link wikidata="Q85739412" start="32469" end="32486" title="abelian Lie group" label="abelian Lie group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324364" start="32553" end="32576" title="homogeneous space" label="&amp;quot;homogeneous&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q288465" start="32718" end="32730" title="group action" label="group action"/>
<link wikidata="Q2211166" start="32782" end="32796" title="isometry group" label="isometry group"/>
<link wikidata="Q743179" start="33079" end="33094" title="normal subgroup" label="normal subgroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q96375368" start="33108" end="33129" title="complemented subspace" label="complemented subspace"/>
<link wikidata="Q664495" start="33137" end="33148" title="Lie algebra" label="Lie algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324364" start="33294" end="33305" title="coset space" label="coset space"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058244" start="34367" end="34388" title="symmetric space" label="&amp;quot;symmetric&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q217608" start="34464" end="34475" title="Fixed point (mathematics)" label="fixed point"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130428" start="34510" end="34522" title="differential (mathematics)" label="differential"/>
<link wikidata="Q321119" start="34533" end="34545" title="identity map" label="identity map"/>
<link wikidata="Q855112" start="34827" end="34851" title="Riemann curvature tensor" label="Riemann curvature tensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195879" start="34856" end="34871" title="Ricci curvature" label="Ricci curvature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814838" start="34876" end="34884" title="parallel transport" label="parallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250422" start="35042" end="35060" title="constant curvature" label="constant curvature"/>
<link wikidata="Q274639" start="35162" end="35173" title="Élie Cartan" label="Élie Cartan"/>
<link wikidata="Q912058" start="35274" end="35290" title="simply-connected" label="simply-connected"/>
<link wikidata="Q2597317" start="35429" end="35450" title="real projective space" label="real projective space"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724480" start="35540" end="35569" title="quaternionic projective space" label="quaternionic projective space"/>
<link wikidata="Q16858508" start="35575" end="35587" title="Cayley plane" label="Cayley plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q110264245" start="35664" end="35688" title="complex hyperbolic space" label="complex hyperbolic space"/>
<link wikidata="Q129638" start="35799" end="35820" title="Grassmannian manifold" label="Grassmannian manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070472" start="36233" end="36246" title="product space" label="product space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309313" start="36286" end="36303" title="Einstein manifold" label="Einstein manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q907926" start="36430" end="36449" title="Riemannian holonomy" label="Riemannian holonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q553949" start="36476" end="36489" title="Marcel Berger" label="Marcel Berger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353916" start="36765" end="36780" title="Kähler geometry" label="Kähler geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269561" start="36782" end="36808" title="quaternion-Kähler manifold" label="quaternion-Kähler geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5512692" start="36810" end="36821" title="G2 manifold" label="G2 geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577346" start="36827" end="36843" title="Spin(7) manifold" label="Spin(7) geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455249" start="37393" end="37417" title="topological vector space" label="topological vector space"/>
<link wikidata="Q3554820" start="37432" end="37439" title="Fréchet manifold" label="Fréchet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3554819" start="37441" end="37447" title="Banach manifold" label="Banach"/>
<link wikidata="Q3554824" start="37453" end="37470" title="Hilbert manifold" label="Hilbert manifolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q190056" start="38093" end="38106" title="Hilbert space" label="Hilbert space"/>
<link wikidata="Q25303670" start="38389" end="38397" title="Convenient vector space" label="see here"/>
<link wikidata="Q622679" start="38414" end="38423" title="Lie group" label="Lie group"/>
<link wikidata="Q186247" start="38481" end="38494" title="Vector field" label="vector fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q781415" start="38531" end="38542" title="volume form" label="volume form"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397059" start="38982" end="38994" title="Pseudometric space" label="pseudometric"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552958" start="40421" end="40436" title="Smooth manifold" label="Smooth manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q761383" start="40439" end="40458" title="Riemannian geometry" label="Riemannian geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2498782" start="40461" end="40477" title="Finsler manifold" label="Finsler manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q7630587" start="40480" end="40503" title="Sub-Riemannian manifold" label="Sub-Riemannian manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510587" start="40506" end="40532" title="Pseudo-Riemannian manifold" label="Pseudo-Riemannian manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q757269" start="40535" end="40548" title="Metric tensor" label="Metric tensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5741935" start="40551" end="40569" title="Hermitian manifold" label="Hermitian manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064500" start="40572" end="40591" title="Symplectic manifold" label="Symplectic manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353916" start="40594" end="40609" title="Kahler manifold" label="Kahler manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309313" start="40612" end="40629" title="Einstein manifold" label="Einstein manifold"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="144656" wikidata="Q2303697" url="?curid=144656" title="Sorting">
<text>Sorting refers to ordering data in an increasing or decreasing manner according to some linear relationship among the data items.
# ordering: arranging items in a sequence ordered by some criterion;
# categorizing: grouping items with similar properties.
Ordering items is the combination of categorizing them based on equivalent order, and ordering the categories themselves.

==By type==
===Information or data===
In , arranging in an ordered sequence is called &quot;sorting&quot;. Sorting is a common operation in many applications, and efficient algorithms have been developed to perform it.

The most common uses of sorted sequences are:
* making lookup or search efficient;
* making merging of sequences efficient;
* enabling processing of data in a defined order.

The opposite of sorting, rearranging a sequence of items in a random or meaningless order, is called shuffling.

For sorting, either a weak order, &quot;should not come after&quot;, can be specified, or a strict weak order, &quot;should come before&quot; (specifying one defines also the other, the two are the complement of the inverse of each other, see operations on binary relations). For the sorting to be unique, these two are restricted to a total order and a strict total order, respectively.

Sorting n-tuples (depending on context also called e.g. records consisting of fields) can be done based on one or more of its components. More generally objects can be sorted based on a property. Such a component or property is called a sort key.

For example, the items are books, the sort key is the title, subject or author, and the order is alphabetical.

A new sort key can be created from two or more sort keys by lexicographical order. The first is then called the primary sort key, the second the secondary sort key, etc.

For example, addresses could be sorted using the city as primary sort key, and the street as secondary sort key.

If the sort key values are totally ordered, the sort key defines a weak order of the items: items with the same sort key are equivalent with respect to sorting. See also stable sorting. If different items have different sort key values then this defines a unique order of the items.
A standard order is often called &quot;ascending&quot; (corresponding to the fact that the standard order of numbers is ascending, i.e. A to Z, 0 to 9), the reverse order &quot;descending&quot; (Z to A, 9 to 0). For dates and times, &quot;ascending&quot; means that earlier values precede later ones e.g. 1/1/2000 will sort ahead of 1/1/2001.

====Common algorithms====
* Bubble/Shell sort: Exchange two adjacent elements if they are out of order. Repeat until array is sorted.
* Insertion sort: Scan successive elements for an out-of-order item, then insert the item in the proper place. 
* Selection sort: Find the smallest (or biggest) element in the array, and put it in the proper place. Swap it with the value in the first position. Repeat until array is sorted.
* Quick sort: Partition the array into two segments. In the first segment, all elements are less than or equal to the pivot value. In the second segment, all elements are greater than or equal to the pivot value. Finally, sort the two segments recursively.
* Merge sort: Divide the list of elements in two parts, sort the two parts individually and then merge it.

===Physical===
Various sorting tasks are essential in industrial processes, such as mineral processing. For example, during the extraction of gold from ore, a device called a shaker table uses gravity, vibration, and flow to separate gold from lighter materials in the ore (sorting by size and weight). Sorting is also a naturally occurring process that results in the concentration of ore or sediment. Sorting results from the application of some criterion or differential stressors to a mass to separate it into its components based on some variable quality. Materials that are different, but only slightly so, such as the isotopes of uranium, are very difficult to separate.

Optical sorting is an automated process of sorting solid products using cameras and/or lasers and has widespread use in the food industry. Sensor-based sorting is used in mineral processing.

==See also==
* in Wikipedia tables. For sorting of categories, see and for sorting of article sections, see 
* Collation
* Data processing
* IBM mainframe sort/merge
* Unicode collation algorithm
* Knolling
* 5S (methodology)

==References==
==External links==

* Demonstration of Sorting Algorithms (includes bubble and quicksort)
* Animated video explaining bubble sort and quick sort and compares their performance.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2303697" start="0" end="7" title="Sorting" label="Sorting"/>
<link wikidata="Q14953108" start="132" end="140" title="Collating order" label="ordering"/>
<link wikidata="Q13582682" start="201" end="213" title="categorization" label="categorizing"/>
<link wikidata="Q181593" start="551" end="561" title="Sorting algorithm" label="algorithms"/>
<link wikidata="Q755673" start="653" end="669" title="search algorithm" label="lookup or search"/>
<link wikidata="Q11341754" start="690" end="710" title="merge algorithm" label="merging of sequences"/>
<link wikidata="Q6661985" start="733" end="751" title="data processing" label="processing of data"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930567" start="874" end="883" title="shuffling" label="shuffling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414271" start="978" end="995" title="strict weak order" label="strict weak order"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1129" end="1159" title="Binary relation#Operations" label="operations on binary relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q369377" start="1222" end="1233" title="total order" label="total order"/>
<link wikidata="Q600590" start="1283" end="1290" title="n-tuple" label="n-tuple"/>
<link wikidata="Q390066" start="1331" end="1337" title="Object composition" label="record"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1641" end="1649" title="collation#sort keys" label="sort key"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144915" start="1695" end="1716" title="lexicographical order" label="lexicographical order"/>
<link wikidata="Q369377" start="1947" end="1962" title="total order" label="totally ordered"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1987" end="1997" title="strict weak ordering#Total preorders" label="weak order"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2090" end="2104" title="Sorting algorithm#Stability" label="stable sorting"/>
<link wikidata="Q60864" start="2575" end="2581" title="Bubble sort" label="Bubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q848955" start="2582" end="2592" title="Shell sort" label="Shell sort"/>
<link wikidata="Q117241" start="2683" end="2697" title="Insertion sort" label="Insertion sort"/>
<link wikidata="Q220831" start="2795" end="2809" title="Selection sort" label="Selection sort"/>
<link wikidata="Q486598" start="2974" end="2984" title="Quick sort" label="Quick sort"/>
<link wikidata="Q189057" start="3231" end="3241" title="Merge sort" label="Merge sort"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995444" start="3421" end="3439" title="mineral processing" label="mineral processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="3479" end="3483" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303697" start="3512" end="3524" title="shaker table" label="shaker table"/>
<link wikidata="Q11412" start="3530" end="3537" title="gravity" label="gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q170475" start="3539" end="3548" title="oscillation" label="vibration"/>
<link wikidata="Q898987" start="3562" end="3570" title="separation process" label="separate"/>
<link wikidata="Q102798" start="3723" end="3726" title="ore" label="ore"/>
<link wikidata="Q4429373" start="3730" end="3738" title="Sorting (sediment)" label="sediment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098897" start="4016" end="4031" title="Optical sorting" label="Optical sorting"/>
<link wikidata="Q4387535" start="4155" end="4175" title="Sensor-based sorting" label="Sensor-based sorting"/>
<link wikidata="Q14953108" start="4319" end="4328" title="Collation" label="Collation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6661985" start="4331" end="4346" title="Data processing" label="Data processing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4349" end="4373" title="IBM mainframe utility programs#IBM SORT" label="IBM mainframe sort/merge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476615" start="4376" end="4403" title="Unicode collation algorithm" label="Unicode collation algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530873" start="4406" end="4414" title="Knolling" label="Knolling"/>
<link wikidata="Q245417" start="4417" end="4433" title="5S (methodology)" label="5S (methodology)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="144657" wikidata="Q344045" url="?curid=144657" title="Alfred P. Sloan">
<text>Alfred Pritchard Sloan Jr. ( ; May 23, 1875February 17, 1966) was an American business executive in the automotive industry. He was a long-time president, chairman and CEO of General Motors Corporation. Sloan, first as a senior executive and later as the head of the organization, helped GM grow from the 1920s through the 1950s, decades when concepts such as the annual model change, brand architecture, industrial engineering, automotive design (styling), and planned obsolescence transformed the industry, and when the industry changed lifestyles and the built environment in America and throughout the world.

Sloan wrote his memoir, &quot;My Years with General Motors&quot;, in the 1950s. Like Henry Ford, Sloan is remembered with a complex mixture of admiration for his accomplishments, appreciation for his philanthropy, and unease or reproach regarding his attitudes during the interwar period and World War II.

==Life and career==
Born in New Haven, Connecticut, Sloan studied electrical engineering initially at Brooklyn Polytechnic Institute, then transferred to and graduated from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1895. While attending MIT he joined the Delta Upsilon fraternity. In 1898, Sloan married Irene Jackson of Roxbury, Massachusetts. The couple had no children but Sloan was very close to his younger half-brother, Raymond.

Sloan became president and owner of Hyatt Roller Bearing, a company that made roller- and ball-bearings, in 1899 when his father and another investor bought out the company from the previous owner. An account stated that Sloan persuaded his father to buy a controlling interest in the company for $5,000 and let him manage it. Oldsmobile was Hyatt&#x27;s first automotive customer, with many other companies soon following suit. Henry Leland was among his clients. By 1903, he was said to have summoned the young Sloan and castigated him for delivering inconsistent quality of his bearings&#x27; tolerances. According to Sloan, this conversation allowed him to gain &quot;a genuine conception of what mass production should really mean.&quot; Ford Motor Company&#x27;s Model T also used Hyatt bearings and, for a time, over half of the company&#x27;s bearings went to Ford.

In 1916 Hyatt merged with other companies into United Motors Company, which soon became part of General Motors Corporation. Sloan became vice-president of GM, then president (1923), and finally chairman of the board (1937). In 1934, he established the philanthropic, nonprofit Alfred P. Sloan Foundation. GM under Sloan became famous for managing diverse operations with financial statistics such as return on investment; these measures were introduced to GM by Donaldson Brown, a protege of GM vice-president John J. Raskob. Raskob came to GM as an advisor to Pierre S. du Pont and the du Pont corporation; the latter was a principal investor in GM whose executives largely ran GM in the 1920s.

Sloan is credited with establishing annual styling changes, from which came the concept of planned obsolescence. He also established a pricing structure in which (from lowest to highest priced) Chevrolet, Pontiac, Oldsmobile, Buick and Cadillac, referred to as the ladder of success, did not compete with each other, and buyers could be kept in the GM &quot;family&quot; as their buying power and preferences changed as they aged. In 1919, he and his corporate deputies created the General Motors Acceptance Corporation, a financing arm that practically invented the auto loan credit system, that allowed car buyers to bypass having to save for years to buy Ford&#x27;s affordable car. These concepts, along with Ford&#x27;s resistance to the change in the 1920s, propelled GM to industry-sales leadership by the early 1930s, a position it retained for over 70 years. Under Sloan&#x27;s direction, GM became the largest industrial enterprise the world had ever known.

In the 1930s GM, long hostile to unionization, confronted its workforce—newly organized and ready for labor rights—in an extended contest for control. Sloan was averse to violence of the sort associated with Henry Ford. He preferred spying, investing in an internal undercover apparatus to gather information and monitor labor union activity. When workers organized the massive Flint sit-down strike in 1936, Sloan found that espionage had little value in the face of such open tactics, and instead the successful strike legitimized the United Auto Workers as the exclusive bargaining representative for GM workers.

The world&#x27;s first university-based executive education program, the Sloan Fellows, started in 1931 at MIT under the sponsorship of Sloan. A Sloan Foundation grant established the MIT School of Industrial Management in 1952 with the charge of educating the &quot;ideal manager&quot;, and the school was renamed in Sloan&#x27;s honor as the Alfred P. Sloan School of Management, one of the world&#x27;s premier business schools. Additional grants established a Sloan Institute of Hospital Administration in 1955 at Cornell University-the first two-year graduate program of its type in the US, a Sloan Fellows Program at Stanford Graduate School of Business in 1957, and at London Business School in 1965. They became degree programs in 1976, awarding the degree of Master of Science in Management. Sloan&#x27;s name also lives on in the Sloan-Kettering Institute and Cancer Center in New York. In 1951, Sloan received the Hundred Year Association of New York&#x27;s Gold Medal Award &quot;in recognition of outstanding contributions to the City of New York&quot;.

The Alfred P. Sloan Museum, showcasing the evolution of the automobile industry and traveling galleries, is located in Flint, Michigan.

Sloan maintained an office in 30 Rockefeller Plaza in Rockefeller Center, now known as the Comcast Building. He retired as GM chairman on April 2, 1956. His memoir and management treatise, &quot;My Years with General Motors&quot;, was more or less finished around this time; but GM&#x27;s legal staff, who feared that it would be used to support an antitrust case against GM, held up its publication for nearly a decade. It was finally published in 1964. Sloan died in 1966.

Sloan was inducted into the Junior Achievement U.S. Business Hall of Fame in 1975.

==Philanthropy==
The Alfred P. Sloan Foundation is a philanthropic non-profit organization established by Sloan in 1934. The foundation&#x27;s programs and interests fall into the areas of science and technology, standard of living, economic performance, and education and careers in science and technology. For the year ending December 31, 2014, the total assets of the Sloan Foundation had a market value of about $1.876 billion.

The Sloan Foundation bankrolled the 1956 Warner Bros. cartoon &quot;Yankee Dood It&quot;, which promotes mass production. In the late 1940s, the Sloan Foundation made a grant to Harding College (now Harding University) in Searcy, Arkansas. The foundation wanted to fund the production of a series of short films that would extol the virtues of capitalism and the American way of life. This resulted in the production of a series of animated cartoons by John Sutherland (producer) which were released on the 16mm non-theatrical market, and also distributed theatrically in 35mm by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer.

According to Edwin Black, Sloan was one of the central, behind-the-scenes 1934 founders of the American Liberty League, a political organization whose stated goal was to defend the Constitution, and who opposed Franklin D. Roosevelt&#x27;s New Deal. In turn, the league would finance other groups with openly more extreme agendas. One such group was the Sentinels of the Republic to which Sloan himself made a $1000 check. After a Congressional investigation into this group went public in 1936, Sloan issued a statement pledging not to further support the Sentinels.

Also according to Black, the GM chief continued to personally fund and organize fund-raising for the National Association of Manufacturers, which was critical of the New Deal.

The Sloan Foundation has made three grants, of $3 million each, to the Wikimedia Foundation (WMF). These are some of the largest grants that the WMF has received.

==Criticism==

===Overly rational and profit-driven orientation===
According to O&#x27;Toole (1995), Sloan built a very objective organization, a company that paid significant attention to &quot;policies, systems, and structures and not enough to people, principles, and values. Sloan, the quintessential engineer, had worked out all the intricacies and contingencies of a foolproof system.&quot; But this system left out employees and society. One consequence of this management philosophy was a culture that resisted change. Proof that the system did not remain foolproof forever was seen in GM&#x27;s problems of the 1980s, 1990s, and 2000s.

In fact, Sloan&#x27;s memoir and management treatise, &quot;My Years With General Motors&quot;, foresaw some of these problems. About them, Sloan implied that only vigilant, intelligent management could meet them successfully. He predicted that &quot;remaining&quot; at the top [of its industry and the economy] would prove a bigger challenge for GM than was getting there; and it turned out that he was right. But he also seemed confident that the management style of GM under his leadership, if continued and adapted, could meet these challenges. He said, &quot;There have been and always will be many opportunities to fail in the automobile industry. The circumstances of the ever-changing market and ever-changing product are capable of breaking any business organization if that organization is unprepared for change—indeed, in my opinion, if it has not provided procedures for anticipating change. In General Motors these procedures are provided by the central management, which is in a position to appraise the broad long-term trends of the market. ... As the industry has grown and evolved, we have adhered to this policy and have demonstrated an ability to meet competition and the shifts of customer demand.&quot;

As these words of Sloan (1964) show in juxtaposition with the words of Peter F. Drucker (1946), Sloan (and his fellow GM executives) never agreed with Drucker on the lessons that Drucker drew from his study of GM management during the war. However, unlike many GM executives, Sloan did not put Drucker on his blacklist for writing the 1946 book; Drucker, in his new introduction [foreword] for the 1990 republishing of Sloan&#x27;s memoir, said, &quot;When his associates attacked me in a meeting called to discuss the book, Sloan immediately rose to my defense. &#x27;I fully agree with you,&#x27; he said to his colleagues. &#x27;Mr. Drucker is dead wrong. But he did precisely what he told us he would do when we asked him in. And he is as entitled to his opinions, wrong though they are, as you or I. Drucker related that for 20 years after that meeting, Sloan and Drucker had a good relationship, in which Sloan would invite Drucker to lunch once or twice a year to discuss Sloan&#x27;s philanthropic plans and the memoir that Sloan was working on assembling (what became &quot;My Years&quot;). Drucker said, &quot;He asked for my opinions and carefully listened—and he never once took my advice.&quot; History seems to have vindicated Drucker in his belief that Sloan&#x27;s faith in rationality alone—and in the ability of other white-collar managers to be as astute as Sloan himself — was over-ardent. 40 years later, the management and board of directors who had run the original General Motors Corporation into the ground by 2009 were &quot;not&quot; &quot;in a position to appraise the broad long-term trends of the market&quot;—or were in that position, but not doing the job successfully therein.

O&#x27;Toole described Sloan&#x27;s style as follows: &quot;[W]hereas Taylor occasionally backs off to justify his ardor for efficiency in human terms, not once does Sloan make reference to any other values. Freedom, equality, humanism, stability, community, tradition, religion, patriotism, family, love, virtue, nature—all are ignored. In the one personal element in the book, he makes passing reference to his wife: he abandons her on the first day of a European vacation to return to business in Detroit. His language is as calculating as that of the engineer-of-old working with calipers and slide rule, as cold as the steel he caused to be bent to form cars: economizing, utility, facts, objectivity, systems, rationality, maximizing—that is the stuff of his vocabulary.&quot;

===Accounting system drawbacks===
In 2005, Sloan&#x27;s work at GM came under criticism for creating a complicated accounting system that prevents the implementation of lean manufacturing methods. Essentially, the criticism is that by using Sloan&#x27;s methods a company will value inventory just the same as cash, and thus there is no penalty for building up inventory. Carrying excessive inventory is detrimental to a company&#x27;s operation and induces significant hidden costs. This criticism must be viewed in the context that it is provided in hindsight. During the period in which Sloan advocated carrying what would now be considered excess inventory, the industrial and transportation infrastructure would not support what is now known as just-in-time inventory. During this period, the auto industry experienced incredible growth as the public eagerly sought to purchase this life-changing utility known as the automobile. The cost of lost sales due to lack of inventory was likely greater than the cost of carrying excess inventory. Sloan&#x27;s system seems to have been widely adopted because of its advance over previous methods.

In his memoir, Sloan (who acknowledged that he was not a trained accountant) said that the system that he implemented in the early 1920s was far better than what it replaced. He said that years later, a professional accountant (Albert Bradley, longtime CFO of GM) &quot;was kind enough to say [that it] was pretty good for a layman.&quot; Sloan was far from the sole author of GM&#x27;s financial and accounting systems, as GM later had many trained minds in accounting and finance; but regardless of authorship, GM&#x27;s financial controls, at one time considered top-notch, eventually proved to have latent drawbacks. Systems similar to GM&#x27;s were implemented by other major companies, especially in the United States, and they eventually undermined the ability to compete with companies that used different accounting, according to Waddell &amp; Bodek&#x27;s 2005 analysis.

Sloan&#x27;s memoir, particularly Chapter 8, &quot;The development of financial controls&quot;, indicates that Sloan and GM appreciated the financial dangers of excess inventory even as early as the 1920s. However, Waddell &amp; Bodek&#x27;s 2005 analysis indicates that this theory was not successfully implemented in GM&#x27;s practice. For all of the intellectual understanding, the reality remained slow inventory turnover and an accounting system that functionally treated inventory similarly to cash.

===Nazi collaboration===
In August 1938, a senior executive for General Motors, James D. Mooney, received the Grand Cross of the German Eagle for his distinguished service to the Reich. &quot;Nazi armaments chief Albert Speer told a congressional investigator that Germany could not have attempted its September 1939 blitzkrieg of Poland without the performance-boosting additive technology provided by Alfred P. Sloan and General Motors&quot;. During the war, GM&#x27;s Opel Brandenburg facilities produced Ju 88 bombers, trucks, land mines and torpedo detonators for Nazi Germany. Charles Levinson, formerly deputy director of the European office of the CIO, alleged that Sloan remained on the board of Opel.

Sloan&#x27;s memoir presents a different picture of Opel&#x27;s wartime role. According to Sloan, Opel was nationalized, along with most other industrial activity owned or co-owned by foreign interests, by the German state soon after the outbreak of war. But Opel was never factually nationalized and the GM-appointed directors and management remained unchanged throughout the Nazi period including the war, dealing with other GM companies in Axis and Allied countries including the United States. Sloan presents Opel at the end of the war as a black box to GM&#x27;s American management, an organization with which the Americans had had no contact for five years. According to Sloan, GM in Detroit debated whether to even try to run Opel in the postwar era, or to leave to the interim West German government the question of who would pick up the pieces.

Defending the German investment strategy as &quot;highly profitable&quot;, Sloan told shareholders in 1939 that GM&#x27;s continued industrial production for the Nazi government was merely sound business practice. In a letter to a concerned shareholder, Sloan said that the manner in which the Nazi government ran Germany &quot;should not be considered the business of the management of General Motors. ... We must conduct ourselves as a German organization. ... We have no right to shut down the plant.&quot;

==Post-war==
As the war drew to an end, most economists and New Deal policy makers assumed that without continued massive government spending, the pre-war Great Depression and its huge unemployment would return. The economist Paul Samuelson warned that unless government took immediate action, &quot;there would be ushered in the greatest period of unemployment and industrial dislocation which any economy has faced.&quot; Many adhering to the prevailing Keynesian economic wisdom predicted economic disaster when the war ended.

Sloan, however, felt otherwise and predicted a post-war boom. He pointed to workers&#x27; savings and pent-up demand, and predicted a huge jump in national income and a rise in standard of living. In line with his predictions, and despite a precipitous cut-back in government spending and the wholesale closure of defense plants, the economy boomed. One of the greatest periods of economic expansion in American history resulted.

== See also ==
* The Alfred P. Sloan Prize - given to films dealing with science and technology by the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation each year at the Sundance Film Festival.
* Sloan was a member of the Crusaders, an organization that promoted the repeal of national Prohibition of alcohol in the U.S.
* List of covers of &quot;Time&quot; magazine (1920s) - December 27, 1926

==References==

===Notes===
===Bibliography===
* 
* 
* 

==Further reading==
* 
* 

==External links==
* Alfred P. Sloan Foundation. Its total assets had a market value of over $1.5 billion in 2005.
* Official &quot;Generations of GM Wiki&quot; site: Sloan, Alfred Pritchard Jr.
* Review of Klein and Olson&#x27;s film &quot;Taken for a Ride&quot;
* Extract from Bradford C. Snell, American Ground Transport: A Proposal for Restructuring the Automobile, Truck, Bus and Rail Industries. Report presented to the Committee of the Judiciary, Subcommittee on Antitrust and Monopoly, United States Senate, February 26, 1974, United States Government Printing Office, Washington, 1974, pp. 16-24.
* Find Law
* Taken for a Ride</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q344045" start="0" end="26" title="Alfred P. Sloan" label="Alfred Pritchard Sloan Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1383594" start="78" end="96" title="executive officer" label="business executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q190117" start="104" end="123" title="automotive industry" label="automotive industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255921" start="144" end="153" title="President (corporate title)" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q140686" start="155" end="163" title="chairman" label="chairman"/>
<link wikidata="Q484876" start="168" end="171" title="CEO" label="CEO"/>
<link wikidata="Q81965" start="175" end="201" title="General Motors" label="General Motors Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17004055" start="385" end="403" title="brand architecture" label="brand architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4489420" start="405" end="427" title="industrial engineering" label="industrial engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q787489" start="429" end="446" title="automotive design" label="automotive design"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967458" start="462" end="482" title="planned obsolescence" label="planned obsolescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4986688" start="558" end="575" title="built environment" label="built environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q8768" start="699" end="709" title="Henry Ford" label="Henry Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q154611" start="886" end="901" title="interwar period" label="interwar period"/>
<link wikidata="Q49145" start="949" end="971" title="New Haven, Connecticut" label="New Haven, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q43035" start="987" end="1009" title="electrical engineering" label="electrical engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q75478" start="1023" end="1053" title="Brooklyn Polytechnic Institute" label="Brooklyn Polytechnic Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="1098" end="1135" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="Massachusetts Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254771" start="1179" end="1192" title="Delta Upsilon" label="Delta Upsilon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16985367" start="1396" end="1416" title="Hyatt Roller Bearing" label="Hyatt Roller Bearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335987" start="1438" end="1463" title="Rolling-element bearing" label="roller- and ball-bearings"/>
<link wikidata="Q204327" start="1687" end="1697" title="Oldsmobile" label="Oldsmobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q957621" start="1789" end="1801" title="Henry Leland" label="Henry Leland"/>
<link wikidata="Q182323" start="2129" end="2136" title="Ford Model T" label="Model T"/>
<link wikidata="Q288170" start="2282" end="2303" title="United Motors Company" label="United Motors Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q81965" start="2331" end="2357" title="General Motors Corporation" label="General Motors Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200258" start="2512" end="2538" title="Alfred P. Sloan Foundation" label="Alfred P. Sloan Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295361" start="2697" end="2712" title="Donaldson Brown" label="Donaldson Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181821" start="2745" end="2759" title="John J. Raskob" label="John J. Raskob"/>
<link wikidata="Q7192435" start="2796" end="2813" title="Pierre S. du Pont" label="Pierre S. du Pont"/>
<link wikidata="Q221062" start="2822" end="2829" title="DuPont" label="du Pont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850364" start="2968" end="2990" title="model year" label="annual styling changes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967458" start="3023" end="3043" title="planned obsolescence" label="planned obsolescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q29570" start="3126" end="3135" title="Chevrolet" label="Chevrolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q40990" start="3137" end="3144" title="Pontiac (automobile)" label="Pontiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q204327" start="3146" end="3156" title="Oldsmobile" label="Oldsmobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q27415" start="3158" end="3163" title="Buick" label="Buick"/>
<link wikidata="Q27436" start="3168" end="3176" title="Cadillac" label="Cadillac"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032800" start="3414" end="3451" title="General Motors Acceptance Corporation" label="General Motors Acceptance Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5037272" start="3499" end="3508" title="auto loan" label="auto loan"/>
<link wikidata="Q121591482" start="3934" end="3946" title="unionization" label="unionization"/>
<link wikidata="Q8768" start="4109" end="4119" title="Henry Ford" label="Henry Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3118399" start="4279" end="4300" title="Flint sit-down strike" label="Flint sit-down strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814260" start="4438" end="4457" title="United Auto Workers" label="United Auto Workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294287" start="4591" end="4604" title="Sloan Fellows" label="Sloan Fellows"/>
<link wikidata="Q142740" start="4862" end="4898" title="MIT Sloan School of Management" label="Alfred P. Sloan School of Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q49115" start="5036" end="5054" title="Cornell University" label="Cornell University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294287" start="5116" end="5129" title="Sloan Fellows" label="Sloan Fellows"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413558" start="5141" end="5177" title="Stanford Graduate School of Business" label="Stanford Graduate School of Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481050" start="5194" end="5216" title="London Business School" label="London Business School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6785253" start="5286" end="5317" title="Master of Science in Management" label="Master of Science in Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808012" start="5358" end="5401" title="Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center" label="Sloan-Kettering Institute and Cancer Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521330" start="5439" end="5479" title="the Hundred Year Association of New York" label="the Hundred Year Association of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q18749198" start="5590" end="5612" title="Sloan Museum" label="Alfred P. Sloan Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q490584" start="5705" end="5720" title="Flint, Michigan" label="Flint, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11277" start="5777" end="5795" title="Rockefeller Center" label="Rockefeller Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q680614" start="5814" end="5830" title="Comcast Building" label="Comcast Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q326498" start="6072" end="6081" title="competition law" label="antitrust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153045" start="6227" end="6245" title="Junior Achievement" label="Junior Achievement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200258" start="6304" end="6330" title="Alfred P. Sloan Foundation" label="Alfred P. Sloan Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q185733" start="6336" end="6349" title="philanthropy" label="philanthropic"/>
<link wikidata="Q163740" start="6350" end="6373" title="non-profit organization" label="non-profit organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="6472" end="6479" title="science" label="science"/>
<link wikidata="Q11016" start="6484" end="6494" title="technology" label="technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q175850" start="6496" end="6514" title="standard of living" label="standard of living"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="6516" end="6536" title="economics" label="economic performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="6757" end="6769" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q8048739" start="6784" end="6798" title="Yankee Dood It" label="Yankee Dood It"/>
<link wikidata="Q5656138" start="6915" end="6933" title="Harding University" label="Harding University"/>
<link wikidata="Q79709" start="6938" end="6954" title="Searcy, Arkansas" label="Searcy, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182549" start="7169" end="7195" title="John Sutherland (producer)" label="John Sutherland (producer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="7296" end="7315" title="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer" label="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048767" start="7331" end="7342" title="Edwin Black" label="Edwin Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842971" start="7413" end="7436" title="American Liberty League" label="American Liberty League"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="7529" end="7550" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q186356" start="7558" end="7566" title="New Deal" label="New Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q17018399" start="7672" end="7697" title="Sentinels of the Republic" label="Sentinels of the Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336837" start="7988" end="8025" title="National Association of Manufacturers" label="National Association of Manufacturers"/>
<link wikidata="Q180" start="8135" end="8155" title="Wikimedia Foundation" label="Wikimedia Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q81096" start="8533" end="8541" title="engineer" label="engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q81965" start="9781" end="9795" title="General Motors" label="General Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q84238" start="10170" end="10186" title="Peter F. Drucker" label="Peter F. Drucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q203906" start="11880" end="11886" title="Frederick Winslow Taylor" label="Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q46158" start="12037" end="12045" title="humanism" label="humanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="12310" end="12317" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116214" start="12709" end="12719" title="accountancy" label="accounting"/>
<link wikidata="Q380772" start="12763" end="12781" title="lean manufacturing" label="lean manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q380772" start="13344" end="13356" title="just-in-time manufacturing" label="just-in-time"/>
<link wikidata="Q623268" start="13994" end="13997" title="chief financial officer" label="CFO"/>
<link wikidata="Q15999006" start="15212" end="15227" title="James D. Mooney" label="James D. Mooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q94117" start="15242" end="15273" title="Grand Cross of the German Eagle" label="Grand Cross of the German Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="15311" end="15316" title="Nazi Germany" label="Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q60045" start="15345" end="15357" title="Albert Speer" label="Albert Speer"/>
<link wikidata="Q56506" start="15449" end="15459" title="blitzkrieg" label="blitzkrieg"/>
<link wikidata="Q155661" start="15640" end="15645" title="Junkers Ju 88" label="Ju 88"/>
<link wikidata="Q43193" start="15655" end="15660" title="truck" label="truck"/>
<link wikidata="Q178795" start="15663" end="15672" title="land mine" label="land mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q165363" start="15678" end="15685" title="torpedo" label="torpedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088842" start="15686" end="15695" title="detonator" label="detonator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023739" start="15788" end="15791" title="Congress of Industrial Organizations" label="CIO"/>
<link wikidata="Q40966" start="15837" end="15841" title="Opel" label="Opel"/>
<link wikidata="Q178564" start="15951" end="15963" title="nationalization" label="nationalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q102454" start="17437" end="17451" title="Paul Samuelson" label="Paul Samuelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q83937" start="17667" end="17676" title="Keynesian" label="Keynesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763328" start="18194" end="18215" title="Alfred P. Sloan Prize" label="Alfred P. Sloan Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200258" start="18276" end="18302" title="Alfred P. Sloan Foundation" label="Alfred P. Sloan Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q189887" start="18320" end="18342" title="Sundance Film Festival" label="Sundance Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q7728288" start="18368" end="18381" title="The Crusaders (repeal of alcohol prohibition)" label="the Crusaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q399999" start="18436" end="18447" title="Prohibition in the United States" label="Prohibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q6633147" start="18473" end="18524" title="List of covers of Time magazine (1920s)" label="List of covers of &amp;quot;Time&amp;quot; magazine (1920s)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="144660" wikidata="Q26556" url="?curid=144660" title="Westland (municipality), Netherlands">
<text>Westland () is a municipality in the western Netherlands, in the province of South Holland. It covers an area of of which is covered by water and had a population of in .

Towns and other settlements: De Lier, &#x27;s-Gravenzande, Monster, Naaldwijk, Wateringen, Heenweg, Honselersdijk, Kwintsheul, Maasdijk, Poeldijk, and Ter Heijde.

==History==
Westland was created on 1 January 2004 by a merger of the municipalities De Lier, &#x27;s-Gravenzande, Monster, Naaldwijk and Wateringen. These are also the names of five of the settlements. The others are Heenweg, Honselersdijk, Kwintsheul, Maasdijk, Poeldijk, and Ter Heijde. Westland itself is not the name of a settlement or town, but rather of the region. The City hall is located in the middle of Westland, in Naaldwijk, the second largest settlement in Westland.

The town of Honselersdijk also possesses the largest Flower Auction, FloraHolland, which also has a location in Rijnsburg. This is a very important sector of the Westland economy. Flowers produced in Westland are sold all over the world.

Coastal towns are Ter Heijde (near Monster), Monster itself and &#x27;s-Gravenzande. These towns are popular with Germans and people from the Eastern Netherlands. It is not unknown for every holiday campsite to be fully booked with tourists because of their relative proximity to the more popular Scheveningen.

==Wider area==

Westland is part of the Haaglanden conurbation.

In a wider sense, Westland is also the name of the region south-west of the line The Hague - Delft - Rotterdam, approximately consisting of the municipalities Westland and Midden-Delfland, as well as Hook of Holland (municipality of Rotterdam).

Westland is most known for its horticulture in greenhouses, growing flowers and vegetables.


== Notable people ==


* Martinus Dorpius (1485 in Naaldwijk – 1525) a humanist, friend and correspondent of Erasmus 
* Arnold Vinnius (1588 in Monster – 1657) a leading jurist
* Franco Burgersdijk (1590 in De Lier – 1635) a Dutch logician 
* Maria Ponderus (1672 in Monster – 1764), an art collector and hofje founder
* Gerrit van Poelje (1884 in Maasdijk – 1976) a Dutch civil servant, lawyer and Public Administration scholar
* Peter Van de Wetering (1931 in Naaldwijk – 2014) an American horticulturist and nurseryman
* Huub Kortekaas (born 1935 in &#x27;s-Gravenzande) a Dutch sculptor
* Rein Welschen (1941–2013) Dutch politician, acting Mayor of Westland in 2014
* Hans Strikwerda (born 1952 in Naaldwijk) a Dutch organizational theorist and academic 
* Marc Lankhorst (born 1968 in Naaldwijk) a Dutch computer scientist, researcher and consultant, works on enterprise architecture and ArchiMate 
* Anneliese Van Der Pol (born 1984 in Naaldwijk) a Dutch-American actress and singer 

=== Sport ===
* Cornelis van Dalen (1885 in Monster – 1953) a Dutch sports shooter, competed at the 1920 Summer Olympics
* Hans Houtzager (1910 in Honselersdijk – 1993) a Dutch hammer thrower, competed at the 1936 and 1948 Summer Olympics
* Wim van der Voort (1923 in &#x27;s-Gravenzande – 2016) a Dutch speed skater, silver medalist at the 1952 Summer Olympics
* Kees Broekman (1927 in De Lier – 1992) a Dutch former speed skater, silver medalist at the 1952 Summer Olympics
* Leo van Vliet (born 1955 in Honselersdijk) a former professional racing cyclist
* Gerrit Solleveld (born 1961 in De Lier) a former Dutch professional road bicycle racer
* Menno Boelsma (born 1961 in Monster) a retired speed skater, competed at the 1988 Winter Olympics
* Patrick van der Meer (born 1971 in Wateringen) a Dutch dressage rider, competed at the 2012 Summer Olympics
* Marinus Dijkhuizen (born 1972 in &#x27;s-Gravenzande) a Dutch football manager, coach and former player with 365 club caps
* Oscar Moens (born 1973 in &#x27;s-Gravenzande) a former Dutch footballer with 401 club caps
* Guus Vogels (born 1975 in Naaldwijk) a Dutch field hockey goalkeeper, gold medallist at the 1966 and 2000 Summer Olympics
* Stefan Aartsen (born 1975 in &#x27;s-Gravenzande) a former butterfly swimmer, competed at the 1996 and 2000 Summer Olympics
* Ricardo van der Ende (born 1979 in Poeldijk) a Dutch racing driver
* Johan Voskamp (born 1984 in De Lier) a Dutch footballer with over 280 club caps
* Mandy Mulder (born 1987 in Poeldijk) a sailor, competed at the 2008 Summer Olympics 
* Thiemo de Bakker (born 1988 in &#x27;s-Gravenzande) a Dutch tennis player
* Mandy van den Berg (born 1990 in Naaldwijk) a Dutch football defender
* Arantxa Rus (born 1990) a Dutch tennis player, lives in Monster 
* Kiki Bertens (born 1991 in Wateringen) a Dutch tennis player
* Lara van Ruijven (born 1992 in Naaldwijk - 2020) a Dutch short track speed skater

==References==
==External links==

* Official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q26556" start="0" end="8" title="Westland (municipality), Netherlands" label="Westland"/>
<link wikidata="Q15284" start="17" end="29" title="municipality" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="45" end="56" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q694" start="77" end="90" title="South Holland" label="South Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616247" start="201" end="208" title="De Lier" label="De Lier"/>
<link wikidata="Q425786" start="210" end="229" title="&amp;#x27;s-Gravenzande" label="&amp;#x27;s-Gravenzande"/>
<link wikidata="Q969531" start="231" end="238" title="Monster, Netherlands" label="Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1613459" start="240" end="249" title="Naaldwijk" label="Naaldwijk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615972" start="251" end="261" title="Wateringen" label="Wateringen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2288579" start="263" end="270" title="Heenweg" label="Heenweg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2012788" start="272" end="285" title="Honselersdijk" label="Honselersdijk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2508826" start="287" end="297" title="Kwintsheul" label="Kwintsheul"/>
<link wikidata="Q502312" start="299" end="307" title="Maasdijk, Westland" label="Maasdijk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112494" start="309" end="317" title="Poeldijk" label="Poeldijk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2684898" start="323" end="333" title="Ter Heijde" label="Ter Heijde"/>
<link wikidata="Q3957" start="526" end="537" title="town" label="settlements"/>
<link wikidata="Q3957" start="794" end="804" title="town" label="settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q916488" start="888" end="900" title="FloraHolland" label="FloraHolland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615333" start="931" end="940" title="Rijnsburg" label="Rijnsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q159810" start="990" end="997" title="economy" label="economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="1172" end="1179" title="Germany" label="Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q837211" start="1355" end="1367" title="Scheveningen" label="Scheveningen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239487" start="1410" end="1420" title="Haaglanden" label="Haaglanden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2197113" start="1453" end="1461" title="Westland, region of the Netherlands" label="Westland"/>
<link wikidata="Q36600" start="1516" end="1525" title="The Hague" label="The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q690" start="1528" end="1533" title="Delft" label="Delft"/>
<link wikidata="Q34370" start="1536" end="1545" title="Rotterdam" label="Rotterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q952206" start="1607" end="1622" title="Midden-Delfland" label="Midden-Delfland"/>
<link wikidata="Q990130" start="1635" end="1650" title="Hook of Holland" label="Hook of Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q34370" start="1668" end="1677" title="Rotterdam" label="Rotterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q165044" start="1728" end="1738" title="greenhouse" label="greenhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q506" start="1749" end="1755" title="flower" label="flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q11004" start="1761" end="1770" title="vegetable" label="vegetable"/>
<link wikidata="Q2050711" start="1800" end="1816" title="Martinus Dorpius" label="Martinus Dorpius"/>
<link wikidata="Q43499" start="1884" end="1891" title="Erasmus" label="Erasmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q696466" start="1895" end="1909" title="Arnold Vinnius" label="Arnold Vinnius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442647" start="1954" end="1972" title="Franco Burgersdijk" label="Franco Burgersdijk"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078" start="2006" end="2014" title="logician" label="logician"/>
<link wikidata="Q18697128" start="2018" end="2032" title="Maria Ponderus" label="Maria Ponderus"/>
<link wikidata="Q574990" start="2080" end="2085" title="hofje" label="hofje"/>
<link wikidata="Q1911054" start="2096" end="2113" title="Gerrit van Poelje" label="Gerrit van Poelje"/>
<link wikidata="Q17320645" start="2206" end="2227" title="Peter Van de Wetering" label="Peter Van de Wetering"/>
<link wikidata="Q4441484" start="2299" end="2313" title="Huub en Adelheid Kortekaas" label="Huub Kortekaas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338005" start="2368" end="2381" title="Rein Welschen" label="Rein Welschen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2048658" start="2447" end="2462" title="Hans Strikwerda" label="Hans Strikwerda"/>
<link wikidata="Q15429416" start="2536" end="2550" title="Marc Lankhorst" label="Marc Lankhorst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048431" start="2640" end="2663" title="enterprise architecture" label="enterprise architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077796" start="2668" end="2677" title="ArchiMate" label="ArchiMate"/>
<link wikidata="Q233697" start="2681" end="2702" title="Anneliese Van Der Pol" label="Anneliese Van Der Pol"/>
<link wikidata="Q11855519" start="2782" end="2800" title="Cornelis van Dalen" label="Cornelis van Dalen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8128" start="2866" end="2886" title="1920 Summer Olympics" label="1920 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354942" start="2889" end="2903" title="Hans Houtzager" label="Hans Houtzager"/>
<link wikidata="Q8150" start="2975" end="2979" title="1936 Summer Olympics" label="1936"/>
<link wikidata="Q8403" start="2984" end="3004" title="1948 Summer Olympics" label="1948 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2650557" start="3007" end="3024" title="Wim van der Voort" label="Wim van der Voort"/>
<link wikidata="Q8407" start="3107" end="3127" title="1952 Summer Olympics" label="1952 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2180141" start="3130" end="3143" title="Kees Broekman" label="Kees Broekman"/>
<link wikidata="Q8407" start="3221" end="3241" title="1952 Summer Olympics" label="1952 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356909" start="3244" end="3257" title="Leo van Vliet" label="Leo van Vliet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932672" start="3326" end="3342" title="Gerrit Solleveld" label="Gerrit Solleveld"/>
<link wikidata="Q6817181" start="3415" end="3428" title="Menno Boelsma" label="Menno Boelsma"/>
<link wikidata="Q9658" start="3492" end="3512" title="1988 Winter Olympics" label="1988 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576748" start="3515" end="3535" title="Patrick van der Meer" label="Patrick van der Meer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8577" start="3602" end="3622" title="2012 Summer Olympics" label="2012 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3450667" start="3625" end="3643" title="Marinus Dijkhuizen" label="Marinus Dijkhuizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379836" start="3750" end="3761" title="Oscar Moens" label="Oscar Moens"/>
<link wikidata="Q570971" start="3844" end="3855" title="Guus Vogels" label="Guus Vogels"/>
<link wikidata="Q8531" start="3936" end="3940" title="1996 Summer Olympics" label="1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q8544" start="3945" end="3965" title="2000 Summer Olympics" label="2000 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2159931" start="3968" end="3982" title="Stefan Aartsen" label="Stefan Aartsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8531" start="4062" end="4066" title="1996 Summer Olympics" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q8544" start="4071" end="4091" title="2000 Summer Olympics" label="2000 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322869" start="4094" end="4114" title="Ricardo van der Ende" label="Ricardo van der Ende"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625344" start="4163" end="4176" title="Johan Voskamp" label="Johan Voskamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1873082" start="4245" end="4257" title="Mandy Mulder" label="Mandy Mulder"/>
<link wikidata="Q8567" start="4308" end="4328" title="2008 Summer Olympics" label="2008 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q512712" start="4332" end="4348" title="Thiemo de Bakker" label="Thiemo de Bakker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865779" start="4408" end="4426" title="Mandy van den Berg" label="Mandy van den Berg"/>
<link wikidata="Q239758" start="4480" end="4491" title="Arantxa Rus" label="Arantxa Rus"/>
<link wikidata="Q239733" start="4547" end="4559" title="Kiki Bertens" label="Kiki Bertens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7000030" start="4610" end="4626" title="Lara van Ruijven" label="Lara van Ruijven"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="144666" wikidata="Q368914" url="?curid=144666" title="Louis Durey">
<text>Louis Edmond Durey (; 27 May 18883 July 1979) was a French composer. He was among the Les Six group of composers.

==Life==
Louis Durey was born in Paris, the son of a local businessman. It was not until he was nineteen years old that he chose to pursue a musical career after hearing a performance of a Claude Debussy work. As a composer, he was primarily self-taught. From the beginning, choral music was of great importance in Durey&#x27;s productivity. His &quot;L&#x27;Offrande Lyrique&quot; (1914) has been called the first piece of French twelve-tone music. The first of his works to gain recognition in the music world was for a piano duet titled &quot;Carillons&quot;. At a 1918 concert, this work attracted the interest of Maurice Ravel, who recommended him to his publisher.

Durey communicated with his colleague, Darius Milhaud, and asked him to contribute a piano piece that would bring together the six composers who, in 1920 were dubbed &quot;Les Six&quot;. This joint project was &quot;L&#x27;Album des Six&quot;. Despite the acclaim they received, Durey did not participate in the group&#x27;s 1921 collaborative work &quot;Les mariés de la tour Eiffel&quot;, a decision which was a source of great irritation to Jean Cocteau.

After the &quot;Les Six&quot; period, Durey continued with his career. Never feeling the need to belong to the musical establishment, he voiced his growing left-wing ideals that put him in an artistic isolation that lasted for the rest of his life.

Following the break with Cocteau, Durey withdrew to his home in Saint-Tropez in the south of France. In addition to chamber music, at Saint-Tropez he wrote his only opera, &quot;L&#x27;Occasion&quot;. In 1929, he married Anne Grangeon and moved back to Paris the following year. In the mid-thirties he joined the Communist Party and became active in the newly formed Fédération Musicale Populaire. During the years of the Nazi occupation of World War II, he worked with the French Resistance as a prominent member of the Front National des Musiciens who worked to hide Jews and preserve French music under Nazi rule. He also wrote anti-fascist songs. As others, he stopped composing under Nazi rule and instead arranged and collected older French music and folk songs.

After the war, he embraced hard-line communism and his uncompromising political attitudes hindered his career. Needing to earn a living, in 1950 he accepted the post of music critic for a communist newspaper in Paris.

In the late 1950s and early 1960s, he continued to compose but these works did not reach widespread popularity. His work on Vietnamese themes in the 1960s, based on his disgust with the turmoil France had left in Vietnam (formerly French Indochina) and the ensuing Vietnam War, seemed at that time in Paris to be a voice in the wilderness. He set poems by Ho Chi Minh and Mao Zedong. Other works include a string quartet, a flute sonatina, and &quot;Images à Crusoe&quot;.

Louis Durey died at Saint-Tropez in 1979.

== Piano works ==
== Notes ==
== References ==
* Kennedy, Michael, &quot;The Oxford Dictionary of Music&quot; (2006), 
* Frédéric Robert, &quot;Louis Durey: L&#x27;aîne des Six&quot; (Les Éditeurs Français Réunis, 1968)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q368914" start="0" end="18" title="Louis Durey" label="Louis Edmond Durey"/>
<link wikidata="Q841212" start="86" end="93" title="Les Six" label="Les Six"/>
<link wikidata="Q4700" start="304" end="318" title="Claude Debussy" label="Claude Debussy"/>
<link wikidata="Q221686" start="546" end="563" title="twelve-tone music" label="twelve-tone music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1178" start="733" end="746" title="Maurice Ravel" label="Maurice Ravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q186264" start="826" end="840" title="Darius Milhaud" label="Darius Milhaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q841212" start="959" end="966" title="Les Six" label="Les Six"/>
<link wikidata="Q129380" start="1003" end="1023" title="L&amp;#x27;Album des Six" label="L&amp;#x27;Album des Six"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480913" start="1142" end="1170" title="Les mariés de la tour Eiffel" label="Les mariés de la tour Eiffel"/>
<link wikidata="Q83158" start="1231" end="1243" title="Jean Cocteau" label="Jean Cocteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813" start="1560" end="1572" title="Saint-Tropez" label="Saint-Tropez"/>
<link wikidata="Q192821" start="1809" end="1824" title="French Communist Party" label="Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1863" end="1892" title="Fédération Musicale Populaire" label="Fédération Musicale Populaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="1918" end="1922" title="Nazism" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1937" end="1949" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q157146" start="1970" end="1987" title="French Resistance" label="French Resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088525" start="2017" end="2045" title="Front National des Musiciens" label="Front National des Musiciens"/>
<link wikidata="Q210189" start="2127" end="2139" title="Anti-fascism" label="anti-fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="2303" end="2312" title="communism" label="communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="2609" end="2616" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q185682" start="2716" end="2732" title="French Indochina" label="French Indochina"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="2750" end="2761" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q36014" start="2841" end="2852" title="Ho Chi Minh" label="Ho Chi Minh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="2857" end="2867" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308292" start="3051" end="3067" title="Michael Kennedy (music critic)" label="Kennedy, Michael"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="144668" wikidata="Q1700097" url="?curid=144668" title="John Fowler (politician)">
<text>John Fowler (April 27, 1756 – August 22, 1840) was an American planter and political leader in Virginia and Kentucky. He was a Jeffersonian Democrat who served as a Democratic-Republican member of the United States House of Representatives from Kentucky in the United States Congress from 1797 to 1807. Fowler was also an early settler and civic leader in Lexington, Kentucky.

==Early life and education==
Fowler was born in Chesterfield County, Virginia, on April 27, 1756, to John and Judith (Hudson) Fowler. He attended the common schools. He fought in the American Revolutionary War, joining Captain Patterson&#x27;s company in 1777 as a first lieutenant and rising to the rank of captain in 1783. Fowler studied at the College of William &amp; Mary in 1780; he was a member of the Williamsburg Lodge Freemasons.

== Career ==
In 1783, Fowler moved to Lexington, Kentucky. In October 1786, by act of the Virginia General Assembly, Fowler was appointed to serve as one of the trustees of the new city of Frankfort, Kentucky. In June 1787, Fowler joined Captain James Brown&#x27;s company of Kentucky volunteers, which fought Indians. In 1787, Fowler was part of the Danville convention of 1787 (Kentucky&#x27;s third statehood convention), representing Fayette County, then part of Virginia but later part of Kentucky. The same year, Fowler was elected to the Virginia House of Delegates. On 1788, Fowler was Fayette County to the Virginia Ratifying Convention, which ratified the United States Constitution. In 1788, Fowler, along with Richard Clough Anderson Sr. and Green Clay, established Lexington Freemason Lodge No. 1. From 1787 to 1794, Fowler served as an ensign in the Lexington Light Infantry, and fought against Indians. Fowler was a member of Kentucky Society for Promoting Useful Knowledge, which was associated with the Danville Political Club.

Fowler was the treasurer of Transylvania Seminary from 1789 to 1793. He was &quot;gentleman justice&quot; for Woodford County, Kentucky from May 5, 1789, to 1794. From 1792 to 1794, Fowler served as clerk of the court of oyer and terminer, and clerk to the directors of public buildings. In the 1794 elections, Fowler was a candidate for U.S. Senate from Kentucky, but was eliminated on the first ballot in the Kentucky Legislature; Humphrey Marshall received eighteen votes, John Breckinridge sixteen, Fowler eight, and incumbent John Edwards seven.

Fowler was elected to the United States House of Representatives in 1797. He was reelected several times—he served in the Fifth, Sixth, Seventh, Eighth, and Ninth congresses—and served a total of ten years, leaving office in 1807. After leaving office, he served as a member of the board of trustees of Lexington, and chairman of the board from 1817 to 1818. Fowler also served as the fourth postmaster of Lexington, from 1814 to 1822.

Fowler had large land holdings in Virginia and Kentucky. He was one of the founders of the Kentucky Agricultural Society. Sometime before 1800, Fowler established &quot;Fowler&#x27;s Gardens&quot; on three hundred acres near Lexington. This large tract of land on the eastern edge of Lexington opened as a park in 1817, and the area was used for fairs, picnics, barbeques, political gatherings, and other events.

In 1802, Fowler donated ninety-three acres of land near Carlisle, Kentucky, to the Concord Presbyterian Church.

== Personal life ==
Fowler married Millicent Wills of Virginia sometime before 1789, and they had five children. Millicent Wills Fowler predeceased him in July 1833. Fowler died in Lexington on August 22, 1840. He is buried in the Old Episcopal Cemetery in Lexington.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1700097" start="0" end="11" title="John Fowler (politician)" label="John Fowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201620" start="63" end="70" title="Plantations in the American South" label="planter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="95" end="103" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603" start="108" end="116" title="Kentucky" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278039" start="127" end="148" title="Jeffersonian democracy" label="Jeffersonian Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q42186" start="165" end="186" title="Democratic-Republican Party" label="Democratic-Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="201" end="239" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="261" end="283" title="United States Congress" label="United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q49241" start="356" end="375" title="Lexington, Kentucky" label="Lexington, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q340608" start="426" end="455" title="Chesterfield County, Virginia" label="Chesterfield County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153616" start="528" end="542" title="common schools" label="common schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="561" end="587" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348780" start="597" end="621" title="Robert Patterson (pioneer)" label="Captain Patterson&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q20715023" start="643" end="659" title="first lieutenant" label="first lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q875637" start="725" end="754" title="College of William &amp;amp; Mary" label="College of William &amp;amp; Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q492346" start="787" end="799" title="Williamsburg, Virginia" label="Williamsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="806" end="816" title="Freemasonry" label="Freemasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q49241" start="857" end="876" title="Lexington, Kentucky" label="Lexington, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q530970" start="909" end="934" title="Virginia General Assembly" label="Virginia General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q28603" start="1008" end="1027" title="Frankfort, Kentucky" label="Frankfort, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q849680" start="1122" end="1136" title="Indian Wars" label="fought Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q988923" start="1170" end="1178" title="Danville, Kentucky" label="Danville"/>
<link wikidata="Q491931" start="1257" end="1271" title="Fayette County, Kentucky" label="Fayette County"/>
<link wikidata="Q320275" start="1364" end="1391" title="Virginia House of Delegates" label="Virginia House of Delegates"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934473" start="1435" end="1464" title="Virginia Ratifying Convention" label="Virginia Ratifying Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="1485" end="1511" title="United States Constitution" label="United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q60675926" start="1541" end="1568" title="Richard Clough Anderson Sr." label="Richard Clough Anderson Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q5602421" start="1573" end="1583" title="Green Clay" label="Green Clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q14595679" start="1669" end="1675" title="Ensign (rank)" label="ensign"/>
<link wikidata="Q5221379" start="1839" end="1862" title="Danville Political Club" label="Danville Political Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q956056" start="1893" end="1914" title="Transylvania University" label="Transylvania Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q503442" start="1975" end="2000" title="Woodford County, Kentucky" label="Woodford County, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q641208" start="2064" end="2082" title="clerk of the court" label="clerk of the court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7116266" start="2086" end="2103" title="oyer and terminer" label="oyer and terminer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5510682" start="2160" end="2174" title="United States Senate elections, 1794 and 1795" label="1794 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386353" start="2298" end="2315" title="Humphrey Marshall (politician)" label="Humphrey Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q959976" start="2341" end="2358" title="John Breckinridge (Virginia and Kentucky)" label="John Breckinridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q432795" start="2396" end="2408" title="John Edwards (Kentucky)" label="John Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="2443" end="2481" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573610" start="2539" end="2544" title="Fifth United States Congress" label="Fifth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395126" start="2546" end="2551" title="Sixth United States Congress" label="Sixth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1906490" start="2553" end="2560" title="Seventh United States Congress" label="Seventh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4645488" start="2562" end="2568" title="Eighth United States Congress" label="Eighth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4646693" start="2574" end="2579" title="Ninth United States Congress" label="Ninth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416611" start="2809" end="2819" title="postmaster" label="postmaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q461696" start="3216" end="3224" title="barbeque" label="barbeque"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624404" start="3324" end="3342" title="Carlisle, Kentucky" label="Carlisle, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3351" end="3378" title="Concord Presbyterian Church (Kentucky)" label="Concord Presbyterian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383286" start="3612" end="3634" title="Episcopal Burying Ground and Chapel (Lexington, Kentucky)" label="Old Episcopal Cemetery"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="144670" wikidata="Q343876" url="?curid=144670" title="Billboard (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Billboard]] is a large outdoor sign usually used for advertising.

Billboard may also refer to:

==Arts and entertainment==
* &quot;Billboard&quot; (magazine), a music and entertainment media brand
** Billboard charts, inspired by the magazine
** Billboard Music Award, sponsored by the magazine
* &quot;Billboard Türkiye&quot;, official Turkish chart magazine founded in 2006
* Billboard, a large film poster called a &quot;Twenty four sheet&quot;
* &quot;Billboard&quot;, an episode of the sitcom &quot;Malcolm in the Middle&quot; 
* &quot;Billboard&quot;, television ident for BBC Two used in 1992, from the 1991-2001 series of idents
* &quot;Three Billboards Outside Ebbing, Missouri&quot;, 2017 crime drama film

==Other uses==
* The Billboard, a massive granite monolith in West Antarctica
* Billboard, a 3D computer graphics sprite that is always facing the viewer

==See also==
* Billboard antenna, an array of parallel antennas with flat reflectors</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q343876" start="0" end="13" title="Billboard (disambiguation)" label="[[Billboard]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q343876" start="69" end="78" title="Billboard (disambiguation)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="128" end="160" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; (magazine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19754079" start="203" end="219" title="Billboard charts" label="Billboard charts"/>
<link wikidata="Q392565" start="249" end="270" title="Billboard Music Award" label="Billboard Music Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579123" start="306" end="323" title="Billboard Türkiye" label="Billboard Türkiye"/>
<link wikidata="Q374821" start="400" end="411" title="film poster" label="film poster"/>
<link wikidata="" start="479" end="534" title="List of Malcolm in the Middle episodes#Season 6: 2004–2005" label="episode of the sitcom &amp;quot;Malcolm in the Middle&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834992" start="613" end="622" title="BBC Two &amp;#x27;1991-2001&amp;#x27; idents" label="1991-2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q24053277" start="648" end="689" title="Three Billboards Outside Ebbing, Missouri" label="Three Billboards Outside Ebbing, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q7717994" start="737" end="750" title="The Billboard" label="The Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333015" start="834" end="840" title="sprite (computer graphics)" label="sprite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7307317" start="890" end="907" title="Billboard antenna" label="Billboard antenna"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="144672" wikidata="Q368762" url="?curid=144672" title="Thomas Bouch">
<text>Sir Thomas Bouch (; 22 February 1822 – 30 October 1880) was a British railway engineer. He was born in Thursby, near Carlisle, Cumberland, and lived in Edinburgh. As manager of the Edinburgh and Northern Railway he introduced the first roll-on/roll-off train ferry service in the world. Subsequently as a consulting engineer, he helped develop the caisson and popularised the use of lattice girders in railway bridges. He was knighted after the successful completion of the first Tay Railway Bridge, but his reputation was destroyed by the subsequent Tay Bridge disaster, in which 75 people are believed to have died as a result of defects in design, construction and maintenance, for all of which Bouch was held responsible. He died within 18 months of being knighted.

== Early career ==

Bouch&#x27;s father (a retired sea-captain) kept the Ship Inn at Thursby and Thomas was educated locally (Thursby and then Carlisle) before at the age of 17 beginning his civil engineering career as assistant to one of the engineers constructing the Lancaster and Carlisle Railway. After a short spell working in Leeds (1844–45) he was for four years one of the Resident Engineers on the Stockton and Darlington Railway, leaving in 1849 to become manager and engineer of the Edinburgh and Northern Railway, one of the precursors of the North British Railway. He introduced the first roll-on roll-off train ferries in the world, across the Firth of Forth from Granton to Burntisland in Fife (3 February 1850.) Others had had similar ideas, but Bouch put them into effect, and did so with an attention to detail (such as design of the ferry slip) which led a subsequent President of the Institution of Civil Engineers to settle any dispute over priority of invention with the observation that &quot;there was little merit in a simple conception of this kind, compared with a work practically carried out in all its details, and brought to perfection.&quot;

==Railway and bridge designer==
Bouch then set up on his own as a railway engineer, working chiefly in Scotland and Northern England. Lines he designed include four connecting lines all built by separate companies, which together allowed a direct connection between the West Cumbrian haematite mines and the area served by the Stockton and Darlington (which was behind them):
* the Darlington and Barnard Castle Railway (20 miles, completed 1856)
* the South Durham and Lancashire Union Railway (from a junction near West Auckland via Barnard Castle, over Stainmore via Kirkby Stephen to a junction with the West Coast Main Line at Tebay (50 miles, completed 1861 (Barnard Castle – Tebay) 1863 (remainder), total cost £666,879) This included his viaduct over the Gaunless.)
*the Eden Valley Railway (Kirkby Stephen to Penrith, 22 miles, completed 1862, cost £204,803)
*the Cockermouth, Keswick and Penrith Railway (31 miles (including 135 bridges), completed 1864, constructed for £267,000)
His response to a toast at a dinner after the cutting of the first sod on the Eden Railway gave his philosophy on the engineering of those lines:The works were all of a light and inexpensive character, and if he gave them a first-class railway, - one upon which any speed attainable by a locomotive engine could be run with perfect safety and ease - if he gave it without any extravagance, then he should only have done his duty, but if he failed then he should deserve all the obloquy and discredit attaching to the failure of light works. … Mr Whitwell had spoken of his character as a maker of cheap railways, but in giving a cheap Eden Valley railway he had relied entirely upon the easy district, and not on inferiority of the works. The line would be carried out in the most permanent and substantial manner possible. 
He made considerable use of lattice girder bridges, both with conventional masonry piers and with iron lattice piers; the most notable examples of the latter being on the Stainmore line: the Deepdale and Belah Viaducts. A contemporary treatise on iron bridges praised the detailed engineering of the Belah viaduct piers (and described the viaduct as one of the lightest and cheapest of the kind that had ever been erected.)

Elsewhere, Bouch&#x27;s forte was cheapness, and an ability to construct branch lines at a capital cost that might allow them to pay their way, especially if operated frugally (In 1854 Bouch advised the directors of the Peebles Railway that the company should work the line themselves, as they could do so much more economically than a large undertaking.) Examples included branches to St Andrews, to Leven, and to Peebles, the Peebles line being described in his obituary as &quot;long the pattern for cheap construction&quot;. This could leave over-optimistic clients with a railway designed and built to a price and not making enough money to support proper maintenance (and hence laying up problems for itself as an accident on the St Andrews Railway showed).

Bouch did the initial survey for the Edinburgh Suburban and Southside Junction Railway, laid out tramway systems in Edinburgh, Glasgow, Dundee and London, and designed the Redheugh viaduct a road bridge across the Tyne at the same height as and not far upstream of Stephenson&#x27;s High Level Bridge. He also designed Hownes Gill Viaduct in Consett, County Durham, which at long and using a 12-arch design constructed in brick, carried the Stanhope and Tyne Railway above Hownsgill. Today it forms part of the Sea to Sea Cycle Route.

Bouch returned repeatedly to the problem of bridging the two great East Coast firths. Eventually authorisation was given to bridge both the Tay and the Forth; in both cases Bouch was the engineer selected to design the bridge.

== Tay Bridge ==
Bouch designed the first Tay Rail Bridge while working for the North British Railway, and the official opening took place in May 1878. Queen Victoria travelled over it in late June 1879, and she awarded him a knighthood in recognition of his achievement. The bridge collapsed on 28 December 1879, in the Tay Bridge disaster, when it was hit by strong side winds. A train was travelling over it at the time, and 75 people died.

The subsequent public inquiry revealed that the contractors to the railway company sacrificed safety and durability to save costs. Sloppy work practices, such as poor casting of the metal, and the re-use of girders dropped into the estuary during construction, were factors in the bridge&#x27;s collapse.

The minority report of the inquiry concluded that the bridge was &quot;badly designed, badly built, and badly maintained&quot;. The entire &quot;high girders&quot; section, in which trains ran inside the girders rather than on top of them, fell during the accident, taking the train with it. Analysis of the archives has shown that the design, which featured cast-iron columns with integral lugs holding the tie bars, was a critical mistake, because cast iron is brittle under tension. Many similar bridges had been built using cast-iron columns and wrought iron tie bars, but none used that particular design detail. Gustave Eiffel built many such bridges in France in the 1860s, some surviving and still carrying railway traffic.

Being the engineer, Thomas Bouch was blamed for the collapse of the Tay bridge. His assistant, Charles Meik, conveyed the impression that he &quot;was aptly named&quot;, implying that he had no real influence over the design and construction.

===Aftermath of the disaster===

====South Esk Viaduct====
After the inquiry, Bouch rapidly removed and reinforced similar lugs on the new bridge he had built, the South Esk Viaduct, at Montrose, but after another inspection, the bridge was demolished and replaced.

====Tay Bridge====
The remains of the original Tay bridge were demolished and replaced by an entirely new design by William Henry Barlow and his son Crawford Barlow. Some of the wrought iron girders were re-used in the new double track bridge by cutting them in half and re-welding to form wider structures for the track. The brick and masonry piers from the old bridge were left as breakwaters for the new piers, which were monocoques of wrought iron and steel.

==== Forth Bridge ====
Bouch&#x27;s design for a suspension bridge to take a railway across the Firth of Forth, had been accepted and the foundation stone laid, but the project was cancelled following the Tay Bridge disaster. One of the piers still remains at the site. A different design, a cantilever bridge, was drawn up by Sir Benjamin Baker and Sir John Fowler. The Forth Bridge was completed in 1890.

==Other works==

Bouch also seems to have been involved in the design of pleasure piers. He designed Portobello Pier in 1869, which opened in 1871. The structure rusted badly and by 1917 was uneconomic to repair and was demolished.

==Family==
Thomas was a brother of William Bouch, the railway engine designer. Thomas married Margaret Forrest in Longtown, Cumberland, in early 1856. There were three children: Fanny, born 1854; Elizabeth Ann, born 1856; William, born 1859.

==Death==
Thomas Bouch bought a country house in Moffat, &quot;his health&quot;, already not good, &quot;more rapidly gave way... under the shock and distress of mind&quot; caused by the disaster. However he kept offices in Edinburgh, at 111 George Street, his Edinburgh address being 6 Oxford Terrace, near Dean Bridge.

He died at his house in Moffat on 30 October 1880 a few months after the public inquiry into the disaster finished. He is buried very close by, in Dean Cemetery. &quot;In his death&quot;, said the journal of the Institution of Civil Engineers, &quot;the profession has to lament one who, though perhaps carrying his works nearer to the margin of safety than many others would have done, displayed boldness, originality and resource in a high degree, and bore a distinguished part in the later development of the railway system&quot;.

== References ==
===Sources===
*Shipway, J S, &quot;The Oxford Dictionary of National Biography&quot;, Oxford University Press (2004)
*Lewis, Peter R, &quot;Beautiful Railway Bridge of the Silvery Tay&quot;, Tempus (2004)
*Rapley, John, &quot;Thomas Bouch: The Builder of the Tay Bridge&quot;, Tempus (2007)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q368762" start="0" end="16" title="Thomas Bouch" label="Sir Thomas Bouch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4260703" start="70" end="86" title="railway engineer" label="railway engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020242" start="103" end="110" title="Thursby" label="Thursby"/>
<link wikidata="Q192896" start="117" end="125" title="Carlisle, Cumbria" label="Carlisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q23360" start="127" end="137" title="Cumberland" label="Cumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="152" end="161" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5338300" start="181" end="211" title="Edinburgh and Northern Railway" label="Edinburgh and Northern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q473932" start="236" end="252" title="roll-on/roll-off" label="roll-on/roll-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q15262" start="253" end="264" title="train ferry" label="train ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q846451" start="348" end="355" title="Caisson (engineering)" label="caisson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497114" start="383" end="397" title="lattice girder" label="lattice girder"/>
<link wikidata="Q6480690" start="480" end="498" title="Tay Rail Bridge" label="Tay Railway Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287158" start="551" end="570" title="Tay Bridge disaster" label="Tay Bridge disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q77590" start="962" end="979" title="civil engineering" label="civil engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801779" start="1041" end="1071" title="Lancaster and Carlisle Railway" label="Lancaster and Carlisle Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q39121" start="1104" end="1109" title="Leeds" label="Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q375044" start="1179" end="1210" title="Stockton and Darlington Railway" label="Stockton and Darlington Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5338300" start="1266" end="1296" title="Edinburgh and Northern Railway" label="Edinburgh and Northern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750203" start="1327" end="1348" title="North British Railway" label="North British Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q202083" start="1430" end="1444" title="Firth of Forth" label="Firth of Forth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3115421" start="1450" end="1457" title="Granton, Edinburgh" label="Granton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011521" start="1461" end="1472" title="Burntisland" label="Burntisland"/>
<link wikidata="Q100355757" start="1624" end="1634" title="ferry slip" label="ferry slip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665181" start="1676" end="1706" title="Institution of Civil Engineers" label="Institution of Civil Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q103223" start="2231" end="2240" title="haematite" label="haematite"/>
<link wikidata="Q60740572" start="2329" end="2366" title="Darlington and Barnard Castle Railway" label="Darlington and Barnard Castle Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567088" start="2400" end="2441" title="South Durham and Lancashire Union Railway" label="South Durham and Lancashire Union Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1957386" start="2464" end="2477" title="West Auckland, Durham" label="West Auckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q808437" start="2482" end="2496" title="Barnard Castle" label="Barnard Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2412710" start="2503" end="2512" title="Stainmore" label="Stainmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1838138" start="2517" end="2531" title="Kirkby Stephen" label="Kirkby Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q19889" start="2555" end="2575" title="West Coast Main Line" label="West Coast Main Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520387" start="2579" end="2584" title="Tebay" label="Tebay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527701" start="2689" end="2718" title="Gaunless Viaduct" label="his viaduct over the Gaunless"/>
<link wikidata="Q5336953" start="2726" end="2745" title="Eden Valley Railway" label="Eden Valley Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105286" start="2820" end="2860" title="Cockermouth, Keswick and Penrith Railway" label="Cockermouth, Keswick and Penrith Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q13528046" start="3967" end="3980" title="Belah Viaduct" label="Belah Viaduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q207736" start="4574" end="4584" title="St Andrews" label="St Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q672948" start="4589" end="4594" title="Leven, Fife" label="Leven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011507" start="4603" end="4610" title="Peebles" label="Peebles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5338267" start="4990" end="5039" title="Edinburgh Suburban and Southside Junction Railway" label="Edinburgh Suburban and Southside Junction Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7305896" start="5125" end="5141" title="Redheugh Bridge" label="Redheugh viaduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617778" start="5236" end="5253" title="High Level Bridge, River Tyne" label="High Level Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5922469" start="5272" end="5291" title="Hownes Gill Viaduct" label="Hownes Gill Viaduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080364" start="5295" end="5302" title="Consett" label="Consett"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598870" start="5394" end="5419" title="Stanhope and Tyne Railway" label="Stanhope and Tyne Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440138" start="5464" end="5486" title="Sea to Sea Cycle Route" label="Sea to Sea Cycle Route"/>
<link wikidata="Q6480690" start="5759" end="5774" title="Tay Rail Bridge" label="Tay Rail Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="5869" end="5883" title="Victoria of the United Kingdom" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q102083" start="5943" end="5953" title="knighthood" label="knighthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287158" start="6038" end="6057" title="Tay Bridge disaster" label="Tay Bridge disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268371" start="6329" end="6336" title="casting (metalworking)" label="casting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371480" start="6369" end="6375" title="girder" label="girder"/>
<link wikidata="Q483269" start="6827" end="6836" title="cast iron" label="cast-iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q860451" start="7018" end="7030" title="wrought iron" label="wrought iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q20882" start="7086" end="7100" title="Gustave Eiffel" label="Gustave Eiffel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5080886" start="7296" end="7308" title="Charles Meik" label="Charles Meik"/>
<link wikidata="Q14992745" start="7609" end="7626" title="South Esk Viaduct" label="South Esk Viaduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q420303" start="7631" end="7639" title="Montrose (Angus)" label="Montrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568691" start="7828" end="7848" title="William Henry Barlow" label="William Henry Barlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q860451" start="7890" end="7902" title="wrought iron" label="wrought iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q215635" start="8095" end="8105" title="Breakwater (structure)" label="breakwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161151" start="8137" end="8146" title="monocoque" label="monocoque"/>
<link wikidata="Q12570" start="8225" end="8242" title="suspension bridge" label="suspension bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q202083" start="8272" end="8286" title="Firth of Forth" label="Firth of Forth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287158" start="8381" end="8400" title="Tay Bridge disaster" label="Tay Bridge disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429218" start="8468" end="8485" title="cantilever bridge" label="cantilever bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q817394" start="8503" end="8521" title="Benjamin Baker (engineer)" label="Sir Benjamin Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700096" start="8526" end="8541" title="Sir John Fowler, 1st Baronet" label="Sir John Fowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q275" start="8547" end="8559" title="Forth Bridge" label="Forth Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q21003946" start="8685" end="8700" title="Portobello Pier" label="Portobello Pier"/>
<link wikidata="Q8005742" start="8852" end="8865" title="William Bouch" label="William Bouch"/>
<link wikidata="Q646784" start="9109" end="9115" title="Moffat" label="Moffat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5246025" start="9368" end="9379" title="Dean Bridge" label="Dean Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5246062" start="9529" end="9542" title="Dean Cemetery" label="Dean Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665181" start="9594" end="9624" title="Institution of Civil Engineers" label="Institution of Civil Engineers"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="144673" wikidata="Q829363" url="?curid=144673" title="List of Edinburgh festivals">
<text>This is a list of arts and cultural festivals regularly taking place in Edinburgh, Scotland.

The city has become known for its festivals since the establishment in 1947 of the Edinburgh International Festival and the Edinburgh Festival Fringe which runs alongside it. The latter is the largest event of its kind in the world.

The term Edinburgh Festival is commonly used, but there is no single festival; the various festivals are put on by separate, unrelated organisations. However they are widely regarded as part of the same event, particularly the various festivals that take place simultaneously in August each year. The term &quot;Edinburgh Festival&quot; is often used to refer more specifically to the Fringe, being the largest of the festivals; or sometimes to the International Festival, being the original &quot;official&quot; arts festival. Within the industry, people refer to all the festivals collectively as the Edinburgh Festivals (plural).

== The festivals ==
Listed in chronological order by 2018 start date, with year of foundation in brackets

===April===
* Dead by Dawn (1993)
* Edinburgh International Science Festival (1988)

===Easter time===
* Ceilidh Culture (1951)

===May===
* Edinburgh International Children&#x27;s Festival (formerly the Imaginate Festival) (1990)

===June===
* Leith Festival (1907)
* Leith Jazz and Blues Festival
* Edinburgh International Film Festival (1947) 
* Edinburgh Annuale (2004)

===July===
* Edinburgh International Magic Festival (2010)
* Edinburgh Jazz and Blues Festival (1978)

===August===
* Edinburgh International Festival (1947)
* Edinburgh Festival Fringe (1947) 
* Edinburgh International Film Festival (1947)
* Royal Edinburgh Military Tattoo (1950)
* Edinburgh International Television Festival (1976)
* Edinburgh International Book Festival (1983)
* Edinburgh Mela (1995)
* Edinburgh Art Festival (2004)
* Just Festival (formerly the Festival of Spirituality and Peace) (2005)
* Fringe of Colour (2018)

===October===
* Leith Comedy Festival (2020)
* Africa in Motion (2006)
* Scottish International Storytelling Festival (1990)
* Festival of Politics (2005)
* Edinburgh Horror Festival (2016)

===December===
* Edinburgh&#x27;s Hogmanay (1994)

===Uncertain dates===
* Edinburgh People&#x27;s Festival (2002, but claims heritage from earlier festival of same name 1951–1954)

===Defunct festivals===
* Edinburgh Interactive Festival (2003)
* Edinburgh International Internet Festival (1999)
* Edinburgh Swing Festival (2006)
* Fringe Film Festival (1984 - 1990)
* Fringe Film &amp; Video Festival (FFVF) (1991 - 1996)
* iFest (2007) — the Internet Festival and Conference
* West Port Book Festival (2008) – a free book festival involving secondhand bookshops in the West Port area

== Notes and references ==
== External links ==

* Edinburgh Festival City
* Edinburgh Festivals a guide to the festivals that take place in Edinburgh which are members of Festivals Edinburgh
* EdinburghFestivalGuide.co.uk a comprehensive listing of all (small and large) Edinburgh festivals
* A History of the Edinburgh Festivals
* Edinburgh Festival Classroom resources
*National Library of Scotland: SCOTTISH SCREEN ARCHIVE (selection of archive films about the Edinburgh Festival)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4801521" start="18" end="45" title="Arts festival" label="arts and cultural festivals"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="72" end="81" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="83" end="91" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151919" start="177" end="209" title="Edinburgh International Festival" label="Edinburgh International Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q368176" start="218" end="243" title="Edinburgh Festival Fringe" label="Edinburgh Festival Fringe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5245468" start="1083" end="1095" title="Dead by Dawn (film festival)" label="Dead by Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5338211" start="1105" end="1145" title="Edinburgh International Science Festival" label="Edinburgh International Science Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q5057364" start="1174" end="1189" title="Ceilidh Culture" label="Ceilidh Culture"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1210" end="1258" title="Edinburgh International Children&amp;#x27;s Festival" label="Edinburgh International Children&amp;#x27;s Festival"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1273" end="1291" title="Imaginate Festival" label="Imaginate Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932477" start="1314" end="1328" title="Leith Festival" label="Leith Festival"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1338" end="1367" title="Leith Jazz and Blues Festival" label="Leith Jazz and Blues Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284745" start="1370" end="1407" title="Edinburgh International Film Festival" label="Edinburgh International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q5338144" start="1418" end="1435" title="Edinburgh Annuale" label="Edinburgh Annuale"/>
<link wikidata="Q16834839" start="1457" end="1495" title="Edinburgh International Magic Festival" label="Edinburgh International Magic Festival"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1505" end="1538" title="Edinburgh Jazz and Blues Festival" label="Edinburgh Jazz and Blues Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151919" start="1562" end="1594" title="Edinburgh International Festival" label="Edinburgh International Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q368176" start="1604" end="1629" title="Edinburgh Festival Fringe" label="Edinburgh Festival Fringe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284745" start="1640" end="1677" title="Edinburgh International Film Festival" label="Edinburgh International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284748" start="1687" end="1718" title="Royal Edinburgh Military Tattoo" label="Royal Edinburgh Military Tattoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070607" start="1728" end="1771" title="Edinburgh International Television Festival" label="Edinburgh International Television Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q4351301" start="1781" end="1818" title="Edinburgh International Book Festival" label="Edinburgh International Book Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q5338219" start="1828" end="1842" title="Edinburgh Mela" label="Edinburgh Mela"/>
<link wikidata="Q5338146" start="1852" end="1874" title="Edinburgh Art Festival" label="Edinburgh Art Festival"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1884" end="1897" title="Just Festival" label="Just Festival"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1912" end="1946" title="Festival of Spirituality and Peace" label="Festival of Spirituality and Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q108810988" start="1957" end="1973" title="Fringe of Colour" label="Fringe of Colour"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1998" end="2019" title="Leith Comedy Festival" label="Leith Comedy Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689611" start="2029" end="2045" title="Africa in Motion" label="Africa in Motion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2055" end="2099" title="Scottish International Storytelling Festival" label="Scottish International Storytelling Festival"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2109" end="2129" title="Festival of Politics" label="Festival of Politics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2139" end="2164" title="Edinburgh Horror Festival" label="Edinburgh Horror Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q24197201" start="2190" end="2215" title="Edinburgh&amp;#x27;s Hogmanay" label="Edinburgh&amp;#x27;s Hogmanay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5338236" start="2248" end="2280" title="Edinburgh People&amp;#x27;s Festival" label="Edinburgh People&amp;#x27;s Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q5991164" start="2599" end="2604" title="Ifest" label="iFest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7986277" start="2653" end="2676" title="West Port Book Festival" label="West Port Book Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q4019090" start="2745" end="2754" title="West Port, Edinburgh" label="West Port"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="144674" wikidata="Q5326798" url="?curid=144674" title="Early day motion">
<text>In the Westminster parliamentary system, an early day motion (EDM) is a motion, expressed as a single sentence, tabled by a member of Parliament, which the Government (in charge of parliamentary business) has not yet scheduled for debate. 

==History and uses==
The name derives from the idea that an MP who tables one is calling for a debate on the topic covered by the motion to be held &quot;on an early day&quot;. In practice, early day motions are rarely debated in the House, and their main purpose is to draw attention to particular subjects of interest. Government ministers, Whips, Parliamentary Private Secretaries, the Speaker of the House of Commons and Deputy Speakers do not normally sign EDMs. EDMs remain open for signature for the duration of the parliamentary session.

EDMs can be tabled on matters ranging from trivial or humorous topics to those of great importance. The censure motion by which the Labour Government of James Callaghan was ejected had its origin in an early day motion (no. 351 of 1978–79), put down on 22 March 1979, by Margaret Thatcher.

MPs may ensure the text of an EDM is printed in Hansard by mentioning it by number in questions to the Leader of the House of Commons after the Business Statement (normally on a Thursday when the house is in session).

EDMs tabled on serious topics have included one demanding the release of Nelson Mandela when he was incarcerated in apartheid South Africa, and one calling for a consultation on the fingerprinting of children in schools without parental permission. Shortly after the 2005 general election, 412 of the 646 MPs signed EDM 178 calling for a Climate Change Bill; only three other early day motions had ever been signed by more than 400 MPs.

In the 2021-2022 Parliamentary session, an Early Day Motion which expressed support for WAVE Trust&#x27;s 70/30 campaign to reduce child maltreatment by 70% by 2030 achieved the support of 151 Members of Parliament and, in doing so, became the most supported EDM of that particular session.

== Criticism ==
Conservative MP Robert Courts has been an outspoken critic of EDMs, describing them as &quot;parliamentary graffiti.&quot; Courts has said that EDMs are generally tabled by MPs on behalf of &quot;lobbyists or groups keen to show themselves as doing something&quot;, that they are &quot;politically impotent&quot; and a waste of taxpayers&#x27; money.

==See also==
* Adjournment debate

==References==
== External links ==
*Early Day Motions Database
*Volunteer run site with Early Day Motions re-presented and supplying raw data</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q720477" start="7" end="39" title="Westminster parliamentary system" label="Westminster parliamentary system"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326798" start="44" end="60" title="Early day motion" label="early day motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326798" start="62" end="65" title="Early day motion" label="EDM"/>
<link wikidata="Q452237" start="72" end="78" title="motion (parliamentary procedure)" label="motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7673125" start="112" end="118" title="table (parliamentary procedure)" label="tabled"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="122" end="144" title="member of Parliament" label="a member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q83307" start="562" end="582" title="Minister (government)" label="Government ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433693" start="584" end="589" title="Whip (politics)" label="Whips"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477321" start="591" end="624" title="Parliamentary Private Secretary" label="Parliamentary Private Secretaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q464103" start="630" end="661" title="Speaker of the House of Commons (United Kingdom)" label="Speaker of the House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812889" start="764" end="785" title="parliamentary session" label="parliamentary session"/>
<link wikidata="Q329547" start="892" end="906" title="motion of censure" label="censure motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q9576" start="941" end="956" title="James Callaghan" label="James Callaghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4579001" start="957" end="968" title="1979 vote of no confidence in the Callaghan ministry" label="was ejected"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="1059" end="1076" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q524352" start="1127" end="1134" title="Hansard" label="Hansard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636053" start="1182" end="1212" title="Leader of the House of Commons" label="Leader of the House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1223" end="1241" title="Business Statement" label="Business Statement"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023" start="1371" end="1385" title="Nelson Mandela" label="Nelson Mandela"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="1414" end="1423" title="apartheid" label="apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="1424" end="1436" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q428598" start="1565" end="1586" title="2005 United Kingdom general election" label="2005 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133407" start="1636" end="1655" title="Climate Change Act 2008" label="Climate Change Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="2044" end="2056" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q27671735" start="2060" end="2073" title="Robert Courts" label="Robert Courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683179" start="2411" end="2429" title="Adjournment debate" label="Adjournment debate"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="144676" wikidata="Q554830" url="?curid=144676" title="Man-in-the-middle attack">
<text>In cryptography and computer security, a man-in-the-middle (MITM) attack, or on-path attack, is a cyberattack where the attacker secretly relays and possibly alters the communications between two parties who believe that they are directly communicating with each other, where in actuality the attacker has inserted themselves between the two user parties.

One example of a MITM attack is active eavesdropping, in which the attacker makes independent connections with the victims and relays messages between them to make them believe they are talking directly to each other over a private connection, when in fact the entire conversation is controlled by the attacker. In this scenario, the attacker must be able to intercept all relevant messages passing between the two victims and inject new ones. This is straightforward in many circumstances; for example, an attacker within range of a Wi-Fi access point hosting a network without encryption could insert themselves as a man in the middle.

As it aims to circumvent mutual authentication, a MITM attack can succeed only when the attacker impersonates each endpoint sufficiently well to satisfy their expectations. Most cryptographic protocols include some form of endpoint authentication specifically to prevent MITM attacks. For example, TLS can authenticate one or both parties using a mutually trusted certificate authority.

== Example ==
Suppose Alice wishes to communicate with Bob. Meanwhile, Mallory wishes to intercept the conversation to eavesdrop (breaking confidentiality) with the option to deliver a false message to Bob under the guise of Alice (breaking non-repudiation). Mallory would perform a man-in-the-middle attack as described in the following sequence of events.

# Alice sends a message to Bob, which is intercepted by Mallory:
#: Alice &quot;Hi Bob, it&#x27;s Alice. Give me your key.&quot; →     Mallory     Bob
# Mallory relays this message to Bob; Bob cannot tell it is not really from Alice:
#: Alice     Mallory &quot;Hi Bob, it&#x27;s Alice. Give me your key.&quot; →     Bob
# Bob responds with his encryption key:
#: Alice     Mallory     ← &quot;[Bob&#x27;s key]&quot; Bob
# Mallory replaces Bob&#x27;s key with her own, and relays this to Alice, claiming that it is Bob&#x27;s key:
#: Alice     ← &quot;[Mallory&#x27;s key]&quot; Mallory     Bob
# Alice encrypts a message with what she believes to be Bob&#x27;s key, thinking that only Bob can read it:
#: Alice &quot;&quot;Meet me at the bus stop!&quot; [encrypted with Mallory&#x27;s key]&quot; →     Mallory     Bob
# However, because it was actually encrypted with Mallory&#x27;s key, Mallory can decrypt it, read it, modify it (if desired), re-encrypt with Bob&#x27;s key, and forward it to Bob:
#: Alice     Mallory &quot;&quot;Meet me at the park!&quot; [encrypted with Bob&#x27;s key]&quot; →     Bob
# Bob thinks that this message is a secure communication from Alice.
This example shows the need for Alice and Bob to have a means to ensure that they are truly each using each other&#x27;s public keys, and not the public key of an attacker. Otherwise, such attacks are generally possible, in principle, against any message sent using public-key technology.

==Types of MITM==
There are several attack types that can fall into the category of MITM. The most notable are:
#HTTPS Spoofing: The attacker tricks the victim into believing their connection is secure by substituting a fake SSL/TLS certificate.
#SSL/TLS Stripping: Downgrades HTTPS traffic to HTTP, intercepting and reading unencrypted data.
#ARP Spoofing: Sends fake ARP messages to associate the attacker’s MAC address with a target IP, intercepting local network traffic.
#DNS Spoofing/Poisoning: Redirects DNS queries to malicious servers, leading victims to fake websites.
#Session Hijacking: Steals session cookies or tokens to impersonate a legitimate user in an active session.
#Man-in-the-Browser (MITB): Malware alters browser activity, intercepting or manipulating transactions in real-time.
#Wi-Fi MITM (Evil Twin Attack): Creates a fake Wi-Fi hotspot to intercept communications from connected devices.
#Email Hijacking: Intercepts email exchanges to manipulate or steal sensitive information.
#Replay Attacks: Captures and retransmits valid data to repeat actions or disrupt communication.
#Fake Certificate Authority (CA): Uses a fraudulent CA to sign fake certificates, tricking victims into trusting malicious connections.

== Defense and detection ==
MITM attacks can be prevented or detected by two means: authentication and tamper detection. Authentication provides some degree of certainty that a given message has come from a legitimate source. Tamper detection merely shows evidence that a message may have been altered and has broken integrity.

=== Authentication ===
All cryptographic systems that are secure against MITM attacks provide some method of authentication for messages. Most require an exchange of information (such as public keys) in addition to the message over a secure channel. Such protocols, often using key-agreement protocols, have been developed with different security requirements for the secure channel, though some have attempted to remove the requirement for any secure channel at all.

A public key infrastructure, such as Transport Layer Security, may harden Transmission Control Protocol against MITM attacks. In such structures, clients and servers exchange certificates which are issued and verified by a trusted third party called a certificate authority (CA). If the original key to authenticate this CA has not been itself the subject of a MITM attack, then the certificates issued by the CA may be used to authenticate the messages sent by the owner of that certificate. Use of mutual authentication, in which both the server and the client validate the other&#x27;s communication, covers both ends of a MITM attack. If the server or client&#x27;s identity is not verified or deemed as invalid, the session will end. However, the default behavior of most connections is to only authenticate the server, which means mutual authentication is not always employed and MITM attacks can still occur.

Attestments, such as verbal communications of a shared value (as in ZRTP), or recorded attestments such as audio/visual recordings of a public key hash are used to ward off MITM attacks, as visual media is much more difficult and time-consuming to imitate than simple data packet communication. However, these methods require a human in the loop in order to successfully initiate the transaction.

HTTP Public Key Pinning (HPKP), sometimes called &quot;certificate pinning&quot;, helps prevent a MITM attack in which the certificate authority itself is compromised, by having the server provide a list of &quot;pinned&quot; public key hashes during the first transaction. Subsequent transactions then require one or more of the keys in the list must be used by the server in order to authenticate that transaction.

DNSSEC extends the DNS protocol to use signatures to authenticate DNS records, preventing simple MITM attacks from directing a client to a malicious IP address.

=== Tamper detection ===
Latency examination can potentially detect the attack in certain situations, such as with long calculations that lead into tens of seconds like hash functions. To detect potential attacks, parties check for discrepancies in response times. For example: Say that two parties normally take a certain amount of time to perform a particular transaction. If one transaction, however, were to take an abnormal length of time to reach the other party, this could be indicative of a third party&#x27;s presence interfering with the connection and inserting additional latency in the transaction.

Quantum cryptography, in theory, provides tamper-evidence for transactions through the no-cloning theorem. Protocols based on quantum cryptography typically authenticate part or all of their classical communication with an unconditionally secure authentication scheme. As an example Wegman-Carter authentication.

=== Forensic analysis ===
Captured network traffic from what is suspected to be an attack can be analyzed in order to determine whether there was an attack and, if so, determine the source of the attack. Important evidence to analyze when performing network forensics on a suspected attack includes:
* IP address of the server
* DNS name of the server
* X.509 certificate of the server
** Whether the certificate has been self signed
** Whether the certificate has been signed by a trusted certificate authority
** Whether the certificate has been revoked
** Whether the certificate has been changed recently
** Whether other clients, elsewhere on the Internet, received the same certificate

== Notable instances ==
A Stingray phone tracker is a cellular phone surveillance device that mimics a wireless carrier cell tower in order to force all nearby mobile phones and other cellular data devices to connect to it. The tracker relays all communications back and forth between cellular phones and cell towers. 

In 2011, a security breach of the Dutch certificate authority DigiNotar resulted in the fraudulent issuing of certificates. Subsequently, the fraudulent certificates were used to perform MITM attacks.

In 2013, Nokia&#x27;s Xpress Browser was revealed to be decrypting HTTPS traffic on Nokia&#x27;s proxy servers, giving the company clear text access to its customers&#x27; encrypted browser traffic. Nokia responded by saying that the content was not stored permanently, and that the company had organizational and technical measures to prevent access to private information.

In 2017, Equifax withdrew its mobile phone apps following concern about MITM vulnerabilities.

Bluetooth, a wireless communication protocol, has also been susceptible to man-in-the-middle attacks due to its wireless transmission of data.

Other notable real-life implementations include the following:
* DSniff the first public implementation of MITM attacks against SSL and SSHv1
* Fiddler2 HTTP(S) diagnostic tool
* NSA impersonation of Google
* Superfish malware
* Forcepoint Content Gateway used to perform inspection of SSL traffic at the proxy
* Comcast uses MITM attacks to inject JavaScript code to 3rd party web pages, showing their own ads and messages on top of the pages
* 2015 Kazakhstan man-in-the-middle attack

== See also ==

*ARP spoofing – a technique by which an attacker sends Address Resolution Protocol messages onto a local area network
* Aspidistra transmitter a British radio transmitter used for World War II &quot;intrusion&quot; operations, an early MITM attack.
* Babington Plot the plot against Elizabeth I of England, where Francis Walsingham intercepted the correspondence.
* Computer security the design of secure computer systems.
* Cookiemonster attack a man-in-the-middle exploit.
* Cryptanalysis the art of deciphering encrypted messages with incomplete knowledge of how they were encrypted.
* Digital signature a cryptographic guarantee of the authenticity of a text, usually the result of a calculation only the author is expected to be able to perform.
* Evil maid attack attack used against full disk encryption systems
* Interlock protocol a specific protocol to circumvent a MITM attack when the keys may have been compromised.
* Key management how to manage cryptographic keys, including generation, exchange and storage.
* Key-agreement protocol a cryptographic protocol for establishing a key in which both parties can have confidence.
* Man-in-the-browser a type of web browser MITM
* Man-on-the-side attack a similar attack, giving only regular access to a communication channel.
* Mutual authentication how communicating parties establish confidence in one another&#x27;s identities.
* Password-authenticated key agreement a protocol for establishing a key using a password.
* Quantum cryptography the use of quantum mechanics to provide security in cryptography.
* Secure channel a way of communicating resistant to interception and tampering.
* Terrapin attack a downgrade attack on the ssh protocol that requires an adversary with a man-in-the-middle position.
== Notes ==
== References ==
==External links==
* Finding Hidden Threats by Decrypting SSL (PDF). SANS Institute.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8789" start="3" end="15" title="cryptography" label="cryptography"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510521" start="20" end="37" title="computer security" label="computer security"/>
<link wikidata="Q554830" start="41" end="58" title="Man-in-the-middle attack" label="man-in-the-middle"/>
<link wikidata="Q554830" start="60" end="64" title="Man-in-the-middle attack" label="MITM"/>
<link wikidata="Q554830" start="66" end="72" title="Man-in-the-middle attack" label="attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q554830" start="77" end="91" title="Man-in-the-middle attack" label="on-path attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q4071928" start="98" end="109" title="cyberattack" label="cyberattack"/>
<link wikidata="Q389772" start="169" end="183" title="Data communication" label="communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q104842639" start="396" end="409" title="Network eavesdropping" label="eavesdropping"/>
<link wikidata="Q326717" start="891" end="909" title="wireless access point" label="Wi-Fi access point"/>
<link wikidata="Q206494" start="1294" end="1297" title="Transport Layer Security" label="TLS"/>
<link wikidata="Q196776" start="1360" end="1381" title="certificate authority" label="certificate authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q649676" start="1406" end="1411" title="Alice and Bob" label="Alice"/>
<link wikidata="Q649676" start="1439" end="1442" title="Alice and Bob" label="Bob"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1455" end="1462" title="Alice and Bob#Mallory" label="Mallory"/>
<link wikidata="Q44484" start="3323" end="3328" title="HTTPS" label="HTTPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q206494" start="3457" end="3464" title="Transport Layer Security" label="SSL/TLS"/>
<link wikidata="Q15171" start="3554" end="3557" title="Address Resolution Protocol" label="ARP"/>
<link wikidata="Q296847" start="3558" end="3566" title="ARP spoofing" label="Spoofing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8767" start="3687" end="3690" title="Domain Name System" label="DNS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3700500" start="3691" end="3699" title="DNS spoofing" label="Spoofing"/>
<link wikidata="Q178995" start="3824" end="3831" title="HTTP cookie" label="cookies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888470" start="3918" end="3922" title="Man-in-the-browser" label="MITB"/>
<link wikidata="Q29643" start="4015" end="4020" title="Wi-Fi" label="Wi-Fi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707950" start="4027" end="4043" title="Evil twin (wireless networks)" label="Evil Twin Attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q9158" start="4128" end="4133" title="Email" label="Email"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756025" start="4219" end="4233" title="Replay attack" label="Replay Attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q196776" start="4321" end="4342" title="Certificate authority" label="Certificate Authority"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4678" end="4694" title="Tamper-evident technology#Computer systems" label="Tamper detection"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304359" start="5015" end="5029" title="secure channel" label="secure channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306713" start="5059" end="5081" title="key-agreement protocol" label="key-agreement protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q658476" start="5252" end="5277" title="public key infrastructure" label="public key infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q206494" start="5287" end="5311" title="Transport Layer Security" label="Transport Layer Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q8803" start="5324" end="5353" title="Transmission Control Protocol" label="Transmission Control Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q196776" start="5502" end="5523" title="certificate authority" label="certificate authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q6944186" start="5750" end="5771" title="mutual authentication" label="mutual authentication"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031896" start="6235" end="6239" title="ZRTP" label="ZRTP"/>
<link wikidata="Q20426300" start="6565" end="6588" title="HTTP Public Key Pinning" label="HTTP Public Key Pinning"/>
<link wikidata="Q41609" start="6983" end="6989" title="Domain Name System Security Extensions" label="DNSSEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q11135" start="7132" end="7142" title="IP address" label="IP address"/>
<link wikidata="Q477202" start="7314" end="7328" title="cryptographic hash function" label="hash functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q471906" start="7759" end="7779" title="Quantum cryptography" label="Quantum cryptography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751823" start="7846" end="7864" title="no-cloning theorem" label="no-cloning theorem"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8042" end="8070" title="Wegman-Carter authentication" label="Wegman-Carter authentication"/>
<link wikidata="Q54366" start="8099" end="8123" title="Packet capture" label="Captured network traffic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7001032" start="8323" end="8340" title="network forensics" label="network forensics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065865" start="8427" end="8432" title="X.509" label="X.509"/>
<link wikidata="Q196776" start="8563" end="8584" title="certificate authority" label="certificate authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q2146990" start="8621" end="8628" title="certificate revocation" label="revoked"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617439" start="8792" end="8814" title="Stingray phone tracker" label="Stingray phone tracker"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="8820" end="8834" title="cellular phone" label="cellular phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q603011" start="9148" end="9157" title="DigiNotar" label="DigiNotar"/>
<link wikidata="Q274758" start="9196" end="9208" title="Public key certificate" label="certificates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418" start="9297" end="9302" title="Nokia" label="Nokia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14623421" start="9310" end="9324" title="Xpress Browser" label="Xpress Browser"/>
<link wikidata="Q11189" start="9385" end="9397" title="proxy server" label="proxy server"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162538" start="9419" end="9429" title="clear text" label="clear text"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9673" end="9680" title="Equifax#2017 withdrawal of vulnerable mobile apps" label="Equifax"/>
<link wikidata="Q39531" start="9759" end="9768" title="Bluetooth" label="Bluetooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350040" start="9968" end="9974" title="DSniff" label="DSniff"/>
<link wikidata="Q17183696" start="10047" end="10055" title="Fiddler (software)" label="Fiddler2"/>
<link wikidata="Q121194" start="10082" end="10085" title="NSA" label="NSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q95" start="10103" end="10109" title="Google" label="Google"/>
<link wikidata="Q19326099" start="10112" end="10121" title="Superfish" label="Superfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934027" start="10132" end="10142" title="Forcepoint" label="Forcepoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q11189" start="10208" end="10213" title="Proxy server" label="proxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113804" start="10216" end="10223" title="Comcast" label="Comcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q65665939" start="10354" end="10389" title="Kazakhstan man-in-the-middle attack" label="Kazakhstan man-in-the-middle attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q296847" start="10408" end="10420" title="ARP spoofing" label="ARP spoofing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2866821" start="10527" end="10549" title="Aspidistra (transmitter)" label="Aspidistra transmitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q787963" start="10658" end="10672" title="Babington Plot" label="Babington Plot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510521" start="10773" end="10790" title="Computer security" label="Computer security"/>
<link wikidata="Q638079" start="10832" end="10852" title="Cookiemonster attack" label="Cookiemonster attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q897511" start="10884" end="10897" title="Cryptanalysis" label="Cryptanalysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q220849" start="10996" end="11013" title="Digital signature" label="Digital signature"/>
<link wikidata="Q60178212" start="11160" end="11176" title="Evil maid attack" label="Evil maid attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q15617427" start="11228" end="11246" title="Interlock protocol" label="Interlock protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320561" start="11338" end="11352" title="Key management" label="Key management"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306713" start="11433" end="11455" title="Key-agreement protocol" label="Key-agreement protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888470" start="11549" end="11567" title="Man-in-the-browser" label="Man-in-the-browser"/>
<link wikidata="Q16324539" start="11597" end="11619" title="Man-on-the-side attack" label="Man-on-the-side attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q6944186" start="11695" end="11716" title="Mutual authentication" label="Mutual authentication"/>
<link wikidata="Q7142872" start="11800" end="11836" title="Password-authenticated key agreement" label="Password-authenticated key agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q471906" start="11891" end="11911" title="Quantum cryptography" label="Quantum cryptography"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304359" start="11980" end="11994" title="Secure channel" label="Secure channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q123938059" start="12061" end="12076" title="Terrapin attack" label="Terrapin attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q170460" start="12103" end="12106" title="ssh" label="ssh"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="144677" wikidata="Q269573" url="?curid=144677" title="Baldwin II, Latin Emperor">
<text>Baldwin II, also known as Baldwin of Courtenay (; ; late 1217 – October 1273), was the last Latin Emperor ruling from Constantinople. He was the only Latin Emperor born in Constantinople.

==Biography==
Baldwin II was born in Constantinople, a younger son of Yolanda of Flanders, sister of the first two emperors, Baldwin I and Henry of Flanders. Her husband, Peter of Courtenay, was third emperor of the Latin Empire, and had been followed by his son Robert of Courtenay, on whose death in 1228 the succession passed to Baldwin, then an 11-year-old boy.

The barons chose John of Brienne as Bladwin&#x27;s co-ruler for life. Baldwin was also to marry Marie of Brienne, daughter of John and his third wife Berenguela of Leon, and on John&#x27;s death to enjoy the full imperial sovereignty. The marriage contract was carried out in 1234. Since the death of Baldwin&#x27;s uncle Emperor Henry in 1216, the Latin Empire had declined and the Byzantine (Nicene) power advanced; and the hopes that John of Brienne might restore it were disappointed.
The realm Baldwin governed was little more than the city of Constantinople. He adopted the Byzantine title of &quot;porphyrogenetos&quot;. His financial situation was desperate, and his life was chiefly occupied in begging at European courts. He went to the West in 1236, visited Rome, France and Flanders, trying to raise money and men to recover the lost territory of his realm. In 1237, with the support of the King of France and the Countess of Flanders, he chased his sister Margaret from power to become the next Count of Namur. But Baldwin was practically never present, and after the invasion and conquest of Namur by Henry V, Count of Luxembourg in 1256, he sold the rights on the county to his cousin Guy, Count of Flanders.

In around March 1238, Baldwin II&#x27;s regency council pawned the Crown of Thorns to the Venetian Podestà of Constantinople for 13,134 &quot;hyperpyra&quot; from a &quot;consortium of creditors&quot;. His efforts met with success, and in 1240 he returned to Constantinople (through Germany and Hungary) at the head of a considerable army. Circumstances hindered him from accomplishing anything with this help, and in 1245 he traveled again to the West, first to Italy and then to France, where he spent two years. The empress Marie and Philip of Toucy governed during his absence. He was happy to be able to get money from King Louis IX in exchange for relics. In 1249 he was with King Louis at Damietta.
The extremity of his financial straits reduced him soon afterwards to handing over his only son, Philip, to Venetian merchants as a pledge for loans of money. Philip was later redeemed by Alfonso X of Castile. Baldwin spent the rest of his reign in mendicant tours in western Europe.

On the night of 24 July 1261, a group of soldiers under Alexios Strategopoulos entered Constantinople through a secret passageway and captured the city. Baldwin was asleep in the Blachernae Palace when the noise of the fighting awoke him; upon seeing the Byzantine troops advance upon him, he fled in such haste that he left his crown and sceptre behind him. Baldwin made his way to the harbor, where he boarded a Venetian galley to Negropont. From there he proceeded to Athens, then to Apulia, and finally to France. As titular emperor, his role was still the same: to beg help from the western powers. In 1267 he went to Italy; his hopes were centred on Charles of Anjou. Charles seriously entertained the idea of conquering Constantinople, though his efforts were destroyed during the Sicilian Vespers, an event perhaps engineered by Michael VIII Palaeologus of Constantinople. To this intent, he signed the Treaty of Viterbo with Baldwin (May 1267). During the next year Baldwin and his son Philip lived on pensions from Charles. In October 1273 Philip married Beatrice, daughter of Charles, at Foggia. A few days later Baldwin died in Naples. Under Baldwin II, Constantinople&#x27;s population had fallen to a mere 35,000 inhabitants.

==Ancestors==

==References==
==Sources==
*
* Harris, Jonathan, &quot;Byzantium and the Crusades&quot;, Bloomsbury, 2nd ed., 2014. 
* 
* 
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q269573" start="0" end="10" title="Baldwin II, Latin Emperor" label="Baldwin II"/>
<link wikidata="Q269573" start="26" end="46" title="Baldwin II, Latin Emperor" label="Baldwin of Courtenay"/>
<link wikidata="Q669200" start="92" end="105" title="Latin Emperor" label="Latin Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="118" end="132" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q232147" start="259" end="278" title="Yolanda of Flanders" label="Yolanda of Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q298896" start="314" end="323" title="Baldwin I of Constantinople" label="Baldwin I"/>
<link wikidata="Q269235" start="328" end="345" title="Henry of Flanders" label="Henry of Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q354672" start="360" end="378" title="Peter II of Courtenay" label="Peter of Courtenay"/>
<link wikidata="Q178897" start="405" end="417" title="Latin Empire" label="Latin Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q365620" start="452" end="471" title="Robert of Courtenay" label="Robert of Courtenay"/>
<link wikidata="Q332704" start="573" end="588" title="John of Brienne" label="John of Brienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q526450" start="652" end="668" title="Marie of Brienne" label="Marie of Brienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q457667" start="706" end="724" title="Berenguela of Leon" label="Berenguela of Leon"/>
<link wikidata="Q269235" start="878" end="891" title="Henry of Flanders" label="Emperor Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="939" end="948" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q181254" start="950" end="956" title="Empire of Nicaea" label="Nicene"/>
<link wikidata="Q643330" start="1161" end="1176" title="porphyrogenetos" label="porphyrogenetos"/>
<link wikidata="Q234" start="1342" end="1350" title="Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q441872" start="1525" end="1533" title="Margaret, Marchioness of Namur" label="Margaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049905" start="1564" end="1578" title="Count of Namur" label="Count of Namur"/>
<link wikidata="Q72364" start="1671" end="1699" title="Henry V, Count of Luxembourg" label="Henry V, Count of Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q28531" start="1756" end="1778" title="Guy, Count of Flanders" label="Guy, Count of Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127583" start="1848" end="1863" title="Crown of Thorns" label="Crown of Thorns"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="1871" end="1879" title="Republic of Venice" label="Venetian"/>
<link wikidata="Q65057635" start="1880" end="1905" title="Podestà of Constantinople" label="Podestà of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q127441" start="1923" end="1932" title="Hyperpyron" label="hyperpyra"/>
<link wikidata="Q383166" start="2318" end="2333" title="Philip of Toucy" label="Philip of Toucy"/>
<link wikidata="Q346" start="2405" end="2418" title="Louis IX of France" label="King Louis IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q189383" start="2477" end="2485" title="Damietta" label="Damietta"/>
<link wikidata="Q888405" start="2584" end="2590" title="Philip of Courtenay" label="Philip"/>
<link wikidata="Q47595" start="2675" end="2695" title="Alfonso X of Castile" label="Alfonso X of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q471132" start="2828" end="2850" title="Alexios Strategopoulos" label="Alexios Strategopoulos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400402" start="2906" end="2923" title="Reconquest of Constantinople" label="captured the city"/>
<link wikidata="Q879941" start="2951" end="2968" title="Blachernae Palace" label="Blachernae Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q173096" start="3205" end="3214" title="Negropont" label="Negropont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="3243" end="3249" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1447" start="3259" end="3265" title="Apulia" label="Apulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q203829" start="3428" end="3444" title="Charles of Anjou" label="Charles of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q207327" start="3560" end="3576" title="Sicilian Vespers" label="Sicilian Vespers"/>
<link wikidata="Q200033" start="3609" end="3633" title="Michael VIII Palaeologus" label="Michael VIII Palaeologus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536907" start="3683" end="3700" title="Treaty of Viterbo" label="Treaty of Viterbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q13464" start="3871" end="3877" title="Foggia" label="Foggia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="144678" wikidata="Q162879" url="?curid=144678" title="Bundespräsident">
<text>Bundespräsident (&quot;President of the Federation&quot; or &quot;Federal President&quot;) is the German language title for:

* The President of Austria (head of state)
* The President of Germany (head of state)
* The President of the Swiss Confederation: the presiding member of the Swiss Federal Council (government and head of state)

Bundespräsident is the title for males, females are titled Bundespräsidentin. The correct style of addressing is for females &quot;Frau Bundespräsidentin&quot; and for males &quot;Herr Bundespräsident&quot;.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q475658" start="132" end="152" title="President of Austria" label="President of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q25223" start="175" end="195" title="President of Germany" label="President of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q688230" start="218" end="254" title="President of the Swiss Confederation" label="President of the Swiss Confederation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="144680" wikidata="Q146465" url="?curid=144680" title="Baldwin III of Jerusalem">
<text>Baldwin III (1130 – 10 February 1163) was King of Jerusalem from 1143 to 1163. He was the eldest son of Queen Melisende and King Fulk. He became king while still a child, and was at first overshadowed by his mother Melisende, whom he eventually defeated in a civil war. During his reign Jerusalem became more closely allied with the Byzantine Empire, and the Second Crusade tried and failed to conquer Damascus. Baldwin captured the important Egyptian fortress of Ascalon, but also had to deal with the increasing power of Nur ad-Din in Syria. He died childless and was succeeded by his brother Amalric.

==Succession==
Baldwin III was born in 1130, during the reign of his maternal grandfather Baldwin II, one of the original crusaders. This made him the third generation to rule Jerusalem. Baldwin&#x27;s mother Princess Melisende was heiress to her father Baldwin II, King of Jerusalem. Baldwin III&#x27;s father was Fulk of Anjou, the former Count of Anjou. King Baldwin II died at the age of 60 when his grandson was a year old, which led to a power struggle between Melisende and Fulk. Melisende asserted her right to rule as successor to her father. She and Fulk reconciled and conceived a second child, Baldwin III&#x27;s brother Amalric. Baldwin III was 13 years old when his father Fulk died in a hunting accident in 1143, and Baldwin III was crowned as co-ruler alongside his mother, echoing Melisende&#x27;s own crowning alongside her father as his heir. Yet Baldwin showed little interest in the intricacies of governance.

With a woman and a child ruling Jerusalem, the political situation was somewhat tense; the northern crusader states of Tripoli, Antioch, and Edessa increasingly asserted their independence, and there was no king to impose the suzerainty of Jerusalem as Baldwin II or Fulk had done. In the Muslim world, Zengi ruled northern Syria from the cities of Mosul and Aleppo, and desired to add Damascus in the south to his control. In 1144, Zengi captured Edessa, which shocked the Western world and led to the Second Crusade.

This crusade did not reach Jerusalem until 1148, and in the meantime Zengi was assassinated in 1146. He was succeeded by his son Nur ad-Din, who was just as eager to bring Damascus under his control. To counter this, Jerusalem and Damascus had made an alliance for their mutual protection. However, in 1147 Nur ad-Din and Mu&#x27;in ad-Din Unur, the governor of Damascus, made an alliance against Jerusalem, as the kingdom had already broken the treaty by allying with one of Unur&#x27;s rebellious vassals. Baldwin marched out from Jerusalem and attempted to capture the Muslim fortress Bosra, but Nur ad-Din arrived with his army and forced the Crusaders to withdraw. As the Crusaders marched back toward their own territory they were attacked by Nur ad-Din&#x27;s cavalry, but Baldwin III&#x27;s generalship combined with the martial prowess of his knights managed to throw off the Muslim assault. Later, Jerusalem&#x27;s truce with Damascus was restored.

==Second Crusade==

In 1148 the crusade finally arrived in Jerusalem, led by Louis VII of France, his wife Eleanor of Aquitaine, and Conrad III of Germany. Baldwin held a council at Acre in 1148 to decide on a target; control of Aleppo in the north would allow the crusaders to restore Edessa to Christian control, but capturing Damascus in the south would limit the power of the Zengids and add to Jerusalem&#x27;s power and influence. Damascus was also considered more important in the history of Christianity than Aleppo and Edessa. Baldwin agreed to the plan to attack Damascus, but the ensuing siege ended in defeat after only four days. The city fell under Nur ad-Din&#x27;s control in 1154, and the loss of a Muslim counterweight to Nur ad-Din was a diplomatic disaster.

By 1149 the crusaders had returned to Europe, leaving behind a weakened Jerusalem. Nur ad-Din took advantage of the crusader defeat to invade Antioch, and Prince Raymond was killed in the subsequent Battle of Inab. Baldwin III hurried north to take up the regency of the principality. Raymond&#x27;s wife, Constance, was Baldwin&#x27;s cousin through his mother and heiress of Antioch by right of her father. Baldwin unsuccessfully tried to marry her to an ally. Also in the north, Baldwin was unable to help defend Turbessel, the last remnant of the County of Edessa, and was forced to cede it to Byzantine emperor Manuel I Comnenus in August 1150. He evacuated Turbessel&#x27;s Latin Christian residents despite being attacked by Nur ad-Din in the Battle of Aintab. In 1152 Baldwin and his mother were called to intervene in a dispute between Baldwin&#x27;s aunt Hodierna of Tripoli and her husband Count Raymond II. When the matter was settled, Hodierna was about to return to Jerusalem with them, when Raymond was suddenly murdered by the Hashshashin. Baldwin remained behind to settle the affairs of Tripoli, while Hodierna took up the regency for her young son Raymond III.

==Civil war==
By 1152 Baldwin had been of age to rule by himself for seven years, and he began to assert himself in political affairs. Though he had not previously expressed an interest in the administration of the country, he now demanded more authority. He and his mother had become increasingly estranged since 1150, and Baldwin blamed the constable Manasses for interfering with his legal succession. In early 1152 Baldwin demanded a second coronation from Patriarch Fulcher, separate from his mother. The patriarch refused and as a kind of self-coronation Baldwin paraded through the city streets with laurel wreaths on his head.

Baldwin and Melisende agreed to put the matter before the &quot;Haute Cour&quot;, or royal council. The &quot;Haute Cour&quot; returned a decision that would divide the kingdom into two administrative districts. Baldwin would retain Galilee in the north, including the cities of Acre and Tyre, while Melisende held the richer Judea and Samaria, including Nablus and Jerusalem itself. Supporting Melisende in the south were Manasses of Hierges, and Baldwin&#x27;s younger brother Amalric, who held the County of Jaffa within Melisende&#x27;s jurisdiction. Neither Baldwin nor Melisende were pleased with the decision, as Baldwin wanted to rule the entire kingdom and realized it would divide the country&#x27;s resources, but in order to prevent a civil war Melisende agreed to the compromise.

Within weeks of the division Baldwin launched an invasion of the south. Manasses was defeated at the castle of Mirabel and exiled, and Nablus fell quickly as well. To prevent further violence, Jerusalem opened its gates to Baldwin. Melisende and Amalric sought refuge in the Tower of David. Throughout the siege the church negotiated with Baldwin. The peace that was settled allowed for Melisende to hold Nablus for life, with a solemn oath by Baldwin not to disturb her peace. Baldwin named his supporter Humphrey II of Toron as the new constable.

By 1154 mother and son were reconciled, as Baldwin was astute enough to realize his mother&#x27;s expertise in statecraft. At the same time, he asserted his authority over the kingdom&#x27;s nobles. Though she was &quot;retired&quot;, she maintained great influence in court and government affairs, acting as regent for Baldwin while he was on campaign.

==Recovery==
During the civil war, Nur ad-Din had been busy consolidating his control of Damascus following the death of Mu&#x27;in ad-Din. With Syria united under one ruler, Jerusalem could only expand its influence to the south, towards Egypt. Egypt was weakened by civil wars as well, after the succession of a series of young Fatimid caliphs. Around 1150 Baldwin refortified Gaza to place some pressure on the nearby Egyptian outpost of Ascalon, and in 1153 Baldwin successfully besieged and captured Ascalon itself. This secured the border with Egypt, although it would later lead to aggressive campaigns against Jerusalem&#x27;s southern border. Ascalon was added to Amalric&#x27;s fief of Jaffa, creating the double County of Jaffa and Ascalon. In 1152 Baldwin also defeated an Ortoqid invasion of the kingdom from northern Syria.

In 1156 Baldwin was forced to sign a treaty with Nur ad-Din. However, in the winter of 1157–1158 Baldwin led an expedition into Syria, where he besieged Shaizar. The expedition was forced to withdraw when a dispute arose between Thierry, Count of Flanders and Raynald of Châtillon, the new husband of Constance of Antioch, both of whom wanted Shaizar for themselves. Baldwin was, however, able to capture Harim, a former territory of Antioch, and in 1158 he defeated Nur ad-Din himself.

==Byzantine alliance==
Baldwin&#x27;s modest recovery garnered him enough prestige to seek a wife from the Byzantine Empire. In 1157 he sent Humphrey of Toron to negotiate with Emperor Manuel, and it was decided that Baldwin should marry Theodora, Manuel&#x27;s niece. The alliance was more favourable to Byzantium than Jerusalem, as Baldwin was forced to recognize Byzantine suzerainty over Antioch, and if Theodora were to be widowed she would be provided the city of Acre. Though Theodora personified the Byzantine-Jerusalem alliance, she was not to exercise any authority outside of Acre. The marriage took place in September 1158, when Baldwin was 28 years old and Theodora only 13.

Relations between Jerusalem and Byzantium improved and in 1159 Baldwin met with Manuel in Antioch. The two became friends, with Manuel adopting western clothes and customs and participating in a tournament against Baldwin. Manuel personally attended to Baldwin when the king was thrown from his horse during the tournament. Later in 1159 Baldwin became regent of Antioch once more, after Raynald of Châtillon had been captured in battle. This offended Manuel, who considered Antioch imperial territory, and the emperor strengthened his ties to the principality in 1160 by marrying Princess Maria, Baldwin&#x27;s cousin. Baldwin himself suggested Manuel marry another cousin, Melisende of Tripoli, preferring not to see such a close relationship between Byzantium and Antioch.

==Death==

Queen Melisende died in 1161, and Baldwin died in Beirut on 10 February 1163. It was rumoured that he had been poisoned in Antioch by pills given to him by his Syrian Orthodox doctor. &quot;As soon as the king had taken the pills,&quot; says William of Tyre, &quot;he was seized with a fever and dysentery which developed into consumption from which he was never able to obtain relief or help.&quot; On the way home Baldwin remained in Tripoli for a few months, and then continued to Beirut where he finally succumbed to his illness. As William says, &quot;For eight successive days, while the funeral procession moved from Beirut to Jerusalem, lamentation was unrestrained and grief was renewed almost hourly.&quot; Theodora, now queen-dowager, retired to Acre. She was still only 18 years old; their marriage was childless. Baldwin was succeeded by his brother, Amalric I.

A marble screen panel in the Terra Sancta Museum, Jerusalem, is from his [the caption states Baldwin II] or Fulk&#x27;s tomb, formerly in the Church of the Holy Sepulchre.

==References==
==Sources==
*
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q146465" start="0" end="11" title="Baldwin III of Jerusalem" label="Baldwin III"/>
<link wikidata="Q693614" start="42" end="59" title="King of Jerusalem" label="King of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q232151" start="104" end="119" title="Queen Melisende" label="Queen Melisende"/>
<link wikidata="Q312904" start="124" end="133" title="King Fulk" label="King Fulk"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="333" end="349" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q51654" start="359" end="373" title="Second Crusade" label="Second Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q104664899" start="464" end="471" title="Ascalon" label="Ascalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q312973" start="523" end="533" title="Nur ad-Din Zangi" label="Nur ad-Din"/>
<link wikidata="Q311808" start="595" end="602" title="Amalric I of Jerusalem" label="Amalric"/>
<link wikidata="Q51718" start="695" end="705" title="Baldwin II of Jerusalem" label="Baldwin II"/>
<link wikidata="Q51649" start="718" end="736" title="First Crusade" label="original crusaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q51718" start="859" end="869" title="Baldwin II of Jerusalem" label="Baldwin II"/>
<link wikidata="Q311808" start="1238" end="1245" title="Amalric, King of Jerusalem" label="Amalric"/>
<link wikidata="Q272033" start="1656" end="1663" title="County of Tripoli" label="Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q235030" start="1665" end="1672" title="Principality of Antioch" label="Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q232806" start="1678" end="1684" title="County of Edessa" label="Edessa"/>
<link wikidata="Q189550" start="1840" end="1845" title="Imad ad-Din Zengi" label="Zengi"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="1861" end="1866" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q83317" start="1886" end="1891" title="Mosul" label="Mosul"/>
<link wikidata="Q41183" start="1896" end="1902" title="Aleppo" label="Aleppo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766" start="1923" end="1931" title="Damascus" label="Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083368" start="1976" end="1991" title="Siege of Edessa (1144)" label="captured Edessa"/>
<link wikidata="Q51654" start="2040" end="2054" title="Second Crusade" label="Second Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3882219" start="2136" end="2148" title="assassinated" label="assassinated"/>
<link wikidata="Q312973" start="2186" end="2196" title="Nur ad-Din Zangi" label="Nur ad-Din"/>
<link wikidata="Q29225" start="2379" end="2401" title="Mu&amp;#x27;in ad-Din Unur" label="Mu&amp;#x27;in ad-Din Unur"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870532" start="2645" end="2650" title="Battle of Bosra (1147)" label="Bosra"/>
<link wikidata="Q134259" start="3094" end="3113" title="Louis VII of France" label="Louis VII of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q178525" start="3124" end="3144" title="Eleanor of Aquitaine" label="Eleanor of Aquitaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q157133" start="3150" end="3171" title="Conrad III of Germany" label="Conrad III of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991972" start="3188" end="3203" title="Council of Acre" label="council at Acre"/>
<link wikidata="Q382967" start="3608" end="3621" title="Siege of Damascus (1148)" label="ensuing siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q437271" start="3951" end="3965" title="Raymond of Poitiers" label="Prince Raymond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328380" start="3995" end="4009" title="Battle of Inab" label="Battle of Inab"/>
<link wikidata="Q238609" start="4102" end="4111" title="Constance of Antioch" label="Constance"/>
<link wikidata="Q49353046" start="4312" end="4321" title="Turbessel" label="Turbessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q232806" start="4347" end="4363" title="County of Edessa" label="County of Edessa"/>
<link wikidata="Q128866" start="4394" end="4411" title="Byzantine emperor" label="Byzantine emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q41610" start="4412" end="4429" title="Manuel I Comnenus" label="Manuel I Comnenus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870234" start="4546" end="4562" title="Battle of Aintab" label="Battle of Aintab"/>
<link wikidata="Q53114" start="4661" end="4680" title="Hodierna of Tripoli" label="Hodierna of Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q712674" start="4697" end="4713" title="Raymond II of Tripoli" label="Count Raymond II"/>
<link wikidata="Q187715" start="4839" end="4850" title="Hashshashin" label="Hashshashin"/>
<link wikidata="Q354389" start="4963" end="4974" title="Raymond III of Tripoli" label="Raymond III"/>
<link wikidata="Q980629" start="5438" end="5455" title="Patriarch Fulcher" label="Patriarch Fulcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q381637" start="5677" end="5687" title="Haute Cour of Jerusalem" label="Haute Cour"/>
<link wikidata="Q83241" start="5846" end="5853" title="Galilee" label="Galilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q126084" start="5892" end="5896" title="Acre (city)" label="Acre"/>
<link wikidata="Q82070" start="5901" end="5905" title="Tyre (Lebanon)" label="Tyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q104028" start="5939" end="5944" title="Judea" label="Judea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294629" start="5949" end="5956" title="Samaria" label="Samaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q214178" start="5968" end="5974" title="Nablus" label="Nablus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398284" start="6036" end="6055" title="Manasses of Hierges" label="Manasses of Hierges"/>
<link wikidata="Q311808" start="6092" end="6099" title="Amalric I of Jerusalem" label="Amalric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1893486" start="6114" end="6129" title="County of Jaffa" label="County of Jaffa"/>
<link wikidata="Q15243925" start="6518" end="6525" title="Mirabel (castle)" label="Mirabel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177765" start="6682" end="6696" title="Tower of David" label="Tower of David"/>
<link wikidata="Q1625275" start="6913" end="6933" title="Humphrey II of Toron" label="Humphrey II of Toron"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="7551" end="7556" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q160307" start="7642" end="7649" title="Fatimid" label="Fatimid"/>
<link wikidata="Q131401" start="7650" end="7656" title="caliph" label="caliph"/>
<link wikidata="Q47492" start="7691" end="7695" title="Gaza City" label="Gaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q104664899" start="7753" end="7760" title="Ascalon" label="Ascalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q677982" start="7795" end="7824" title="Battle of Ascalon (1153)" label="besieged and captured Ascalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133431" start="8097" end="8104" title="Ortoqid" label="Ortoqid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030058" start="8304" end="8311" title="Shaizar" label="Shaizar"/>
<link wikidata="Q224958" start="8380" end="8406" title="Thierry, Count of Flanders" label="Thierry, Count of Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q316831" start="8411" end="8431" title="Raynald of Châtillon" label="Raynald of Châtillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q771907" start="8556" end="8561" title="Harem, Syria" label="Harim"/>
<link wikidata="Q200441" start="8585" end="8592" title="Antioch" label="Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="8746" end="8762" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q273606" start="8877" end="8885" title="Theodora Komnene, Queen of Jerusalem" label="Theodora"/>
<link wikidata="Q126084" start="9109" end="9113" title="Akko" label="Acre"/>
<link wikidata="Q736161" start="9523" end="9533" title="tournament (medieval)" label="tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q240604" start="9909" end="9923" title="Maria of Antioch" label="Princess Maria"/>
<link wikidata="Q273808" start="10003" end="10023" title="Melisende of Tripoli" label="Melisende of Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820" start="10166" end="10172" title="Beirut" label="Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q210540" start="10276" end="10291" title="Syrian Orthodox" label="Syrian Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q129279" start="10412" end="10421" title="dysentery" label="dysentery"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="10443" end="10454" title="tuberculosis" label="consumption"/>
<link wikidata="Q168954" start="10552" end="10559" title="Tripoli, Lebanon" label="Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q57272667" start="11021" end="11040" title="Terra Sancta Museum" label="Terra Sancta Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q51718" start="11085" end="11095" title="Baldwin II of Jerusalem" label="Baldwin II"/>
<link wikidata="Q312904" start="11100" end="11104" title="Fulk of Jerusalem" label="Fulk"/>
<link wikidata="Q187702" start="11134" end="11162" title="Church of the Holy Sepulchre" label="Church of the Holy Sepulchre"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="144681" wikidata="Q6480690" url="?curid=144681" title="Tay Bridge">
<text>The Tay Bridge carries rail traffic across the Firth of Tay in Scotland between Dundee and the suburb of Wormit in Fife. Its span is . It is the second bridge to occupy the site.

Plans for a bridge over the Tay to replace the train ferry service emerged in 1854, but the first Tay Bridge did not open until 1878. It was a lightweight lattice design of relatively low cost with a single track. On 28 December 1879, the bridge suddenly collapsed in high winds while a train was crossing, killing everybody on board. The incident is one of the worst bridge-related engineering disasters in history. An enquiry determined that the bridge was insufficiently engineered to cope with high winds.

It was replaced by a second bridge constructed of iron and steel, with a double track, parallel to the remains of the first bridge. Work commenced on 6 July 1883 and the bridge opened in 1887. The new bridge was subject to extensive testing by the Board of Trade, which resulted in a favourable report. In 2003, the bridge was strengthened and refurbished, winning a British Construction Industry Engineering Award to mark the scale and difficulty of the project.

== First bridge ==
===Origins and concept===
Proposals to build a bridge across the Tay date to 1854 but it was not until 15 July 1870 that the North British Railway Tay Bridge Act received royal assent. On 22 July 1871, the foundation stone of the bridge was laid.

The bridge was designed by engineer Thomas Bouch, who received a knighthood following the bridge&#x27;s completion. The bridge was a lattice-grid design, combining cast and wrought iron. The design had been used by Thomas W. Kennard in the Crumlin Viaduct in South Wales in 1858, after the use of cast iron in the Crystal Palace. The Crystal Palace was not as heavily loaded as a railway bridge. An earlier cast-iron design, the Dee bridge collapsed in 1847, having failed because of poor use of cast-iron girders. Gustave Eiffel used a similar design to create several large viaducts in the Massif Central in 1867.
The original design was for lattice girders supported by brick piers resting on the bedrock, shown by trial borings to lie at no great depth under the river. At either end of the bridge, the single track ran on top of the bridge girder, most of which lay below the pier tops. At the centre section of the bridge (the high girders), the railway ran inside the bridge girder, which was above the pier tops to give clearance for the passage of sailing ships. To accommodate thermal expansion, there were non-rigid connections between girders and piers.

As the bridge extended out into the river, by December 1873, it became clear that the bedrock lay much deeper, too deep to act as a foundation for the bridge piers. Bouch redesigned the bridge to reduce the number of piers and increase the span of the girders. The pier foundations were no longer resting on bedrock; instead they were constructed by sinking brick-lined wrought-iron caissons onto the riverbed, removing sand until they rested on the consolidated gravel layer which had been misreported as rock, and then filling the caissons with concrete.

To reduce the weight that the ground underneath the caissons would have to support, the brick piers were replaced by open lattice iron skeleton piers. Each pier had multiple cast-iron columns taking the weight of the bridging girders, with wrought iron horizontal braces and diagonal tiebars linking the columns to give rigidity and stability. The basic concept was well known, having been used by Kennard in the Crumlin Viaduct in South Wales in 1858. Bouch had used the technique for viaducts, including the Belah Viaduct (1860) on the South Durham &amp; Lancashire Union Railway line over Stainmore, but for the Tay Bridge, even with the largest practicable caissons, the pier dimensions were constrained by their size. Bouch&#x27;s pier design set six columns in a hexagon maximising the pier width but not the number of diagonal braces directly resisting sideways forces.

=== Design details ===
The engineering details on the Tay Bridge were considerably simpler, lighter, and cheaper than on the earlier viaducts. The machined base of each column section docked securely into a machined enlarged section of the top of the section below. The joint was then secured by bolts through matching holes on lugs (Crumlin) or flanges (Belah) on the two sections. This &#x27;spigot and faucet&#x27; configuration was used, apparently without machining, on some Tay Bridge pier columns, but on some the bolts were relied upon to ensure correct alignment. In the event, the joints were made using undersized bolts, of a smaller diameter than that which would just go through the hole. This made assembling the column easier, as the bolt holes would not need to align exactly before inserting the bolt. However, this allowed the two members, so joined, to move relative to each other under load, weakening the column.

On the Tay Bridge the diagonal bracing was by means of flat bars running from the top of one column-section diagonally down to the bottom of the adjacent column section. The top connection was to a lug that was an integral part of the column casting. The bottom connection was to two sling plates bolted to the base of the equivalent section on an adjacent column. The bar and sling plates all had matching longitudinal slots in them. The tie bar was placed between the sling plates with all three slots aligned and overlapping. A gib was driven through all three slots and secured. Two cotters, metal wedges, were then positioned to fill the rest of the slot overlap, and driven in hard to put the tie under tension. Horizontal bracing was provided by wrought iron channel iron. The various bolt heads were too close to each other, and to the column for easy tightening up with spanners; this coupled with lack of precision in the preparation of the channel iron braces led to various on site fitting expedients (one of them described by a witness to the enquiry as &quot;about as slovenly a piece of work as ever I saw in my life&quot;.

On the Crumlin and Belah Viaducts, however, horizontal bracing was provided by substantial fitted cast-iron girders securely attached to the columns, with the diagonal braces then being attached to the girders. The Chairman of the Court of Inquiry quoted at length from a contemporary book praising the detailed engineering of the Belah viaduct piers, and describing the viaduct as one of the lightest and cheapest of the kind that had ever been erected.
... It is a distinguishing feature in this viaduct that the cross, or distance girders of the piers encircle the columns, which are turned up at that point, the girders being bored out to fit the turned part with great accuracy. No cement of any kind was used in the whole structure, and the piers when completed, and the vertical and horizontal wrought-iron bracings keyed up, are nearly as rigid as though they were one solid piece... ... The fitting was all done by machines, which were specially designed for the purpose, and finished the work with mathematical accuracy The flanges of the column were all faced up and their edges turned, and every column was stepped into the one below it with a lip of about 5/8 of an inch in depth, the lip and socket for it being actually turned and bored. That portion of the column against which the cross girders rested was also turned. The whole of these operations were performed at one time, the column being centred in a hollow mandril-lathe. After being turned the columns passed on to a drilling machine, in which all the holes in each flange were drilled out of the solid simultaneously. And as this was done with them all in the same machine, the holes of course, perfectly coincided when the columns were placed one on the other in the progress of erection. Similar care was taken with the cross-girders, which were bored out at the ends by machines designed for that purpose. Thus, when the pieces of the viaduct had to be put together at the place of erection there was literally not a tool required, and neither chipping or filing to retard the progress of the work.
Either, said the chairman, the Belah viaduct had been over-engineered, or the Tay Bridge had been under engineered.

=== Construction ===
Whilst Bouch was in the process of revising his design, the company which had been awarded the contract for the bridge&#x27;s construction, Messrs De Bergue of Cardiff, went out of business. During June 1874, a replacement contract for the work was issued to Hopkin Gilkes and Company, successors to the Middlesbrough company which had previously provided the ironwork for the Belah viaduct. Gilkes had originally intended to produce all the bridge ironwork on Teesside, but in the event continued to use a foundry at Wormit to produce the cast-iron components, and to carry out limited post-casting machining operations.

The change in design increased cost and necessitated delay, intensified after two of the high girders fell when being lifted into place during the night of Friday, 3 February 1877. 
The fallen girders had to be removed and new ones built. and the piers to be erected again; and this threatened seriously to interfere with the expectation of having the bridge finished for the passage of a train by September. Only eight months were now available for the erection and floating out of six, and the lifting of ten spans. Five and seven respectively of the spans had yet to go through the same process. Seven large and three small piers had yet to be built. The weight of iron which had to be put in its place was , and it seemed incredible that all this could be done in eight months. A good deal would depend on the weather but this was far from favourable.

Despite this the first engine crossed the bridge on 22 September 1877, and upon its completion in early 1878 the Tay Bridge was the longest in the world. While visiting the city, Ulysses S. Grant commented that it was &quot;a big bridge for a small city&quot;.

=== Inspection and opening ===

Like all UK rail lines, the Tay Bridge was subject to a Board of Trade inspection before it could carry passenger trains. The inspection was conducted 25–27 February 1878 by Major General Hutchinson of the Railway Inspectorate, who measured the deflection of the bridge girders under a distributed load of 1.5 tons per foot (5 t/m) due to heavy locomotives, travelling at up to , as less than . He reported that &quot;these results are in my opinion to be regarded as satisfactory. The lateral oscillation [roughly, rhythmic side-to-side movement], as observed by the theodolite when the engines ran over at speed, was slight and the structure overall showed great stiffness&quot;.

Hutchinson did require some minor remedial work to be performed, and also issued a &quot;recommendation&quot; to impose a speed limit on traffic passing over the bridge. Subsequently, Hutchinson explained to the Inquiry that he had suggested this speed limit because of the minimal taper on the piers. The inspection report added: &quot;When again visiting the spot I should wish, if possible, to have an opportunity of observing the effects of high wind when a train of carriages is running over the bridge&quot;.
On 1 June 1878, the Tay Bridge was opened for passenger traffic, with formal opening ceremonies having taken place during the previous day, in the course of which Thomas Bouch was made a burgess of Dundee &quot;in respect of his meritorious services as engineer of the bridge. ...&quot; On 20 June 1879, Queen Victoria crossed the bridge during her return south from staying at Balmoral; Bouch was presented to her before she did so. On 26 June 1879, he was knighted by the Queen at Windsor Castle.

===Catastrophic failure===
On the night of 28 December 1879 at 7:15 p.m., the bridge collapsed after its central spans gave way during high winter gales. A train with six carriages carrying seventy-five passengers and crew, crossing at the time of the collapse, plunged into the icy waters of the Tay. All seventy-five people on board were killed. The disaster stunned the whole country and sent shock waves through the Victorian engineering community. The ensuing enquiry revealed that the design of the bridge had not accommodated for high winds. At the time of the collapse, a gale estimated at force ten or eleven (Tropical Storm force winds: had been blowing down the Tay estuary at right angles to the bridge. The train engine (North British Railway no. 224) was salvaged from the river and subsequently restored for service on the railway.

The collapse of the bridge, despite opening only nineteen months earlier after being found safe by the Board of Trade, had a long-term effect on wider society. According to some commenters, it is still regarded as having been the most notorious bridge disaster to have ever occurred in the British Isles. The disaster was commemorated in &quot;The Tay Bridge Disaster&quot;, one of the best-known verse efforts of William McGonagall. Today, the stumps of the original bridge piers are still visible above the surface of the Tay even at high tide.

In 2005, Scottish playwright Mike Gibb and composer Mairi Paton premiered their musical titled &quot;Five Pound and Twa Bairns&quot; in Dundee. It focuses on three fictional women from very different backgrounds who lose men in the disaster. The musical has had several further productions, including three separate sold-out runs at Dundee Rep Theatre.

==Second bridge==
===Proposals===
Almost immediately following the Tay Bridge failure, the North British Railway company began to develop plans for its reconstruction or replacement. During 1880, barely six months after the accident, the North British Railway (Tay Bridge) Bill for a construction of a new bridge was submitted to Parliament. The bill was reviewed by a special committee, chaired by Sir Lopes Massey Lopes, 3rd Baronet; Lopes drew attention to the substantial pressure for safety factors to be considered in light of the loss of the earlier bridge, including the need to examine the suitability of the location. In response to this inquiry, Mr Walker, the general manager of the North British Railway, stated his opinion that there was no more suitable site than what had been chosen, emphasising the relatively large interchange of traffic in the area and the importance of making the line as direct as practically possible. Additionally, a number of local witnesses, who included several leading merchants from Dundee, spoke favourably of the proposed location.

Plans for the reconstructed bridge were submitted by civil engineer Sir James Brunlees. His proposed design would have involved doubling the piers of the first bridge by installing the new columns on the east side of each of the existing piers, while arched brickwork would have been used to join the old and new elements alike. On top of these foundations, a brick decking would be laid that was wide enough to carry two sets of girders as well as a double-track layout. Brunlees proposed that the permanent way should be laid on the upper booms of the girders. The addition of bowstring girders, positioned high over the fairway, was considered to have much less exposure to the wind and greater lateral stiffness than the girders of the first bridge. The girders would also have been doubled, to be capable of resisting to the square foot of wind pressure, while the piers as designed were to be capable of resisting a pressure of 900 lb per square foot. Overall, Brunlees&#x27; proposed structure would have possessed greater strength for resisting lateral pressure over the original. This proposal had an estimated total cost of £356,323. While it was carefully considered, the Board of Trade regarded the practice of connecting the old bridge to a new design to be dangerous. It rejected both the proposed design and the overall bill.
The North British Railway, placing great importance on the connection between Fife and Forfarshire, was committed to developing a viable design. During August 1880, the noted railway engineer William Henry Barlow, of Barlow &amp; Sons, London, was consulted on the matter. Following experiments upon the first bridge&#x27;s remains, Barlow gave his opinion that the intact portions should be abandoned in favour of a new structure spanning between the two shores. Adopting this as the basis of their next submission, a new bill was raised and put before a select committee of the House of Commons on 10 May 1881. With little alteration or suggestions issued, this was soon passed, becoming the (44 &amp; 45 Vict. c. cxxxvii). During November 1881, a contract for the new bridge&#x27;s construction was awarded to Messrs William Arrol &amp; Co of Glasgow. For the new bridge&#x27;s design, Messrs Barlow elected to refrain from using any untested engineering principles, instead choosing to strictly adhere to established methodology.

===Design details===


The second Tay Bridge is a straightforward pier-and-lattice girder bridge; aside from its considerable length, it lacks any distinguishing characteristics. It has an overall length of , which is covered by a total of 85 spans. These spans are ordinary brick arches, backed by cement concrete and set on top of piers which are supported by pairs of columns. Wanting to avoid a repeat of the fate of the First Tay Bridge, a principal intention of the design is stability, followed in importance by measures to minimise the bridge&#x27;s weight and the adoption of aesthetically pleasing shaping where possible without compromising on structural strength.

The piers, which are primarily built from brick and concrete, are enclosed by a wrought iron caisson up to the low-water mark, above which a brick exterior is used, which cannot be infiltrated by water. The submerged portions are cased with blue vitrified brick. Above the high-water mark, each pair of piers has a connecting masonry section, terminating at the superstructure&#x27;s base. Due to the high proportion of masonry on the piers, they were extremely heavy, which meant that Messrs Barlow worked to minimise the structure&#x27;s weight without the piers being weakened. As such, a graceful iron superstructure was adopted.

Above the brickwork, two firmly braced octagonal columns continued upwards to meet the inner members in the form of an arch. Other members were used to provide a bed for the girders to provide for substantial pier that took much of its weight away from the basal area. Since the Second Tay Bridge&#x27;s completion, the lattice girder arrangement has become a commonplace feature, near-universally adopted for bridge construction. The configuration provides for a high levels of compression strain despite the girders being comparatively light. The decking is composed of steel and is surrounded both sides of the bridge by a closely knit latticework, which functions as a wind screen as well as somewhat protecting the workers.

===Construction===
On 9 March 1882, the work on the second bridge commenced, located upstream of, and parallel to, the original bridge. The first portions of the bridge to be erected were built upon the southern shore; work proceeded for some time before construction activities were initiated on the northern shore. Despite this, the majority of the bridge was erected simultaneously at both ends, continuing until the centre girders were connected and the junction was completed. Only some of the girders of the old bridge were reused for the new structure, and none were used without being subjected to considerable testing beforehand. It is believed that fourteen men died during the bridge&#x27;s construction, most by drowning.

Large quantities of materials were used in the construction of the bridge. In terms of wrought iron, 16,300 tons were used for the piers and girders; if the 118 girders from the previous bridge are also included, the total weight is believed to amount to roughly 19,000 tons. 3,500 tons of steel was also used, while the cast iron elements of the piers weighs 2,500 tons, for a combined 25,000 tons of iron and steel having been used. Around 10 million bricks, possessing a combined weight of 37,500 tons, were used to build both the approaches to the bridge and the cylinders. The total weight of the concrete used is 70,000 tons. Additionally, the bridge contains around 3,000,000 rivets.

The estimated cost for the second bridge was £640,000 ; while this figure was overrun, it did not prove to have been overly optimistic. When the construction work is broken down, the founding of the piers was calculated as having cost £282,000, the installation of the girders and parapets £268,000, while £90,000 was involved in producing the approaches and arches. Some additional costs of roughly £16,000 had been incurred to improve the approach to the bridge from Newport; the branch line was reconstructed for a distance of half a mile eastward. When combined with the £350,000 cost of the first Tay Bridge, the North British Railway had spent roughly a million pounds to bridge the Tay.

===Operational use===

Prior to entering service, the completed structure was subjected to an extensive examination by inspectors working for the Board of Trade. Being keen to avoid a repeat of the disaster of the first Tay Bridge, the second bridge was subjected to stringent testing, which in some cases simulated conditions that were far in excess of any ever likely to be encountered during the entirety of its service life. According to the reports submitted, the results from this testing were satisfying, clearing the way for operational use. On 11 June 1887, the first passenger-carrying trains passed along the second Tay Bridge. On 20 June 1887, which also happened to be the 50th anniversary of Queen Victoria&#x27;s accession, the bridge was opened for use by general traffic.

The second Tay Bridge has remained in use to the present day. To protect the structure from sustaining damage, the double-heading of locomotives is restricted on trains that traverse the bridge; it has been stipulated that some combinations of consecutive locomotives must be separated by at least using barrier or reach wagons.

During 2003, a £20.85 million strengthening and refurbishment project on the bridge won the British Construction Industry Civil Engineering Award, in consideration of the staggering scale and logistics involved. More than of bird droppings were scraped off the ironwork lattice of the bridge using hand tools, and bagged into sacks. At the same time, hundreds of thousands of rivets were removed and replaced, all of which was being done by workers who were in exposed conditions while high over a firth with fast-running tides.

== See also ==
*David Kirkaldy
*Harry Watts
*Tommy Burns
*History of Dundee
*List of bridge disasters
*List of structural failures and collapses
*Structural engineering
*Structural failure
*William McGonagall
==References==
===Citations===
===Bibliography===

* Norrie, Charles Matthew &quot;Bridging the Years: A Short History of British Civil Engineering&quot;, Edward Arnold (Publishers) Ltd., 1956.
* Lewis, Peter R. &quot;Beautiful Railway Bridge of the Silvery Tay: Reinvestigating the Tay Bridge Disaster of 1879&quot;, Tempus, 2004, .
* McKean, Charles &quot;Battle for the North: The Tay and Forth bridges and the 19th century railway wars&quot; Granta, 2006, 
* Rapley, John &quot;Thomas Bouch : the builder of the Tay Bridge&quot;, Stroud : Tempus, 2006, 
== External links ==
* 
* Tay Bridge page on railscot.co.uk 
* The Great Tay Bridge, &quot;The New York Times&quot;, 30 December 1879
* Tay Bridge Disaster: Report Of The Court of Inquiry Include the Minutes of Evidence.
* Tay Bridge Disaster: Appendix to the Report Of The Court of Inquiry. Includes a large number of drawings of the bridge, and calculations of the result of wind pressure on the structure</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6480690" start="4" end="14" title="Tay Bridge" label="Tay Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765455" start="47" end="59" title="Firth of Tay" label="Firth of Tay"/>
<link wikidata="Q123709" start="80" end="86" title="Dundee" label="Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4020981" start="105" end="111" title="Wormit" label="Wormit"/>
<link wikidata="Q201149" start="115" end="119" title="Fife" label="Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q15262" start="227" end="238" title="train ferry" label="train ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326900" start="380" end="392" title="Single-track railway" label="single track"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287158" start="419" end="443" title="Tay Bridge disaster" label="bridge suddenly collapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q962977" start="764" end="776" title="double-track railway" label="double track"/>
<link wikidata="Q887543" start="939" end="953" title="Board of Trade" label="Board of Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q16953900" start="1058" end="1105" title="British Construction Industry Awards" label="British Construction Industry Engineering Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070654" start="1346" end="1358" title="royal assent" label="royal assent"/>
<link wikidata="Q81096" start="1450" end="1458" title="engineer" label="engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q368762" start="1459" end="1471" title="Thomas Bouch" label="Thomas Bouch"/>
<link wikidata="Q102083" start="1488" end="1498" title="knighthood" label="knighthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q483269" start="1587" end="1591" title="Cast iron" label="cast"/>
<link wikidata="Q860451" start="1596" end="1608" title="wrought iron" label="wrought iron"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1638" end="1655" title="Thomas W. Kennard" label="Thomas W. Kennard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5190065" start="1663" end="1678" title="Crumlin Viaduct" label="Crumlin Viaduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q202902" start="1733" end="1751" title="the Crystal Palace" label="the Crystal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311992" start="1852" end="1862" title="Dee bridge disaster" label="Dee bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q20882" start="1938" end="1952" title="Gustave Eiffel" label="Gustave Eiffel"/>
<link wikidata="Q190695" start="2015" end="2029" title="Massif Central" label="Massif Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583695" start="2510" end="2527" title="thermal expansion" label="thermal expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5190065" start="3561" end="3576" title="Crumlin Viaduct" label="Crumlin Viaduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q13528046" start="3658" end="3671" title="Belah Viaduct" label="Belah Viaduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567088" start="3686" end="3729" title="South Durham &amp;amp; Lancashire Union Railway" label="South Durham &amp;amp; Lancashire Union Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2412710" start="3740" end="3749" title="Stainmore" label="Stainmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737721" start="5492" end="5495" title="Gib and cotter" label="gib"/>
<link wikidata="Q13528046" start="6120" end="6133" title="Belah Viaduct" label="Belah Viaduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690" start="8477" end="8484" title="Cardiff" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q5561858" start="8576" end="8601" title="Gilkes Wilson and Company" label="Hopkin Gilkes and Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q171866" start="8621" end="8634" title="Middlesbrough" label="Middlesbrough"/>
<link wikidata="Q34836" start="9976" end="9992" title="Ulysses S. Grant" label="Ulysses S. Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q887543" start="10147" end="10161" title="Board of Trade" label="Board of Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082422" start="10265" end="10289" title="Charles Scrope Hutchinson" label="Major General Hutchinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q170475" start="10585" end="10596" title="oscillation" label="oscillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q181517" start="10659" end="10669" title="theodolite" label="theodolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q48784578" start="11476" end="11483" title="burgess (title)" label="burgess"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="11593" end="11607" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q42049" start="11667" end="11675" title="Balmoral Castle" label="Balmoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q42646" start="11772" end="11786" title="Windsor Castle" label="Windsor Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6952850" start="12523" end="12552" title="NBR 224 Class" label="North British Railway no. 224"/>
<link wikidata="Q887543" start="12740" end="12754" title="Board of Trade" label="Board of Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1863211" start="12882" end="12897" title="bridge disaster" label="bridge disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768168" start="12981" end="13004" title="The Tay Bridge Disaster" label="The Tay Bridge Disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q981978" start="13051" end="13069" title="William McGonagall" label="William McGonagall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907604" start="13938" end="13973" title="Massey Lopes" label="Sir Lopes Massey Lopes, 3rd Baronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6130397" start="14688" end="14706" title="James Brunlees" label="Sir James Brunlees"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568691" start="16153" end="16173" title="William Henry Barlow" label="William Henry Barlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q9247597" start="16541" end="16557" title="House of Commons" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q123965302" start="16656" end="16673" title="44 &amp;amp; 45 Vict." label="44 &amp;amp; 45 Vict."/>
<link wikidata="Q2289938" start="16774" end="16803" title="Sir William Arrol &amp;amp; Co." label="Messrs William Arrol &amp;amp; Co"/>
<link wikidata="Q860451" start="17753" end="17765" title="wrought iron" label="wrought iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q212500" start="20456" end="20461" title="rivet" label="rivet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507101" start="22065" end="22079" title="double-heading" label="double-heading"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863613" start="22254" end="22261" title="barrier vehicle" label="barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q16953900" start="22372" end="22425" title="British Construction Industry Awards" label="British Construction Industry Civil Engineering Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q212500" start="22656" end="22661" title="rivet" label="rivet"/>
<link wikidata="Q558116" start="22778" end="22783" title="firth" label="firth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236044" start="22826" end="22840" title="David Kirkaldy" label="David Kirkaldy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5673249" start="22842" end="22853" title="Harry Watts" label="Harry Watts"/>
<link wikidata="Q108032118" start="22855" end="22866" title="Tommy Burns (diver)" label="Tommy Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136696" start="22868" end="22885" title="History of Dundee" label="History of Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1863211" start="22887" end="22911" title="List of bridge disasters" label="List of bridge disasters"/>
<link wikidata="Q21921605" start="22913" end="22954" title="List of structural failures and collapses" label="List of structural failures and collapses"/>
<link wikidata="Q633538" start="22956" end="22978" title="Structural engineering" label="Structural engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309431" start="22980" end="22998" title="Structural failure" label="Structural failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q981978" start="23000" end="23018" title="William McGonagall" label="William McGonagall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5080843" start="23355" end="23370" title="Charles McKean" label="McKean, Charles"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="144682" wikidata="Q296850" url="?curid=144682" title="Baldwin IV of Jerusalem">
<text>Baldwin IV (1161–1185), known as the Leper King, was the king of Jerusalem from 1174 until his death in 1185. He was admired by his contemporaries and later historians for his willpower and dedication to the Kingdom of Jerusalem in the face of his debilitating leprosy. Choosing competent advisers, Baldwin ruled a thriving crusader state and succeeded in protecting it from the Muslim ruler Saladin.

Baldwin developed the first symptoms of leprosy as a child but was only diagnosed after he succeeded his father, King Amalric (). Thereafter his hands and face became increasingly disfigured. Count Raymond III of Tripoli ruled the kingdom in Baldwin&#x27;s name until the king reached the age of majority in 1176. As soon as he assumed government, Baldwin planned an invasion of Egypt, which fell through because of his vassals&#x27; uncooperativeness. Saladin in turn attacked Baldwin&#x27;s kingdom in 1177, but the king and the nobleman Raynald of Châtillon repelled him at Montgisard, earning Baldwin fame. The young king mastered horse riding despite gradually losing sensation in his extremities and was able to fight in battles until his last years.

Leprosy prevented Baldwin from marrying. He hoped to abdicate when his sister, Sibylla, married William of Montferrat in 1176, but William died the next year. In 1180, in order to forestall a coup by Count Raymond III of Tripoli and Prince Bohemond III of Antioch, Baldwin had Sibylla marry Guy of Lusignan. Guy was opposed by a large fraction of the nobility, and soon permanently impaired his relationship with Baldwin. The internal discord that followed forced Baldwin to remain king, as only he was capable of uniting the quarreling nobility. Baldwin again repelled Saladin in 1182 but leprosy rendered him blind and unable to walk or use his hands in 1183. He disinherited Guy and had Sibylla&#x27;s son, Baldwin V, crowned co-king before having himself taken in a litter to lift Saladin&#x27;s Siege of Kerak. Baldwin failed to have Sibylla&#x27;s marriage to Guy annulled and Guy&#x27;s fief of Ascalon confiscated. In early 1185, he arranged for Raymond to rule as regent for Sibylla&#x27;s son and died before 16 May.

==Childhood==
Baldwin was born in mid-1161. His parents were Amalric, then the count of Jaffa and Ascalon, and Agnes of Courtenay. Baldwin&#x27;s godfather was his paternal uncle, King Baldwin III, who joked that his christening present was the Kingdom of Jerusalem. The kingdom and other crusader principalities, though surrounded by Arab Muslim states, were ruled by Franks, French-speaking Catholics who had arrived in the Levant from Western Europe and remained Western in culture. The king was young and recently married, making a nephew&#x27;s accession seem unlikely; yet Baldwin III died childless in 1163. Amalric was his heir, but the nobles of the kingdom were strongly opposed to Amalric&#x27;s wife, Agnes; historian Bernard Hamilton suggests that they were likely threatened by the prospect of her increased influence. The High Court forced Amalric to agree to an annulment of his marriage on the grounds of consanguinity in order to be accepted as king. Amalric succeeded in having his and Agnes&#x27;s children, Sibylla and Baldwin, declared legitimate despite the annulment.

Baldwin grew up without a mother, as Agnes remarried soon after the annulment (firstly to Hugh of Ibelin and then to Reynald of Sidon). Hamilton surmises that she only saw Baldwin on public occasions. He also seldom saw his sister, Sibylla, who was raised in the Convent of Saint Lazarus by their grandaunt Ioveta. At the age of six Baldwin gained a stepmother, Maria Komnene, with whom he was not close. Queen Maria was an ambitious woman who, in Hamilton&#x27;s opinion, likely saw Baldwin as an obstacle to her own children.

King Amalric ensured that Baldwin, as the heir apparent to the kingdom, received a good education. The nine-year-old prince was sent to live with William of Tyre, a sophisticated and well-traveled cleric who was famed for his learning. William noticed that, unlike other children in the playground, Baldwin did not cry when pinched by his peers. After a while it became apparent to the tutor that Baldwin could not feel pain in his right arm. The king hired the Arab physician Abu Sulayman Dawud to treat Baldwin and another Arab, Abul&#x27;Khair, to teach Baldwin horse riding, an essential skill for a Frankish nobleman. Having sensation in only one hand, Baldwin needed to learn to control the horse in battle using solely his knees, and mastered riding despite the handicap. Leprosy was suspected, but there were no visible symptoms yet and physicians hesitated to diagnose because of the stigma the boy would face. Had such a diagnosis been made when he was a child, Baldwin might have been required by law to enter the Order of St Lazarus, a military order composed of affected knights and serjeants.

As an adolescent, Baldwin was precocious, determined, and optimistic in the face of his illness. He took after his father in good looks, body shape, and manner of walking and expressing himself. Baldwin was a quick learner, but he stuttered. He enjoyed listening to stories and history lessons. His tutor, William, remarked on Baldwin&#x27;s excellent memory, stating that he forgot neither kindness nor slights done to him by others.

Amalric attempted to have Sibylla marry the French Count Stephen I of Sancerre, who would rule the kingdom as regent on Baldwin&#x27;s behalf if Amalric died early. When physicians informed him that Baldwin could develop leprosy, Amalric may have begun viewing Sibylla and Stephen as eventual monarchs instead of Baldwin, but the match fell through. In June 1174, the king came down with dysentery. He died on 11 July leaving an underage heir, as he had feared might happen.

==Accession==
Upon Amalric&#x27;s death, the High Court convened to discuss the succession. Though he had not yet been diagnosed, the High Court must have been aware of the royal physicians&#x27; suspicions that Baldwin had contracted leprosy. Yet there was no viable alternative. Baldwin was the king&#x27;s only son; Amalric&#x27;s second marriage had produced two daughters, of which only Isabella survived infancy. Female succession was expressly allowed, but Sibylla was an unmarried adolescent and Isabella only two years old. The male candidates, Amalric&#x27;s cousins Prince Bohemond III of Antioch, Baldwin of Antioch, and Count Raymond III of Tripoli, were politically unsuitable: Bohemond was bound to distant Antioch, Baldwin in the service of Byzantine Emperor Manuel I Komnenos, and Raymond virtually a stranger to the barons after nine years spent in Muslim captivity.

After three days of deliberation Baldwin IV was chosen, with the expectation that a husband would be found for Sibylla to succeed him if he proved to be affected. The young king&#x27;s coronation by the Latin patriarch of Jerusalem, Amalric of Nesle, took place immediately in the Church of the Holy Sepulchre. Medieval rulers were typically crowned on Sundays, but in Baldwin&#x27;s case 15 July 1174 was chosen instead as it was the 75th anniversary of the First Crusade&#x27;s seizure of Jerusalem.

==Regency==
Until he reached the age of majority, which was 15 in the Kingdom of Jerusalem, Baldwin needed a regent to rule in his name. The government was initially assumed by the seneschal, Miles of Plancy. Shortly thereafter Count Raymond III of Tripoli arrived in Jerusalem and succeeded in claiming regency as the king&#x27;s closest kinsman. Miles was murdered while trying to extend his hold on the government. No new seneschal was appointed for two years, and so the young and sickly king presided over burdensome High Court meetings when the regent was away on military duties or in Tripoli.

Baldwin&#x27;s mother, Agnes, returned to court when Raymond became regent. She is frequently accused by historians of exploiting her son&#x27;s condition for self-gain, but Hamilton notes that the contemporary sources, including Baldwin&#x27;s tutor, William of Tyre, are biased against her. Hamilton believes that Baldwin had no memories of his mother because he grew up without her since the age of two, but that she became devotedly kind to him and he developed a strong attachment to her.

During the regency it became clear that the king was indeed affected by leprosy. It is not clear from whom he caught it; medical historian Piers Mitchell concludes that it must have been someone with whom Baldwin had spent a lot of time at a young age, such as a family member, a wet nurse, or another servant, and who did not exhibit easily visible symptoms. Puberty may have accelerated the development of the lepromatous form of the illness. His condition worsened rapidly. Most severely affected were his limbs and face, which made his subjects uneasy when they approached him. Yet, contrary to the common practice, and to the surprise of Muslim observers, Baldwin was never segregated. As a leper, Baldwin could not marry or expect to have children. It thus became a priority to arrange a marriage for Baldwin&#x27;s sister and heir presumptive, Sibylla. Raymond&#x27;s choice was William of Montferrat, son of Margrave William V of Montferrat in Piedmont, Italy, and cousin of both the Holy Roman Emperor Frederick Barbarossa and King Louis VII of France.

==Personal rule==
===Planned offensive===
On the second anniversary of his coronation, 15 July 1176, Baldwin reached the age of majority and Raymond&#x27;s regency lapsed. At the suggestion of his mother, the king appointed his loyal and capable maternal uncle, Joscelin of Courtenay, to the office of seneschal and arranged for him to marry a rich heiress, Agnes of Milly. The change in government signaled a new Frankish approach to the Egyptian ruler Saladin, who had encircled the crusader states during Raymond&#x27;s regency by conquering Muslim principalities in Syria. Baldwin did not ratify Raymond&#x27;s peace treaty with Saladin, firmly agreeing with Joscelin that the sultan&#x27;s power needed to be curbed.

As soon as he took over the government, Baldwin began planning a full-scale attack on Egypt with his advisers. The king took advantage of Saladin&#x27;s campaign in Aleppo to lead a raid around Damascus. This was his first experience of warfare. Despite having use of only one hand, he refused to delegate his military duties and took part in fighting. He and his advisers then decided to intervene in Saladin&#x27;s war against the Order of Assassins. On 1 August, Baldwin and Raymond led the armies of Jerusalem and Tripoli, respectively, in a raid of the Beqaa Valley (modern-day Lebanon), where they defeated the garrison of Damascus, forcing Saladin to abandon his campaign.

William of Montferrat married Baldwin&#x27;s sister Sibylla in November 1176 and was made count of Jaffa and Ascalon. The nobles had misgivings because they no longer trusted his cousin Emperor Frederick&#x27;s ability to aid the kingdom. According to Sicard of Cremona, Baldwin offered to resign the throne to William; if he did, William declined because he knew he lacked the support of the nobility.

In order to carry out his attack on Egypt, Baldwin needed naval support. He thus sent Raynald of Châtillon to lead an embassy to Emperor Manuel, Raynald&#x27;s stepson-in-law, in Constantinople in the winter of 1176–77. Manuel agreed to take part in the invasion in return for the establishment of Byzantine protectorate over the kingdom and restoration of the Orthodox patriarch, Leontius II, in Jerusalem. As Raynald&#x27;s mission was successful, Baldwin consented to his marriage with the lady of Oultrejordain, Stephanie of Milly.

In April 1177, William of Monferrat fell sick with malaria in Ascalon. Baldwin visited him and became gravely ill too. William died in June, leaving Sibylla pregnant and Baldwin incapacitated without a deputy ahead of a major war offensive. The king entrusted the government and military command to Raynald, snubbing the count of Tripoli. Baldwin&#x27;s first cousin Count Philip I of Flanders arrived in the East in September. He brought to Baldwin financial aid from another cousin, King Henry II of England. Henry was invested because he and Baldwin both belonged to the Angevin family. Still in sickbed in Ascalon, the king had himself taken back to Jerusalem in a litter and convened a general council, on the advice of which he offered regency to Philip. Philip declined, and Raynald retained his post.

The Byzantines sent a war fleet in preparation of the invasion of Egypt but to Baldwin&#x27;s regret they withdrew because of the uncooperativeness of Philip of Flanders, Bohemond of Antioch, Raymond of Tripoli, and the grand master of the Knights Hospitaller, Roger de Moulins. Saladin&#x27;s power remained unchecked, and the Byzantine alliance collapsed. Despite the hostility of the Latin patriarch, Amalric of Nesle, Baldwin continued to court the Greek patriarch, Leontius, in hopes that the Byzantines would remain committed to his kingdom.

===Initial conflicts with Saladin===
Philip left the Kingdom of Jerusalem with his troops in late October 1177 to help Raymond of Tripoli attack the Muslim-held city of Hama. With the Frankish army in northern Syria, Saladin seized the opportunity to invade Baldwin&#x27;s kingdom on 18 November. Though still recovering from malaria, Baldwin rode to meet the sultan, while the Knights Templar hurried to defend Gaza. The king took his humble host to Ascalon, where in desperation he issued an &quot;arrière-ban&quot;, summoning all able-bodied men. Saladin reached Ascalon on 22 November and Baldwin led the troops out to meet him. Seeing how drastically outnumbered he was, the king retreated into the city. Saladin too saw the strength in his numbers and confidently proceeded towards Jerusalem. Baldwin managed to contact the Templars, however, and ordered them to abandon Gaza and join him. Contrary to the sultan&#x27;s expectation, Baldwin and Raynald then rode out of Ascalon, joined up with the Templars, and attacked his dispersed army at Montgisard. The young king was in the forefront. Saladin, who barely survived, suffered a crushing defeat.

Not having enough men to launch an offensive on the retreating Muslims, Baldwin decided to fortify the Damascene frontier. The Templars convinced him to build a castle, Chastellet, on the upper Jordan River; he was reluctant because the Franks had promised not to mark that part of the border. After protests of local Muslims, Saladin offered money to Baldwin in exchange for aborting the construction, but the king refused. In 1178, Baldwin hosted the patriarch of the Syriac Orthodox Church, Michael the Syrian, in Jerusalem and won his lasting loyalty to the Frankish cause.

In April 1179, Baldwin intended to round up the sheep passing from Damascus to Banias. Saladin&#x27;s nephew Farrukh Shah was sent to investigate the king&#x27;s movement but suddenly ran into him, and a skirmish followed. The elderly but exceptionally able constable, Humphrey II of Toron, sustained fatal wounds while protecting the king. Weeks later Baldwin rode out to intercept Bedouin raids of Beirut and Sidon, and in June Saladin&#x27;s raiding party routed Baldwin&#x27;s. The king was unhorsed and carried to safety on a knight&#x27;s back because he could not remount on his own. In late August, Baldwin summoned a host to Tiberias to respond to Saladin&#x27;s siege of Le Chastellet, but the castle fell before the relic of the True Cross could be fetched from Jerusalem to accompany the Christian troops.

===Rise of factions===
In the winter of 1177–78 the king&#x27;s widowed sister, Sibylla, gave birth to a son, Baldwin, named after the king. A year of official mourning for the child&#x27;s father, William, concluded in June 1178 and it became appropriate to seek another husband for her. Baldwin of Ibelin&#x27;s suit was well known, but not entertained. Balian of Ibelin married the king&#x27;s stepmother, Queen Maria, in late 1177; Hamilton believes that the king allowed the match in order to avoid antagonizing the Ibelins. In July 1178 Baldwin IV began associating Sibylla with him in some public acts, thereby acknowledging her as next in line to the throne. He contemplated her marriage to Duke Hugh III of Burgundy, and wrote to the king of France: &quot;To be deprived of the use of one&#x27;s limbs is of little help to one in carrying out the work of government ... It is not fitting that a hand so weak as mine should hold power when fear of Arab aggression daily presses upon the Holy City and when my sickness increases the enemy&#x27;s daring.&quot;

During the Holy Week in 1180, the prince of Antioch and the count of Tripoli marched with their armies to Jerusalem. Hamilton considers it most likely that their intention was to force the king to have Sibylla marry Baldwin of Ibelin and to then abdicate. The king had never approved of Baldwin&#x27;s ambition to marry his sister, and though he did wish to abdicate, he was not keen on having terms forced on him. Baldwin acted decisively before his kinsmen&#x27;s armies reached Jerusalem: he arranged for Sibylla to marry a Poitevin knight, Guy of Lusignan. Raymond and Bohemond had no option but to accept the &quot;fait accompli&quot;, and the coup was foiled.

Baldwin had hoped to abdicate, but was prevented by a deep rift within his court. The historian Steven Runciman speaks of a division already at the beginning of Baldwin&#x27;s reign between the cautious, diplomatic native barons and the Hospitallers on one side and the &quot;aggressive, militantly Christian&quot; newcomers from Western Europe and Templars on the other. This view, though common in older historiography, is rejected by modern authors such as Bernard Hamilton and Peter Edbury. Hamilton posits that the factions arose only after Sibylla&#x27;s marriage to Guy and centered on the king&#x27;s paternal relatives (cousins Raymond of Tripoli and Bohemond of Antioch; stepmother, Maria; and her new family, the Ibelins) and maternal relatives (mother, Agnes; stepfather, Reynald of Sidon; sister, Sibylla; brother-in-law, Guy; uncle, Joscelin; and Raynald of Châtillon), of whom the king supported the latter. In light of these problems, Baldwin proposed a two-year truce with Saladin, who was glad to accept in order to campaign freely in northern Syria. Baldwin sent his uncle and chief minister, Joscelin, to assure the Byzantine court that Jerusalem still needed their protection. During Joscelin&#x27;s absence, from mid-1180 to mid-1181, the full burden of government fell on the shoulders of the king, whose health was deteriorating. He relied chiefly on his mother in this period.

To secure Guy&#x27;s position and prevent the emergence of an alternative claimant, Baldwin had his eight-year-old half-sister, Isabella, solemnly betrothed to the teenage lord of Toron, Humphrey IV, in October 1180. Isabella was then sent to live at Kerak Castle with the lady of Oultrejourdain, Humphrey&#x27;s mother, as far as possible from her maternal kin and potential conspirators. By the terms of the marriage contract, Humphrey ceded Toron to Baldwin, who thus prevented the union of two great fiefs under one vassal and strengthened his position against the count of Tripoli.
 
 

 
 

===Truce and resumed hostilities===
Baldwin made use of the truce with Saladin to strengthen the position of his maternal kin, granting Maron and Chastel Neuf to Joscelin and usufruct of Toron to Agnes, while associating Guy and Sibylla with him in public acts. He remained unreconciled with Raymond, however, and forbade the count to enter the kingdom in early 1182 owing to suspicions of another conspiracy. Baldwin likely intended to charge Raymond with treason and deprive him of the Principality of Galilee, a fief of Jerusalem held by Raymond through marriage to Eschiva of Bures. The law prevented the king from seizing the fief without the assent of the High Court, and the High Court urged the king to reconcile with Raymond; Baldwin reluctantly heeded his vassals&#x27; advice.

Baldwin&#x27;s truce with Saladin was due to expire in May 1182 but was broken in mid-1181 by Raynald, who seized a merchant caravan on its way from Egypt to Damascus. Raynald ignored the king&#x27;s request to make restitution to Saladin, who was then preparing to annex the Zengid-ruled Aleppo. The king, who consistently acted against Saladin&#x27;s attempts to expand into northern Syria, decided to oppose him. The recent anti-Catholic coup in Constantinople gave Saladin confidence to attack the Kingdom of Jerusalem. In July, Baldwin marched with his host to relieve the Muslims&#x27; siege of Bethsan, and his outnumbered army won the Battle of Le Forbelet. Historian Bernard Hamilton attributes the victory to the respect and loyalty commanded by Baldwin, who stayed on the battlefield despite his illness and intense heat.

The defeated sultan took his host to besiege Beirut, while another army from Egypt attacked the south of the kingdom. Baldwin knew that he was being provoked into dividing his forces. Deciding that Beirut was of a greater strategic importance, he ignored the southern attack and moved with his troops to Tyre. From there he procured assistance from the Italian maritime republics in lifting Saladin&#x27;s naval blockade of Beirut. Saladin abandoned the siege, but declined to make a truce, worrying Baldwin and his advisers. He proceeded north to fight the Zengids, thereby expanding his realm, while Baldwin led an attack on Saladin&#x27;s Damascene territory, then on Bosra, before finally laying siege and capturing Cave de Sueth. In the winter of 1182–1183, after agreeing on a strategy with his council, Baldwin attacked Damascus again. He threatened to destroy a mosque in Darayya, but local Christians convinced him not to for fear of losing their churches in retaliation.

==Last years==

===Progressing disability===
Baldwin could not walk unsupported or use his hands from 1183. Because of an inability to blink, his cornea dried and he became blind. He nevertheless had to summon his troops in response to Saladin&#x27;s march south following the Egyptian conquest of Aleppo in June. The king then developed a life-threatening fever. He was attended by his mother and the new patriarch, Heraclius, at nearby Nazareth. Having summoned the High Court to his bedside, Baldwin entrusted the government to his brother-in-law, Guy, who was next in line to succeed him. Guy&#x27;s appointment to regency was meant to be permanent. Baldwin retained only the royal title and authority over the city of Jerusalem, but he had Guy swear that, while Baldwin lived, he would not make himself king or alienate parts of the royal demesne.

Fearing discontent among his barons, Baldwin had failed to give Guy any experience in military leadership prior to making him regent. Indeed, the great lords of the kingdom, the independent rulers of Antioch and Tripoli, and the grand masters of the military orders refused to cooperate with Guy. Baldwin recovered unexpectedly and returned to Jerusalem. Having found that coastal climate suited his health, Baldwin offered Jerusalem to Guy in exchange for Tyre. Guy brusquely refused, possibly because Tyre was more lucrative, leaving Baldwin gravely insulted.

The wedding of Baldwin&#x27;s half-sister, Isabella, and Humphrey IV of Toron was celebrated in Kerak in late 1183. Saladin attacked during the festivities and laid siege to the castle, hoping to capture the king&#x27;s half-sister and her husband. The retired king had gathered a council in Jerusalem to inform him about the government of the kingdom when news about the siege reached him. He immediately dismissed Guy from regency and resumed power, as the defense of such a vital fortress and the king&#x27;s half-sister within it could not be entrusted to the man who had proven unable to command the troops. Guy&#x27;s removal from regency was effectively disinheritance; at the council&#x27;s insistence, deliberations about the succession followed. The proposal of the king&#x27;s mother that Sibylla&#x27;s five-year-old son, Baldwin, be made co-king was accepted, and the boy was crowned on 20 November.

In late November Baldwin ordered the lighting of a beacon on the Tower of David, which may have been the first in a chain of such beacons, in order to hearten the defenders of the intensely bombarded Kerak. Baldwin accompanied his troops again, but having become blind and immobile, this time he went in a litter slung between two horses. His presence was essential to unite the discordant barons. Even his humiliated brother-in-law led his men. Warned by his scouts about the king&#x27;s approach and concerned about having left Egypt unguarded, Saladin abandoned the siege on 4 December. Baldwin entered Kerak triumphantly.

===Brother-in-law&#x27;s insubordination===
The question of regency for his nephew troubled Baldwin. The only way to ensure that Guy could not claim it was to have his marriage to Sibylla annulled. Baldwin discussed this with the patriarch, Heraclius. The king may have intended to claim that he had forced his sister to marry Guy and that the marriage was unlawful because of that. Sibylla&#x27;s unwavering loyalty to Guy thwarted his plans, as the couple refused to appear at court.

Early in 1184, Baldwin ordered Guy to attend him as vassal in Jerusalem. Guy declined, citing poor health, and this was repeated several times. Baldwin then had himself carried to Ascalon in the company of the High Court. Guy refused to let him into the city. From the battlements and towers, the inhabitants witnessed the king ceremoniously raise his hand to knock on the gates and demand admission only for the gates to remain closed. The king was welcomed in Jaffa, however, where he installed a governor, thereby depriving Guy of half of his county. In Acre, Baldwin summoned his council, probably to gain support to seize Guy&#x27;s fief on the grounds of refusal of the royal summons. The patriarch and the grand masters begged Baldwin to forgive Guy in order to avoid a civil war. This was as unacceptable to Baldwin as it would have been to any contemporary king. The patriarch and the grand masters stormed out of the council, swaying the rest of the assembly to withhold support for the action.

Baldwin was reconciled with the patriarch and the grand masters by June when he sent them to Europe on a diplomatic mission to seek aid for the kingdom. He informed them by letter that Saladin was once more besieging Kerak. Again, Saladin abandoned the siege when the litter-bound king approached with his army. Once in Kerak, Baldwin ordered and financed the reparations of the damaged castle.

===Last months, death, and aftermath===
In late 1184 Baldwin was shocked to learn about Guy&#x27;s massacre of the Bedouin of the royal fief of Darum, who were under royal protection and who provided information about the Egyptians&#x27; movements. He soon developed a fever. When he returned to Jerusalem in late 1184 or early 1185, Baldwin bestowed regency on Raymond of Tripoli, the man whom he had never trusted, but to whom he could find no better alternative. At the time, he expected to survive the illness, having done so twice before, but within weeks it became apparent that it would be his last. On his deathbed he summoned the High Court to appoint a permanent regent for his nephew, Baldwin V, and Raymond was chosen. The dying king then ordered that homage be rendered to his nephew as king and to Raymond as regent, to be followed by a solemn crown-wearing ceremony at the Church of the Holy Sepulchre.

Baldwin IV died, attended by his vassals, in March 1185 or before 16 May 1185 at the latest, when Baldwin V is recorded as the sole king. He was buried in the Church of the Holy Sepulchre, close to his father, King Amalric. The young Baldwin V died the next year. Sibylla, who succeeded her son, made Guy king. Baldwin IV&#x27;s realm was destroyed by Saladin following his decisive victory over Guy at the Horns of Hattin in 1187. Sibylla and her daughters died in 1190, leaving Isabella I as the heir to the defeated kingdom.

==Assessment and legacy==
Christian defeat at Hattin two years after Baldwin&#x27;s death marred the king&#x27;s legacy, with historians tracing fatal discord to Baldwin&#x27;s reign. Yet, while Baldwin was on the throne, the kingdom lost no territory and flourished economically and spiritually. Baldwin understood the importance of curbing Saladin&#x27;s power, which was reflected in his choice of ministers. He did not devise strategy or diplomacy alone, and delegated Church patronage and finances to his mother, Agnes, and uncle, Joscelin, respectively. His chief contribution was his determination not to abdicate before finding a suitable successor, despite leprosy making government an unbearable burden. As was clear during his reign and especially in its disastrous aftermath, Baldwin alone preserved unity in the kingdom.

Contemporary Christian theologians were divided on the issue of leprosy. Pope Alexander III showed little sympathy when writing about Baldwin, declaring leprosy a &quot;just judgement of God&quot;, but another school of thought encouraged the faithful to see Christ in the affected. Baldwin&#x27;s reign may have led to a lesser stigmatization of the illness in the 13th-century Kingdom of Jerusalem. His subjects&#x27; acceptance of his illness confounded some Muslims. Muslim historian Imad al-Din al-Isfahani wrote:
Baldwin&#x27;s public image may have been aided by his chastity, seen as evidence of extraordinary sanctity, and his success against Saladin was interpreted as a sign of God&#x27;s favor. After the disastrous Seventh Crusade, a crusader was told by an old man in Damascus:
Despite perceived sanctity Baldwin was not particularly devout. He was primarily a knight, both in character and in upbringing, and to contemporaries his most distinctive traits were his courage and honourableness.

==See also==
* &quot;Kingdom of Heaven&quot; – film in which Edward Norton plays Baldwin, who is portrayed as an androgynous, orientalized, and fragile king bound to his chamber

==References==
===Bibliography===
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q296850" start="0" end="10" title="Baldwin IV of Jerusalem" label="Baldwin IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q296850" start="37" end="47" title="Baldwin IV of Jerusalem" label="Leper King"/>
<link wikidata="Q693614" start="57" end="74" title="king of Jerusalem" label="king of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q55502" start="208" end="228" title="Kingdom of Jerusalem" label="Kingdom of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q36956" start="261" end="268" title="leprosy" label="leprosy"/>
<link wikidata="Q190967" start="324" end="338" title="crusader state" label="crusader state"/>
<link wikidata="Q8581" start="392" end="399" title="Saladin" label="Saladin"/>
<link wikidata="Q311808" start="515" end="527" title="King Amalric" label="King Amalric"/>
<link wikidata="Q354389" start="600" end="622" title="Raymond III of Tripoli" label="Raymond III of Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q18000" start="691" end="706" title="age of majority" label="age of majority"/>
<link wikidata="Q316831" start="942" end="962" title="Raynald of Châtillon" label="Raynald of Châtillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q847287" start="976" end="989" title="Battle of Montgisard" label="at Montgisard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6527849" start="1160" end="1177" title="Leprosy stigma" label="Leprosy prevented"/>
<link wikidata="Q207549" start="1213" end="1221" title="abdicate" label="abdicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q234782" start="1239" end="1246" title="Sibylla of Jerusalem" label="Sibylla"/>
<link wikidata="Q255101" start="1256" end="1277" title="William of Montferrat, Count of Jaffa and Ascalon" label="William of Montferrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q349062" start="1400" end="1423" title="Bohemond III of Antioch" label="Bohemond III of Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q294192" start="1451" end="1466" title="Guy of Lusignan" label="Guy of Lusignan"/>
<link wikidata="Q345687" start="1870" end="1879" title="Baldwin V" label="Baldwin V"/>
<link wikidata="Q815156" start="1960" end="1974" title="Siege of Kerak" label="Siege of Kerak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1893486" start="2062" end="2069" title="County of Jaffa and Ascalon" label="Ascalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q311808" start="2249" end="2256" title="Amalric of Jerusalem" label="Amalric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1893486" start="2267" end="2293" title="count of Jaffa and Ascalon" label="count of Jaffa and Ascalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q241228" start="2299" end="2317" title="Agnes of Courtenay" label="Agnes of Courtenay"/>
<link wikidata="Q146465" start="2368" end="2384" title="King Baldwin III" label="King Baldwin III"/>
<link wikidata="Q55502" start="2433" end="2453" title="Kingdom of Jerusalem" label="Kingdom of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q190967" start="2477" end="2500" title="crusader principalities" label="crusader principalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="2523" end="2527" title="Arab" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="2528" end="2534" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q43482" start="2557" end="2563" title="Franks" label="Franks"/>
<link wikidata="Q35222" start="2565" end="2571" title="Old French" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="2581" end="2590" title="Catholics" label="Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="2614" end="2620" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="2626" end="2640" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q478958" start="2654" end="2672" title="Western culture" label="Western in culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q381637" start="3025" end="3035" title="High Court of Jerusalem" label="High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q701040" start="3066" end="3075" title="annulment" label="annulment"/>
<link wikidata="Q774347" start="3110" end="3123" title="consanguinity" label="consanguinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q234782" start="3216" end="3223" title="Sibylla of Jerusalem" label="Sibylla"/>
<link wikidata="Q378505" start="3246" end="3256" title="Legitimacy (family law)" label="legitimate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495759" start="3371" end="3385" title="Hugh of Ibelin" label="Hugh of Ibelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388825" start="3398" end="3414" title="Reynald of Sidon" label="Reynald of Sidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q123454325" start="3544" end="3568" title="Convent of Saint Lazarus" label="Convent of Saint Lazarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q53101" start="3588" end="3594" title="Ioveta" label="Ioveta"/>
<link wikidata="Q255737" start="3643" end="3656" title="Maria Komnene, Queen of Jerusalem" label="Maria Komnene"/>
<link wikidata="Q2762318" start="3852" end="3865" title="heir apparent" label="heir apparent"/>
<link wikidata="Q311822" start="3956" end="3971" title="William of Tyre" label="William of Tyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q177826" start="4007" end="4013" title="cleric" label="cleric"/>
<link wikidata="Q131277902" start="4287" end="4305" title="Abu Sulayman Dawud" label="Abu Sulayman Dawud"/>
<link wikidata="Q179226" start="4375" end="4387" title="horse riding" label="horse riding"/>
<link wikidata="Q36956" start="4589" end="4596" title="Leprosy" label="Leprosy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6527849" start="4703" end="4709" title="leprosy stigma" label="stigma"/>
<link wikidata="Q830796" start="4835" end="4854" title="Order of St Lazarus" label="Order of St Lazarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q474717" start="4858" end="4872" title="military order (religious society)" label="military order"/>
<link wikidata="Q4417607" start="4906" end="4915" title="serjeanty" label="serjeants"/>
<link wikidata="Q301217" start="5411" end="5432" title="Stephen I of Sancerre" label="Stephen I of Sancerre"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="5464" end="5470" title="regent" label="regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q129279" start="5742" end="5751" title="dysentery" label="dysentery"/>
<link wikidata="Q235629" start="6222" end="6230" title="Isabella I of Jerusalem" label="Isabella"/>
<link wikidata="Q349062" start="6414" end="6437" title="Bohemond III of Antioch" label="Bohemond III of Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4850617" start="6439" end="6457" title="Baldwin of Antioch" label="Baldwin of Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q354389" start="6469" end="6491" title="Raymond III of Tripoli" label="Raymond III of Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q235030" start="6552" end="6559" title="Principality of Antioch" label="Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q128866" start="6587" end="6604" title="Byzantine Emperor" label="Byzantine Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q41610" start="6605" end="6622" title="Manuel I Komnenos" label="Manuel I Komnenos"/>
<link wikidata="Q209715" start="6901" end="6911" title="coronation" label="coronation"/>
<link wikidata="Q530906" start="6919" end="6947" title="Latin patriarch of Jerusalem" label="Latin patriarch of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q453361" start="6949" end="6965" title="Amalric of Nesle" label="Amalric of Nesle"/>
<link wikidata="Q187702" start="6997" end="7025" title="Church of the Holy Sepulchre" label="Church of the Holy Sepulchre"/>
<link wikidata="Q51649" start="7175" end="7188" title="First Crusade" label="First Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q456993" start="7196" end="7216" title="Siege of Jerusalem (1099)" label="seizure of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q18000" start="7252" end="7267" title="age of majority" label="age of majority"/>
<link wikidata="Q167334" start="7400" end="7409" title="Seneschal of the Kingdom of Jerusalem" label="seneschal"/>
<link wikidata="Q650014" start="7411" end="7426" title="Miles of Plancy" label="Miles of Plancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q272033" start="7811" end="7818" title="County of Tripoli" label="Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q472898" start="8596" end="8605" title="wet nurse" label="wet nurse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6527832" start="8728" end="8744" title="Lepromatous leprosy" label="lepromatous form"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923231" start="9100" end="9118" title="arranged marriages" label="arrange a marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q255101" start="9202" end="9223" title="William of Montferrat, Count of Jaffa and Ascalon" label="William of Montferrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q778149" start="9241" end="9264" title="William V of Montferrat" label="William V of Montferrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216" start="9268" end="9276" title="Piedmont" label="Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="9308" end="9326" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q79789" start="9327" end="9347" title="Frederick Barbarossa" label="Frederick Barbarossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q134259" start="9357" end="9376" title="Louis VII of France" label="Louis VII of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q503875" start="9641" end="9662" title="Joscelin III of Courtenay" label="Joscelin of Courtenay"/>
<link wikidata="Q8581" start="9833" end="9840" title="Saladin" label="Saladin"/>
<link wikidata="Q41183" start="10267" end="10273" title="Aleppo" label="Aleppo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766" start="10296" end="10304" title="Damascus" label="Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q187715" start="10535" end="10553" title="Order of Assassins" label="Order of Assassins"/>
<link wikidata="Q202322" start="10660" end="10672" title="Beqaa Valley" label="Beqaa Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280386" start="11035" end="11052" title="Sicard of Cremona" label="Sicard of Cremona"/>
<link wikidata="Q207549" start="11073" end="11090" title="Abdication" label="resign the throne"/>
<link wikidata="Q316831" start="11273" end="11293" title="Raynald of Châtillon" label="Raynald of Châtillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="11366" end="11380" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q877458" start="11548" end="11566" title="Orthodox Patriarch of Jerusalem" label="Orthodox patriarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400613" start="11568" end="11579" title="Leontius II of Jerusalem" label="Leontius II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006572" start="11680" end="11701" title="lady of Oultrejordain" label="lady of Oultrejordain"/>
<link wikidata="Q450971" start="11703" end="11721" title="Stephanie of Milly" label="Stephanie of Milly"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="11775" end="11782" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q104664899" start="11786" end="11793" title="Ascalon" label="Ascalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q469588" start="12097" end="12117" title="Philip I of Flanders" label="Philip I of Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q102140" start="12214" end="12233" title="Henry II of England" label="Henry II of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q836484" start="12298" end="12312" title="Angevin kings of England" label="Angevin family"/>
<link wikidata="Q187549" start="12774" end="12793" title="Knights Hospitaller" label="Knights Hospitaller"/>
<link wikidata="Q559382" start="12795" end="12811" title="Roger de Moulins" label="Roger de Moulins"/>
<link wikidata="Q173545" start="13252" end="13256" title="Hama" label="Hama"/>
<link wikidata="Q41300" start="13461" end="13476" title="Knights Templar" label="Knights Templar"/>
<link wikidata="Q47492" start="13495" end="13499" title="Gaza City" label="Gaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q700201" start="13583" end="13594" title="arrière-ban" label="arrière-ban"/>
<link wikidata="Q847287" start="14132" end="14142" title="Battle of Montgisard" label="Montgisard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068128" start="14409" end="14419" title="Chastellet" label="Chastellet"/>
<link wikidata="Q40059" start="14434" end="14446" title="Jordan River" label="Jordan River"/>
<link wikidata="Q210540" start="14710" end="14732" title="Syriac Orthodox Church" label="Syriac Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q129020" start="14734" end="14752" title="Michael the Syrian" label="Michael the Syrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q606295" start="14898" end="14904" title="Banias" label="Banias"/>
<link wikidata="Q16198557" start="14928" end="14940" title="Farrukh Shah" label="Farrukh Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1625275" start="15088" end="15108" title="Humphrey II of Toron" label="Humphrey II of Toron"/>
<link wikidata="Q180688" start="15202" end="15209" title="Bedouin" label="Bedouin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1609953" start="15219" end="15225" title="Lordship of Beirut" label="Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q588186" start="15230" end="15235" title="Lordship of Sidon" label="Sidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371358" start="15278" end="15282" title="rout" label="rout"/>
<link wikidata="Q151920" start="15453" end="15461" title="Tiberias" label="Tiberias"/>
<link wikidata="Q2236782" start="15491" end="15513" title="siege of Le Chastellet" label="siege of Le Chastellet"/>
<link wikidata="Q380356" start="15559" end="15569" title="True Cross" label="True Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q345687" start="15748" end="15755" title="Baldwin V of Jerusalem" label="Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q750652" start="15789" end="15806" title="official mourning" label="official mourning"/>
<link wikidata="Q804832" start="15927" end="15944" title="Baldwin of Ibelin" label="Baldwin of Ibelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q374385" start="15994" end="16010" title="Balian of Ibelin" label="Balian of Ibelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142429" start="16159" end="16166" title="House of Ibelin" label="Ibelins"/>
<link wikidata="Q464908" start="16342" end="16362" title="Hugh III of Burgundy" label="Hugh III of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131080" start="16717" end="16726" title="Holy Week" label="Holy Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q954076" start="17233" end="17241" title="Poitou" label="Poitevin"/>
<link wikidata="Q294192" start="17250" end="17265" title="Guy of Lusignan" label="Guy of Lusignan"/>
<link wikidata="Q21067567" start="17326" end="17339" title="fait accompli" label="fait accompli"/>
<link wikidata="Q49979" start="17469" end="17484" title="Steven Runciman" label="Steven Runciman"/>
<link wikidata="Q681554" start="18948" end="18961" title="lord of Toron" label="lord of Toron"/>
<link wikidata="Q913574" start="18963" end="18974" title="Humphrey IV" label="Humphrey IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q844694" start="19027" end="19039" title="Kerak Castle" label="Kerak Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q681554" start="19220" end="19225" title="Toron" label="Toron"/>
<link wikidata="Q12406488" start="19519" end="19531" title="Chastel Neuf" label="Chastel Neuf"/>
<link wikidata="Q160474" start="19548" end="19556" title="usufruct" label="usufruct"/>
<link wikidata="Q2109946" start="19861" end="19884" title="Principality of Galilee" label="Principality of Galilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q17198551" start="19888" end="19905" title="vassals of the Kingdom of Jerusalem" label="fief of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q527308" start="19942" end="19958" title="Eschiva of Bures" label="Eschiva of Bures"/>
<link wikidata="Q189545" start="20438" end="20444" title="Zengid" label="Zengid"/>
<link wikidata="Q41183" start="20451" end="20457" title="Aleppo" label="Aleppo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246569" start="20589" end="20625" title="Massacre of the Latins" label="anti-Catholic coup in Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q152368" start="20763" end="20770" title="Bethsan" label="Bethsan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1836863" start="20805" end="20826" title="Battle of Le Forbelet" label="Battle of Le Forbelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q82070" start="21300" end="21304" title="Tyre, Lebanon" label="Tyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q62825" start="21357" end="21375" title="maritime republics" label="maritime republics"/>
<link wikidata="Q272680" start="21667" end="21672" title="Bosra" label="Bosra"/>
<link wikidata="Q65059583" start="21716" end="21729" title="Cave de Sueth" label="Cave de Sueth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033066" start="21876" end="21883" title="Darayya" label="Darayya"/>
<link wikidata="Q168291" start="22124" end="22130" title="cornea" label="cornea"/>
<link wikidata="Q653774" start="22395" end="22404" title="Heraclius of Jerusalem" label="Heraclius"/>
<link wikidata="Q430776" start="22416" end="22424" title="Nazareth" label="Nazareth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5473816" start="22816" end="22829" title="royal demesne" label="royal demesne"/>
<link wikidata="Q815156" start="23555" end="23565" title="Siege of Kerak" label="laid siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q13436425" start="24246" end="24253" title="co-king" label="co-king"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177765" start="24374" end="24388" title="Tower of David" label="Tower of David"/>
<link wikidata="Q180294" start="25885" end="25890" title="Jaffa" label="Jaffa"/>
<link wikidata="Q126084" start="25980" end="25984" title="Acre, Israel" label="Acre"/>
<link wikidata="Q557383" start="26969" end="26974" title="Darum" label="Darum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187484" start="27589" end="27595" title="Homage (feudal)" label="homage"/>
<link wikidata="Q233568" start="28144" end="28166" title="Battle of Hattin" label="at the Horns of Hattin"/>
<link wikidata="Q160116" start="29181" end="29199" title="Pope Alexander III" label="Pope Alexander III"/>
<link wikidata="Q825" start="29295" end="29298" title="God in Christianity" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="29367" end="29373" title="Christ" label="Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q742319" start="29596" end="29619" title="Imad al-Din al-Isfahani" label="Imad al-Din al-Isfahani"/>
<link wikidata="Q51661" start="29836" end="29851" title="Seventh Crusade" label="Seventh Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q207698" start="30137" end="30154" title="Kingdom of Heaven (film)" label="Kingdom of Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q125904" start="30177" end="30190" title="Edward Norton" label="Edward Norton"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="144684" wikidata="Q459667" url="?curid=144684" title="The Murders in the Rue Morgue">
<text>&quot;The Murders in the Rue Morgue&quot; is a short story by Edgar Allan Poe published in &quot;Graham&#x27;s Magazine&quot; in 1841. It has been described as the first modern detective story; Poe referred to it as one of his &quot;tales of &quot;.

C. Auguste Dupin is a man in Paris who solves the mystery of the brutal murder of two women. Numerous witnesses heard a suspect, though no one agrees on what language was spoken. At the murder scene, Dupin finds a hair that does not appear to be human.

As the first fictional detective, Poe&#x27;s Dupin displays many traits which became literary conventions in subsequent fictional detectives, including Sherlock Holmes and Hercule Poirot. Many later characters, for example, follow Poe&#x27;s model of the brilliant detective, his personal friend who serves as narrator, and the final revelation being presented before the reasoning that leads up to it. Dupin himself reappears in &quot;The Mystery of Marie Rogêt&quot; and &quot;The Purloined Letter&quot;.

==Plot summary==

The unnamed narrator opens with a lengthy commentary on the nature and practice of analytical reasoning, then describes the circumstances under which he first met Dupin during a visit to Paris. The two share rooms in a dilapidated old mansion and allow no visitors, having cut off all contact with past acquaintances and venturing outside only at night. One evening, Dupin demonstrates his analytical prowess by deducing the narrator&#x27;s thoughts about a particular stage actor, based on clues gathered from the narrator&#x27;s previous words and actions.

Dupin and the narrator read the newspaper accounts of a baffling double murder. Madame L&#x27;Espanaye and her daughter Camille have been found dead at their home in the Rue Morgue, a fictional street in Paris. The mother was found in a yard behind the house, with multiple broken bones and her throat so deeply cut that her head fell off when the body was moved. Camille was found strangled to death and stuffed upside down into a chimney, wedged so tightly that it took the strength of several men to pull her loose. The murders occurred in a fourth-floor room that was locked from the inside; on the floor were found a bloody straight razor, bloody tufts of gray hair, and two bags of gold coins. Several witnesses reported hearing two voices at the time of the murder, one male and French, but disagreed on the language spoken by the other. The speech was unclear, and all witnesses claimed not to know the language the second voice was speaking.

A bank clerk named Adolphe Le Bon, who had delivered the gold coins to the ladies the day before, is arrested even though there is no other evidence linking him to the crime. Remembering a service that Le Bon once performed for him, Dupin offers his assistance to &quot;G–&quot;, the prefect of police.

Because none of the witnesses can agree on the language of the second voice, Dupin concludes they were not hearing a human voice at all. He and the narrator examine the house thoroughly; Dupin dismisses the idea of Le Bon&#x27;s guilt and a robbery motive, citing the fact that the gold was not taken. He points out that the murderer would have had to have superhuman strength to force Camille&#x27;s body up the chimney. He formulates a method by which the murderer could have entered the room and killed both women, involving an agile climb up a lightning rod and a leap to a set of open window shutters. Showing an unusual tuft of hair from the scene, Dupin concludes that an &quot;Ourang-Outang&quot; (orangutan) killed the women. He places an advertisement in the newspaper asking if anyone has lost such an animal, and a sailor arrives looking for it.
The sailor offers a reward, but Dupin is interested only in learning the circumstances behind the two murders. The sailor explains that he captured the orangutan while in Borneo and brought it back to Paris, intending to sell it, but had trouble keeping it under control. When he saw the orangutan attempting to shave its face with his straight razor, imitating his morning grooming, it fled into the streets and reached the Rue Morgue, where it climbed up and into the house. The orangutan seized the mother by the hair and was waving the razor, imitating a barber; when she screamed in fear, it flew into a rage, ripped her hair out, slashed her throat, and strangled Camille. The sailor climbed up the lightning rod in an attempt to catch the animal, and the two voices heard by witnesses belonged to it and him. Fearing punishment by its master, the orangutan threw the mother&#x27;s body out the window and stuffed Camille into the chimney before fleeing.

The sailor sells the orangutan, Le Bon is released from custody, and an embarrassed G– sarcastically remarks that people should mind their own business. Dupin comments to the narrator that G– is &quot;somewhat too cunning to be profound&quot;, but admires his ability &quot;de nier ce qui est, et d&#x27;expliquer ce qui n&#x27;est pas&quot; (a quote from &quot;Julie; or, The New Heloise&quot; by Jean-Jacques Rousseau: &quot;to deny that which is, and explain that which is not&quot;).

==Themes and analysis==

In a letter to friend Joseph Snodgrass, Poe said of &quot;The Murders in the Rue Morgue&quot;, &quot;its &quot;theme&quot; was the exercise of ingenuity in detecting a murderer&quot;. Dupin is not a professional detective; he decides to investigate the murders in the Rue Morgue for his personal amusement. He also has a desire for truth and to prove a falsely accused man innocent. His interests are not financial and he even declines a monetary reward from the owner of the orangutan. The revelation of the actual murderer removes the crime, as neither the orangutan nor its owner can be held responsible. Poe scholar Arthur Hobson Quinn speculates that later detective stories might have set up M. Le Bon, the suspect who is arrested, as appearing guilty as a red herring, though Poe chose not to.

Poe wrote &quot;The Murders in the Rue Morgue&quot; at a time when crime was at the forefront in people&#x27;s minds due to urban development. London had recently established its first professional police force and American cities were beginning to focus on scientific police work as newspapers reported murders and criminal trials. &quot;The Murders in the Rue Morgue&quot; continues an urban theme that was used several times in Poe&#x27;s fiction, in particular &quot;The Man of the Crowd&quot;, likely inspired by Poe&#x27;s time living in Philadelphia.

The tale has an underlying metaphor for the battle of brains vs. brawn. Physical strength, depicted as the orangutan as well as its owner, stand for violence: the orangutan is a murderer, while its owner admits he has abused the animal with a whip. The analyst&#x27;s brainpower overcomes their violence. The story also contains Poe&#x27;s often-used theme of the death of a beautiful woman, which he called the &quot;most poetical topic in the world&quot;.

===Dupin&#x27;s method===
Poe defines Dupin&#x27;s method, &quot;ratiocination&quot;, using the example of a card player: &quot;the extent of information obtained; lies not so much in the validity of the inference as in the quality of the observation&quot;. Poe then provides a narrative example where Dupin explains how he knew the narrator was thinking about the actor Chantilly. Dupin then applies his method to the solving of this crime.

Dupin&#x27;s method emphasizes the importance of reading and the written word. The newspaper accounts pique his curiosity; he learns about orangutans from a written account by &quot;Cuvier&quot; — likely Georges Cuvier, the French zoologist. This method also engages the reader, who follows along by reading the clues himself. Poe also emphasizes the power of the spoken word. When Dupin asks the sailor for information about the murders, the sailor himself acts out a partial death: &quot;The sailor&#x27;s face flushed up as if he were struggling with suffocation... the next moment he fell back into his seat, trembling violently, and with the countenance of death itself&quot;.

==Literary significance and reception==

Poe biographer Jeffrey Meyers sums up the significance of &quot;The Murders in the Rue Morgue&quot; by saying it &quot;changed the history of world literature&quot;. Often cited as the first detective fiction story, the character of Dupin became the prototype for many future fictional detectives, including Arthur Conan Doyle&#x27;s Sherlock Holmes and Agatha Christie&#x27;s Hercule Poirot. The genre is distinctive from a general mystery story in that the focus is on analysis. Poe&#x27;s role in the creation of the detective story is reflected in the Edgar Awards, given annually by the Mystery Writers of America.

&quot;The Murders in the Rue Morgue&quot; also established many tropes that would become common elements in mystery fiction: the eccentric but brilliant detective, the bumbling constabulary, the first-person narration by a close personal friend. Poe also portrays the police in an unsympathetic manner as a sort of foil to the detective. Poe also initiates the storytelling device where the detective announces his solution and then explains the reasoning leading up to it. It is also the first locked room mystery in detective fiction. On the other hand, unlike many detective stories that followed, Poe&#x27;s story does not allow the reader to plausibly deduce the solution before it is revealed; the readers are unlikely to include an orangutan on their list of potential suspects.

Upon its release, &quot;The Murders in the Rue Morgue&quot; and its author were praised for the creation of a new profound novelty. The Pennsylvania &quot;Inquirer&quot; printed that &quot;it proves Mr Poe to be a man of genius... with an inventive power and skill, of which we know no parallel&quot;. Poe, however, downplayed his achievement in a letter to Philip Pendleton Cooke:
==Inspiration==
The word &quot;detective&quot; did not exist at the time Poe wrote &quot;The Murders in the Rue Morgue&quot;, though there were other stories that featured similar problem-solving characters. &quot;Das Fräulein von Scuderi&quot; (1819), by E. T. A. Hoffmann, in which Mlle. de Scuderi, a kind of 19th-century Miss Marple, establishes the innocence of the police&#x27;s favorite suspect in the murder of a jeweler, is sometimes cited as the first detective story. Other forerunners include Voltaire&#x27;s &quot;Zadig&quot; (1748), with a main character who performs similar feats of analysis, themselves borrowed from &quot;The Three Princes of Serendip&quot;, an Italian rendition of Amir Khusro&#x27;s &quot;Hasht-Bihisht&quot;.

Poe may also have been expanding on previous analytical works of his own including the essay on &quot;Maelzel&#x27;s Chess Player&quot; and the comedic &quot;Three Sundays in a Week&quot;. As for the twist in the plot, Poe was likely inspired by the crowd reaction to an orangutan on display at the Masonic Hall in Philadelphia in July 1839. Poe might have picked up some of the relevant biological knowledge from collaborating with Thomas Wyatt, with Poe furthermore linking &quot;his narrative with the subject of evolution, especially the studies done by Cuvier&quot;, possibly also influenced by the studies conducted by Lord Monboddo, though it has been argued that Poe&#x27;s information was &quot;more literary than scientific&quot;.

The name of the main character may have been inspired from the &quot;Dupin&quot; character in a series of stories first published in &quot;Burton&#x27;s Gentleman&#x27;s Magazine&quot; in 1828 called &quot;Unpublished passages in the Life of Vidocq, the French Minister of Police&quot;. Poe would likely have known the story, which features an analytical man who discovers a murderer, though the two plots share little resemblance. Murder victims in both stories, however, have their neck cut so badly that the head is almost entirely removed from the body. Dupin actually mentions Vidocq by name, dismissing him as &quot;a good guesser&quot;.

==Publication history==

Poe wrote the short story in Philadelphia, where he resided at various locations from 1838 to 1844.

Poe originally titled the story &quot;The Murders in the Rue Trianon-Bas&quot; but renamed it to better associate with death. &quot;The Murders in the Rue Morgue&quot; first appeared in &quot;Graham&#x27;s Magazine&quot; in April 1841 while Poe was working as an editor. He was paid an additional $56 () for it — an unusually high figure; he was paid only $9 () for &quot;The Raven&quot; in 1845. In 1843, Poe had the idea to print a series of pamphlets with his stories entitled &quot;The Prose Romances of Edgar A. Poe&quot;. He printed only one, &quot;The Murders in the Rue Morgue&quot; oddly collected with the satirical &quot;The Man That Was Used Up&quot;. It sold for 12 and a half cents. This version included 52 changes from the original text from &quot;Graham&#x27;s&quot;, including the new line: &quot;The Prefect is somewhat too cunning to be profound&quot;, a change from the original &quot;too cunning to be acute&quot;. &quot;The Murders in the Rue Morgue&quot; was also reprinted in Wiley &amp; Putnam&#x27;s collection of Poe&#x27;s stories simply called &quot;Tales&quot;. Poe did not take part in selecting which tales would be collected.

Poe&#x27;s sequel to &quot;The Murders in the Rue Morgue&quot; was &quot;The Mystery of Marie Rogêt&quot;, first serialized in December 1842 and January 1843. Though subtitled &quot;A Sequel to &#x27;The Murders in the Rue Morgue&#x27;&quot;, &quot;The Mystery of Marie Rogêt&quot; shares very few common elements with &quot;The Murders in the Rue Morgue&quot; beyond the inclusion of C. Auguste Dupin and the Paris setting. Dupin reappeared in &quot;The Purloined Letter&quot;, which Poe called &quot;perhaps the best of my tales of ratiocination&quot; in a letter to James Russell Lowell in July 1844.

The original manuscript of &quot;The Murders in the Rue Morgue&quot; which was used for its first printing in &quot;Graham&#x27;s Magazine&quot; was discarded in a wastebasket. An apprentice at the office, J. M. Johnston, retrieved it and left it with his father for safekeeping. It was left in a music book, where it survived three house fires before being bought by George William Childs. In 1891, Childs presented the manuscript, re-bound with a letter explaining its history, to Drexel University. Childs had also donated $650 () for the completion of Edgar Allan Poe&#x27;s new grave monument in Baltimore, Maryland in 1875.

&quot;The Murders in the Rue Morgue&quot; was one of the earliest of Poe&#x27;s works to be translated into French. Between June 11 and June 13, 1846, a translation titled &quot;&quot; was published in &quot;La Quotidienne&quot;, a Paris newspaper. It was signed &quot;G. B.&quot;, with Poe&#x27;s name not mentioned. Many details were changed; the street &quot;Rue Morgue&quot; became &quot;rue de l&#x27;Ouest&quot;, while &quot;Dupin&quot; became &quot;Bernier&quot;. On October 12, 1846, another uncredited translation, renamed &quot;Une Sanglante Enigme&quot;, was published in &quot;Le Commerce&quot;. The editor of &quot;Le Commerce&quot; was accused of plagiarizing the story from &quot;La Quotidienne&quot;. The accusation went to trial and the public discussion brought Poe&#x27;s name to the attention of the French public.

==Adaptations==
&quot;The Murders in the Rue Morgue&quot; has been adapted into several films. At least four films of the early silent era borrowed from &quot;The Murders in the Rue Morgue&quot;. One was &quot;Sherlock Holmes in the Great Murder Mystery&quot; (1908) in which an escaped gorilla attacks and kills a young woman in her home. In 1914 a film promoted as a three-reel &quot;comedy-drama&quot; titled &quot;The Phantom Thief&quot; involves a monkey stealing a pearl necklace. Other films from the era where an ape-like creature murders or is convicted of murder include &quot;Who Killed Olga Carew?&quot; (1913) and &quot;The Orang-Outang&quot; (1915). A film adaptation of the story came out in 1914 starring Paul Clemons. The film was later released as &quot;The Mystery of the Rue Morgue&quot;. 

Director Robert Florey first mentioned the story &quot;Murders in the Rue Morgue&quot; to Universal Studios in March 1930, at which time &quot;Dracula&quot; was on release and &quot;Frankenstein&quot; (1931) was in pre-production, so planning an adaptation of Poe&#x27;s story did not begin until 1931. The film starred Bela Lugosi leading much of Poe&#x27;s story changed to accommodate for him; Florey said he &quot;had to strengthen and lengthen the Poe short story&quot; and that he &quot;added numerous characters&quot;. According to the book &quot;Universal Horrors&quot;, &quot;Murders in the Rue Morgue&quot; critical reception on its release was &quot;harsh&quot;. Later adaptations of &quot;The Murders in the Rue Morgue&quot; include &quot;Phantom of the Rue Morgue&quot; (1954), a color 3D film that was produced by Warner Bros. Gordon Hessler directed a 1971 adaptation of &quot;Murders in the Rue Morgue&quot;, which is closer to being an adaptation of &quot;Phantom of the Opera&quot; than of Poe&#x27;s tale. According to Hessler, &quot;the problem with the original story, which is a mystery where the &#x27;monkey&#x27; did it, was not the kind of story you could do anymore&quot;. A 1986 television adaptation of the story was directed by Jeannot Szwarc and stars George C. Scott as Auguste Dupin. In the 2023 Netflix miniseries &quot;The Fall of the House of Usher&quot;, Auguste Dupin is reimagined as an Assistant United States Attorney. The third episode of the series is titled &quot;Murder in the Rue Morgue&quot; and features a character, Camille L&#x27;Espanaye, being killed by a chimpanzee in a medical testing facility nicknamed the &quot;Rue Morgue&quot;. 

The story has also been adapted as a video game by Big Fish Games for their &quot;Dark Tales&quot; franchise, under the title &quot;Dark Tales: Edgar Allan Poe&#x27;s Murders in the Rue Morgue&quot;.

==See also==

*&quot;Rue Morgue&quot; (magazine)
*Rue Morgue Radio

==References==
===Sources===
* 
* The Seven Basic Plots. 
* 
* . Harrowitz discusses Dupin&#x27;s method in the light of Charles Sanders Peirce&#x27;s logic of making good guesses or abductive reasoning.
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

* Full text on PoeStories.com with hyperlinked vocabulary words.
* First appearance in &quot;Graham&#x27;s Magazine&quot;, April 1841, p. 166.
*History of publications at the Edgar Allan Poe Society online</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q459667" start="6" end="35" title="The Murders in the Rue Morgue" label="The Murders in the Rue Morgue"/>
<link wikidata="Q49084" start="47" end="58" title="short story" label="short story"/>
<link wikidata="Q16867" start="62" end="77" title="Edgar Allan Poe" label="Edgar Allan Poe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7879167" start="97" end="119" title="Graham&amp;#x27;s Magazine" label="Graham&amp;#x27;s Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q186424" start="177" end="192" title="detective fiction" label="detective story"/>
<link wikidata="Q549047" start="251" end="267" title="C. Auguste Dupin" label="C. Auguste Dupin"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="280" end="285" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653" start="657" end="672" title="Sherlock Holmes" label="Sherlock Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q170534" start="677" end="691" title="Hercule Poirot" label="Hercule Poirot"/>
<link wikidata="Q33005760" start="815" end="823" title="narrator" label="narrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1167993" start="941" end="967" title="The Mystery of Marie Rogêt" label="The Mystery of Marie Rogêt"/>
<link wikidata="Q733448" start="984" end="1004" title="The Purloined Letter" label="The Purloined Letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="1218" end="1223" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q170477" start="2023" end="2030" title="chimney" label="chimney"/>
<link wikidata="Q597040" start="2220" end="2234" title="straight razor" label="straight razor"/>
<link wikidata="Q371909" start="2827" end="2834" title="prefect" label="prefect"/>
<link wikidata="Q7973" start="3395" end="3408" title="lightning rod" label="lightning rod"/>
<link wikidata="Q41050" start="3553" end="3562" title="orangutan" label="orangutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q36117" start="3876" end="3882" title="Borneo" label="Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q129289" start="5029" end="5055" title="Julie; or, The New Heloise" label="Julie; or, The New Heloise"/>
<link wikidata="Q6527" start="5065" end="5086" title="Jean-Jacques Rousseau" label="Jean-Jacques Rousseau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5706973" start="5801" end="5820" title="Arthur Hobson Quinn" label="Arthur Hobson Quinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q572959" start="5944" end="5955" title="Red herring (plot device)" label="red herring"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="6126" end="6132" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195598" start="6454" end="6474" title="The Man of the Crowd" label="The Man of the Crowd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="6527" end="6539" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18534" start="6569" end="6577" title="metaphor" label="metaphor"/>
<link wikidata="Q942049" start="6902" end="6932" title="The Philosophy of Composition" label="the death of a beautiful woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q171969" start="7648" end="7662" title="Georges Cuvier" label="Georges Cuvier"/>
<link wikidata="Q186424" start="8359" end="8376" title="detective fiction" label="detective fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q35610" start="8476" end="8494" title="Arthur Conan Doyle" label="Arthur Conan Doyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653" start="8502" end="8517" title="Sherlock Holmes" label="Sherlock Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q35064" start="8522" end="8537" title="Agatha Christie" label="Agatha Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q170534" start="8545" end="8559" title="Hercule Poirot" label="Hercule Poirot"/>
<link wikidata="Q833154" start="8724" end="8735" title="Edgar Award" label="Edgar Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720621" start="8760" end="8786" title="Mystery Writers of America" label="Mystery Writers of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q110248179" start="8853" end="8859" title="Trope (literature)" label="tropes"/>
<link wikidata="Q50013" start="8918" end="8927" title="Eccentricity (behavior)" label="eccentric"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163480" start="8966" end="8978" title="constabulary" label="constabulary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5563727" start="9104" end="9108" title="foil (literature)" label="foil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141200" start="9284" end="9303" title="locked room mystery" label="locked room mystery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4245670" start="9934" end="9956" title="Philip Pendleton Cooke" label="Philip Pendleton Cooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q150471" start="10214" end="10231" title="E. T. A. Hoffmann" label="E. T. A. Hoffmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q358642" start="10242" end="10258" title="Mademoiselle de Scuderi" label="Mlle. de Scuderi"/>
<link wikidata="Q193531" start="10283" end="10294" title="Miss Marple" label="Miss Marple"/>
<link wikidata="Q9068" start="10463" end="10471" title="Voltaire" label="Voltaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q140057" start="10485" end="10490" title="Zadig" label="Zadig"/>
<link wikidata="Q3563423" start="10598" end="10627" title="The Three Princes of Serendip" label="The Three Princes of Serendip"/>
<link wikidata="Q207817" start="10659" end="10670" title="Amir Khusro" label="Amir Khusro"/>
<link wikidata="Q5679089" start="10684" end="10697" title="Hasht-Bihisht (poem)" label="Hasht-Bihisht"/>
<link wikidata="Q6729212" start="10808" end="10835" title="Maelzel&amp;#x27;s Chess Player" label="Maelzel&amp;#x27;s Chess Player"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727286" start="11139" end="11151" title="The Conchologist&amp;#x27;s First Book" label="Thomas Wyatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680084" start="11331" end="11344" title="James Burnett, Lord Monboddo" label="Lord Monboddo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928637" start="11587" end="11626" title="Burton&amp;#x27;s Gentleman&amp;#x27;s Magazine" label="Burton&amp;#x27;s Gentleman&amp;#x27;s Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q122818" start="12030" end="12036" title="Eugène François Vidocq" label="Vidocq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="12147" end="12159" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7879167" start="12411" end="12433" title="Graham&amp;#x27;s Magazine" label="Graham&amp;#x27;s Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q22726" start="12591" end="12600" title="The Raven" label="The Raven"/>
<link wikidata="Q190399" start="12663" end="12671" title="pamphlet" label="pamphlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q128758" start="12835" end="12844" title="satire" label="satirical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089502" start="12851" end="12875" title="The Man That Was Used Up" label="The Man That Was Used Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q1167993" start="13453" end="13479" title="The Mystery of Marie Rogêt" label="The Mystery of Marie Rogêt"/>
<link wikidata="Q733448" start="13831" end="13851" title="The Purloined Letter" label="The Purloined Letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q449670" start="13949" end="13969" title="James Russell Lowell" label="James Russell Lowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q20773771" start="14165" end="14175" title="apprenticeship" label="apprentice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5546310" start="14353" end="14374" title="George William Childs" label="George William Childs"/>
<link wikidata="Q603034" start="14468" end="14485" title="Drexel University" label="Drexel University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="14586" end="14605" title="Baltimore, Maryland" label="Baltimore, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q164666" start="15277" end="15289" title="plagiarism" label="plagiarizing"/>
<link wikidata="Q16676652" start="15662" end="15705" title="Sherlock Holmes in the Great Murder Mystery" label="Sherlock Holmes in the Great Murder Mystery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349886" start="16272" end="16285" title="Robert Florey" label="Robert Florey"/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="16353" end="16370" title="Universal Pictures" label="Universal Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q279378" start="16406" end="16413" title="Dracula (1931 English-language film)" label="Dracula"/>
<link wikidata="Q546829" start="16445" end="16457" title="Frankenstein (1931 film)" label="Frankenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q202264" start="16566" end="16574" title="Murders in the Rue Morgue (1932 film)" label="The film"/>
<link wikidata="Q34529" start="16583" end="16594" title="Bela Lugosi" label="Bela Lugosi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3222667" start="17014" end="17039" title="Phantom of the Rue Morgue" label="Phantom of the Rue Morgue"/>
<link wikidata="Q229390" start="17062" end="17069" title="3D film" label="3D film"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="17091" end="17102" title="Warmer Bros." label="Warner Bros"/>
<link wikidata="Q922905" start="17104" end="17118" title="Gordon Hessler" label="Gordon Hessler"/>
<link wikidata="Q3791338" start="17155" end="17180" title="Murders in the Rue Morgue (1971 film)" label="Murders in the Rue Morgue"/>
<link wikidata="Q272506" start="17236" end="17256" title="The Phantom of the Opera (novel)" label="Phantom of the Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q104869908" start="17470" end="17491" title="The Murders in the Rue Morgue (1986 film)" label="television adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q336024" start="17521" end="17535" title="Jeannot Szwarc" label="Jeannot Szwarc"/>
<link wikidata="Q182450" start="17546" end="17561" title="George C. Scott" label="George C. Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q549047" start="17565" end="17578" title="C. Auguste Dupin" label="Auguste Dupin"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="17592" end="17599" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q110156249" start="17617" end="17647" title="The Fall of the House of Usher (miniseries)" label="The Fall of the House of Usher"/>
<link wikidata="Q48767438" start="17689" end="17721" title="Assistant United States Attorney" label="Assistant United States Attorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="17989" end="17999" title="video game" label="video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q668735" start="18003" end="18017" title="Big Fish Games" label="Big Fish Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q3449251" start="18168" end="18201" title="Rue Morgue (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Rue Morgue&amp;quot; (magazine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3449251" start="18203" end="18219" title="Rue Morgue Radio" label="Rue Morgue Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q11960326" start="18255" end="18276" title="The Seven Basic Plots" label="The Seven Basic Plots"/>
<link wikidata="Q187520" start="18342" end="18364" title="Charles Sanders Peirce" label="Charles Sanders Peirce"/>
<link wikidata="Q308495" start="18404" end="18423" title="abductive reasoning" label="abductive reasoning"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="144685" wikidata="Q349705" url="?curid=144685" title="Summit (disambiguation)">
<text>A [[summit]] is the highest point of a mountain, hill, road, or railway.

Summit may also refer to:

==Places==
* Summit, Alabama, an unincorporated community
* Summit, Arizona, a census-designated place
* Summit, Arkansas, a city
* Summit, California (disambiguation)
* Summit Bridge, Delaware, an unincorporated community also called Summit
* Summit, Illinois, a village
* Summit, DeKalb County, Indiana, an unincorporated community
* Summit, Greene County, Indiana, an unincorporated community
* Summit, LaPorte County, Indiana, an unincorporated community
* Summit, Kentucky, an unincorporated community
* Summit, Mississippi, a town
* Summit, Missouri, an unincorporated community
* Summit, New Jersey, a city
* Summit, New York, a town
* Summit, Oklahoma, a town
* Summit, Oregon, an unincorporated community
* Summit, Rhode Island, a village
* Summit, South Carolina, a town
* Summit, South Dakota, a town
* Summit, Utah, a census-designated place
* Summit, Washington, a census-designated place
* Summit, West Virginia, an unincorporated community
* Summit, Wisconsin (disambiguation)
* Summit Camp, a research station on the Greenland Ice Sheet
* Summit City (disambiguation)
* Summit County (disambiguation)
* Lake Summit, Winter Haven, Florida
* Summit Lake (disambiguation)
* Summit Lakes (disambiguation)
* Summit Mountain (disambiguation)
* Summit Pass (British Columbia), a mountain pass in British Columbia, Canada
* Summit Peak, Colorado
* Mount Ina Coolbrith, California, formerly Summit Peak
* Summit Range, a mountain range in California
* Summit Ridge, Graham Land, Antarctica
* Summit, L&#x27;Anse Township, Michigan, an unincorporated community
* Summit, Washtenaw County, Michigan, a historic community

* Summit Township (disambiguation)
* Hope, Providence, Rhode Island or Summit, a neighborhood

==Buildings==
* Summit (Catonsville, Maryland), an historic home on the National Register of Historic Places
* Summit Playhouse, a theater in Summit, New Jersey; on the National Register of Historic Places
* Summit Square or Summit Bank Building, the tallest office building in Fort Wayne, Indiana

==Arts and entertainment==
===Games and puzzles===
* &quot;Summit&quot; (game), a board game based on the Cold War
* Summit (puzzle), a word puzzle and scoring system; see Showdown (game)

===Music===
* Summit (groups), a type of collaboration in jazz music
* Summit Records, an American record label
* &quot;Summit&quot; (album), a 1974 album by Astor Piazzolla and Gerry Mulligan
* &quot;Summit&quot;, a 2010 album by American band Thou
* &quot;Summit&quot; (song), a 2007 song by Josh Gabriel
* &quot;Summit&quot;, a 2013 song by Skrillex featuring Ellie Goulding from &quot;Bangarang&quot;

===Television===
* &quot;Summit&quot; (&quot;The Outer Limits&quot;), a 1999 television episode
* &quot;Summit&quot; (&quot;Stargate SG-1&quot;), a 2001 television episode

==Business==
* Summit Air, an air charter airline serving northern Canada
* Summit Aerosports, American producer of the powered parachute Summit 2
* Summit Bank, based in Pakistan
* Summit Brewing Company, a craft brewery in Saint Paul, Minnesota, US
* Summit Business Media, a business-to-business media and information company
* Summit Cookie Bars, a candy bar that is no longer produced
* Summit Credit Union, Madison, Wisconsin, US
* Summit Entertainment, a movie production company
* Summit Group, a large Bangladeshi conglomerate
* Summit Mall, Fairlawn, Ohio, US
* Summit Media, a magazine publishing company in the Philippines
* Summit Racing Equipment, a mail order automotive performance equipment company
* Summit Systems, a financial software editor, now part of the Misys group

==Plants==
* Summit, a variety of hop
* Summit, a muscadine (&quot;Vitis rotundifolia&quot;) cultivar

==Schools==
* Clarks Summit University, formerly known as Baptist Bible College &amp; Seminary, in Clarks Summit, Pennsylvania, US
* Summit High School (disambiguation)
* Summit Middle School (disambiguation)
* Summit School (disambiguation)

==Sports==
* Summit Arena, an indoor arena in Hot Springs, Arkansas
* Summit League, a U.S. college athletic conference
* Summit Motorsports Park, a drag racing facility near Norwalk, Ohio
* Summit Ski Area, Mount Hood, Oregon

==Transportation-related==
* AJW Summit, a British high specification motorcycle made by AJW Motorcycles between 1927 and 1931
* Eagle Summit, a subcompact automobile sold by the Chrysler Corporation
* Summit Airport (Alaska), Summit, Alaska
* Summit Airport (Delaware), Middletown, Delaware
* Summit Avenue (disambiguation)
* Summit Bridge, connecting Newark and Dover, Delaware
* Summit rail station (disambiguation), several rail stations
* Summit Tunnel, West Yorkshire, England

==Other uses==
* Summit (meeting), a meeting of heads of state or government
* Summit (supercomputer), a TOP500 supercomputer developed by IBM
* USS &quot;Summit&quot; (AMc-106), a US Navy coastal minesweeper
* Summit Awards, for advertising
* Summit Ministries, an evangelical Christian organization
* SUMMIT, biennial technical festival conducted by the College of Engineering Chengannur, India
* Summit, an interlibrary loan service offered by the Orbis Cascade Alliance

==See also==
* The Summit (disambiguation)
* Summit Series (disambiguation), competitions between Soviet and Canadian professional ice hockey players
* 
* summit1g, American internet personality Jaryd Russell Lazar
* Albert Somit (1919–2020), American political scientist
* Sumit or Sumeet, an Indian masculine given name
* SUMIT, a connector between computer expansion buses</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q349705" start="2" end="12" title="Summit (disambiguation)" label="[[summit]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q349705" start="74" end="80" title="Summit (disambiguation)" label="Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637735" start="114" end="129" title="Summit, Alabama" label="Summit, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703196" start="161" end="176" title="Summit, Arizona" label="Summit, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q80153" start="206" end="222" title="Summit, Arkansas" label="Summit, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637737" start="233" end="268" title="Summit, California (disambiguation)" label="Summit, California (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637779" start="271" end="294" title="Summit Bridge, Delaware" label="Summit Bridge, Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q2674024" start="345" end="361" title="Summit, Illinois" label="Summit, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637738" start="375" end="405" title="Summit, DeKalb County, Indiana" label="Summit, DeKalb County, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637739" start="437" end="467" title="Summit, Greene County, Indiana" label="Summit, Greene County, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q20709385" start="499" end="530" title="Summit, LaPorte County, Indiana" label="Summit, LaPorte County, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637742" start="562" end="578" title="Summit, Kentucky" label="Summit, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105278" start="610" end="629" title="Summit, Mississippi" label="Summit, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q28120763" start="640" end="656" title="Summit, Missouri" label="Summit, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000642" start="688" end="706" title="Summit, New Jersey" label="Summit, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708988" start="717" end="733" title="Summit, New York" label="Summit, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q3287714" start="744" end="760" title="Summit, Oklahoma" label="Summit, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637745" start="771" end="785" title="Summit, Oregon" label="Summit, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637746" start="817" end="837" title="Summit, Rhode Island" label="Summit, Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2242541" start="851" end="873" title="Summit, South Carolina" label="Summit, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553836" start="884" end="904" title="Summit, South Dakota" label="Summit, South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q3473382" start="915" end="927" title="Summit, Utah" label="Summit, Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504136" start="957" end="975" title="Summit, Washington" label="Summit, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637749" start="1005" end="1026" title="Summit, West Virginia" label="Summit, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637748" start="1058" end="1092" title="Summit, Wisconsin (disambiguation)" label="Summit, Wisconsin (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502578" start="1095" end="1106" title="Summit Camp" label="Summit Camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637787" start="1156" end="1184" title="Summit City (disambiguation)" label="Summit City (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q231994" start="1187" end="1217" title="Summit County (disambiguation)" label="Summit County (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6477876" start="1220" end="1231" title="Lake Summit" label="Lake Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637820" start="1257" end="1285" title="Summit Lake (disambiguation)" label="Summit Lake (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637820" start="1288" end="1317" title="Summit Lakes (disambiguation)" label="Summit Lakes (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637851" start="1320" end="1352" title="Summit Mountain (disambiguation)" label="Summit Mountain (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637847" start="1355" end="1385" title="Summit Pass (British Columbia)" label="Summit Pass (British Columbia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637850" start="1433" end="1444" title="Summit Peak" label="Summit Peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q6921409" start="1457" end="1476" title="Mount Ina Coolbrith" label="Mount Ina Coolbrith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637862" start="1513" end="1525" title="Summit Range" label="Summit Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q2680422" start="1560" end="1572" title="Summit Ridge" label="Summit Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2208296" start="1600" end="1638" title="Summit, L&amp;#x27;Anse Township, Michigan" label="Summit, L&amp;#x27;Anse Township, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931334" start="1670" end="1704" title="Summit, Washtenaw County, Michigan" label="Summit, Washtenaw County, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365468" start="1730" end="1762" title="Summit Township (disambiguation)" label="Summit Township (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q14709417" start="1765" end="1795" title="Hope, Providence, Rhode Island" label="Hope, Providence, Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637754" start="1839" end="1869" title="Summit (Catonsville, Maryland)" label="Summit (Catonsville, Maryland)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637852" start="1934" end="1950" title="Summit Playhouse" label="Summit Playhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637875" start="2031" end="2044" title="Summit Square" label="Summit Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637757" start="2175" end="2200" title="Summit (game)" label="&amp;quot;Summit&amp;quot; (game)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2239" end="2254" title="Summit (puzzle)" label="Summit (puzzle)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7503200" start="2294" end="2309" title="Showdown (game)" label="Showdown (game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637758" start="2325" end="2340" title="Summit (groups)" label="Summit (groups)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4549705" start="2382" end="2396" title="Summit Records" label="Summit Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365457" start="2425" end="2451" title="Summit (album)" label="&amp;quot;Summit&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20687383" start="2556" end="2560" title="Thou (American band)" label="Thou"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637761" start="2563" end="2588" title="Summit (song)" label="&amp;quot;Summit&amp;quot; (song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20881" start="2700" end="2709" title="Bangarang (EP)" label="Bangarang"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545617" start="2736" end="2785" title="Summit (The Outer Limits)" label="&amp;quot;Summit&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;The Outer Limits&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556982" start="2815" end="2861" title="Summit (Stargate SG-1)" label="&amp;quot;Summit&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Stargate SG-1&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637763" start="2905" end="2915" title="Summit Air" label="Summit Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698522" start="2966" end="2983" title="Summit Aerosports" label="Summit Aerosports"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637775" start="3039" end="3050" title="Summit Bank" label="Summit Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637776" start="3072" end="3094" title="Summit Brewing Company" label="Summit Brewing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q4652400" start="3143" end="3164" title="Summit Business Media" label="Summit Business Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637782" start="3221" end="3239" title="Summit Cookie Bars" label="Summit Cookie Bars"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637799" start="3282" end="3301" title="Summit Credit Union" label="Summit Credit Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q632323" start="3328" end="3348" title="Summit Entertainment" label="Summit Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637805" start="3379" end="3391" title="Summit Group" label="Summit Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637834" start="3428" end="3439" title="Summit Mall" label="Summit Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637835" start="3462" end="3474" title="Summit Media" label="Summit Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637861" start="3527" end="3550" title="Summit Racing Equipment" label="Summit Racing Equipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939341" start="3669" end="3674" title="Misys" label="Misys"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3705" end="3719" title="List of hop varieties#Summit" label="variety of hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701573" start="3732" end="3741" title="muscadine" label="muscadine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857600" start="3799" end="3823" title="Clarks Summit University" label="Clarks Summit University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637807" start="3918" end="3953" title="Summit High School (disambiguation)" label="Summit High School (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637840" start="3956" end="3993" title="Summit Middle School (disambiguation)" label="Summit Middle School (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637867" start="3996" end="4026" title="Summit School (disambiguation)" label="Summit School (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637767" start="4041" end="4053" title="Summit Arena" label="Summit Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400411" start="4098" end="4111" title="Summit League" label="Summit League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637842" start="4150" end="4173" title="Summit Motorsports Park" label="Summit Motorsports Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q109285533" start="4219" end="4234" title="Summit Ski Area" label="Summit Ski Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q4652085" start="4285" end="4295" title="AJW Summit" label="AJW Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q959726" start="4385" end="4397" title="Eagle Summit" label="Eagle Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637765" start="4458" end="4481" title="Summit Airport (Alaska)" label="Summit Airport (Alaska)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3545131" start="4500" end="4525" title="Summit Airport (Delaware)" label="Summit Airport (Delaware)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637769" start="4550" end="4580" title="Summit Avenue (disambiguation)" label="Summit Avenue (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637777" start="4583" end="4596" title="Summit Bridge" label="Summit Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q27802978" start="4638" end="4674" title="Summit rail station (disambiguation)" label="Summit rail station (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637903" start="4700" end="4713" title="Summit Tunnel" label="Summit Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072326" start="4757" end="4773" title="Summit (meeting)" label="Summit (meeting)"/>
<link wikidata="Q22073261" start="4819" end="4841" title="Summit (supercomputer)" label="Summit (supercomputer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874452" start="4885" end="4917" title="USS Summit (AMc-106)" label="USS &amp;quot;Summit&amp;quot; (AMc-106)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637772" start="4951" end="4964" title="Summit Awards" label="Summit Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173513" start="4984" end="5001" title="Summit Ministries" label="Summit Ministries"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5096" end="5129" title="College of Engineering Chengannur#SUMMIT" label="College of Engineering Chengannur"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100024" start="5191" end="5213" title="Orbis Cascade Alliance" label="Orbis Cascade Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741778" start="5230" end="5257" title="The Summit (disambiguation)" label="The Summit (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365472" start="5260" end="5290" title="Summit Series (disambiguation)" label="Summit Series (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q38458241" start="5370" end="5378" title="summit1g" label="summit1g"/>
<link wikidata="Q47221935" start="5432" end="5444" title="Albert Somit" label="Albert Somit"/>
<link wikidata="Q60785514" start="5489" end="5494" title="Sumit" label="Sumit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2325754" start="5539" end="5544" title="SUMIT" label="SUMIT"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="144686" wikidata="Q345687" url="?curid=144686" title="Baldwin V of Jerusalem">
<text>Baldwin V (1177 or 11781186) was the king of Jerusalem who reigned together with his uncle Baldwin IV from 1183 to 1185 and, after his uncle&#x27;s death, as the sole king from 1185 to his own death in 1186. Baldwin IV&#x27;s leprosy meant that he could not have children, and so he spent his reign grooming various relatives to succeed him. Finally his nephew was chosen, and Baldwin IV had him crowned as co-king in order to sideline the child&#x27;s unpopular stepfather, Guy of Lusignan. When Baldwin IV died, Count Raymond III of Tripoli assumed government on behalf of the child king. Baldwin V died of unknown causes and was succeeded by his mother, Sibylla, who then made Guy king.

==Background==
Baldwin of Montferrat was born in December 1177 or January 1178 to Sibylla, sister of King Baldwin IV of Jerusalem, after whom he was named. His father, William of Montferrat, had died in June 1177. Though only 16, the king was not expected to live long, nor could he marry and have children, because he had contracted leprosy and was growing weaker. Baldwin had thus been expected to succeed his uncle. By July 1178, the king recognized his sister as his new heir presumptive. Her son, Baldwin of Montferrat, followed her in the line of succession.

The Kingdom of Jerusalem, a Crusader state in the Levant ruled by Catholic Franks, was often threatened by the neighbouring Muslim powers.
Because of the king&#x27;s illness, it was imperative that the young Baldwin&#x27;s mother, Sibylla, remarry soon; she married Guy of Lusignan in early 1180 and had four daughters with him. Baldwin IV initially intended Guy to become the next king, but soon realized that Guy was a poor candidate because of his unpopularity with the barons of the Kingdom of Jerusalem and rulers of the neighbouring Crusader states, Prince Bohemond III of Antioch and Count Raymond III of Tripoli.

==Kingship==

In 1183, King Baldwin IV summoned a council to discuss who could succeed him as king instead of his brother-in-law, Guy. The supporters of the king&#x27;s sister, Sibylla, were not present, while his younger half-sister, Isabella, and Isabella&#x27;s husband, Humphrey IV of Toron, were not viable candidates as they were besieged in Kerak by the Egyptian ruler Saladin. Agnes of Courtenay, mother of Sibylla and Baldwin IV, suggested that the young Baldwin, son of Sibylla, should be made co-king with Baldwin IV. Agnes may have acted to foil the ambitions of Raymond of Tripoli, who also had a claim to the throne. As the boy had the next best claim after his mother, his grandmother&#x27;s proposal was widely accepted. Baldwin V was acclaimed, crowned and anointed in the Church of the Holy Sepulchre on 20 November 1183, and he received homage from all the barons except his stepfather, Guy.

Roger de Moulins and Arnold of Torroja, grand masters of the Knights Hospitaller and Knights Templar respectively, and the Latin patriarch of Jerusalem, Heraclius, travelled to Western Europe in mid-1184 to seek military aid in defense of the kingdom against potential Muslim attacks. It became apparent in late 1184 or early 1185 that Baldwin IV was dying. He summoned the High Court to select a regent for his nephew. Both the king and the barons wanted to prevent Guy from ruling in the boy&#x27;s name. They appointed Raymond, but made Joscelin of Courtenay the child&#x27;s guardian. Baldwin V suffered from ill health, and the contemporary chronicler Ernoul states that Raymond insisted on not having custody of the king so that he would not be blamed if the child died; the historian Bernard Hamilton doubts that the custody arrangement was Raymond&#x27;s idea. Joscelin was Baldwin V&#x27;s granduncle with no claim to the throne and had a vested interest in keeping the boy alive. On the other hand, the High Court suspected that Raymond might seek to make himself king and imposed limits on his power to ensure that he could not usurp the royal dignity.

After the question of regency was settled, Baldwin V and Raymond received homage as king and regent, respectively. The young king then took part in a solemn crown-wearing ceremony in the Church of the Holy Sepulchre at his uncle&#x27;s command. From there the boy was carried to banquet on the shoulders of Balian of Ibelin &quot;because he was the tallest of the great lords present&quot;; in reality, Balian was chosen to carry the young king because he was a staunch opponent of Guy and the stepfather of Baldwin IV and Sibylla&#x27;s half-sister, Isabella, the only other possible contender for the throne. Balian&#x27;s gesture thus signified Isabella&#x27;s family&#x27;s support of the boy king. Baldwin IV had died by 16 May 1185, leaving Baldwin V as the sole monarch.

The kingdom faced no external threats during Baldwin V&#x27;s reign, as Raymond succeeded in procuring a truce from Saladin. Western princes refused to come to aid, likely because they could not be offered the crown but, at most, the prospect of a temporary rule on behalf of a minor. Only the king&#x27;s paternal grandfather, experienced crusader Marquess William V of Montferrat, moved to the East, ensuring that the child&#x27;s rights would be upheld. Though the failure of the mission to Europe secured his regency, Raymond could not exercise much power; key government posts were occupied by the supporters of Guy, who continued to resent not being regent for his stepson.
 
 
 
 
 

==Death and aftermath==

Baldwin V died of unknown causes in Acre between May and mid-September 1186. The exact date is not known; the historian Steven Runciman proposes late August. The contemporary chronicler William of Newburgh wrote that Baldwin was poisoned by his regent, Raymond of Tripoli, but William was generally hostile to the count. Hamilton considers foul play by Raymond unlikely because the king was in the care of his granduncle Joscelin of Courtenay.

Baldwin V&#x27;s death led to another crisis. Joscelin handed his body to the Templars, who took it to Jerusalem for funeral. Raymond did not attend the funeral–historian Malcolm Barber argues that he was mustering supporters to claim the throne–but Joscelin, Reginald of Châtillon, Patriarch Heraclius, Baldwin&#x27;s grandfather William, and the masters of the military orders were present. Baldwin became the seventh and last of the Latin kings to be buried in the Church of the Holy Sepulchre. Baldwin&#x27;s mother, Sibylla, promptly established herself as the successor to her son and then invested her husband, Guy, with kingship. Jerusalem was conquered by Saladin in 1187. Baldwin&#x27;s mother and half-sisters died in 1190, leaving his half-aunt, Isabella I, as the heir to what remained of the kingdom. Baldwin V&#x27;s elaborate tomb, likely commissioned by Sibylla, survived until 1808 when it was destroyed in a fire.
==References==

===Sources===

*
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q345687" start="0" end="9" title="Baldwin V of Jerusalem" label="Baldwin V"/>
<link wikidata="Q693614" start="37" end="54" title="king of Jerusalem" label="king of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q296850" start="91" end="101" title="Baldwin IV" label="Baldwin IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q36956" start="226" end="233" title="leprosy" label="leprosy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13436425" start="407" end="414" title="co-king" label="co-king"/>
<link wikidata="Q294192" start="475" end="490" title="Guy of Lusignan" label="Guy of Lusignan"/>
<link wikidata="Q354389" start="520" end="542" title="Raymond III of Tripoli" label="Raymond III of Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q234782" start="657" end="664" title="Sibylla of Jerusalem" label="Sibylla"/>
<link wikidata="Q234782" start="773" end="780" title="Sibylla, Queen of Jerusalem" label="Sibylla"/>
<link wikidata="Q296850" start="797" end="820" title="Baldwin IV of Jerusalem" label="Baldwin IV of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q255101" start="859" end="880" title="William Longsword of Montferrat" label="William of Montferrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q36956" start="1025" end="1032" title="leprosy" label="leprosy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370385" start="1166" end="1182" title="heir presumptive" label="heir presumptive"/>
<link wikidata="Q55502" start="1261" end="1281" title="Kingdom of Jerusalem" label="Kingdom of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q190967" start="1285" end="1299" title="Crusader state" label="Crusader state"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="1303" end="1313" title="the Levant" label="the Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1323" end="1331" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q43482" start="1332" end="1338" title="Franks" label="Franks"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="1381" end="1387" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q294192" start="1523" end="1538" title="Guy of Lusignan" label="Guy of Lusignan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17198551" start="1730" end="1764" title="barons of the Kingdom of Jerusalem" label="barons of the Kingdom of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q190967" start="1796" end="1811" title="Crusader states" label="Crusader states"/>
<link wikidata="Q349062" start="1820" end="1843" title="Bohemond III of Antioch" label="Bohemond III of Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q354389" start="1854" end="1876" title="Raymond III of Tripoli" label="Raymond III of Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q235629" start="2114" end="2122" title="Isabella I of Jerusalem" label="Isabella"/>
<link wikidata="Q913574" start="2153" end="2173" title="Humphrey IV of Toron" label="Humphrey IV of Toron"/>
<link wikidata="Q815156" start="2215" end="2232" title="siege of Kerak" label="besieged in Kerak"/>
<link wikidata="Q8581" start="2255" end="2262" title="Saladin" label="Saladin"/>
<link wikidata="Q241228" start="2264" end="2282" title="Agnes of Courtenay" label="Agnes of Courtenay"/>
<link wikidata="Q13436425" start="2383" end="2390" title="co-king" label="co-king"/>
<link wikidata="Q419736" start="2630" end="2639" title="acclaimed" label="acclaimed"/>
<link wikidata="Q209715" start="2641" end="2648" title="coronation" label="crowned"/>
<link wikidata="Q641922" start="2653" end="2661" title="anointed" label="anointed"/>
<link wikidata="Q187702" start="2669" end="2697" title="Church of the Holy Sepulchre" label="Church of the Holy Sepulchre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187484" start="2735" end="2741" title="homage (feudal)" label="homage"/>
<link wikidata="Q559382" start="2791" end="2807" title="Roger de Moulins" label="Roger de Moulins"/>
<link wikidata="Q457273" start="2812" end="2829" title="Arnold of Torroja" label="Arnold of Torroja"/>
<link wikidata="Q622601" start="2831" end="2844" title="grand master (order)" label="grand masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q187549" start="2852" end="2871" title="Knights Hospitaller" label="Knights Hospitaller"/>
<link wikidata="Q41300" start="2876" end="2891" title="Knights Templar" label="Knights Templar"/>
<link wikidata="Q530906" start="2914" end="2942" title="Latin patriarch of Jerusalem" label="Latin patriarch of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q653774" start="2944" end="2953" title="Heraclius of Jerusalem" label="Heraclius"/>
<link wikidata="Q381637" start="3165" end="3175" title="High Court of Jerusalem" label="High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="3188" end="3194" title="regent" label="regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q503875" start="3331" end="3352" title="Joscelin III of Courtenay" label="Joscelin of Courtenay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1222790" start="3448" end="3454" title="Ernoul" label="Ernoul"/>
<link wikidata="Q374385" start="4263" end="4279" title="Balian of Ibelin" label="Balian of Ibelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="5075" end="5082" title="crusade" label="crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q778149" start="5093" end="5116" title="William V of Montferrat" label="William V of Montferrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q126084" start="5487" end="5491" title="Acre, Israel" label="Acre"/>
<link wikidata="Q49979" start="5571" end="5586" title="Steven Runciman" label="Steven Runciman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234687" start="5637" end="5656" title="William of Newburgh" label="William of Newburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3176124" start="6067" end="6081" title="Malcolm Barber" label="Malcolm Barber"/>
<link wikidata="Q316831" start="6156" end="6177" title="Reginald of Châtillon" label="Reginald of Châtillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q815161" start="6548" end="6557" title="Siege of Jerusalem (1187)" label="conquered"/>
<link wikidata="Q123367183" start="6711" end="6742" title="Tomb of Baldwin V" label="Baldwin V&amp;#x27;s elaborate tomb"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="144687" wikidata="Q63347784" url="?curid=144687" title="Tay Bridge (disambiguation)">
<text>The [[Tay Bridge]] is a railway bridge across the Firth of Tay at Dundee, Scotland:

Tay Bridge may also refer to:

* Tay Road Bridge, across the Firth of Tay at Dundee, Scotland
* Tay Bridge, another name for Wade&#x27;s Bridge in Aberfeldy, Scotland 
* &quot;Operation Tay Bridge&quot; was also the codename for the funeral plans for Queen Elizabeth, The Queen Mother

==See also==
* Tay Bridge disaster
* &quot;The Tay Bridge Disaster&quot;, a poem written by Scottish poet William McGonagall
* :Category:Bridges across the River Tay and List of crossings of the River Tay, for other bridges across the River Tay
* Jubilee Bridge, Tay, aka Tay Crossing</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q63347784" start="4" end="18" title="Tay Bridge (disambiguation)" label="[[Tay Bridge]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441301" start="118" end="133" title="Tay Road Bridge" label="Tay Road Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q17572330" start="210" end="228" title="Wade&amp;#x27;s Bridge" label="Wade&amp;#x27;s Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q10633" start="336" end="369" title="Queen Elizabeth, The Queen Mother" label="Queen Elizabeth, The Queen Mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287158" start="386" end="405" title="Tay Bridge disaster" label="Tay Bridge disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768168" start="414" end="437" title="The Tay Bridge Disaster" label="The Tay Bridge Disaster"/>
<link wikidata="" start="498" end="536" title=":Category:Bridges across the River Tay" label=":Category:Bridges across the River Tay"/>
<link wikidata="Q125986449" start="541" end="575" title="List of crossings of the River Tay" label="List of crossings of the River Tay"/>
<link wikidata="Q124962645" start="618" end="637" title="Jubilee Bridge, Tay" label="Jubilee Bridge, Tay"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="144688" wikidata="Q733448" url="?curid=144688" title="The Purloined Letter">
<text>&quot;The Purloined Letter&quot; is a short story by American author Edgar Allan Poe. It is the third of his three detective stories featuring the fictional C. Auguste Dupin, the other two being &quot;The Murders in the Rue Morgue&quot; and &quot;The Mystery of Marie Rogêt&quot;. These stories are considered to be important early forerunners of the modern detective story. It first appeared in the literary annual &quot;The Gift for 1845&quot; (1844) and soon was reprinted in numerous journals and newspapers.

==Plot summary==
The unnamed narrator is with the famous Parisian amateur detective C. Auguste Dupin when they are joined by G—, prefect of the Paris police. G— brings to Dupin&#x27;s attention the theft from the queen&#x27;s royal boudoir of a letter addressed to her. The thief is the unscrupulous Minister D—, who switched the letter for one of no importance during a visit with the queen and who has since been using its contents to blackmail her. Dupin agrees with two conclusions formed by G—: that the letter has not yet been made public, since doing so would lead to certain circumstances that have not yet occurred; and that D— must have it close at hand, ready to disclose at a moment&#x27;s notice.

The police have thoroughly searched D—&#x27;s home (referred to as a &quot;hotel&quot; in keeping with Parisian word usage of the era) and person for the letter, including an exhaustive examination of the furniture, walls, and carpeting for any concealed hiding places, but have found nothing. Dupin suggests that G— and his men repeat their search and requests a description of the letter, which G— provides. A month later, the police still have nothing to show for their efforts and a frustrated G— declares that he would pay 50,000 francs to anyone who can help find the letter. Dupin tells G— to write him a check for that amount; once he has done so, Dupin produces the letter from a writing-desk and an overjoyed G— races away to return it to the queen.
Dupin then explains to the narrator that the police did not take into account the psychology of their adversary in executing their search, drawing a parallel with a schoolboy he once knew who exploited his classmates&#x27; methods of thinking in order to win all their marbles at the game of odds and evens. The police had assumed that since the letter was so politically sensitive, D— would take great pains to conceal it; however, Dupin conjectured that it would instead be hidden in plain sight. He contrived to visit D— at his home, disguising his eyes behind green spectacles in order to covertly survey the rooms. Hanging near the mantelpiece was a cheap card-rack with a dirty, half-torn letter in one of its slots. Dupin determined that this was the missing letter, which D— had folded inside-out, re-addressed and sealed, and damaged in order to hide its nature. He left his snuffbox behind upon departing, as an excuse to return the next day. Shortly after this second arrival, a disturbance occurred in the street outside, arranged in advance with a paid confederate. While D— was distracted, Dupin took the letter and replaced it with a duplicate he had prepared.

Dupin chose not to attempt to seize the letter openly for fear that D— would have had him killed. As he both supports the queen politically and bears an old grudge against D—, he hopes that D— will try to use the duplicate in his blackmail scheme and thus bring about his own downfall. Instead of insulting D— by leaving it blank, Dupin had written a quotation from Prosper Jolyot de Crébillon&#x27;s play &quot;Atrée et Thyeste&quot; that implies he took the original: &quot;Un dessein si funeste, / S&#x27;il n&#x27;est digne d&#x27;Atrée, est digne de Thyeste&quot; (&quot;If such a sinister design is not worthy of Atreus, it is worthy of Thyestes&quot;).

==Publication history==
 This story first appeared in &quot;The Gift: A Christmas and New Year&#x27;s Present for 1845&quot;, published in December, 1844 in Philadelphia by Carey and Hart. Poe earned $12 for its first printing. It later was included in the 1845 collection &quot;Tales by Edgar A. Poe&quot;.

==Analysis==
The epigraph &quot;&quot; (&quot;Nothing is more hateful to wisdom than excessive cleverness&quot;) attributed by Poe to Seneca was not found in Seneca&#x27;s known work. It is from Petrarch&#x27;s treatise &quot;De remediis utriusque fortunae&quot;. Poe probably took the reference from Samuel Warren&#x27;s novel &quot;Ten Thousand a-Year&quot;.

Dupin is not a professional detective. In &quot;The Murders in the Rue Morgue&quot;, Dupin takes the case for amusement and refuses a financial reward. In &quot;The Purloined Letter&quot;, however, Dupin undertakes the case for financial gain and personal revenge. He is not motivated by pursuing truth, emphasized by the lack of information about the contents of the purloined letter. Dupin&#x27;s innovative method to solve the mystery is by trying to identify with the criminal. The minister and Dupin have equally matched minds, combining skills of mathematician and poet, and their battle of wits is threatened to end in stalemate. Dupin wins because of his moral strength: the minister is &quot;unprincipled&quot;, a blackmailer who obtains power by exploiting the weakness of others.

&quot;The Purloined Letter&quot; completes Dupin&#x27;s tour of different settings. In &quot;The Murders in the Rue Morgue,&quot; he travels through city streets; in &quot;The Mystery of Marie Rogêt&quot;, he is in the wide outdoors; in &quot;The Purloined Letter&quot;, he is in an enclosed private space. French linguist Jean-Claude Milner suggests Dupin and D— are brothers, based on the final reference to Atreus and his twin brother Thyestes.

==Literary significance and criticism==

In May 1844, just before its first publication, Poe wrote to James Russell Lowell that he considered &quot;The Purloined Letter&quot; &quot;perhaps the best of my tales of ratiocination.&quot; When it was republished in &quot;The Gift&quot; in 1845, the editor called it &quot;one of the aptest illustrations which could well be conceived of that curious play of two minds in one person.&quot;

Poe&#x27;s story provoked a debate among literary theorists in the 1960s and 1970s. Jacques Lacan argued in &quot;Ecrits&quot; that the content of the queen&#x27;s letter is irrelevant to the story and that the proper &quot;place&quot; of the signifier (the letter itself) is determined by the symbolic structure in which it exists and is displaced, first by the minister and then by Dupin. Jacques Derrida responded to Lacan&#x27;s reading in &quot;Le Facteur de la vérité&quot; (&quot;The Purveyor of Truth&quot;), questioning Lacan&#x27;s structuralist assumptions. The triangular relationships that Lacan claims are foundational to the story are not, in fact, more foundational than other structured relationships one can perceive in it. Derrida sees Lacan&#x27;s reading as yet another structuralism attempting to establish an ultimate, foundational truth to the story. In reality, according to Derrida, none of the structural schemas one can see in the story are more foundational than any other. Lacan&#x27;s structuralist reading and Derrida&#x27;s deconstructive reading provoked a response by Barbara Johnson, who mediated the debate by suggesting that the letter belongs all along to the queen as a substitute for a phallus.

Donald E. Pease suggests that Lacan &quot;equates the possession of a letter—defined as a &#x27;lack&#x27; of content—with &#x27;literal&#x27; as opposed to &#x27;symbolic&#x27; castration, hence the odor of the feminine. In other words the &#x27;possession&#x27; of the lack otherwise displaced by language identifies the possessor with the lack &#x27;she&#x27; thinks she possesses. So femininity exists as an &#x27;effect&#x27; of the delusion of possession of a lack otherwise displaced (as a masculine effect?) by the endless purloining of the letter.&quot;

The debate up to the mid-1980s is collected in a helpful though incomplete volume titled &quot;The Purloined Poe&quot;. The volume does not include, for instance, Richard Hull&#x27;s reading based on the work of Michel Foucault, in which he argues that &quot;&#x27;The Purloined Letter&#x27; is a good text for questioning the metalinguistic claim that artists can&#x27;t avoid doing surveillance, because it is a discourse on poetry&#x27;s superiority over surveillance.&quot; Slavoj Žižek asks &quot;So why &quot;does&quot; a letter always arrive at its destination? Why could it not—sometimes at least—also &quot;fail&quot; to reach it?&quot; Hollis Robbins critiques Derrida for his own blindness to patriotism in prefacing his reading of &quot;The Purloined Letter&quot; with a reading of &quot;The Emperor&#x27;s New Clothes&quot;: &quot;In Derrida&#x27;s view, both Poe&#x27;s story and Andersen&#x27;s feature a king whose manhood is imperiled, who is surrounded by habit-driven and ineffectual civil servants, and who is saved by an individual who sees what is obvious. ... Both save the crown from further embarrassment. ... There is never a question that a king could or should fall from grace.&quot;

==Adaptations==
* In 1948, NBC University Theater aired an adaptation starring Adolphe Menjou as C. Auguste Dupin.
*&quot;The Purloined Letter&quot; was adapted in an episode of the 1950s television series &quot;Suspense&quot;, but the events were portrayed in a linear fashion.
* In 1995, the story was adapted for an episode of the children&#x27;s television program &quot;Wishbone&quot;. The episode was titled &quot;The Pawloined Paper&quot;.
* In 2013 a theatrical adaptation of the story by Lance Tait was published. Ava Caridad wrote that &quot;The Purloined Letter...lends itself well to a one-act play.&quot;

==References==
==Sources==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
* &quot;The Purloined Letter&quot; at American Literature
* Full text on PoeStories.com with hyperlinked vocabulary words
* Dept. of English, fju.edu analyzes the story with the help of diagrams
* Seminar on &quot;The Purloined Letter&quot;, &quot;Écrits&quot;, transl. by Jeffrey Mehlman, &quot;French Freud&quot; in &quot;Yale French Studies&quot; 48, 1972.
* &quot;The Purloined Letter (Unabridged)&quot; on Spotify</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q733448" start="6" end="26" title="The Purloined Letter" label="The Purloined Letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q49084" start="38" end="49" title="short story" label="short story"/>
<link wikidata="Q16867" start="69" end="84" title="Edgar Allan Poe" label="Edgar Allan Poe"/>
<link wikidata="Q186424" start="115" end="132" title="detective fiction" label="detective stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q549047" start="157" end="173" title="C. Auguste Dupin" label="C. Auguste Dupin"/>
<link wikidata="Q459667" start="201" end="230" title="The Murders in the Rue Morgue" label="The Murders in the Rue Morgue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1167993" start="247" end="273" title="The Mystery of Marie Rogêt" label="The Mystery of Marie Rogêt"/>
<link wikidata="Q549047" start="598" end="614" title="C. Auguste Dupin" label="C. Auguste Dupin"/>
<link wikidata="Q34284" start="951" end="960" title="blackmail" label="blackmail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456815" start="2277" end="2291" title="odds and evens (hand game)" label="odds and evens"/>
<link wikidata="Q551721" start="3528" end="3555" title="Prosper Jolyot de Crébillon" label="Prosper Jolyot de Crébillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q192469" start="3781" end="3787" title="Atreus" label="Atreus"/>
<link wikidata="Q622504" start="3805" end="3813" title="Thyestes" label="Thyestes"/>
<link wikidata="Q669777" start="4149" end="4157" title="Epigraph (literature)" label="epigraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054" start="4266" end="4272" title="Seneca the Younger" label="Seneca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401" start="4327" end="4335" title="Petrarch" label="Petrarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3704161" start="4358" end="4388" title="De remediis utriusque fortunae" label="De remediis utriusque fortunae"/>
<link wikidata="Q7412884" start="4433" end="4446" title="Samuel Warren (British lawyer)" label="Samuel Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q7699351" start="4466" end="4485" title="Ten Thousand a-Year" label="Ten Thousand a-Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q328270" start="5609" end="5627" title="Jean-Claude Milner" label="Jean-Claude Milner"/>
<link wikidata="Q192469" start="5696" end="5702" title="Atreus" label="Atreus"/>
<link wikidata="Q622504" start="5724" end="5732" title="Thyestes" label="Thyestes"/>
<link wikidata="Q449670" start="5837" end="5857" title="James Russell Lowell" label="James Russell Lowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q178354" start="5948" end="5961" title="ratiocination" label="ratiocination"/>
<link wikidata="Q169906" start="6255" end="6268" title="Jacques Lacan" label="Jacques Lacan"/>
<link wikidata="Q130631" start="6562" end="6577" title="Jacques Derrida" label="Jacques Derrida"/>
<link wikidata="Q179168" start="7187" end="7200" title="structuralism" label="structuralist"/>
<link wikidata="Q180348" start="7228" end="7242" title="deconstruction" label="deconstructive"/>
<link wikidata="Q4859030" start="7274" end="7289" title="Barbara Johnson" label="Barbara Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294293" start="7408" end="7423" title="Donald E. Pease" label="Donald E. Pease"/>
<link wikidata="Q44272" start="8184" end="8199" title="Michel Foucault" label="Michel Foucault"/>
<link wikidata="Q184750" start="8450" end="8462" title="Slavoj Žižek" label="Slavoj Žižek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5881590" start="8618" end="8632" title="Hollis Robbins" label="Hollis Robbins"/>
<link wikidata="Q11866" start="8772" end="8802" title="The Emperor&amp;#x27;s New Clothes" label="The Emperor&amp;#x27;s New Clothes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6952797" start="9212" end="9234" title="NBC University Theatre" label="NBC University Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q358379" start="9264" end="9278" title="Adolphe Menjou" label="Adolphe Menjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q7649201" start="9391" end="9411" title="Suspense (American TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Suspense&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q62925" start="9560" end="9568" title="Wishbone (TV series)" label="Wishbone"/>
<link wikidata="Q689141" start="10277" end="10284" title="Spotify" label="Spotify"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="144689" wikidata="Q5462990" url="?curid=144689" title="Fluvanna">
<text>Fluvanna may refer to:
*Fluvanna County, Virginia
*Fluvanna, Texas
*Fluvanna (horse), American Champion racehorse
*Fluvanna Correctional Center for Women</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q502014" start="24" end="49" title="Fluvanna County, Virginia" label="Fluvanna County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5462991" start="51" end="66" title="Fluvanna, Texas" label="Fluvanna, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5462994" start="68" end="84" title="Fluvanna (horse)" label="Fluvanna (horse)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5462995" start="115" end="153" title="Fluvanna Correctional Center for Women" label="Fluvanna Correctional Center for Women"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="144692" wikidata="Q233791" url="?curid=144692" title="Greenwood">
<text>[[Green wood]] is unseasoned wood.
Greenwood or Green wood may also refer to:

== People ==
* Greenwood (surname)

== Settlements ==

=== Australia ===
* Greenwood, Queensland, a locality in the Toowoomba Region
* Greenwood, Western Australia, a suburb of Perth

=== Canada ===
* Greenwood, Calgary, Alberta, a neighbourhood
* Greenwood, British Columbia, a city
* Greenwood, Nova Scotia, a village
* Greenwood, Halifax County, Nova Scotia, a community in the Halifax Regional Municipality
* Greenwood, Durham Regional Municipality, Ontario
* Greenwood, Renfrew County, Ontario

=== United States ===
* Greenwood, Arizona
* Greenwood, Arkansas
* Greenwood, El Dorado County, California
* Greenwood, Glenn County, California
* Greenwood, former name of Elk, Mendocino County, California
* Greenwood Village, Colorado, a city
* Greenwood, Delaware
* Greenwood, Florida
* Greenwood, Georgia
* Greenwood, Idaho
* Greenwood, Illinois
* Mount Greenwood, Chicago, Illinois
* Greenwood, Indiana
* Greenwood, Wayne County, Indiana
* Greenwood, Wells County, Indiana
* Greenwood, Louisville, Kentucky
* Greenwood, former name of Erlanger, Kentucky
* Greenwood, Louisiana
* Greenwood, Maine
* Greenwood, Massachusetts
* Greenwood, Marquette County, Michigan
* Greenwood, Minnesota
* Greenwood, Mississippi micropolitan area
* Greenwood, Mississippi
* Greenwood Springs, Mississippi
* Greenwood, Missouri
* Greenwood, Nebraska
* Greenwood, New York
* Greenwood, Tulsa, Oklahoma
* Greenwood, Pennsylvania
* Greenwood, Franklin County, Pennsylvania
* Greenwood, South Carolina
* Greenwood, Charles Mix County, South Dakota
* Greenwood, Lawrence County, South Dakota
* Greenwood, Clarksville, Tennessee
* Greenwood, Midland County, Texas 
* Greenwood, Parker County, Texas 
* Greenwood, Wise County, Texas 
* Greenwood, Albemarle County, Virginia
* Greenwood, Bath County, Virginia
* Greenwood, Washington
* Greenwood, Seattle, Washington
* Greenwood, Boone County, West Virginia
* Greenwood, Doddridge County, West Virginia
* Greenwood, Fayette County, West Virginia
* Greenwood, Morgan County, West Virginia
* Greenwood, Wisconsin, a city in Clark County
* Greenwood, Taylor County, Wisconsin, a town
* Greenwood, Vernon County, Wisconsin, a town
* Greenwood (community), Vernon County, Wisconsin, an unincorporated community

==Electoral districts==
* Greenwood (Ontario federal electoral district), a former federal district in Ontario
* Greenwood (Ontario provincial electoral district), a defunct provincial riding
* Greenwood (British Columbia electoral district), British Columbia

==Historic buildings==
* Greenwood (Alexandria, Alabama), an Antebellum plantation house
* Greenwood (Columbia, Missouri), a house
* Greenwood (Fayette, Missouri), also known as the Estill-Parrish House
* Greenwood (Memphis, Tennessee), also known as Beverly Hall, a mansion
* Greenwood (Culpeper, Virginia), a plantation house
* Greenwood (Orange, Virginia), a house
* Greenwood Elementary School (Terre Haute, Indiana), Terre Haute, Indiana, US
* Greenwood Lodge, Grand County, Colorado, US
* Greenwood Museum, Smyrna, New York, US
* Greenwood Plantation (disambiguation)

==Other uses==
* Greenwood (bank), an American digital bank
* Greenwood Branch, a river in New Jersey
*Greenwood International, a timber trader from The Netherlands
* Greenwood Publishing Group
* Greenwood Raceway, a defunct harness horse-racing track in Toronto
* Greenwood Terrace, a public housing estate in Chai Wan, Hong Kong
* CFB Greenwood, an RCAF/Canadian Forces base located near the village of Greenwood
* GreenWood, an amusement park in Wales
* Green Wood Centre, Shropshire, formerly the Greenwood Trust, a centre for the coppice revival
* &quot;Greenwood&quot;, a song by Peter, Paul and Mary from the 1986 album &quot;No Easy Walk to Freedom&quot;

== See also ==
* Greenwood Academy (disambiguation)
* Greenwood Cemetery (disambiguation)
* Greenwood College School, a day school in Toronto, Ontario
* Greenwood County (disambiguation)
* Greenwood Farm (disambiguation)
* Greenwood High School (disambiguation)
* Greenwood Lake (disambiguation)
* Greenwood Plantation (disambiguation)
* Greenwood River (disambiguation)
* Greenwood station (disambiguation)
* Greenwood Township (disambiguation)
* Greenwoods, a menswear store chain
* North Greenwood, historically African American neighborhood in Clearwater, Florida</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q233791" start="0" end="14" title="Greenwood" label="[[Green wood]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q233791" start="35" end="44" title="Greenwood" label="Greenwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q233791" start="48" end="58" title="Greenwood" label="Green wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544833" start="94" end="113" title="Greenwood (surname)" label="Greenwood (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q48809668" start="154" end="175" title="Greenwood, Queensland" label="Greenwood, Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604964" start="214" end="242" title="Greenwood, Western Australia" label="Greenwood, Western Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14252577" start="280" end="298" title="Greenwood, Calgary" label="Greenwood, Calgary"/>
<link wikidata="Q767282" start="327" end="354" title="Greenwood, British Columbia" label="Greenwood, British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604945" start="365" end="387" title="Greenwood, Nova Scotia" label="Greenwood, Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604936" start="401" end="439" title="Greenwood, Halifax County, Nova Scotia" label="Greenwood, Halifax County, Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604930" start="492" end="540" title="Greenwood, Durham Regional Municipality, Ontario" label="Greenwood, Durham Regional Municipality, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116605" start="543" end="577" title="Greenwood, Renfrew County, Ontario" label="Greenwood, Renfrew County, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q28221963" start="603" end="621" title="Greenwood, Arizona" label="Greenwood, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q80106" start="624" end="643" title="Greenwood, Arkansas" label="Greenwood, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604934" start="646" end="685" title="Greenwood, El Dorado County, California" label="Greenwood, El Dorado County, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q5363956" start="752" end="785" title="Elk, Mendocino County, California" label="Elk, Mendocino County, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003256" start="788" end="815" title="Greenwood Village, Colorado" label="Greenwood Village, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q756094" start="826" end="845" title="Greenwood, Delaware" label="Greenwood, Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036769" start="848" end="866" title="Greenwood, Florida" label="Greenwood, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q4846145" start="869" end="887" title="Greenwood, Georgia" label="Greenwood, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q29000314" start="890" end="906" title="Greenwood, Idaho" label="Greenwood, Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997976" start="909" end="928" title="Greenwood, Illinois" label="Greenwood, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q3326020" start="931" end="955" title="Mount Greenwood, Chicago" label="Mount Greenwood, Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778780" start="968" end="986" title="Greenwood, Indiana" label="Greenwood, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q25346025" start="989" end="1021" title="Greenwood, Wayne County, Indiana" label="Greenwood, Wayne County, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q24887474" start="1024" end="1056" title="Greenwood, Wells County, Indiana" label="Greenwood, Wells County, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604939" start="1059" end="1080" title="Greenwood, Louisville" label="Greenwood, Louisville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998355" start="1119" end="1137" title="Erlanger, Kentucky" label="Erlanger, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341209" start="1140" end="1160" title="Greenwood, Louisiana" label="Greenwood, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3448256" start="1163" end="1179" title="Greenwood, Maine" label="Greenwood, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426909" start="1182" end="1206" title="Greenwood, Massachusetts" label="Greenwood, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5368435" start="1209" end="1246" title="Greenwood, Marquette County, Michigan" label="Greenwood, Marquette County, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923436" start="1249" end="1269" title="Greenwood, Minnesota" label="Greenwood, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604943" start="1272" end="1312" title="Greenwood, Mississippi micropolitan area" label="Greenwood, Mississippi micropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q986376" start="1315" end="1337" title="Greenwood, Mississippi" label="Greenwood, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5605076" start="1340" end="1370" title="Greenwood Springs, Mississippi" label="Greenwood Springs, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3458893" start="1373" end="1392" title="Greenwood, Missouri" label="Greenwood, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079327" start="1395" end="1414" title="Greenwood, Nebraska" label="Greenwood, Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708404" start="1417" end="1436" title="Greenwood, New York" label="Greenwood, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116157" start="1439" end="1455" title="Greenwood, Tulsa" label="Greenwood, Tulsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604952" start="1468" end="1491" title="Greenwood, Pennsylvania" label="Greenwood, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q30682734" start="1494" end="1534" title="Greenwood, Franklin County, Pennsylvania" label="Greenwood, Franklin County, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q520251" start="1537" end="1562" title="Greenwood, South Carolina" label="Greenwood, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q23709360" start="1565" end="1608" title="Greenwood, Charles Mix County, South Dakota" label="Greenwood, Charles Mix County, South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q14946706" start="1611" end="1651" title="Greenwood, Lawrence County, South Dakota" label="Greenwood, Lawrence County, South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604927" start="1654" end="1687" title="Greenwood, Clarksville, Tennessee" label="Greenwood, Clarksville, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604944" start="1690" end="1722" title="Greenwood, Midland County, Texas" label="Greenwood, Midland County, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604951" start="1726" end="1757" title="Greenwood, Parker County, Texas" label="Greenwood, Parker County, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604971" start="1761" end="1790" title="Greenwood, Wise County, Texas" label="Greenwood, Wise County, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604922" start="1794" end="1831" title="Greenwood, Albemarle County, Virginia" label="Greenwood, Albemarle County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604925" start="1834" end="1866" title="Greenwood, Bath County, Virginia" label="Greenwood, Bath County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27988966" start="1869" end="1890" title="Greenwood, Washington" label="Greenwood, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604954" start="1893" end="1911" title="Greenwood, Seattle" label="Greenwood, Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604926" start="1926" end="1964" title="Greenwood, Boone County, West Virginia" label="Greenwood, Boone County, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604929" start="1967" end="2009" title="Greenwood, Doddridge County, West Virginia" label="Greenwood, Doddridge County, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604932" start="2012" end="2052" title="Greenwood, Fayette County, West Virginia" label="Greenwood, Fayette County, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604950" start="2055" end="2094" title="Greenwood, Morgan County, West Virginia" label="Greenwood, Morgan County, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570368" start="2097" end="2117" title="Greenwood, Wisconsin" label="Greenwood, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604965" start="2144" end="2179" title="Greenwood, Taylor County, Wisconsin" label="Greenwood, Taylor County, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604967" start="2190" end="2225" title="Greenwood, Vernon County, Wisconsin" label="Greenwood, Vernon County, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604967" start="2236" end="2283" title="Greenwood (community), Vernon County, Wisconsin" label="Greenwood (community), Vernon County, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116158" start="2340" end="2386" title="Greenwood (Ontario federal electoral district)" label="Greenwood (Ontario federal electoral district)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604977" start="2427" end="2476" title="Greenwood (Ontario provincial electoral district)" label="Greenwood (Ontario provincial electoral district)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604980" start="2508" end="2555" title="Greenwood (British Columbia electoral district)" label="Greenwood (British Columbia electoral district)"/>
<link wikidata="Q122928953" start="2600" end="2631" title="Greenwood (Alexandria, Alabama)" label="Greenwood (Alexandria, Alabama)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604975" start="2666" end="2696" title="Greenwood (Columbia, Missouri)" label="Greenwood (Columbia, Missouri)"/>
<link wikidata="Q28453489" start="2708" end="2737" title="Greenwood (Fayette, Missouri)" label="Greenwood (Fayette, Missouri)"/>
<link wikidata="Q22073627" start="2780" end="2810" title="Greenwood (Memphis, Tennessee)" label="Greenwood (Memphis, Tennessee)"/>
<link wikidata="Q14712407" start="2852" end="2882" title="Greenwood (Culpeper, Virginia)" label="Greenwood (Culpeper, Virginia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15222133" start="2905" end="2933" title="Greenwood (Orange, Virginia)" label="Greenwood (Orange, Virginia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q28124426" start="2945" end="2995" title="Greenwood Elementary School (Terre Haute, Indiana)" label="Greenwood Elementary School (Terre Haute, Indiana)"/>
<link wikidata="Q123423978" start="3024" end="3039" title="Greenwood Lodge" label="Greenwood Lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5605049" start="3070" end="3086" title="Greenwood Museum" label="Greenwood Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q122908603" start="3111" end="3148" title="Greenwood Plantation (disambiguation)" label="Greenwood Plantation (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q100278626" start="3167" end="3183" title="Greenwood (bank)" label="Greenwood (bank)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604985" start="3212" end="3228" title="Greenwood Branch" label="Greenwood Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116159" start="3317" end="3343" title="Greenwood Publishing Group" label="Greenwood Publishing Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q5605061" start="3346" end="3363" title="Greenwood Raceway" label="Greenwood Raceway"/>
<link wikidata="Q8423023" start="3415" end="3432" title="Greenwood Terrace" label="Greenwood Terrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032127" start="3483" end="3496" title="CFB Greenwood" label="CFB Greenwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q20713704" start="3567" end="3576" title="GreenWood" label="GreenWood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603414" start="3607" end="3624" title="Green Wood Centre" label="Green Wood Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q30675136" start="3783" end="3806" title="No Easy Walk to Freedom" label="No Easy Walk to Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q16784113" start="3831" end="3865" title="Greenwood Academy (disambiguation)" label="Greenwood Academy (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544838" start="3868" end="3903" title="Greenwood Cemetery (disambiguation)" label="Greenwood Cemetery (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5605007" start="3906" end="3930" title="Greenwood College School" label="Greenwood College School"/>
<link wikidata="Q228950" start="3967" end="4000" title="Greenwood County (disambiguation)" label="Greenwood County (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5605015" start="4003" end="4034" title="Greenwood Farm (disambiguation)" label="Greenwood Farm (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5605024" start="4037" end="4075" title="Greenwood High School (disambiguation)" label="Greenwood High School (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q22829506" start="4078" end="4109" title="Greenwood Lake (disambiguation)" label="Greenwood Lake (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q122908603" start="4112" end="4149" title="Greenwood Plantation (disambiguation)" label="Greenwood Plantation (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20818254" start="4152" end="4184" title="Greenwood River (disambiguation)" label="Greenwood River (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q22350302" start="4187" end="4221" title="Greenwood station (disambiguation)" label="Greenwood station (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544848" start="4224" end="4259" title="Greenwood Township (disambiguation)" label="Greenwood Township (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5605112" start="4262" end="4272" title="Greenwoods" label="Greenwoods"/>
<link wikidata="Q131319949" start="4299" end="4314" title="North Greenwood" label="North Greenwood"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="144694" wikidata="Q226607" url="?curid=144694" title="Akron (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Akron]] is a city in the U.S. state of Ohio.

Akron may also refer to:
==Aviation==
* USS &quot;Akron&quot;, a rigid airship of the United States Navy
* &quot;Akron&quot; (1911 airship), a semirigid airship that exploded in 1912

==Entertainment==
* &quot;Akron (film)&quot;, a 2015 independent, LGBT-themed film, directed by Brian O&#x27;Donnell
* Akron / Family, a folk-influenced experimental rock band

==Places==
===Canada===
* Akron, Ontario

===United States===
* Akron, Alabama
* Akron, Colorado
* Akron, Indiana
* Akron, Iowa
* Akron, Kansas
* Akron, Michigan
* Akron, Missouri
* Akron, Nebraska
* Akron, New York
* Akron, Pennsylvania
* Akron, West Virginia
* Akron Township, Illinois
* Akron Township, Michigan
* Akron Township, Big Stone County, Minnesota
* Akron Township, Wilkin County, Minnesota

==Other uses==
* University of Akron, in Ohio
* Akron and Barberton Belt Railroad
* Akron Plan, an architectural plan for church buildings in the late 19th and early 20th century
* Acron Group, sometimes spelled Akron Group, a Russian chemical company
* Independence Akron, a German paraglider design
* The Akron (1948–1985), a Southern California-based imported goods and home decorating retail chain
* Akron Stadium, a football stadium in Guadalajara, Mexico
* FC Akron Tolyatti, a Russian professional football club based in Tolyatti

==See also==
* Acron (disambiguation)
* Akron Airport (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q226607" start="0" end="9" title="Akron (disambiguation)" label="[[Akron]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q226607" start="48" end="53" title="Akron (disambiguation)" label="Akron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456109" start="88" end="109" title="USS Akron" label="USS &amp;quot;Akron&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6814097" start="155" end="187" title="Akron (1911 airship)" label="&amp;quot;Akron&amp;quot; (1911 airship)"/>
<link wikidata="Q48672779" start="258" end="270" title="Akron (film)" label="Akron (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4701665" start="351" end="365" title="Akron / Family" label="Akron / Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q2835752" start="435" end="449" title="Akron, Ontario" label="Akron, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q66210" start="473" end="487" title="Akron, Alabama" label="Akron, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q154455" start="490" end="505" title="Akron, Colorado" label="Akron, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q2290421" start="508" end="522" title="Akron, Indiana" label="Akron, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922723" start="525" end="536" title="Akron, Iowa" label="Akron, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q17182497" start="539" end="552" title="Akron, Kansas" label="Akron, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2829150" start="555" end="570" title="Akron, Michigan" label="Akron, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q27985228" start="573" end="588" title="Akron, Missouri" label="Akron, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q17985449" start="591" end="606" title="Akron, Nebraska" label="Akron, Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q2538400" start="609" end="624" title="Akron, New York" label="Akron, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133805" start="627" end="646" title="Akron, Pennsylvania" label="Akron, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q4701661" start="649" end="669" title="Akron, West Virginia" label="Akron, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4701704" start="672" end="696" title="Akron Township, Illinois" label="Akron Township, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q526285" start="699" end="723" title="Akron Township, Michigan" label="Akron Township, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1895160" start="726" end="769" title="Akron Township, Big Stone County, Minnesota" label="Akron Township, Big Stone County, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1895295" start="772" end="812" title="Akron Township, Wilkin County, Minnesota" label="Akron Township, Wilkin County, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346135" start="831" end="850" title="University of Akron" label="University of Akron"/>
<link wikidata="Q4701709" start="862" end="895" title="Akron and Barberton Belt Railroad" label="Akron and Barberton Belt Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4701685" start="898" end="908" title="Akron Plan" label="Akron Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4059809" start="995" end="1006" title="Acron Group" label="Acron Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q28227944" start="1068" end="1086" title="Independence Akron" label="Independence Akron"/>
<link wikidata="Q21071108" start="1117" end="1126" title="The Akron" label="The Akron"/>
<link wikidata="Q666183" start="1218" end="1231" title="Akron Stadium" label="Akron Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q65124755" start="1277" end="1294" title="FC Akron Tolyatti" label="FC Akron Tolyatti"/>
<link wikidata="Q342798" start="1367" end="1389" title="Acron (disambiguation)" label="Acron (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4701669" start="1392" end="1422" title="Akron Airport (disambiguation)" label="Akron Airport (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="144695" wikidata="Q345135" url="?curid=144695" title="Pleasantville">
<text>Pleasantville may refer to:

==Places==
===Canada===
* Pleasantville, a defunct community located inside the modern boundaries of Newmarket, Ontario
* Pleasantville, Newfoundland and Labrador
* Pleasantville (electoral district) - former electoral district in Newfoundland

===United States===
* Pleasantville, Indiana
* Pleasantville, Iowa
* Pleasantville, New Jersey
* Pleasantville, New York
* Pleasantville, Ohio
* Pleasantville, Pennsylvania
** Pleasantville, Bedford County, Pennsylvania
** Pleasantville, Berks County, Pennsylvania
** Pleasantville, Bucks County, Pennsylvania
** Pleasantville, Venango County, Pennsylvania
* Pleasantville, Houston, a neighborhood located in Houston, Texas
* Pleasantville, Wisconsin

==Other==
* &quot;Pleasantville&quot;, a 1976 film with cinematography by Walter Lassally
* &quot;Pleasantville&quot; (film), a 1998 fantasy comedy-drama film
* Pleasantville, the fictional town and setting for the TV series &quot;Big Wolf on Campus&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q345135" start="0" end="13" title="Pleasantville" label="Pleasantville"/>
<link wikidata="Q52999" start="130" end="148" title="Newmarket, Ontario" label="Newmarket, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204150" start="151" end="191" title="Pleasantville, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Pleasantville, Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q60788443" start="194" end="228" title="Pleasantville (electoral district)" label="Pleasantville (electoral district)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204145" start="296" end="318" title="Pleasantville, Indiana" label="Pleasantville, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1927646" start="321" end="340" title="Pleasantville, Iowa" label="Pleasantville, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084372" start="343" end="368" title="Pleasantville, New Jersey" label="Pleasantville, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430755" start="371" end="394" title="Pleasantville, New York" label="Pleasantville, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672480" start="397" end="416" title="Pleasantville, Ohio" label="Pleasantville, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184209" start="450" end="493" title="Pleasantville, Bedford County, Pennsylvania" label="Pleasantville, Bedford County, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204142" start="497" end="538" title="Pleasantville, Berks County, Pennsylvania" label="Pleasantville, Berks County, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1896572" start="542" end="583" title="Pleasantville, Bucks County, Pennsylvania" label="Pleasantville, Bucks County, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182407" start="587" end="630" title="Pleasantville, Venango County, Pennsylvania" label="Pleasantville, Venango County, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204143" start="633" end="655" title="Pleasantville, Houston" label="Pleasantville, Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1885899" start="700" end="724" title="Pleasantville, Wisconsin" label="Pleasantville, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q71424" start="800" end="815" title="Walter Lassally" label="Walter Lassally"/>
<link wikidata="Q729794" start="818" end="850" title="Pleasantville (film)" label="&amp;quot;Pleasantville&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2169120" start="957" end="975" title="Big Wolf on Campus" label="Big Wolf on Campus"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="144696" wikidata="Q5246524" url="?curid=144696" title="Dean Village">
<text>Dean Village (from &quot;dene&quot;, meaning &#x27;deep valley&#x27;) is a former village immediately northwest of the city centre of Edinburgh, Scotland. It is bounded by Belford Road to the south and west, Belgrave Crescent Gardens to the north and below the Dean Bridge to the east. It was formerly known as the &quot;Water of Leith Village&quot; and was a successful grain milling area for more than 800 years. At one time there were no fewer than eleven working mills there, driven by water from the Water of Leith.

==History==

===Development===
Dean Village is one of the oldest of the villages that lay around the original Royal Burgh of Edinburgh. The village was referred to in 1535 as the &quot;miller&#x27;s village&quot; and appears on the 1560 map of the &quot;Siege of Leith&quot;. In the Town Council Minutes of 1585 &quot;Water of Leith&quot; is used as the name of the village. The term &#x27;Dean Village&#x27; initially referred to a small settlement at the top of Dean Path, north of the river, that formed part of the Dean estate (the area now occupied by the Dean Cemetery).

The first extant mention of the &quot;Dene&quot; is in King David I&#x27;s founding charter of Holyrood Abbey, usually dated c.1145 (although the actual founding of the Abbey was in 1128), in which he granted one of his mills of &quot;Dene&quot; to the Abbey.

Because of its role as a milling village, it became heavily associated with the &#x27;Edinburgh Incorporated Trade of Baxters&#x27;. The Incorporation of Baxters (or &#x27;Bakers&#x27;) later built their &#x27;Tolbooth&#x27; (meeting chambers) here around 1675.

The Water of Leith Bridge at the foot of the steep roadways of Bell&#x27;s Brae to the south leading to Edinburgh and Path Brae to the north leading to Granton and Queensferry, in the centre of Dean Village, is believed to be on the site of ancient crossings of the river. The current bridge was built in the early 18th century as a single arch bridge wide enough for a carriage with horses. At the time, this was the main crossing of the Water of Leith on the route from Edinburgh to Queensferry.

In 1592, the Dean estate &quot;w’ the mylnes and mure thereof, and their pertinents, lyand within the Sherifdom of Edinburgh,” were given to James Lindsay, 7th Lord Lindsay of the Byres, by James VI. In 1609, the twice later Provost of Edinburgh, Sir William Nisbet, bought the barony of Dean from John, 8th Lord Lindsay of the Byres. William is said by some to have built a tower house here, however it is possible that he remodelled an existing earlier building. It is believed this is the building that would become known as Dean House. It is known that the Dean House was a tower house dating from around the 16th or early 17th century.

===Decline===
The area remained a separate village until the 19th century, but due to the development of much larger and more modern flour mills at Leith, Dean Village&#x27;s trade diminished.

In 1826, John Learmonth, a future Lord Provost of Edinburgh, purchased the Dean Estate from the Nisbets of Dean with the hope of expanding the Western New Town into the north.

A bridge was needed to access from one side of the high valley to the other (the low-lying village was more or less an irrelevance) to expand the New Town northward. The Cramond Road Trustees discarded plans by other engineers and insisted upon the use of Thomas Telford. They also insisted that the bridge be toll-free. This was built 1831-2 and opened in 1833 and allowed traffic to bypass the Dean Village altogether.
The four-arched Dean Bridge spans a width of over 400 feet and is 106 feet above the water level. It carries the Queensferry Road over the Dean Gorge and over the village, and was built at the joint expense of John Learmonth and the Cramond Road Trustees. The contractors were John Gibb &amp; Son, from Aberdeen. The bridge transformed access westwards from the city and opened up the potential to develop the Dean estate and expand the New Town northward. The side parapet of the bridge was raised in height in 1912 as a deterrent to suicides, which were very common here in the 19th century, being more or less guaranteed success.

In 1847 the Dean Cemetery was created, standing on the site of Dean House. This mansion house, which formed the centre of the Dean Estate, was the one that had been bought by Sir William Nisbet in 1609. It was demolished in 1845 to create the cemetery but some sculptured stones are incorporated in the southern retaining wall (visible only from lower level). Seven surviving panels of the painted ceiling (painted between 1605 and 1627) of the great hall of Dean House are now in the National Museum of Scotland. The cemetery, which is one of the few in Scotland run as a non-profit making charity trust (to avoid being asset-stripped), is the resting place of many well-known people, including the railway engineer Sir Thomas Bouch and David Octavius Hill.

In 1887 a new bridge called Belford Bridge was built at the foot of the Bells Brae, at the site of an older crossing next to Bells Mill. Between the Belford Bridge and the Dean Bridge, travellers could now effectively bypass the majority of the Dean Village entirely, and the Bells Brae Bridge became much less important as a crossing.
As the West End and Wester Coates developments expanded north, their buildings began to engulf and surround the old Dean Village. Rows of Victorian crescents were built up to, and around the water of Leith. Two large Georgian properties were built north of the river as part the West End expansion, to the west and north west of the old Bells Mill site. These were the John Watson&#x27;s School in 1825 and the Dean Orphanage in 1834.

The bakers&#x27; Tolbooth would be altered in 1900 by Robert Lorimer to become the Cathedral Mission for St. Mary&#x27;s Episcopal Cathedral.

For many years, the village became associated with decay and poverty, and it reached a low point by around 1960.

===Redevelopment===

From the mid-1970s onwards it became recognised as a tranquil oasis, very close to the city centre, and redevelopment and restoration began, converting workers&#x27; cottages, warehouses and mill buildings. This included development on a cleared former industrial site on the north side of the river.

The area has now become a desirable residential area.

The Water of Leith Walkway running from Balerno to Leith was created through the area in 1983.

Dean Bridge which passes over the village connecting the north and south parts of the West End was featured in Ian Rankin&#x27;s fictional book &quot;Strip Jack&quot;, in which a woman is found dead in the river underneath the bridge. It also features as a location in the second book of the Peter May Lewis trilogy, &quot;The Lewis Man&quot;, in which a 1950s schoolboy dare results in a fatality.

==Gallery==
==References==
==External links==

*Bartholomew&#x27;s &quot;Chronological map of Edinburgh&quot; (1919)
*Water of Leith Conservation Trust in Edinburgh
* Engraving showing the Water of Leith Village in foreground from the Dean in 1693 by John Slezer at National Library of Scotland</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5246524" start="0" end="12" title="Dean Village" label="Dean Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="134" end="143" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="145" end="153" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5246025" start="261" end="272" title="Dean Bridge" label="Dean Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q623605" start="371" end="384" title="Gristmill" label="grain milling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566668" start="505" end="519" title="Water of Leith" label="Water of Leith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928458" start="632" end="643" title="Royal Burgh" label="Royal Burgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q216787" start="1160" end="1167" title="David I of Scotland" label="David I"/>
<link wikidata="Q966862" start="1195" end="1209" title="Holyrood Abbey" label="Holyrood Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q40888755" start="1457" end="1486" title="Incorporated Trades of Edinburgh" label="Incorporated Trade of Baxters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7814110" start="1571" end="1579" title="Tolbooth" label="Tolbooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3115421" start="1776" end="1783" title="Granton, Edinburgh" label="Granton"/>
<link wikidata="Q767798" start="1788" end="1799" title="South Queensferry" label="Queensferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577033" start="2348" end="2355" title="Lord Provost of Edinburgh" label="Provost"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018540" start="2913" end="2918" title="Leith" label="Leith"/>
<link wikidata="Q380875" start="3392" end="3406" title="Thomas Telford" label="Thomas Telford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5246025" start="3573" end="3584" title="Dean Bridge" label="Dean Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q24288436" start="3767" end="3781" title="John Learmonth" label="John Learmonth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235221" start="3834" end="3853" title="John Gibb &amp;amp; Son" label="John Gibb &amp;amp; Son"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286070" start="4023" end="4030" title="parapet" label="parapet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5246062" start="4203" end="4216" title="Dean Cemetery" label="Dean Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633842" start="4676" end="4703" title="National Museum of Scotland" label="National Museum of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q39614" start="4709" end="4717" title="cemetery" label="cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="4891" end="4898" title="rail transport" label="railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q81096" start="4899" end="4907" title="engineer" label="engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q368762" start="4912" end="4924" title="Thomas Bouch" label="Thomas Bouch"/>
<link wikidata="Q722792" start="4929" end="4948" title="David Octavius Hill" label="David Octavius Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984852" start="5307" end="5320" title="West Coates" label="Wester Coates"/>
<link wikidata="Q6263208" start="5656" end="5681" title="John Watson&amp;#x27;s Institution" label="John Watson&amp;#x27;s School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2679817" start="5698" end="5712" title="Dean Orphanage" label="Dean Orphanage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7973563" start="6362" end="6384" title="Water of Leith Walkway" label="Water of Leith Walkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q318431" start="6565" end="6575" title="Ian Rankin" label="Ian Rankin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1743290" start="6746" end="6755" title="Peter May (writer)" label="Peter May"/>
<link wikidata="Q12069259" start="7105" end="7116" title="John Slezer" label="John Slezer"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="144700" wikidata="Q225624" url="?curid=144700" title="Sullivan">
<text>Sullivan may refer to:
==People==
==Characters==
* Chloe Sullivan, from the television series &quot;Smallville&quot;
* Colin Sullivan, a character in the film &quot;The Departed&quot;, played by Matt Damon
* Harry Sullivan (&quot;Doctor Who&quot;), from the British science fiction television series &quot;Doctor Who&quot;
* James P. &quot;Sulley&quot; Sullivan, a character in the &quot;Monsters, Inc.&quot; franchise
* John &#x27;Sully&#x27; Sullivan, from the television series &quot;Third Watch&quot;
* John L. Sullivan, protagonist in the film &quot;Sullivan&#x27;s Travels&quot;
* Jordan Sullivan, from the television series &quot;Scrubs&quot;
* Kathy Beale, a fictional character in the British soap opera &quot;EastEnders&quot;
* Michael Sullivan, a character in the 1996 American legal crime drama movie &quot;Sleepers&quot;
* Morgan Sullivan, an alias of the fictional protagonist of the film &quot;Cypher&quot;
* Sam Sullivan, from the television series &quot;The Loop&quot;
* Sieglinde Sullivan, a character from the manga and anime &quot;Black Butler&quot;
* Sullivan, a character from the manga and anime &quot;Welcome to Demon School! Iruma-kun&quot;
* Victor Sullivan, character from the video game &quot;Uncharted&quot; franchise
* Walter Sullivan (&quot;Silent Hill&quot;), an antagonist of the video game &quot;Silent Hill 4: The Room&quot;
* William &quot;Rocky&quot; Sullivan, protagonist in the film &quot;Angels with Dirty Faces&quot;

==Places==
=== Canada ===
*Sullivan, Quebec

=== United States ===
*Sullivan, Illinois
*Sullivan, Indiana
*Sullivan, Kentucky
*Sullivan, Maine
*Sullivan, Missouri
*Sullivan, New Hampshire
*Sullivan, New York
*Sullivan, Ohio
* Sullivan, Virginia
* Sullivan, Raleigh County, West Virginia
* Sullivan, Randolph County, West Virginia
*Sullivan (town), Wisconsin
**Sullivan, Wisconsin, a village within the town
*Sullivan City, Texas

=== Craters ===
* Sullivan (Mercurian crater)
* Sullivan (Venusian crater)

==Music==
* Sullivan Foundation, a non-profit organization dedicated to finding, developing, and furthering the careers of promising opera singers in the United States
* Sullivan (band), an alternative rock band from Greensboro, North Carolina
* Sir Arthur Sullivan (1842–1900), composer, of the team Gilbert and Sullivan
* &quot;Sullivan&quot; (song), a 1997 song by Caroline&#x27;s Spine

==Other uses==
* Sullivan reaction, a chemical reaction
* Sullivan Expedition, a United States Revolutionary War offensive against the Seneca Nation of Indians
* Silky Sullivan, racehorse
* &quot;New York Times Co. v. Sullivan&quot;, a United States Supreme Court case
* Sullivan &amp; Company, a brand engagement firm
* Sullivan&#x27;s Index, a health metric
* &quot;Sullivan&quot; (play), a comedy by Anne-Honoré-Joseph Duveyrier de Mélésville

== See also ==
* Sulivan, a surname
* Sullavan
* O&#x27;Sullivan (disambiguation)
* Sullivan County (disambiguation)
* Sullivan Township (disambiguation)
* Justice Sullivan (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q225624" start="0" end="8" title="Sullivan" label="Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q860895" start="51" end="65" title="Chloe Sullivan" label="Chloe Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q175535" start="195" end="205" title="Matt Damon" label="Matt Damon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264483" start="208" end="247" title="Harry Sullivan (Doctor Who)" label="Harry Sullivan (&amp;quot;Doctor Who&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16249214" start="325" end="361" title="James P. &amp;quot;Sulley&amp;quot; Sullivan" label="James P. &amp;quot;Sulley&amp;quot; Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q927245" start="421" end="452" title="John &amp;#x27;Sully&amp;#x27; Sullivan" label="John &amp;#x27;Sully&amp;#x27; Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065711" start="555" end="578" title="Sullivan&amp;#x27;s Travels" label="Sullivan&amp;#x27;s Travels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440387" start="587" end="602" title="Jordan Sullivan" label="Jordan Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6377182" start="652" end="663" title="Kathy Beale" label="Kathy Beale"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="819" end="827" title="Sleepers (film)#Cast" label="Sleepers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148185" start="836" end="851" title="Morgan Sullivan" label="Morgan Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521651" start="971" end="979" title="The Loop (U.S. TV series)" label="The Loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q738299" start="1045" end="1069" title="List of Black Butler characters" label="&amp;quot;Black Butler&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1119" end="1165" title="Welcome to Demon School! Iruma-kun#Characters" label="&amp;quot;Welcome to Demon School! Iruma-kun&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3253068" start="1168" end="1183" title="Victor Sullivan" label="Victor Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q94773" start="1249" end="1290" title="Walter Sullivan (Silent Hill)" label="Walter Sullivan (&amp;quot;Silent Hill&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q524997" start="1428" end="1451" title="Angels with Dirty Faces" label="Angels with Dirty Faces"/>
<link wikidata="Q141937" start="1486" end="1502" title="Sullivan, Quebec" label="Sullivan, Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q575190" start="1527" end="1545" title="Sullivan, Illinois" label="Sullivan, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q304478" start="1547" end="1564" title="Sullivan, Indiana" label="Sullivan, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7636370" start="1566" end="1584" title="Sullivan, Kentucky" label="Sullivan, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q3449006" start="1586" end="1601" title="Sullivan, Maine" label="Sullivan, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q957490" start="1603" end="1621" title="Sullivan, Missouri" label="Sullivan, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430534" start="1623" end="1646" title="Sullivan, New Hampshire" label="Sullivan, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501230" start="1648" end="1666" title="Sullivan, New York" label="Sullivan, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q7636376" start="1668" end="1682" title="Sullivan, Ohio" label="Sullivan, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7636379" start="1685" end="1703" title="Sullivan, Virginia" label="Sullivan, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7636377" start="1706" end="1745" title="Sullivan, Raleigh County, West Virginia" label="Sullivan, Raleigh County, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7636378" start="1748" end="1788" title="Sullivan, Randolph County, West Virginia" label="Sullivan, Randolph County, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7636391" start="1790" end="1816" title="Sullivan (town), Wisconsin" label="Sullivan (town), Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2461038" start="1819" end="1838" title="Sullivan, Wisconsin" label="Sullivan, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q980265" start="1867" end="1887" title="Sullivan City, Texas" label="Sullivan City, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7636385" start="1907" end="1934" title="Sullivan (Mercurian crater)" label="Sullivan (Mercurian crater)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1937" end="1963" title="List of craters on Venus#S" label="Sullivan (Venusian crater)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7636408" start="1977" end="1996" title="Sullivan Foundation" label="Sullivan Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364634" start="2135" end="2150" title="Sullivan (band)" label="Sullivan (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q212692" start="2215" end="2230" title="Arthur Sullivan" label="Arthur Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17022240" start="2289" end="2316" title="Sullivan (song)" label="&amp;quot;Sullivan&amp;quot; (song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16966002" start="2373" end="2390" title="Sullivan reaction" label="Sullivan reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426614" start="2414" end="2433" title="Sullivan Expedition" label="Sullivan Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7515294" start="2518" end="2532" title="Silky Sullivan" label="Silky Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19073411" start="2552" end="2582" title="New York Times Co. v. Sullivan" label="New York Times Co. v. Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7636381" start="2627" end="2649" title="Sullivan &amp;amp; Company" label="Sullivan &amp;amp; Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q17117917" start="2677" end="2698" title="Sullivan&amp;#x27;s Index" label="Sullivan&amp;#x27;s Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q7636386" start="2718" end="2745" title="Sullivan (play)" label="&amp;quot;Sullivan&amp;quot; (play)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7636332" start="2820" end="2827" title="Sulivan" label="Sulivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7636358" start="2841" end="2849" title="Sullavan" label="Sullavan"/>
<link wikidata="Q94777872" start="2852" end="2884" title="O&amp;#x27;Sullivan (disambiguation)" label="O&amp;#x27;Sullivan (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q232118" start="2887" end="2919" title="Sullivan County (disambiguation)" label="Sullivan County (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364649" start="2922" end="2956" title="Sullivan Township (disambiguation)" label="Sullivan Township (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16800494" start="2959" end="2992" title="Justice Sullivan (disambiguation)" label="Justice Sullivan (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="144703" wikidata="Q225091" url="?curid=144703" title="Mao (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Mao Zedong]] (1893–1976) was the leader of the People&#x27;s Republic of China between 1949 and 1976.

Mao, or MAO, may also refer to:
==People and tribes==
* Mao (given name), Japanese given name
* Mao (surname), Chinese surname
* Mão, nickname of Brazilian beach soccer goalkeeper, Jenílson Rodrigues

==Cultures==
* Mao languages, a group of Omotic languages in western Ethiopia
* Anfillo language, which is also called the Southern Mao language
* Mao people (India), Naga tribe in India
** Mao language (India), the language of the Mao people in India
* A division of Shan people in Southeast Asia

==Acronyms==
* Manual analog override, see manual override
* Maximum tolerable period of disruption, also known as maximum allowable/acceptable outage
* Methylaluminoxane, a pyrophoric white solid
* Molėtai Astronomical Observatory, Lithuania
* Monoamine oxidase, a family of enzymes
* Plasma electrolytic oxidation, also known as microarc oxidation

==Codes==
* Eduardo Gomes International Airport (IATA: MAO), in Manaus, Brazil
* Martins Heron railway station (National Rail code: MAO), in Berkshire, United Kingdom
* Madgaon Junction railway station in Margao, Goa, India

==Entertainment and media==
* Mao (card game), a card game
* &quot;MAO&quot; (manga), a Japanese manga series
* &quot;Maō&quot; (TV series), a Japanese television series
* Mao Mao: Heroes of Pure Heart, an American animated television series
* &quot;&quot;, a 2005 biography of Chinese Communist leader Mao Zedong
* Mao, a character in the anime series &quot;Endro!&quot;

==Places==
* Mahón, also known as &quot;Maó&quot;, a city on the island of Minorca, Spain
* Mäo (disambiguation), several places
* Mao, Chad, a city in Chad
* Mao County, in Sichuan, China
* Santa Cruz de Mao, also known as &quot;Mao&quot;, a municipality of the Valverde province in the Dominican Republic
* Mao (Vidhan Sabha constituency), a legislative assembly constituency in Manipur state, India

==Other uses==
* Mah or Mao, the Zoroastrianism&#x27;s divinity of the moon
* Mao (bird), a bird species &quot;Gymnomyza samoensis&quot;
* Mao (currency), 1/10 of a Chinese yuan
* Mao (restaurant chain), Asian-cuisine restaurant chain in Dublin, Ireland
* Ma‘o, a Hawaiian name for a species of cotton
* Maō, a demon or devil in Japanese mythology, folklore, and fiction
* Maotai, a brand of distilled Chinese liquor

==See also==
* Mu Alpha Theta (ΜΑΘ), the United States mathematics honor society for high school and two-year college students</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q225091" start="0" end="14" title="Mao (disambiguation)" label="[[Mao Zedong]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q225091" start="105" end="108" title="Mao (disambiguation)" label="Mao"/>
<link wikidata="Q225091" start="113" end="116" title="Mao (disambiguation)" label="MAO"/>
<link wikidata="Q16278931" start="161" end="177" title="Mao (given name)" label="Mao (given name)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25158728" start="201" end="214" title="Mao (surname)" label="Mao (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q10306665" start="234" end="237" title="Mão" label="Mão"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351495" start="321" end="334" title="Mao languages" label="Mao languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q34928" start="386" end="402" title="Anfillo language" label="Anfillo language"/>
<link wikidata="Q4280985" start="453" end="471" title="Mao people (India)" label="Mao people (India)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7563215" start="496" end="516" title="Mao language (India)" label="Mao language (India)"/>
<link wikidata="Q740417" start="574" end="585" title="Shan people" label="Shan people"/>
<link wikidata="Q6752322" start="648" end="663" title="manual override" label="manual override"/>
<link wikidata="Q831801" start="666" end="704" title="Maximum tolerable period of disruption" label="Maximum tolerable period of disruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q408080" start="758" end="775" title="Methylaluminoxane" label="Methylaluminoxane"/>
<link wikidata="Q578010" start="804" end="836" title="Molėtai Astronomical Observatory" label="Molėtai Astronomical Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q410867" start="850" end="867" title="Monoamine oxidase" label="Monoamine oxidase"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201774" start="891" end="920" title="Plasma electrolytic oxidation" label="Plasma electrolytic oxidation"/>
<link wikidata="Q657271" start="968" end="1003" title="Eduardo Gomes International Airport" label="Eduardo Gomes International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744100" start="1037" end="1066" title="Martins Heron railway station" label="Martins Heron railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q12444973" start="1125" end="1157" title="Madgaon Junction railway station" label="Madgaon Junction railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812303" start="1211" end="1226" title="Mao (card game)" label="Mao (card game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q63411269" start="1242" end="1265" title="MAO (manga)" label="&amp;quot;MAO&amp;quot; (manga)"/>
<link wikidata="Q711576" start="1293" end="1320" title="Maō (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Maō&amp;quot; (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1353" end="1382" title="Mao Mao: Heroes of Pure Heart" label="Mao Mao: Heroes of Pure Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q56034480" start="1540" end="1546" title="Endro!" label="Endro!"/>
<link wikidata="Q49550" start="1567" end="1572" title="Mahón" label="Mahón"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302160" start="1646" end="1666" title="Mäo (disambiguation)" label="Mäo (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786045" start="1685" end="1694" title="Mao, Chad" label="Mao, Chad"/>
<link wikidata="Q612790" start="1713" end="1723" title="Mao County" label="Mao County"/>
<link wikidata="Q692560" start="1745" end="1762" title="Santa Cruz de Mao" label="Santa Cruz de Mao"/>
<link wikidata="Q55587677" start="1863" end="1894" title="Mao (Vidhan Sabha constituency)" label="Mao (Vidhan Sabha constituency)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1884731" start="1974" end="1977" title="Mah" label="Mah"/>
<link wikidata="Q517840" start="2035" end="2045" title="Mao (bird)" label="Mao (bird)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2582418" start="2096" end="2110" title="Mao (currency)" label="Mao (currency)"/>
<link wikidata="Q39072213" start="2137" end="2159" title="Mao (restaurant chain)" label="Mao (restaurant chain)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773620" start="2213" end="2217" title="Ma‘o" label="Ma‘o"/>
<link wikidata="Q838412" start="2261" end="2264" title="Maō" label="Maō"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070974" start="2330" end="2336" title="Maotai" label="Maotai"/>
<link wikidata="Q6930575" start="2390" end="2404" title="Mu Alpha Theta" label="Mu Alpha Theta"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="144704" wikidata="Q167700" url="?curid=144704" title="No such thing as a free lunch">
<text>&quot;No such thing as a free lunch&quot; (also written as &quot;There ain&#x27;t no such thing as a free lunch&quot; and sometimes called Crane&#x27;s law) is a popular adage communicating the idea that it is impossible to get something for nothing. The acronyms &#x27;, &#x27;, and  are also used. The phrase was in use by the 1930s, but its first appearance is unknown. The &quot;free lunch&quot; in the saying refers to the formerly common practice in American bars of offering a &quot;free lunch&quot; in order to entice drinking customers.

The phrase and the acronym are central to Robert A. Heinlein&#x27;s 1966 science-fiction novel &quot;The Moon is a Harsh Mistress&quot;, which helped popularize it. The free-market economist Milton Friedman also increased its exposure and use by paraphrasing it as the title of a 1975 book; it is used in economics literature to describe opportunity cost. Campbell McConnell writes that the idea is &quot;at the core of economics&quot;.

==History and usage==
===&quot;Free lunch&quot;===
The &quot;free lunch&quot; refers to the once-common tradition of saloons in the United States providing a &quot;free&quot; lunch to patrons who had purchased at least one drink. Many foods on offer were high in salt (e.g., ham, cheese, and salted crackers), so those who ate them ended up buying a lot of beer. Rudyard Kipling, writing in 1891, noted how he

...came upon a bar-room full of bad Salon pictures, in which men with hats on the backs of their heads were wolfing food from a counter. It was the institution of the &quot;free lunch&quot; I had struck. You paid for a drink and got as much as you wanted to eat. For something less than a rupee a day a man can feed himself sumptuously in San Francisco, even though he be a bankrupt. Remember this if ever you are stranded in these parts.

Some quotes exist from the time, arguing that these free lunches were not really free, such as in the Columbia &quot;Daily Phoenix&quot; of 1873: &quot;One of the most expensive things in this city—Free lunch.&quot;, &quot;L. A. W. Bulletin&quot; 1897: &quot;If no one ever paid for drinks, there would be no &#x27;free lunch&#x27;, and the man who confines his attention to the free lunch, alone, is getting what he knows others pay for.&quot; and the &quot;Washington Herald&quot; 1909: &quot;as a matter of fact, there is no such thing as free lunch. Somebody has to pay for it.&quot; When Chicago attempted to ban free lunches in 1917, Michael Montague, a saloon owner, made the case that &quot;There is no such thing as free lunch. First of all, you have to buy something from the saloonkeeper before you can partake of the lunch. Lunch is the greatest tempering influence in the saloon. If a man takes a two-ounce drink of whisky and then takes a bite of lunch, he probably does not take a second drink. Whisky taken alone creates an appetite. If you want to create the use of whisky, pass this ordinance.&quot;

TANSTAAFL, on the other hand, applies this more generally, and indicates an acknowledgement that in reality a person or a society cannot get &quot;something for nothing&quot;. Even if something appears to be free, there is always a cost to the person or to society as a whole, although that may be a hidden cost or an externality. For example, as Heinlein has one of his characters point out, a bar offering a free lunch will likely charge more for its drinks.

===Early uses===

The earliest known use of the phrase in its current sense is as the punchline of the article &quot;Economics in Eight Words&quot; by Walter Morrow, published in the &quot;El Paso Herald-Post&quot; of June 27, 1938 (and other Scripps-Howard newspapers about the same time). The article is a fable about a king who seeks advice from his economic advisors. He asks for ever-simplified advice following their original &quot;eighty-seven volumes of six hundred pages&quot;, executing half the economists each time. The last surviving economist distills all the advice to eight words: &quot;There ain&#x27;t no such thing as free lunch.&quot;

In 1942, &quot;There ain&#x27;t no such thing as a free lunch&quot; (with the word &quot;a&quot; before &quot;free lunch&quot;) appeared in &quot;Public Utilities Fortnightly&quot;, and the &quot;Columbia Law Review&quot; in 1945. A shortened version of the phrase, &quot;there is no free lunch&quot; appeared in a 1942 article in the &quot;Oelwein Daily Register&quot; (in a quote attributed to economist Harley L. Lutz) and in a 1947 column by economist Merryle S. Rukeyser.

In 1949, the phrase appeared in Pierre Dos Utt&#x27;s monograph &quot;TANSTAAFL: A Plan for a New Economic World Order&quot;, which describes an oligarchic political system based on his conclusions from &quot;no free lunch&quot; principles.

In 1950, a &quot;New York Times&quot; columnist ascribed the phrase to economist (and army general) Leonard P. Ayres of the Cleveland Trust Company: &quot;It seems that shortly before the General&#x27;s death [in 1946]... a group of reporters approached the general with the request that perhaps he might give them one of several immutable economic truisms that he had gathered from his long years of economic study... &#x27;It is an immutable economic fact,&#x27; said the general, &#x27;that there is no such thing as a free lunch.

The September 8, 1961, issue of &quot;LIFE magazine&quot; has an editorial on page 4, TANSTAFL&#x27;, It&#x27;s the Truth&quot;, that closes with an anecdotal farmer explaining this slight variant of TANSTAAFL.

By the late 1960s, the phrase had also been given the name &quot;Crane&#x27;s law&quot;, for example in an article by Henry D. Harral in the &quot;Pennsylvanian&quot; (1969).

===Popularization===
In 1966, author Robert A. Heinlein published his novel &quot;The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress&quot;, in which TANSTAAFL was a central, libertarian theme, mentioned by name and explained. This increased its use in the mainstream.

Edwin G. Dolan used the phrase as the title of his 1971 book &quot;TANSTAAFL (There Ain&#x27;t No Such Thing As A Free Lunch) – A Libertarian Perspective on Environmental Policy&quot;.

===Meanings===
;Science
In the sciences, no free lunch means that the universe as a whole is ultimately a closed system. There is no source of matter, energy, or light that draws resources from something else which will not eventually be exhausted. Therefore, the no free lunch argument may also be applied to natural physical processes in a closed system (either the universe as a whole, or any system that does not receive energy or matter from outside). (See Second law of thermodynamics.) The bio-ecologist Barry Commoner used this concept as the last of his famous &quot;Four Laws of Ecology&quot;.

According to American theoretical physicist and cosmologist Alan Guth &quot;the universe is the ultimate free lunch&quot;, given that in the early stage of its expansion the total amount of energy available to make particles was very large.

==== Economics ====
In economics, no free lunch demonstrates opportunity cost. Greg Mankiw described the concept as follows: &quot;To get one thing that we like, we usually have to give up another thing that we like. Making decisions requires trading off one goal against another.&quot; The idea that there is no free lunch at the societal level applies only when all resources are being used completely and appropriately – i.e., when economic efficiency prevails. If not, a &#x27;free lunch&#x27; can be had through a more efficient utilization of resources. Or, as Fred Brooks put it, &quot;You can only get something for nothing if you have previously gotten nothing for something.&quot; If one individual or group gets something at no cost, somebody else ends up paying for it. If there appears to be no direct cost to any single individual, there is a social cost. Similarly, someone can benefit for &quot;free&quot; from an externality or from a public good, but someone has to pay the cost of producing these benefits. (See Free rider problem and Tragedy of the commons.)

==== Finance ====
In mathematical finance, the term is also used as an informal synonym for the principle of no-arbitrage. This principle states that a combination of securities that has the same cash-flows as another security must have the same net price in equilibrium.

==== Statistics ====
In statistics, the term has been used to describe the tradeoffs of statistical learners (e.g., in machine learning) which are unavoidable according to the &quot;No free lunch&quot; theorem. That is, any model that claims to offer superior flexibility in analyzing data patterns usually does so at the cost of introducing extra assumptions, or by sacrificing generalizability in important situations.

==== Technology ====
No free lunch is sometimes used as a response to claims of the virtues of free software. Supporters of free software often counter that the use of the term &quot;free&quot; in this context is primarily a reference to a lack of constraint (&quot;libre&quot;) rather than a lack of cost (&quot;gratis&quot;). Richard Stallman has described it as &#x27;free&#x27; as in &#x27;free speech&#x27;, not as in &#x27;free beer&#x27;.

The prefix &quot;TANSTAA-&quot; (or &quot;TINSTAA-&quot;) is used in numerous other contexts as well to denote some immutable property of the system being discussed. For example, &quot;TANSTAANFS&quot; is used by electrical engineering professors to stand for &quot;There Ain&#x27;t No Such Thing As A Noise-Free System&quot;.

==== Sports ====
Baseball Prospectus coined the abbreviation &quot;TINSTAAPP&quot;, for &quot;There Is No Such Thing As A Pitching Prospect&quot;, as many young pitchers hurt their arms before they can be effective at a major league level.

==== Social policy ====
Hungarian prime minister Ferenc Gyurcsány used this adage to justify his social reforms in the mid-2000s. As a post-socialist country, Hungary struggled with the illusion of the state as a caring and giving, independent entity, rather than being the embodiment of the community. The saying &quot;there is no free lunch&quot; represented that even if the state provides welfare or something else for the people in need, it is in fact bought or provided by other people of the same community through taxes. Therefore, the state cannot provide everything for everyone, and increased provisions given by the state can only be financed by economic growth, increased taxes or public debt.

==== Exceptions ====
Some exceptions from the &quot;no free lunch&quot; tenet have been put forward, such as the Sun and carbon dioxide. It was argued in particular that metabolism evolved to take advantage of the free lunch provided by the Sun, which also triggers production of vital oxygen in plants. However, these too fall short in that the viewpoint is an open system, Earth, with &quot;free&quot; inputs from the Sun. When viewed from the larger system context, the Sun/Earth or Solar System, there is no net energy exchange, and still &quot;no free lunch&quot;.

==See also==
* Demonstrated preference
* Have one&#x27;s cake and eat it too
* He who does not work, neither shall he eat
* Milton Friedman
* No free lunch in search and optimization
* No Free Lunch (organization)
* No-arbitrage bounds
* Parable of the broken window
* Revealed preferences
* Scarcity
* Tax choice
* Trade-off
* Zero-sum game
==Notes==
==References==
*Tucker, Bob, (Wilson Tucker) &quot;The Neo-Fan&#x27;s Guide to Science Fiction Fandom&quot; (3rd–8th Editions), 8th edition: 1996, Kansas City Science Fiction &amp; Fantasy Society, KaCSFFS Press, No ISSN or ISBN listed.

==External links==
* &quot;Economics in Eight Words&quot;, digitized text at Libertarianism.org</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q167700" start="6" end="35" title="No such thing as a free lunch" label="No such thing as a free lunch"/>
<link wikidata="Q167700" start="65" end="111" title="No such thing as a free lunch" label="There ain&amp;#x27;t no such thing as a free lunch"/>
<link wikidata="Q167700" start="139" end="155" title="No such thing as a free lunch" label="Crane&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q35102" start="170" end="175" title="adage" label="adage"/>
<link wikidata="Q101244" start="255" end="262" title="acronym" label="acronym"/>
<link wikidata="Q167700" start="284" end="284" title="No such thing as a free lunch" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q5500257" start="490" end="500" title="free lunch" label="free lunch"/>
<link wikidata="Q123078" start="589" end="607" title="Robert A. Heinlein" label="Robert A. Heinlein"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="620" end="635" title="science-fiction" label="science-fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410482" start="648" end="676" title="The Moon is a Harsh Mistress" label="The Moon is a Harsh Mistress"/>
<link wikidata="Q46607" start="716" end="727" title="free-market" label="free-market"/>
<link wikidata="Q47426" start="738" end="753" title="Milton Friedman" label="Milton Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="852" end="861" title="economics" label="economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q185715" start="885" end="901" title="opportunity cost" label="opportunity cost"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422401" start="1102" end="1108" title="Western saloon" label="saloon"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1117" end="1130" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500257" start="1143" end="1165" title="Free lunch" label="&amp;quot;free&amp;quot; lunch"/>
<link wikidata="Q34743" start="1348" end="1363" title="Rudyard Kipling" label="Rudyard Kipling"/>
<link wikidata="Q185715" start="3255" end="3266" title="hidden cost" label="hidden cost"/>
<link wikidata="Q275372" start="3273" end="3284" title="externality" label="externality"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351774" start="3606" end="3625" title="El Paso Herald-Post" label="El Paso Herald-Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q283457" start="3660" end="3674" title="Scripps-Howard" label="Scripps-Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149752" start="4269" end="4288" title="Columbia Law Review" label="Columbia Law Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q1903323" start="4414" end="4421" title="Oelwein" label="Oelwein"/>
<link wikidata="Q6820507" start="4529" end="4548" title="Merryle S. Rukeyser" label="Merryle S. Rukeyser"/>
<link wikidata="Q193495" start="4605" end="4614" title="monograph" label="monograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q79751" start="4696" end="4706" title="oligarchic" label="oligarchic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="4810" end="4824" title="New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q6525642" start="4893" end="4909" title="Leonard Porter Ayres" label="Leonard P. Ayres"/>
<link wikidata="Q123078" start="5753" end="5771" title="Robert A. Heinlein" label="Robert A. Heinlein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410482" start="5798" end="5826" title="The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress" label="The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress"/>
<link wikidata="Q178598" start="5868" end="5879" title="libertarian" label="libertarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468684" start="6255" end="6268" title="closed system" label="closed system"/>
<link wikidata="Q177045" start="6611" end="6639" title="Second law of thermodynamics" label="Second law of thermodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306796" start="6660" end="6674" title="Barry Commoner" label="Barry Commoner"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6725" end="6745" title="Barry Commoner#Environmental books" label="Four Laws of Ecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q323316" start="6814" end="6823" title="Alan Guth" label="Alan Guth"/>
<link wikidata="Q185715" start="7057" end="7073" title="opportunity cost" label="opportunity cost"/>
<link wikidata="Q185734" start="7075" end="7086" title="N. Gregory Mankiw" label="Greg Mankiw"/>
<link wikidata="Q615445" start="7431" end="7450" title="economic efficiency" label="economic efficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q92609" start="7563" end="7574" title="Fred Brooks" label="Fred Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300947" start="7853" end="7864" title="social cost" label="social cost"/>
<link wikidata="Q275372" start="7926" end="7937" title="externality" label="externality"/>
<link wikidata="Q272458" start="7948" end="7959" title="Public good (economics)" label="public good"/>
<link wikidata="Q499215" start="8027" end="8045" title="Free rider problem" label="Free rider problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q334622" start="8050" end="8072" title="Tragedy of the commons" label="Tragedy of the commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q335632" start="8097" end="8117" title="mathematical finance" label="mathematical finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q273088" start="8188" end="8197" title="arbitrage" label="arbitrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q12483" start="8373" end="8383" title="statistics" label="statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2539" start="8468" end="8484" title="machine learning" label="machine learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7045226" start="8525" end="8558" title="No free lunch theorem" label="&amp;quot;No free lunch&amp;quot; theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q341" start="8866" end="8879" title="free software" label="free software"/>
<link wikidata="Q13415025" start="9084" end="9090" title="Gratis versus libre" label="gratis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7439" start="9099" end="9115" title="Richard Stallman" label="Richard Stallman"/>
<link wikidata="Q13415025" start="9136" end="9215" title="Gratis versus libre" label="&amp;#x27;free&amp;#x27; as in &amp;#x27;free speech&amp;#x27;, not as in &amp;#x27;free beer&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q43035" start="9431" end="9453" title="electrical engineering" label="electrical engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q63640" start="9563" end="9582" title="Baseball Prospectus" label="Baseball Prospectus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="9766" end="9778" title="Major League Baseball" label="major league"/>
<link wikidata="Q191337" start="9836" end="9852" title="Ferenc Gyurcsány" label="Ferenc Gyurcsány"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="10608" end="10611" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="10616" end="10630" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057" start="10665" end="10675" title="metabolism" label="metabolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q898312" start="10857" end="10868" title="open system (systems theory)" label="open system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323737" start="11081" end="11104" title="Demonstrated preference" label="Demonstrated preference"/>
<link wikidata="Q8057709" start="11107" end="11142" title="Have one&amp;#x27;s cake and eat it too" label="Have one&amp;#x27;s cake and eat it too"/>
<link wikidata="Q851412" start="11145" end="11187" title="He who does not work, neither shall he eat" label="He who does not work, neither shall he eat"/>
<link wikidata="Q47426" start="11190" end="11205" title="Milton Friedman" label="Milton Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q255847" start="11208" end="11248" title="No free lunch in search and optimization" label="No free lunch in search and optimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7044192" start="11251" end="11279" title="No Free Lunch (organization)" label="No Free Lunch (organization)"/>
<link wikidata="Q629928" start="11282" end="11301" title="No-arbitrage bounds" label="No-arbitrage bounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q594433" start="11304" end="11332" title="Parable of the broken window" label="Parable of the broken window"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323737" start="11335" end="11355" title="Revealed preferences" label="Revealed preferences"/>
<link wikidata="Q815758" start="11358" end="11366" title="Scarcity" label="Scarcity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689414" start="11369" end="11379" title="Tax choice" label="Tax choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q638123" start="11382" end="11391" title="Trade-off" label="Trade-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q156612" start="11394" end="11407" title="Zero-sum game" label="Zero-sum game"/>
<link wikidata="Q637455" start="11448" end="11461" title="Wilson Tucker (writer)" label="Wilson Tucker"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="144705" wikidata="Q17103952" url="?curid=144705" title="Minoa">
<text>Minoa ( ) was the name of several Bronze-Age port cities on the coasts of the Aegean islands Crete, Paros, Siphnos, Amorgos and Corfu in Greece, as well as the Italian island of Sicily. There was also a Minoa in Gaza, whose name was a later introduction, brought by the Philistines in 1200 BC. It appears that settlements with the name Minoa were intended to support Minoa as a &quot;thalassocracy&quot;, or sea-based empire. Austrian historian Fritz Schachermeyr found evidence for this in the name of a settlement on the Laconic island now called Monemvasia, and for the small island outside of the harbour of Megara in Greece.

The original meaning of the word remains unknown. Its root, &quot;min-&quot;, is linked to a group of Aegean languages, appearing elsewhere in toponyms like Minya and Minassos, as well as in the name of the Minyans, an autochthonous group inhabiting the Aegean region. There may be a connection with the mythic king of Crete, Minos, during the Bronze Age Minoan civilization which flourished in Crete and in the Aegean islands in Greece between 2000–1470 BC. The inhabitants of Crete were named Minoans by Arthur Evans, after the legendary king.

It seems that the Minoans travelled from Crete down to Egypt, Syria and Mari of Euphrates, to Asia Minor (Anatolia) and the Black Sea through the Aegean islands, and to the west up to Lipari (Aeolian islands) to the north of Sicily. Approximately in 1600 BC the routes to Italy and Asia Minor were gained by the rising Myceneans. They followed the same tradition with the establishment or use of commercial and supporting settlements in the Mediterranean coasts.

==See also==
*Minos
*Heraclea Minoa
*El Mina
*Al Mina

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q17103952" start="0" end="5" title="Minoa" label="Minoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="34" end="44" title="Bronze-Age" label="Bronze-Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q34575" start="78" end="84" title="Aegean Sea" label="Aegean"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="93" end="98" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q201272" start="100" end="105" title="Paros" label="Paros"/>
<link wikidata="Q212029" start="107" end="114" title="Siphnos" label="Siphnos"/>
<link wikidata="Q208587" start="116" end="123" title="Amorgos" label="Amorgos"/>
<link wikidata="Q121378" start="128" end="133" title="Corfu" label="Corfu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="178" end="184" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q47492" start="212" end="216" title="Gaza City" label="Gaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q193776" start="270" end="281" title="Philistines" label="Philistines"/>
<link wikidata="Q288587" start="384" end="397" title="thalassocracy" label="thalassocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q113937" start="445" end="463" title="Fritz Schachermeyr" label="Fritz Schachermeyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q11723836" start="523" end="530" title="Laconia" label="Laconic"/>
<link wikidata="Q654616" start="549" end="559" title="Monemvasia" label="Monemvasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q184864" start="612" end="618" title="Megara" label="Megara"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="622" end="628" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344038" start="733" end="739" title="Tyrsenian languages" label="Aegean"/>
<link wikidata="Q485762" start="774" end="782" title="toponyms" label="toponyms"/>
<link wikidata="Q310117" start="788" end="793" title="Minya, Egypt" label="Minya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065225" start="838" end="845" title="Minyans" label="Minyans"/>
<link wikidata="Q431113" start="850" end="863" title="Autochthon (ancient Greece)" label="autochthonous"/>
<link wikidata="Q34575" start="885" end="891" title="Aegean Sea" label="Aegean"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="950" end="955" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q23168" start="957" end="962" title="Minos" label="Minos"/>
<link wikidata="Q134178" start="986" end="1005" title="Minoan civilization" label="Minoan civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="1061" end="1067" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="1109" end="1114" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q134178" start="1126" end="1133" title="Minoan civilization" label="Minoans"/>
<link wikidata="Q188929" start="1137" end="1149" title="Arthur Evans" label="Arthur Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q244762" start="1250" end="1254" title="Mari, Syria" label="Mari"/>
<link wikidata="Q34589" start="1258" end="1267" title="Euphrates" label="Euphrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="1272" end="1282" title="Asia Minor" label="Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="1284" end="1292" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="1302" end="1311" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q496389" start="1362" end="1368" title="Lipari" label="Lipari"/>
<link wikidata="Q179883" start="1370" end="1385" title="Aeolian islands" label="Aeolian islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q23168" start="1656" end="1661" title="Minos" label="Minos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502156" start="1663" end="1677" title="Heraclea Minoa" label="Heraclea Minoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777059" start="1679" end="1686" title="El Mina" label="El Mina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477524" start="1688" end="1695" title="Al Mina" label="Al Mina"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="144706" wikidata="Q302936" url="?curid=144706" title="Sidonius Apollinaris">
<text>Gaius Sollius Modestus Apollinaris Sidonius, better known as Sidonius Apollinaris (5 November, 430 – 481/490 AD), was a poet, diplomat, and bishop. Born into the Gallo-Roman aristocracy, he was son-in-law to Emperor Avitus and was appointed Urban prefect of Rome by Emperor Anthemius in 468. In 469 he was appointed Bishop of Clermont and he led the defence of the city from Euric, King of the Visigoths, from 473 to 475. He retained his position as bishop after the city&#x27;s conquest, until his death in the 480s. He is venerated as a saint in the Catholic church, the Orthodox Church, and the True Orthodox Church, with his feast day on 21 August.

Sidonius is &quot;the single most important surviving author from 5th-century Gaul&quot; according to Eric Goldberg. He is one of four Gallo-Roman aristocrats of the 5th- to 6th-century whose letters survive in quantity; the others are Ruricius, bishop of Limoges (died 507), Alcimus Ecdicius Avitus, bishop of Vienne (died 518) and Magnus Felix Ennodius of Arles, bishop of Ticinum (died 534). All of them were linked in the tightly bound aristocratic Gallo-Roman network that provided the bishops of Catholic Gaul. His writing is characterised by an extremely dense network of classical and biblical allusions, which was central to his self-presentation as a Roman aristocrat.

== Life ==

Sidonius was born in Lugdunum (modern Lyon). His father, whose name is unknown, was Prefect of Gaul under Valentinian III (Sidonius recalls with pride being present with his father at the installation of Astyrius as consul for the year 449.) Sidonius&#x27; grandfather, Apollinaris, was Praetorian Prefect of Gaul from May 408 or earlier until 409, when he was succeeded by his friend Decimus Rusticus. Sidonius may be a descendant of another Apollinaris who was Prefect of Gaul under Constantine II between 337 and 340.

Sidonius married Papianilla, the daughter of Emperor Avitus, around 452. This union produced one son, Apollinaris, and at least two daughters, Severina and Roscia, whom Sidonius mentions in his letters. A daughter Alcima is mentioned much later by Gregory of Tours, and Theodor Mommsen speculated that Alcima may be another name for one of his daughters. As part of Papianilla&#x27;s dowry, Sidonius received a summer villa on Lac d&#x27;Aydat, named Avitacum. He describes the villa in detail in his letters, as an L-shaped villa with three baths, located on a hill overlooking the lake, but the description draws heavily on Pliny the Younger&#x27;s depiction of his own villas and is carefully crafted to present his cultural identity.

===Gallo-Roman aristocrat===
Sidonius&#x27; letters reveal him to have been part of a wide-reaching network of Roman aristocrats in Gaul. His correspondence focused on his own region of Auvergne, where his main interlocutors were based in Clairmont (like him) and the provincial capital of Lyon. Other key contacts were the aristocrats of Narbonne and Bordeaux, but some of his letters are addressed as far afield as Ravenna, Rome, and Hispania. Notable acquaintances include bishop Faustus of Riez and his theological adversary Claudianus Mamertus. He was recognised in life for his literary accomplishments; in 456 his bronze portrait was added to the gallery of writers in the libraries of Trajan&#x27;s Forum, the last statue to be erected there.

Sidonius spent time in the court of Theodoric II, king of the Visigoths, in 455 or 456, and wrote a letter about the experience to his brother-in-law Agricola. This letter, placed first in Sidonius&#x27;s anthology of his correspondence, praises Theodoric as an ideal king.

Sidonius&#x27;s father-in-law, Avitus became emperor in 455 and Sidonius wrote a panegyric for him. In 457 Majorian deprived Avitus of the empire and seized the city of Lyons; Sidonius fell into his hands. However, the reputation of Sidonius&#x27;s learning led Majorian to treat him with the greatest respect. In return Sidonius composed a panegyric in his honour (as he had previously done for Avitus), which won for him a statue at Rome and the title of &quot;comes&quot;. In 468 the emperor Anthemius appointed him Urban Prefect of Rome, a post he held until 469. Sidonius presents this as a reward for his literary ability and especially the panegyric which he had written in honour of Anthemius, but the appointment was probably also part of Anthemius&#x27; efforts to win the support of the Roman aristocrats in Gaul. Afterwards, Anthemius made him a Patrician and Senator.

===Bishop===

In 469, Sidonius was elected to succeed Eparchius, a relative of his wife, as Bishop of Averna (Clermont). He says little about this in his writing and it appears that he had not desired the role. Writing to the former praetorian prefect Tonantius Ferreolus, he encourages him to exchange his secular life &quot;among Valentinian&#x27;s prefects&quot; for a religious life &quot;among Christ&#x27;s perfected men&quot;. Gregory of Tours speaks of Sidonius as a man who could celebrate Mass from memory (without a sacramentary) and give spontaneous speeches without any hesitation. He writes in praise of the aristocrats who supported the Church, ascetics, and authors of theological works, including those who incorporated pagan philosophy. On becoming a bishop, he publicly declared that he would give up pagan poetry, as incompatible with a religious life, but he continued to write and exchange poetry privately.

For three years, from 473 to 475, Sidonius and his brother-in-law Ecdicus led the defense of Clermont, which was attacked annually by the Visigoths under king Euric. He compared the conflict to the Carthaginian capture of Capua during the Second Punic War, casting Euric in the role of Hannibal and himself as Decius Magius, loyally defending the city on behalf of Rome. When the city was finally conquered, he was imprisoned and exiled to Liviana, but Euric allowed him to return and resume his office as bishop in 476 or 477, following an intervention by the king&#x27;s advisor Leo. Sidonius maintained connections with Euric&#x27;s court thereafter. Euric favoured Arianism over Catholicism and Sidonius maintained contacts with Catholic clergy throughout Gaul and beyond, in order to support them in legal disputes and with recommendations.

Sidonius accepted a degree of collaboration with Euric&#x27;s court as necessary to maintain the unity of the Roman aristocracy in Gaul, but he was hostile to the Goths, writing to a senator &quot;You shun barbarians because they have a bad reputation; I avoid them, even when they have a good one.&quot; He mocks the literary pretensions of Euric&#x27;s court, which was known as the &quot;Athenaeum&quot;, and presents the Visigothic conquest as responsible for a reversal of the social order, which had placed the uneducated in power over the educated. He was involved in legal disputes with a Gothic noble who had seized the majority of his mother-in-law&#x27;s lands and clashed with Seronatus, whom he considered a collaborator, for encouraging them to billet their troops in the villas of Roman aristocrats. His hostility to Euric is reflected in his decision to open his letter collection, published around 477, with a letter enthusiastically praising Theoderic II, whom Euric had murdered in order to assume the Visigothic throne.

Sidonius was still living in 481, but had died by 490, when his successor as bishop, Aprunculus, died. His date of death was 21 or 23 August. Following his death he was venerated as a saint in Aremorica.

===Descendants===
Sidonius&#x27;s relations have been traced over several generations as a narrative of a family&#x27;s fortunes, from the prominence of his paternal grandfather&#x27;s time into later decline in the 6th century under the Franks. Sidonius&#x27;s son Apollinaris, who was a correspondent of Ruricius of Limoges, commanded a unit raised in Auvergne at the Battle of Vouille in 507, where the Goths were decisively defeated by the Franks. He was also bishop of Clermont for four months before his death. Sidonius&#x27;s grandson, Arcadius, on hearing a rumor that the Frankish king Theuderic I had died, betrayed Clermont to Childebert I, only to abandon his wife and mother when Theuderic appeared; his other appearance in the history of Gregory of Tours is as a servant of king Childebert.

==Works==
===Carmina===

A collection of twenty-four &quot;Carmina&quot; by Sidonius survives, consisting of occasional verse, including &quot;panegyrics&quot; on different emperors , which document several important political events and draw largely upon Statius, Ausonius and Claudian. Sidonius emphasises Rome&#x27;s past successes and glories as a &quot;crisis mirror&quot; for contemporary rulers, suggesting both the degree to which Rome had declined but also the possibility of revitalisation. In both &quot;Carmen&quot; 7 for Avitus and &quot;Carmen&quot; 5 for Majorian, Sidonius reviews past emperors and concludes that only those who earnt the title through virtue, especially the military virtue of Vespasian and above all Trajan, deserved praise - an implicit challenge to the new emperors. Other virtues are also important; &quot;Carmen&quot; 2 praises Anthemius for his mastery of the liberal arts.

Other poems have different subjects. For example, &quot;Carmen&quot; 22 is an ecphrasis of a painting of the Third Mithridatic War on the wall of the villa of Pontius Leontius &quot;Dionysus&quot;, one of Sidonius&#x27; friends, at Burgus. Sidonius&#x27; visit to the villa is compared to a meeting of Apollo with Dionysus, at which they decide to settle in Aquitania and establish learned symposiastic culture there.

===Letters===
Nine books of &quot;Letters&quot; are preserved, containing a total of 147 documents, addressed to 117 different individuals. Sidonius worked on his letter collection over a protracted period, publishing some of them in the early 470s and producing the final version of his collection around 477. The collection was dedicated to Constantius, a priest in Lyon, who was a personal friend, with apologies to the Praetorian Prefect Tonantius Ferreolus, on the grounds that even a minor priest ought to be put before even the greatest members of the laity, because Constantius had helped to edit the volume, and because of Constantius&#x27; advice following the siege of Clairmont in 473.

Sidonius&#x27; Latin style was highly praised in his own time. His contemporary, Claudianus Mamertus, dubbed him the &quot;resuscitator of ancient eloquence.&quot; By contrast, in his introduction to his translation of Sidonius&#x27; letters in 1939, W.B. Anderson characterised them as very stilted in diction, but revealing him as a man of genial temper, fond of good living and of pleasure. Sigrid Mratschek characterises Sidonius&#x27; Latin as intentionally elaborate and learned, calling it 

The complexity of the allusions to mythical, historical, biblical exempla often makes his writing very difficult to understand, but the difficulty was intentional and Sidonius disparages those unwilling to put in the effort necessary for a complete education in Roman language, literature, and culture. For Sidonius, familiarity with Classical Latin authors was the central point of education and the justification for the social position of the aristocrat; he says that difference between educated and uneducated men is the same as the difference between men and animals.

W.B. Anderson notes, &quot;Whatever one may think about their style and diction, the letters of Sidonius are an invaluable source of information on many aspects of the life of his time.&quot; Many studies have used the letters in order to reconstruct the social networks of the intelligentsia in fourth-century Gaul. However, the letters cannot be treated as straightforward depictions of Sidonius&#x27; times. Sidonius actively models his letters and their representations of his contemporary world on those of earlier epistolographers, notably Pliny the Younger. He represents Rome as a model society. Peter Brown argues that the resulting picture of continuity is actually a response to the rapidity of change in his contemporary Gaul. Sigrid Mratschek says that through his literary work, he sought to build up the literary and cultural element of Roman identity, as compensation for Rome&#x27;s military and political collapse, to reinforce the position of the Roman aristocracy in Gaul, and the church.

A letter of Sidonius&#x27;s addressed to Riothamus, &quot;King of the Brittones&quot; () is of particular interest, since it provides evidence that a king or military leader with ties to Britain lived around the time frame of King Arthur. An English translation of his poetry and letters by W.B. Anderson, with accompanying Latin text, have been published by the Loeb Classical Library (volume 1, containing his poems and books 1-2 of his letters, 1939; remainder of letters, 1965).

===Manuscript tradition===

Although Sidonius&#x27; works may have been published in part during his lifetime (5th century), there is no textual evidence of this and all manuscripts can be traced back to a single archetype, which is estimated as dating to roughly the 7th century. The oldest witness dates to the 9th century and is likely a fourth-generation copy. Although the archetype contained poems, they were omitted in most copies, and most extant manuscripts contain only his letters, often jumbled together with a garbled transcription of another writer, Ausonius. Most of the work on textual variants was done by in the 1870s, but Lütjohann died prematurely before he had developed the stemmatics, which are crucial for reconstructing Sidonius&#x27; idiosyncratic Latin. Lütjohann&#x27;s work was published in the 1887 &quot;Monumenta Germaniae Historica&quot; with inferior stemmatics provided by other scholars. Franz Dolveck provided a partial new stemma, including only those editions complete with poetry, in 2020.

==Notes==


==Editions and commentaries==
* 

==Sources and further reading==
* Nora Chadwick, &quot;Poetry and Letters in Early Christian Gaul&quot; London: Bowes and Bowes, 1955.
*M. P. Hanaghan, &quot;Reading Sidonius&#x27; Epistles&quot;, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2019.
*
*Gavin Kelly and Joop van Waarden (eds), &quot;The Edinburgh Companion to Sidonius Apollinaris&quot;, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2020.
* Sigrid Mratschek, &quot;Identitätsstiftung aus der Vergangenheit: Zum Diskurs über die trajanische Bildungskultur im Kreis des Sidonius Apollinaris&quot;, in Therese Fuhrer (hg), &quot;Die christlich-philosophischen Diskurse der Spätantike: Texte, Personen, Institutionen: Akten der Tagung vom 22.-25. Februar 2006 am Zentrum für Antike und Moderne der Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freibur&quot;g (Stuttgart, Franz Steiner Verlag, 2008) (Philosophie der Antike, 28),
* C.E. Stevens, &quot;Sidonius Apollinaris and his Age&quot;. Oxford: University Press, 1933.
*K.F. Stroheker. &quot;Der senatorische Adel im spätantiken Gallien.&quot; Tübingen, 1948.
*

==External links==

*Apollinaris Sidonius (5 November - 21 August ) – Medieval Lectures. Lynn Harry Nelson. 
*1887 critical Latin edition of the works of Sidonius, &quot;Monumenta Germaniae Historica&quot;
*Biographical introduction to the &quot;Letters&quot; , O. M. Dalton (1915)
*Complete English translation of the Letters of Sidonius Apollinaris, O. M. Dalton (1915)
*Sidonius Apollinaris, dedicated site, with bibliography and complete Latin text of the correspondence and the poetry, maintained by Joop van Waarden since 2003, frequently updated
*Opera Omnia by Migne Patrologia Latina with analytical indexes
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q302936" start="0" end="43" title="Sidonius Apollinaris" label="Gaius Sollius Modestus Apollinaris Sidonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q302936" start="61" end="81" title="Sidonius Apollinaris" label="Sidonius Apollinaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q49757" start="120" end="124" title="poet" label="poet"/>
<link wikidata="Q193391" start="126" end="134" title="diplomat" label="diplomat"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="140" end="146" title="bishop" label="bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364601" start="162" end="173" title="Gallo-Roman" label="Gallo-Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q203198" start="216" end="222" title="Avitus" label="Avitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q544015" start="241" end="254" title="Urban prefect" label="Urban prefect"/>
<link wikidata="Q211772" start="274" end="283" title="Anthemius" label="Anthemius"/>
<link wikidata="Q217620" start="375" end="380" title="Euric" label="Euric"/>
<link wikidata="Q23693" start="394" end="403" title="Visigoths" label="Visigoths"/>
<link wikidata="Q43115" start="539" end="544" title="saint" label="saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="552" end="567" title="Catholic church" label="Catholic church"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="573" end="588" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q17036536" start="598" end="618" title="True Orthodox Church" label="True Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364601" start="789" end="800" title="Gallo-Roman" label="Gallo-Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411309" start="890" end="898" title="Ruricius" label="Ruricius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1926235" start="900" end="917" title="bishop of Limoges" label="bishop of Limoges"/>
<link wikidata="Q225201" start="930" end="953" title="Avitus of Vienne" label="Alcimus Ecdicius Avitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q366189" start="955" end="971" title="bishop of Vienne" label="bishop of Vienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q465322" start="987" end="1008" title="Magnus Felix Ennodius" label="Magnus Felix Ennodius"/>
<link wikidata="Q665" start="1367" end="1375" title="Lugdunum" label="Lugdunum"/>
<link wikidata="Q456" start="1384" end="1388" title="Lyon" label="Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q371909" start="1430" end="1437" title="Prefect" label="Prefect"/>
<link wikidata="Q38060" start="1441" end="1445" title="Gaul" label="Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q170026" start="1452" end="1467" title="Valentinian III" label="Valentinian III"/>
<link wikidata="Q3627552" start="1550" end="1558" title="Astyrius" label="Astyrius"/>
<link wikidata="Q40779" start="1562" end="1568" title="Roman consul" label="consul"/>
<link wikidata="Q123376371" start="1616" end="1627" title="Apollinaris (praefect)" label="Apollinaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q692343" start="1633" end="1651" title="Praetorian Prefect" label="Praetorian Prefect"/>
<link wikidata="Q38060" start="1655" end="1659" title="Gaul" label="Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q769213" start="1731" end="1747" title="Decimus Rusticus" label="Decimus Rusticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q46734" start="1831" end="1845" title="Constantine II (emperor)" label="Constantine II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057293" start="1885" end="1895" title="Papianilla, Wife of Sidonius Apollinaris" label="Papianilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q203198" start="1921" end="1927" title="Avitus" label="Avitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780242" start="1970" end="1981" title="Apollinaris of Clermont" label="Apollinaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q67841" start="2116" end="2132" title="Gregory of Tours" label="Gregory of Tours"/>
<link wikidata="Q25351" start="2138" end="2153" title="Theodor Mommsen" label="Theodor Mommsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3215329" start="2295" end="2311" title="Lac d&amp;#x27;Aydat" label="Lac d&amp;#x27;Aydat"/>
<link wikidata="Q168707" start="2494" end="2511" title="Pliny the Younger" label="Pliny the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152" start="2793" end="2801" title="Auvergne" label="Auvergne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6555" start="2946" end="2954" title="Narbonne" label="Narbonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479" start="2959" end="2967" title="Bordeaux" label="Bordeaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q13364" start="3024" end="3031" title="Ravenna" label="Ravenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="3033" end="3037" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q186513" start="3043" end="3051" title="Hispania" label="Hispania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351792" start="3090" end="3105" title="Faustus of Riez" label="Faustus of Riez"/>
<link wikidata="Q782074" start="3136" end="3155" title="Claudianus Mamertus" label="Claudianus Mamertus"/>
<link wikidata="Q211295" start="3300" end="3319" title="Trajan&amp;#x27;s Forum" label="Trajan&amp;#x27;s Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q195443" start="3395" end="3407" title="Theodoric II" label="Theodoric II"/>
<link wikidata="Q23693" start="3421" end="3430" title="Visigoths" label="Visigoths"/>
<link wikidata="Q3606863" start="3509" end="3517" title="Agricola (vir inlustris)" label="Agricola"/>
<link wikidata="Q191956" start="3741" end="3749" title="Majorian" label="Majorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071047" start="4097" end="4102" title="comes" label="comes"/>
<link wikidata="Q211772" start="4129" end="4138" title="Anthemius" label="Anthemius"/>
<link wikidata="Q544015" start="4153" end="4174" title="Praefectus urbi" label="Urban Prefect of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q154668" start="4492" end="4501" title="Patrician (ancient Rome)" label="Patrician"/>
<link wikidata="Q130614" start="4506" end="4513" title="Roman Senator" label="Senator"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4570" end="4579" title="Eparchius (bishop)" label="Eparchius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640132" start="4608" end="4635" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Clermont" label="Bishop of Averna (Clermont)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585244" start="4768" end="4787" title="Tonantius Ferreolus (prefect)" label="Tonantius Ferreolus"/>
<link wikidata="Q170026" start="4848" end="4866" title="Valentinian III" label="Valentinian&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783971" start="5015" end="5019" title="Mass (liturgy)" label="Mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q586744" start="5043" end="5055" title="sacramentary" label="sacramentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q23693" start="5585" end="5594" title="Visigoths" label="Visigoths"/>
<link wikidata="Q217620" start="5606" end="5611" title="Euric" label="Euric"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429397" start="5645" end="5657" title="Ancient Carthage" label="Carthaginian"/>
<link wikidata="Q58477" start="5669" end="5674" title="Capua" label="Capua"/>
<link wikidata="Q6271" start="5686" end="5702" title="Second Punic War" label="Second Punic War"/>
<link wikidata="Q36456" start="5733" end="5741" title="Hannibal" label="Hannibal"/>
<link wikidata="Q83922" start="6116" end="6124" title="Arianism" label="Arianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="6130" end="6141" title="Catholicism" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q918230" start="7080" end="7085" title="Roman villa" label="villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q641203" start="7528" end="7537" title="Aremorica" label="Aremorica"/>
<link wikidata="Q43482" start="7778" end="7784" title="Franks" label="Franks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411309" start="7846" end="7854" title="Ruricius" label="Ruricius"/>
<link wikidata="Q45656" start="7858" end="7865" title="Limoges" label="Limoges"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136880" start="7894" end="7902" title="Auvergne (province)" label="Auvergne"/>
<link wikidata="Q851504" start="7910" end="7927" title="Battle of Vouille" label="Battle of Vouille"/>
<link wikidata="Q233461" start="8135" end="8146" title="Theuderic I" label="Theuderic I"/>
<link wikidata="Q212852" start="8178" end="8190" title="Childebert I" label="Childebert I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499591" start="8455" end="8471" title="occasional verse" label="occasional verse"/>
<link wikidata="Q591055" start="8489" end="8498" title="panegyric" label="panegyric"/>
<link wikidata="Q243203" start="8602" end="8609" title="Statius" label="Statius"/>
<link wikidata="Q234593" start="8611" end="8619" title="Ausonius" label="Ausonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q205947" start="8624" end="8632" title="Claudian" label="Claudian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483342" start="8704" end="8717" title="mirror of princes" label="crisis mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419" start="9057" end="9066" title="Vespasian" label="Vespasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425" start="9081" end="9087" title="Trajan" label="Trajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q189329" start="9246" end="9258" title="liberal arts" label="liberal arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323450" start="9339" end="9348" title="ecphrasis" label="ecphrasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764124" start="9370" end="9391" title="Third Mithridatic War" label="Third Mithridatic War"/>
<link wikidata="Q37340" start="9563" end="9569" title="Apollo" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q715376" start="9619" end="9628" title="Aquitania" label="Aquitania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585244" start="10122" end="10141" title="Tonantius Ferreolus (prefect)" label="Tonantius Ferreolus"/>
<link wikidata="Q782074" start="10460" end="10479" title="Claudianus Mamertus" label="Claudianus Mamertus"/>
<link wikidata="Q96623501" start="10630" end="10643" title="W.B. Anderson" label="W.B. Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285301" start="10773" end="10789" title="Sigrid Mratschek" label="Sigrid Mratschek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993117" start="10944" end="10951" title="exempla" label="exempla"/>
<link wikidata="Q168707" start="11998" end="12015" title="Pliny the Younger" label="Pliny the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1380278" start="12503" end="12512" title="Riothamus" label="Riothamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q45792" start="12688" end="12699" title="King Arthur" label="King Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q645948" start="12825" end="12847" title="Loeb Classical Library" label="Loeb Classical Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q234593" start="13510" end="13518" title="Ausonius" label="Ausonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q275456" start="13642" end="13652" title="stemmatics" label="stemmatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q316880" start="13781" end="13810" title="Monumenta Germaniae Historica" label="Monumenta Germaniae Historica"/>
<link wikidata="Q316880" start="15239" end="15268" title="Monumenta Germaniae Historica" label="Monumenta Germaniae Historica"/>
<link wikidata="Q5616240" start="15331" end="15343" title="Ormonde Maddock Dalton" label="O. M. Dalton"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="144709" wikidata="Q981851" url="?curid=144709" title="Harry Clarke">
<text>Henry Patrick Clarke (17 March 1889 – 6 January 1931) was an Irish stained-glass artist and book illustrator. Born in Dublin, he was a leading figure in the Irish Arts and Crafts Movement.

His work was influenced by both the Art Nouveau and Art Deco movements. His stained glass was particularly informed by the French Symbolist movement.

==Early life==
Henry Patrick Clarke was born on 17 March 1889, the younger son and third child of Joshua Clarke and Brigid (née MacGonigal) Clarke. Joshua Clarke was a church decorator who moved to Dublin from Leeds in 1877 and started a decorating business, Joshua Clarke &amp; Sons, which later incorporated a stained glass division. Through his work with his father, Clarke was exposed to many schools of art but Art Nouveau in particular.

Clarke was educated at the Model School in Marlborough Street, Dublin and Belvedere College, which he left in 1905. He was devastated by the death of his mother in 1903 when he was only 14 years old. Clarke was then apprenticed into his father&#x27;s studio and attended evening classes in the Metropolitan College of Art and Design. His &quot;The Consecration of St Mel, Bishop of Longford, by St Patrick&quot; won the gold medal for stained glass work in the 1910 Board of Education National Competition. He won the Gold Medal for stained glass at the 1911, 1912, and 1913 South Kensington National Competitions. He also exhibited at the 1912 International Art Congress in Dresden, Germany, and the 1914 at the Louvre in Paris.

At the art school in Dublin, Clarke met fellow artist and teacher, Margaret Crilley. They married on 31 October 1914 and moved into a flat at 33 North Frederick Street. In subsequent years the Clarkes lived in various locations in Dublin, including a semi-detached house in Cabra in which Margaret Clarke painted her husband at work. The Clarkes had three children, Michael, David, and Ann.

==Career==
===Book illustration===
Clarke briefly moved to London to seek work as a book illustrator. Picked up by London publisher Harrap, he started with two commissions which were never completed: Samuel Taylor Coleridge&#x27;s &quot;The Rime of the Ancient Mariner&quot; (much of his work on which was destroyed during the 1916 Easter Rising in Dublin) and an illustrated edition of Alexander Pope&#x27;s &quot;The Rape of the Lock&quot;.

Clarke was commissioned by the Committee of the Irish National War Memorial in 1919 to illustrate the &quot;Ireland&#x27;s Memorial Records 1914-1918,&quot; a roll of honour for the 49,435 Irish who died during World War I. Illustrations for the 8 volumes were completed in 1922 and published in 1923, and a set is on display in the Irish National War Memorial Gardens. 100 copies of the book were distributed to cathedrals and libraries across Ireland and to other Allied countries. Each page features a large four-sided border of black and white illustrations by Clarke.

Difficulties with these projects made &quot;Fairy Tales by Hans Christian Andersen&quot;, his first printed work, in 1916. It included 16 colour plates and more than 24 halftone illustrations. This was followed by illustrations for an edition of Edgar Allan Poe&#x27;s &quot;Tales of Mystery and Imagination&quot;: the first version of that title was restricted to halftone illustrations, while a second with eight colour plates and more than 24 halftone images was published in 1923.

This 1923 edition made his reputation as a book illustrator, during the golden age of gift-book illustration in the first quarter of the twentieth century. It was followed by editions of &quot;The Years at the Spring&quot;, with 12 colour plates and more than 14 monotone images; (Lettice D&#x27;Oyly Walters, ed., 1920), Charles Perrault&#x27;s &quot;Fairy Tales of Perrault&quot;, and Goethe&#x27;s Faust, with eight colour plates and more than 70 halftone and duotone images (New York: Hartsdale House, 1925). The last of these is his most famous work, prefiguring the imagery of 1960s psychedelia. Two of his most sought-after titles are promotional booklets for Jameson Irish Whiskey: &quot;A History of a Great House&quot; (1924, and subsequent reprints) and &quot;Elixir of Life&quot; (1925), which was written by Geofrey Warren. His final book, &quot;Selected Poems of Algernon Charles Swinburne&quot;, was published in 1928.

===Stained glass===

Clarke produced more than 130 windows; he and his brother Walter had taken over his father&#x27;s studio after his death in 1921. His glass is distinguished by the finesse of its drawing and his use of rich colours, and innovative integration of the window leading as part of the overall design, originally inspired by an early visit to see the stained glass of the Cathedral of Chartres. He was especially fond of deep blues. Clarke&#x27;s use of heavy lines in his black-and-white book illustrations echoes his glass techniques.

Clarke&#x27;s stained glass work includes many religious windows, but also much secular stained glass. Highlights of the former include his first and finest work - the 11 windows of the Honan Chapel in University College Cork; of the latter, a window illustrating John Keats&#x27; &quot;The Eve of St. Agnes&quot; (now in the Hugh Lane Municipal Gallery in Dublin) and the &quot;Geneva Window&quot;, created for the Centre William Rappard in Geneva, Switzerland (now in the Wolfsonian Museum, Miami, Florida, US). Perhaps his most seen works were the windows he made for Bewley&#x27;s Café on Dublin&#x27;s Grafton Street, which were subject to court proceedings in 2022 in a dispute between landlord and tenant over ownership, as &quot;RGRE v Bewley&#x27;s&quot;.

==Later years and death==
Both Harry and his brother Walter were plagued with ill health, in particular problems with their lungs. Clarke was diagnosed with tuberculosis in 1929, and went to a sanatorium in Davos, Switzerland. Fearing that he would die abroad, he began his journey back to Dublin in 1931, but died on 6 January 1931 in Chur where he was buried. A headstone was erected, but local law required that the family pledge to maintain the grave 15 years after the death. This was not explained to the Clarke family and Harry Clarke&#x27;s remains were disinterred in 1946 and reburied in a communal grave.

==Legacy==
In 2019 a bridge in Cabra, Dublin, was renamed &quot;Harry Clarke Bridge&quot; in his honour.

==Gallery==
===Stained glass===
===Illustrations===
== Works ==

=== As illustrator ===
* Andersen, H. C. — &quot;The Fairy Tales of Hans Christian Andersen&quot;, George Harrap, London, 1916
* Poe, E. A. — &quot;Tales of Mystery and Imagination&quot;, George Harrap, London, 1919
* Walters, L. d&#x27;O. — &quot;The Year&#x27;s at the Spring&quot;, George Harrap, London, 1920 &quot;The Year&#x27;s at the Spring&quot; via HathiTrust
* Perrault, C. — &quot;The Fairy Tales of Charles Perrault&quot;, George Harrap, London, 1922
* _____ &quot;Ireland&#x27;s Memorial Records 1914–1918,&quot; Maunsel and Roberts, Dublin, 1923 Volume Five via Trinity College Dublin
* Warren, G. C. — &quot;The History of a Great House,&quot; John Jameson &amp; Son, Dublin, 1924
* Warren, G. C. — &quot;Elixir of Life {Uisge Beatha}&quot; John Jameson &amp; Son, Dublin, 1925
* Goethe, J. W. von — &quot;Faust&quot;, George Harrap, London, 1925
* Swinburne, A. C. — &quot;Selected Poems of Charles Swinburne, John&quot; Lane, London, 1928

==See also==

* An Túr Gloine, stained glass firm with which Clarke was associated
* &quot;Harry Clarke - Darkness In Light&quot;

==References==
==Further reading==
* Nicola Gordon Bowe. 1994. &quot;The Life and Work of Harry Clarke&quot; (Irish Academic Press)
* Martin Moore Steenson. 2003. &quot;A Bibliographical Checklist of the Work of Harry Clarke&quot; (Books &amp; Things)
* John J Doherty. 2003. &quot;Harry Clarke - Darkness In Light&quot; A film on the life and work of Harry Clarke (Camel Productions)
* Lucy Costigan and Michael Cullen. 2010. &quot;Strangest Genius: The Stained Glass of Harry Clarke&quot; (The History Press Ireland)
* Teehan, Virginia; Heckett, Elizabeth. &quot;The Honan Chapel: A Golden Vision&quot;. Cork: Cork University Press, 2005. 
* Marguerite Helmers, &quot;Harry Clarke’s War: Illustrations for Ireland’s Memorial Records, 1914-1918&quot; (Irish Academic Press, 2015). 
* Angela Griffith, Marguerite Helmers &amp; Róisín Kennedy (Eds), &quot;Harry Clarke and Artistic Visions of the New Irish State&quot; (Irish Academic Press, 2018). 
* Lucy Costigan and Michael Cullen, &quot;Dark Beauty: Hidden Detail in Harry Clarke’s Stained Glass&quot; (Merrion Press 2019). 

== External links ==
* Harry Clarke Stained Glass Site
* Harry Clarke&#x27;s family tree
* 
* Harry Clarke&#x27;s Looking Glass at The Public Domain Review
* Stained Glass Studio Archive at Trinity College Dublin</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q981851" start="0" end="20" title="Harry Clarke" label="Henry Patrick Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473346" start="67" end="80" title="stained glass" label="stained-glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q998555" start="92" end="108" title="book illustration" label="book illustrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="118" end="124" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q330369" start="163" end="187" title="Arts and Crafts Movement" label="Arts and Crafts Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q34636" start="226" end="237" title="Art Nouveau" label="Art Nouveau"/>
<link wikidata="Q173782" start="242" end="250" title="Art Deco" label="Art Deco"/>
<link wikidata="Q164800" start="320" end="329" title="Symbolism (movement)" label="Symbolist"/>
<link wikidata="Q39121" start="551" end="556" title="Leeds" label="Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777738" start="859" end="876" title="Belvedere College" label="Belvedere College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971598" start="1079" end="1117" title="National College of Art and Design" label="Metropolitan College of Art and Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q3854232" start="1149" end="1155" title="Saint Mel" label="St Mel"/>
<link wikidata="Q611644" start="1157" end="1163" title="Bishop (Catholic Church)" label="Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q645623" start="1167" end="1175" title="Longford" label="Longford"/>
<link wikidata="Q165479" start="1180" end="1190" title="Saint Patrick" label="St Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q19675" start="1498" end="1504" title="Louvre" label="Louvre"/>
<link wikidata="Q19875525" start="1583" end="1599" title="Margaret Clarke (artist)" label="Margaret Crilley"/>
<link wikidata="Q130271198" start="1661" end="1683" title="North Frederick Street" label="North Frederick Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101600" start="2040" end="2046" title="Harrap" label="Harrap"/>
<link wikidata="Q82409" start="2108" end="2131" title="Samuel Taylor Coleridge" label="Samuel Taylor Coleridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q708177" start="2145" end="2176" title="The Rime of the Ancient Mariner" label="The Rime of the Ancient Mariner"/>
<link wikidata="Q193689" start="2240" end="2253" title="Easter Rising" label="Easter Rising"/>
<link wikidata="Q164047" start="2295" end="2309" title="Alexander Pope" label="Alexander Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823920" start="2323" end="2343" title="The Rape of the Lock" label="The Rape of the Lock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071033" start="2460" end="2501" title="Ireland&amp;#x27;s Memorial Records 1914-1918" label="Ireland&amp;#x27;s Memorial Records 1914-1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2563" end="2574" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071033" start="2685" end="2720" title="Irish National War Memorial Gardens" label="Irish National War Memorial Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5673" start="2985" end="3008" title="Hans Christian Andersen" label="Hans Christian Andersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110021" start="3095" end="3103" title="halftone" label="halftone"/>
<link wikidata="Q16867" start="3172" end="3187" title="Edgar Allan Poe" label="Edgar Allan Poe"/>
<link wikidata="Q18910806" start="3693" end="3720" title="Lettice D&amp;#x27;Oyly Walters" label="Lettice D&amp;#x27;Oyly Walters"/>
<link wikidata="Q128460" start="3734" end="3750" title="Charles Perrault" label="Charles Perrault"/>
<link wikidata="Q29478" start="3799" end="3818" title="Goethe&amp;#x27;s Faust" label="Goethe&amp;#x27;s Faust"/>
<link wikidata="Q523425" start="3875" end="3882" title="duotone" label="duotone"/>
<link wikidata="Q666011" start="4001" end="4012" title="psychedelia" label="psychedelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2482" start="4079" end="4100" title="Jameson Irish Whiskey" label="Jameson Irish Whiskey"/>
<link wikidata="Q315511" start="4289" end="4315" title="Algernon Charles Swinburne" label="Algernon Charles Swinburne"/>
<link wikidata="Q180274" start="4734" end="4755" title="Cathedral of Chartres" label="Cathedral of Chartres"/>
<link wikidata="Q5892033" start="5086" end="5098" title="Honan Chapel" label="Honan Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574185" start="5102" end="5125" title="University College Cork" label="University College Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q82083" start="5164" end="5174" title="John Keats" label="John Keats"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732639" start="5187" end="5207" title="The Eve of St. Agnes" label="The Eve of St. Agnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q496040" start="5226" end="5253" title="Hugh Lane Municipal Gallery" label="Hugh Lane Municipal Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q131904638" start="5279" end="5292" title="Geneva Window" label="Geneva Window"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944897" start="5316" end="5338" title="Centre William Rappard" label="Centre William Rappard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2178180" start="5374" end="5391" title="Wolfsonian-FIU" label="Wolfsonian Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900422" start="5471" end="5489" title="Bewley&amp;#x27;s" label="Bewley&amp;#x27;s Café"/>
<link wikidata="Q135501" start="5507" end="5521" title="Grafton Street, Dublin" label="Grafton Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q115804882" start="5637" end="5657" title="RGRE v Bewley&amp;#x27;s" label="RGRE v Bewley&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="5823" end="5835" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q68097" start="5873" end="5878" title="Davos" label="Davos"/>
<link wikidata="Q69007" start="6002" end="6006" title="Chur" label="Chur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088319" start="6314" end="6327" title="Cabra, Dublin" label="Cabra, Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5673" start="6479" end="6494" title="Hans Christian Andersen" label="Andersen, H. C."/>
<link wikidata="Q16867" start="6583" end="6593" title="Edgar Allan Poe" label="Poe, E. A."/>
<link wikidata="Q18910806" start="6672" end="6693" title="Lettice D&amp;#x27;Oyly Walters" label="Walters, L. d&amp;#x27;O."/>
<link wikidata="Q128460" start="6826" end="6838" title="Charles Perrault" label="Perrault, C."/>
<link wikidata="Q5879" start="7250" end="7267" title="Johann Wolfgang von Goethe" label="Goethe, J. W. von"/>
<link wikidata="Q315511" start="7319" end="7335" title="Algernon Charles Swinburne" label="Swinburne, A. C."/>
<link wikidata="Q4750238" start="7428" end="7441" title="An Túr Gloine" label="An Túr Gloine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5667940" start="7503" end="7535" title="Harry Clarke - Darkness In Light" label="Harry Clarke - Darkness In Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q5667940" start="7825" end="7857" title="Harry Clarke - Darkness In Light" label="Harry Clarke - Darkness In Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q90720980" start="8064" end="8080" title="Virginia Teehan" label="Teehan, Virginia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="144713" wikidata="Q865943" url="?curid=144713" title="Domingo Ugartechea">
<text>Domingo de Ugartechea (c. 1794 – 24 May 1839) was a 19th-century Mexican Army officer for the Republic of Mexico.

==Biography==

===Early years===

Domingo de Ugartechea served for José Joaquín de Arredondo in 1813. Ugartechea as well as Antonio López de Santa Anna were cadets during the suppression of the Gutiérrez–Magee Expedition, and at the Battle of Medina.

In June 1832, Ugartechea commanded 125 men at the fort at Velasco, Texas; he attempted to employ his artillery to prevent rebelling Texas colonists under John Austin from taking cannon from Brazoria to Anahuac at the time of the Anahuac disturbances. Although defeated by the Texans in the eleven-hour Battle of Velasco, Ugartechea was permitted to evacuate the fort.

In 1835 Ugartechea was military commandant of Coahuila and Texas in command of the forces at Presidio San Antonio de Béxar, all the while struggling with deficiencies in funding, supplies, and manpower. Although 200 men appeared on his rolls, only half that number were in active service. His observations from this position in the spring of that year contributed to the hardening of attitudes in Mexico concerning Anglo-American abuse of land policies and of native Tejanos in the departments of Nacogdoches and Bexar. He also considered the Texans to be disrespectful toward the government and its leaders, writing in one letter: &quot;Nothing is heard but God damn St. Anna. God damn Ugartechea.&quot;

In mid-May 1835 Ugartechea worked through the political authorities to avoid armed conflict with the militiamen under Juan N. Seguín, who departed from the town of Bexar toward Monclova, Coahuila, to aid federalist Governor Agustín Viesca. Only last-minute concessions from political chief José Ángel Navarro prevented a clash between the militia and Ugartechea&#x27;s soldiers. Subsequently, Ugartechea received and passed on to Mexico many reports that the spirit of conciliation was growing in the summer of 1835 and that the greatest threat to a consensus favoring peace would be to bring more troops from Mexico to Texas. However, at the end of July Ugartechea expressed his opinion to his superior, Martín Perfecto de Cos, that reinforcements were still quite necessary. In this way Ugartechea both reflected and furthered the hardening of attitudes that brought about war.

In dealing with the people of Texas, Ugartechea continued to issue reassurances about the potential for peace if his arrest orders were carried out. Those whom he ordered the Texas authorities to detain and hold included representatives to the Coahuila legislature, leaders of the Anahuac expedition or rebellion of June 1835, and other opponents of centralism such as Lorenzo de Zavala. During the course of the summer the units under his command grew to nearly 500 men, including about 200 cavalry on active duty. In September, reports circulated that Ugartechea intended to execute these arrests himself. Indeed, it was under his orders that Lt. Francisco de Castañeda went to Gonzales, Texas, to secure a cannon from the hands of the Texans, leading to the battle on October 2 that initiated hostilities in the Texas Revolution. Ugartechea then urged peace but warned the Texans to surrender their arms or face a renewed advance from San Antonio.

===Siege of San Antonio===

During the siege of Béxar, Stephen F. Austin conducted the Texan forces from the outskirts of the town, while Ugartechea at first remained with the Mexican forces in town. A unit of his cavalry engaged in reconnoitering around Cibolo Creek in mid-October. He then led a body of 275 infantry with two cannons from the town on the morning of October 28, precipitating the Battle of Concepción. Colonel Ugartechea commanded a unit of cavalry that slipped through the siege forces on November 12 and made its way in about ten days to the Rio Grande (Río Bravo) to seek reinforcements. On November 26 he guided a force of 454 conscripts and 173 veteran troops from Laredo to relieve the centralist army under Cos at Bexar. Their arrival on December 8, actually increased the burden of supply on the centralist army and helped to precipitate its surrender on December 9, to the Texans.

===Texas Revolution===
Ugartechea returned to Laredo with Cos&#x27;s forces. He came back to Texas with the Mexican army in 1836. In late March Ugartechea received command of the inexperienced troops left in reserve at Copano, Victoria, and Goliad, making his headquarters in the latter place, and having responsibility for reconstructing shelter for the garrison and activating fortifications. Following the Mexican retreat after the Battle of San Jacinto, Ugartechea went to Matamoros, Tamaulipas, where he reportedly helped initiate the policy of persuading Native Americans to make war against the people of Texas. He continued to support the centralist cause, helping defeat a federalist uprising at Saltillo, Coahuila, from his post in Monterrey, Nuevo León, in February 1839. He was killed in defense of Saltillo on May 24, 1839.

==References==
* . Accessed June 1, 2005.

==Further reading==
* Hubert Howe Bancroft; &quot;History of the North Mexican States and Texas (2 vols&quot;., San Francisco: History Company, 1886, 1889).
* Paul D. Lack, &quot;The Texas Revolutionary Experience: A Political and Social History&quot; (College Station: Texas A&amp;M University Press, 1992).
* Jeff Long, &quot;Duel of Eagles: The Mexican and U.S. Fight for the Alamo&quot; (New York: Morrow, 1990).</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q865943" start="0" end="21" title="Domingo Ugartechea" label="Domingo de Ugartechea"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="65" end="72" title="Mexico" label="Mexican"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047699" start="73" end="77" title="Military of Mexico" label="Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q6292603" start="182" end="207" title="José Joaquín de Arredondo" label="José Joaquín de Arredondo"/>
<link wikidata="Q189145" start="239" end="266" title="Antonio López de Santa Anna" label="Antonio López de Santa Anna"/>
<link wikidata="Q5621813" start="309" end="335" title="Gutiérrez–Magee Expedition" label="Gutiérrez–Magee Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2889307" start="348" end="364" title="Battle of Medina" label="Battle of Medina"/>
<link wikidata="Q838916" start="425" end="439" title="Velasco, Texas" label="Velasco, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638640" start="669" end="686" title="Battle of Velasco" label="Battle of Velasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q18150345" start="725" end="733" title="Fort Velasco" label="the fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q949898" start="782" end="800" title="Coahuila and Texas" label="Coahuila and Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241535" start="829" end="858" title="Presidio San Antonio de Béxar" label="Presidio San Antonio de Béxar"/>
<link wikidata="Q189145" start="1404" end="1412" title="Antonio López de Santa Anna" label="St. Anna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2011803" start="1560" end="1574" title="Juan N. Seguín" label="Juan N. Seguín"/>
<link wikidata="Q990007" start="1619" end="1637" title="Monclova, Coahuila" label="Monclova, Coahuila"/>
<link wikidata="Q4694708" start="1666" end="1680" title="Agustín Viesca" label="Agustín Viesca"/>
<link wikidata="Q8076869" start="1732" end="1750" title="José Ángel Navarro (elder)" label="José Ángel Navarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186940" start="2147" end="2169" title="Martín Perfecto de Cos" label="Martín Perfecto de Cos"/>
<link wikidata="Q53079" start="2567" end="2575" title="Coahuila" label="Coahuila"/>
<link wikidata="Q970690" start="2692" end="2709" title="Lorenzo de Zavala" label="Lorenzo de Zavala"/>
<link wikidata="Q5484118" start="2972" end="2994" title="Francisco de Castañeda" label="Francisco de Castañeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q765552" start="3003" end="3018" title="Gonzales, Texas" label="Gonzales, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191854" start="3084" end="3090" title="Battle of Gonzales" label="battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q638530" start="3138" end="3154" title="Texas Revolution" label="Texas Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722368" start="3314" end="3328" title="siege of Béxar" label="siege of Béxar"/>
<link wikidata="Q250040" start="3330" end="3347" title="Stephen F. Austin" label="Stephen F. Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q665515" start="3530" end="3542" title="Cibolo Creek" label="Cibolo Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315700" start="3673" end="3693" title="Battle of Concepción" label="Battle of Concepción"/>
<link wikidata="Q160636" start="3837" end="3859" title="Rio Grande" label="Rio Grande (Río Bravo)"/>
<link wikidata="Q841278" start="4619" end="4640" title="Battle of San Jacinto" label="Battle of San Jacinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q738353" start="4661" end="4682" title="Matamoros, Tamaulipas" label="Matamoros, Tamaulipas"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="4745" end="4761" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q53077" start="4889" end="4907" title="Saltillo, Coahuila" label="Saltillo, Coahuila"/>
<link wikidata="Q81033" start="4926" end="4947" title="Monterrey, Nuevo León" label="Monterrey, Nuevo León"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="144714" wikidata="Q1186940" url="?curid=144714" title="Martín Perfecto de Cos">
<text>Martín Perfecto de Cos (1800–1 October 1854) was a general for the Mexican army and a politician during the mid-19th century. Born in Veracruz, the son of an attorney, he became an army cadet at the age of 20, a Lieutenant in 1821, and a Brigadier General in 1833.

Cos is perhaps best known as a commander of Mexican forces during the Texas Revolution in the 1830s. In September 1835, he was sent by President-General Antonio López de Santa Anna to investigate the refusal of Texians to pay duties during the Anahuac Disturbances. General Cos dispersed the legislature of Coahuila y Tejas, then in session at Monclova, landed 300 men at Matagorda Bay, established a headquarters in San Antonio, and declared his intention of ending Anglo-American resistance in Texas. He attempted to arrest several Texian critics of Santa Anna, but his demands were resisted; a force of Texians under Stephen F. Austin and Edward Burleson held the Mexican troops for two months in the siege of Béxar until Cos surrendered after an attack led by Benjamin R. Milam in December 1835. Cos and his men were released on their pledge not to oppose further the Constitution of 1824, which Santa Anna had recently repealed.

Texans believed this pledge was broken when Cos returned in the spring of 1836 to command a column in the attack on the Alamo. On April 21, 1836, he reached San Jacinto with reinforcements and crossed Vince&#x27;s Bridge just before the Texians destroyed it. He was taken prisoner by Sam Houston in the general surrender and later released, after which he returned to Mexico. Cos later commanded a post at Tuxpan during the Mexican–American War. He died in Minatitlán, Veracruz, in 1854, while serving as commandant general and political chief of the Tehuantepec territory.

==Family==

It is generally accepted that Martín Perfecto de Cos was a relative of Antonio López de Santa Anna, and most accounts refer to him as a brother-in-law. &quot;The Encyclopedia of the Mexican American War&quot; states that he was married to Lucinda López de Santa Anna, the general&#x27;s sister. Some early Texas accounts also credit him as being either a cousin or nephew of Santa Anna.

==Military career==
When the Mexican government moved away from a new local-level federalist political ideology to create a centralist authoritarian government under Santa Anna, Martín Perfecto de Cos became military commander of the Mexican state of Coahuila y Tejas in 1833. He initially was headquartered in Saltillo. San Antonio had always governed its own affairs and its citizens, increasingly ethnic Anglo-Americans with closer ties to the emerging United States, resented Cos being given power over them. As tensions between Mexico City and Mexican Texas increased, Cos headed north to put down the rebellion. 

Cos arrived in Texas by sea at the port of Copano on September 20, 1835, with 500 soldiers and proceeded to the town of Goliad on October 1, where he ordered the arrest of rebel leaders and garrisoned his men inside the nearby Presidio La Bahía. Even before his arrival, a group of Texians had plotted to kidnap Cos at either Copano or Goliad, but a rebellion committee rejected the idea. The Texas Revolution began in earnest with the Battle of Gonzales on October 2, and upon learning of the Texian victory, Cos hurried to San Antonio de Béxar, leaving with the bulk of his men on October 5. Texians assaulted the Presidio La Bahía at the Battle of Goliad on October 10, only to learn that Cos had already left.

Once he was in San Antonio, the town and Cos&#x27; men were besieged by the Texian Army under the leadership of Stephen F. Austin. After a 56-day siege of the town and the Alamo Mission, on December 9, Cos surrendered San Antonio de Béxar and its weapons to the Texians, then proceeded to retreat back across the Rio Grande. Cos and his men were allowed to keep their muskets for protection, as well as one four-pound cannon. Mexican losses during the siege were about 150. On his way south, Cos met up with Santa Anna&#x27;s forces at Laredo, who were marching north to put down the rebellion.

In February 1836, Cos returned to San Antonio with Santa Anna and led a column of 300 soldiers in the siege of the Alamo. His men assaulted the northwest corner of the mission on March 6, eventually overrunning the north wall. On April 21, Cos arrived with over 500 reinforcements for Santa Anna shortly before the Battle of San Jacinto. That afternoon Texian forces led by General Sam Houston decisively defeated Santa Anna&#x27;s army in a battle which lasted only eighteen minutes. Cos and Santa Anna both escaped during the battle; Santa Anna was captured the next day, on April 22, and Cos was captured on April 24. General Santa Anna subsequently surrendered his army and eventually all Mexican claims to Texas, ending the Texas Revolution.

===Mexican–American War===

Following the Texas Revolution, Martín Perfecto de Cos remained in the Mexican Army and was given command of an army outpost in Tuxpan, where he served during the Mexican–American War and afterwards, until his death in 1854.

==Film depictions==

Among the depictions of Martín Perfecto de Cos on film is that of the Mexico City-born actor Rodolfo Hoyos Jr., in the 1956 picture &quot;The First Texan&quot;, about the rise of Sam Houston in Texas. In the film, Cos orders the arrest of William B. Travis and directs his Mexican soldiers to scale the walls of The Alamo.

In the 2004 film &quot;The Alamo&quot;, General Martín Perfecto de Cos is portrayed by Francisco Philibert.

==References==

==Bibliography==
*
*
*
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1186940" start="0" end="22" title="Martín Perfecto de Cos" label="Martín Perfecto de Cos"/>
<link wikidata="Q60130" start="134" end="142" title="Veracruz" label="Veracruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q638530" start="336" end="352" title="Texas Revolution" label="Texas Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q189145" start="419" end="446" title="Antonio López de Santa Anna" label="Antonio López de Santa Anna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049712" start="477" end="483" title="Texian" label="Texian"/>
<link wikidata="Q865948" start="510" end="530" title="Anahuac Disturbances" label="Anahuac Disturbances"/>
<link wikidata="Q949898" start="573" end="589" title="Coahuila y Tejas" label="Coahuila y Tejas"/>
<link wikidata="Q990007" start="610" end="618" title="Monclova" label="Monclova"/>
<link wikidata="Q1600098" start="638" end="651" title="Matagorda Bay" label="Matagorda Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="683" end="694" title="San Antonio, Texas" label="San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q250040" start="886" end="903" title="Stephen F. Austin" label="Stephen F. Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135672" start="908" end="923" title="Edward Burleson" label="Edward Burleson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722368" start="970" end="984" title="siege of Béxar" label="siege of Béxar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4889027" start="1030" end="1047" title="Ben Milam" label="Benjamin R. Milam"/>
<link wikidata="Q771159" start="1138" end="1158" title="Mexican Constitution of 1824" label="Constitution of 1824"/>
<link wikidata="Q235344" start="1307" end="1326" title="Battle of the Alamo" label="attack on the Alamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q841278" start="1358" end="1369" title="Battle of San Jacinto" label="San Jacinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q216547" start="1485" end="1496" title="Sam Houston" label="Sam Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q6154758" start="1607" end="1613" title="Tuxpan" label="Tuxpan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="1625" end="1645" title="Mexican–American War" label="Mexican–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q991006" start="1658" end="1678" title="Minatitlán, Veracruz" label="Minatitlán, Veracruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q629479" start="1752" end="1763" title="Tehuantepec" label="Tehuantepec"/>
<link wikidata="Q189145" start="1859" end="1886" title="Antonio López de Santa Anna" label="Antonio López de Santa Anna"/>
<link wikidata="Q204886" start="2258" end="2268" title="federalism" label="federalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q190632" start="2300" end="2310" title="centralist" label="centralist"/>
<link wikidata="Q949898" start="2427" end="2443" title="Coahuila y Tejas" label="Coahuila y Tejas"/>
<link wikidata="Q53077" start="2487" end="2495" title="Saltillo" label="Saltillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="2709" end="2720" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315810" start="2725" end="2738" title="Mexican Texas" label="Mexican Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5168312" start="2839" end="2845" title="Copano, Texas" label="Copano"/>
<link wikidata="Q982494" start="2916" end="2922" title="Goliad, Texas" label="Goliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241532" start="3023" end="3040" title="Presidio La Bahía" label="Presidio La Bahía"/>
<link wikidata="Q638530" start="3189" end="3205" title="Texas Revolution" label="Texas Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191854" start="3232" end="3250" title="Battle of Gonzales" label="Battle of Gonzales"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="3321" end="3341" title="San Antonio, Texas" label="San Antonio de Béxar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574486" start="3437" end="3453" title="Battle of Goliad" label="Battle of Goliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722368" start="3571" end="3579" title="Siege of Béxar" label="besieged"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708336" start="3587" end="3598" title="Texian Army" label="Texian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q250040" start="3623" end="3640" title="Stephen F. Austin" label="Stephen F. Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636724" start="3683" end="3696" title="Alamo Mission in San Antonio" label="Alamo Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="3729" end="3749" title="San Antonio de Béxar" label="San Antonio de Béxar"/>
<link wikidata="Q160636" start="3824" end="3834" title="Rio Grande" label="Rio Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q81103" start="3929" end="3935" title="cannon" label="cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q189145" start="4019" end="4029" title="Antonio López de Santa Anna" label="Santa Anna"/>
<link wikidata="Q16868" start="4047" end="4053" title="Laredo, Texas" label="Laredo"/>
<link wikidata="Q235344" start="4209" end="4227" title="Battle of the Alamo" label="siege of the Alamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q841278" start="4422" end="4443" title="Battle of San Jacinto" label="Battle of San Jacinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q6154758" start="5011" end="5017" title="Tuxpan" label="Tuxpan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="5046" end="5066" title="Mexican–American War" label="Mexican–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q16010389" start="5223" end="5240" title="Rodolfo Hoyos Jr." label="Rodolfo Hoyos Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q7734205" start="5268" end="5283" title="The First Texan" label="The First Texan"/>
<link wikidata="Q216547" start="5309" end="5320" title="Sam Houston" label="Sam Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q711818" start="5369" end="5386" title="William B. Travis" label="William B. Travis"/>
<link wikidata="Q626745" start="5477" end="5486" title="The Alamo (2004 film)" label="The Alamo"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="144716" wikidata="Q334113" url="?curid=144716" title="SAT">
<text>The SAT ( ) is a standardized test widely used for college admissions in the United States. Since its debut in 1926, its name and scoring have changed several times. For much of its history, it was called the Scholastic Aptitude Test and had two components, Verbal and Mathematical, each of which was scored on a range from 200 to 800. Later it was called the Scholastic Assessment Test, then the SAT I: Reasoning Test, then the SAT Reasoning Test, then simply the SAT.

The SAT is wholly owned, developed, and published by the College Board and is administered by the Educational Testing Service. The test is intended to assess students&#x27; readiness for college. Historically, starting around 1937, the tests offered under the SAT banner also included optional subject-specific SAT Subject Tests, which were called SAT Achievement Tests until 1993 and then were called SAT II: Subject Tests until 2005; these were discontinued after June 2021. Originally designed not to be aligned with high school curricula, several adjustments were made for the version of the SAT introduced in 2016. College Board president David Coleman added that he wanted to make the test reflect more closely what students learn in high school with the new Common Core standards.

Many students prepare for the SAT using books, classes, online courses, and tutoring, which are offered by a variety of companies and organizations. In the past, the test was taken using paper forms. Starting in March 2023 for international test-takers and March 2024 for those within the U.S., the testing is administered using a computer program called Bluebook. The test was also made adaptive, customizing the questions that are presented to the student based on how they perform on questions asked earlier in the test, and shortened from three hours to two hours and 14 minutes.

While a considerable amount of research has been done on the SAT, many questions and misconceptions remain. Outside of college admissions, the SAT is also used by researchers studying human intelligence in general and intellectual precociousness in particular, and by some employers in the recruitment process.

== Function ==
The SAT is typically taken by high school juniors and seniors. The College Board states that the SAT is intended to measure literacy, numeracy and writing skills that are needed for academic success in college. They state that the SAT assesses how well the test-takers analyze and solve problems—skills they learned in school that they will need in college.

The College Board also claims that the SAT, in combination with high school grade point average (GPA), provides a better indicator of success in college than high school grades alone, as measured by college freshman GPA. Various studies conducted over the lifetime of the SAT show a statistically significant increase in correlation of high school grades and college freshman grades when the SAT is factored in. The predictive validity and powers of the SAT are topics of research in psychometrics.

The SAT is a norm-referenced test intended to yield scores that follow a bell curve distribution among test-takers. To achieve this distribution, test designers include challenging multiple-choice questions with plausible but incorrect options, known as &quot;distractors&quot;, exclude questions that a majority of students answer correctly, and impose tight time constraints during the examination.

There are substantial differences in funding, curricula, grading, and difficulty among U.S. secondary schools due to U.S. federalism, local control, and the prevalence of private, distance, and home schooled students. SAT (and ACT) scores are intended to supplement the secondary school record and help admission officers put local data—such as course work, grades, and class rank—in a national perspective.

Historically, the SAT was more widely used by students living in coastal states and the ACT was more widely used by students in the Midwest and South; in recent years, however, an increasing number of students on the East and West coasts have been taking the ACT. Since 2007, all four-year colleges and universities in the United States that require a test as part of an application for admission will accept either the SAT or ACT, and as of Fall 2022, more than 1400 four-year colleges and universities did not require any standardized test scores at all for admission, though some of them were planning to apply this policy only temporarily due to the coronavirus pandemic.

SAT test-takers are given two hours and 14 minutes to complete the test (plus a 10-minute break between the Reading and Writing section and the Math section), and the test costs US$60.00, plus additional fees for late test registration, registration by phone, registration changes, rapid delivery of results, delivery of results to more than four institutions, result deliveries ordered more than nine days after the test, and testing administered outside the United States, as applicable, and fee waivers are offered to low-income students within the U.S. and its territories. Scores on the SAT range from 400 to 1600, combining test results from two 200-to-800-point sections: the Mathematics section and the Evidence-Based Reading and Writing section. Although taking the SAT, or its competitor the ACT, is required for freshman entry to many colleges and universities in the United States, during the late 2010s, many institutions made these entrance exams optional, but this did not stop the students from attempting to achieve high scores as they and their parents are skeptical of what &quot;optional&quot; means in this context. In fact, the test-taking population was increasing steadily. And while this may have resulted in a long-term decline in scores, experts cautioned against using this to gauge the scholastic levels of the entire U.S. population.

==Structure==
The SAT has two main sections, namely Evidence-Based Reading and Writing (EBRW, normally known as the &quot;English&quot; portion of the test) and the Math section. These are both further broken down into four sections: Reading, Writing and Language, Math (no calculator), and Math (calculator allowed). Until the summer of 2021, the test taker was also optionally able to write an essay which, in that case, is the fifth test section. (The essay was dropped after June 2021, except in a few states and school districts.) The total time for the scored portion of the SAT is two hours and 14 minutes. Some test takers who are not taking the essay may also have a fifth section, which is used, at least in part, for the pretesting of questions that may appear on future administrations of the SAT. (These questions are not included in the computation of the SAT score.)

Two section scores result from taking the SAT: Evidence-Based Reading and Writing, and Math. Section scores are reported on a scale of 200 to 800, and each section score is a multiple of ten. A total score for the SAT is calculated by adding the two section scores, resulting in total scores that range from 400 to 1600. In addition to the two section scores, three &quot;test&quot; scores on a scale of 10 to 40 are reported, one for each of Reading, Writing and Language, and Math, with increment of 1 for Reading / Writing and Language, and 0.5 for Math. There are also two cross-test scores that each range from 10 to 40 points: Analysis in History/Social Studies and Analysis in Science. The essay, if taken, was scored separately from the two section scores. Two people score each essay by each awarding 1 to 4 points in each of three categories: Reading, Analysis, and Writing. These two scores from the different examiners are then combined to give a total score from 2 to 8 points per category. Though sometimes people quote their essay score out of 24, the College Board themselves do not combine the different categories to give one essay score, instead giving a score for each category.

There is no penalty or negative marking for guessing on the SAT: scores are based on the number of questions answered correctly. The optional essay was last featured in the June 2021 administration. College Board said it discontinued the essay section because &quot;there are other ways for students to demonstrate their mastery of essay writing,&quot; including the test&#x27;s reading and writing portion. It also acknowledged that the COVID-19 pandemic had played a role in the change, accelerating &#x27;a process already underway&#x27;.

=== Reading Test ===
The Reading Test of the SAT contains one section of 52 questions and a time limit of 65 minutes. All questions are multiple-choice and based on reading passages. Tables, graphs, and charts may accompany some passages, but no math is required to correctly answer the corresponding questions. There are five passages (up to two of which may be a pair of smaller passages) on the Reading Test and ten or eleven questions per passage or passage pair. SAT Reading passages draw from three main fields: history, social studies, and science. Each SAT Reading Test always includes: one passage from U.S. or world literature; one passage from either a U.S. founding document or a related text; one passage about economics, psychology, sociology, or another social science; and, two science passages. Answers to all of the questions are based only on the content stated in or implied by the passage or passage pair.

The Reading Test contributes (with the Writing and Language Test) to two subscores, each ranging from 1 to 15 points:
* Command of Evidence
* Words in Context

=== Writing and Language Test ===

The Writing and Language Test of the SAT is made up of one section with 44 multiple-choice questions and a time limit of 35 minutes. As with the Reading Test, all questions are based on reading passages which may be accompanied by tables, graphs, and charts. The test taker will be asked to read the passages and suggest corrections or improvements for the contents underlined. Reading passages on this test range in content from topic arguments to nonfiction narratives in a variety of subjects. The skills being evaluated include: increasing the clarity of argument; improving word choice; improving analysis of topics in social studies and science; changing sentence or word structure to increase organizational quality and impact of writing; and, fixing or improving sentence structure, word usage, and punctuation.

The Writing and Language Test reports two subscores, each ranging from 1 to 15 points:
* Expression of Ideas
* Standard English Conventions

=== Mathematics ===

The mathematics portion of the SAT is divided into two sections: Math Test – No Calculator and Math Test – Calculator. In total, the SAT math test is 80 minutes long and includes 58 questions: 45 multiple choice questions and 13 grid-in questions. The multiple choice questions have four possible answers; the grid-in questions are free response and require the test taker to provide an answer.
* The Math Test – No Calculator section has 20 questions (15 multiple choice and 5 grid-in) and lasts 25 minutes.
* The Math Test – Calculator section has 38 questions (30 multiple choice and 8 grid-in) and lasts 55 minutes.

Several scores are provided to the test taker for the math test. A subscore (on a scale of 1 to 15) is reported for each of three categories of math content:
* &quot;Heart of Algebra&quot; (linear equations, systems of linear equations, and linear functions)
* &quot;Problem Solving and Data Analysis&quot; (statistics, modeling, and problem-solving skills)
* &quot;Passport to Advanced Math&quot; (non-linear expressions, radicals, exponentials and other topics that form the basis of more advanced math).
A test score for the math test is reported on a scale of 10 to 40, with an increment of 0.5, and a section score (equal to the test score multiplied by 20) is reported on a scale of 200 to 800.

==== Calculator use ====
All scientific and most graphing calculators, including computer algebra system (CAS) calculators, are permitted on the SAT Math – Calculator section only. However, with the change to the Digital SAT during 2023 and 2024, a graphing calculator may be used throughout the entire test and is accessible through the test application program. All four-function calculators are allowed as well; however, these devices are not recommended. Mobile phone and smartphone calculators, calculators with typewriter-like (QWERTY) keyboards, laptops and other portable computers, and calculators capable of accessing the Internet are not permitted.

Research was conducted by the College Board to study the effect of calculator use on SAT I: Reasoning Test math scores. The study found that performance on the math section was associated with the extent of calculator use: those using calculators on about one third to one half of the items averaged higher scores than those using calculators more or less frequently. However, the effect was &quot;more likely to have been the result of able students using calculators differently than less able students rather than calculator use per se.&quot; There is some evidence that the frequent use of a calculator in school outside of the testing situation has a positive effect on test performance compared to those who do not use calculators in school.

=== Style of questions ===
Most of the questions on the SAT, except for the grid-in math responses, are multiple choice; all multiple-choice questions have four answer choices, one of which is correct. Thirteen of the questions on the math portion of the SAT (about 22% of all the math questions) are not multiple choice. They instead require the test taker to bubble in a number in a four-column grid.

All questions on each section of the SAT are weighted equally. For each correct answer, one raw point is added. No points are deducted for incorrect answers. The final score is derived from the raw score; the precise conversion chart varies between test administrations.

== Logistics ==

=== Frequency ===
The SAT is offered seven times a year in the United States: in August, October, November, December, March, May, and June. For international students SAT is offered four times a year: in October, December, March and May (2020 exception: To cover worldwide May cancelation, an additional September exam was introduced, and August was made available to international test-takers as well). The test is typically offered on the first Saturday of the month for the October, November, December, May, and June administrations. The test was taken by 1,973,891 high school graduates in the class of 2024.

Candidates wishing to take the test may register online at the College Board&#x27;s website or by mail at least three weeks before the test date.

There are also SAT School Day tests for students taking the SAT during school. They are offered from March to April and October.

=== Fees ===
As of 2024, the SAT costs US$68.00, plus additional fees if testing outside the United States. The College Board makes fee waivers available for low-income students. Additional fees apply for late registration, standby testing, registration changes, scores by telephone, and extra score reports (beyond the four provided for free).

=== Accommodation for candidates with disabilities ===
Students with verifiable disabilities, including physical and learning disabilities, are eligible to take the SAT with accommodations. The standard time increase for students requiring additional time due to learning disabilities or physical handicaps is time + 50%; time + 100% is also offered.

== Change from paper-based to digital ==
In January 2022, College Board announced that the SAT would change from paper-based to digital (computer-based). International (non-U.S.) testing centers began using the digital format on March 11, 2023. The December 2023 SAT was the last SAT test offered on paper. The switch to the digital format occurred on March 9, 2024, in the U.S. The digital SAT takes about an hour less to do than the paper-based test (two hours vs. three). It is administered in an official test center, as before, but the students use their own testing devices (a portable computer or tablet). If a student cannot bring his or her own device, one can be requested from College Board. Before the test, College Board&#x27;s &quot;Bluebook&quot; app must have been successfully installed on the testing device.

The new test is adaptive, meaning that students have two modules per section (reading/writing and math), with the second module being adaptive to the demonstrated level based on the results from the first module. On the reading and writing sections, the questions will have shorter passages for each question. On the math sections, the word problems will be more concise. Students have a ten-minute break after the first two English modules and before the two math modules. A timer is built into the testing software and will automatically begin once the student finishes the second English module. New tools such as a question flagger, a timer, and an integrated graphing calculator are included in the new test as well.

== Scaled scores and percentiles ==
Students receive their online score reports approximately two to three weeks after test administration (longer for mailed, paper scores). Included in the report is the total score (the sum of the two section scores, with each section graded on a scale of 200–800) and three subscores (in reading, writing, and analysis, each on a scale of 2–8) for the optional essay. Students may also receive, for an additional fee, various score verification services, including (for select test administrations) the Question and Answer Service, which provides the test questions, the student&#x27;s answers, the correct answers, and the type and difficulty of each question.

In addition, students receive two percentile scores, each of which is defined by the College Board as the percentage of students in a comparison group with equal or lower test scores. One of the percentiles, called the &quot;Nationally Representative Sample Percentile&quot;, uses as a comparison group all 11th and 12th graders in the United States, regardless of whether or not they took the SAT. This percentile is theoretical and is derived using methods of statistical inference. The second percentile, called the &quot;SAT User Percentile&quot;, uses actual scores from a comparison group of recent United States students that took the SAT. For example, for the school year 2019–2020, the SAT User Percentile was based on the test scores of students in the graduating classes of 2018 and 2019 who took the SAT (specifically, the 2016 revision) during high school. Students receive both types of percentiles for their total score as well as their section scores.

=== Percentiles for total scores (2022) ===
=== Percentiles for total scores (2006) ===
The following chart summarizes the original percentiles used for the version of the SAT administered in March 2005 through January 2016. These percentiles used students in the graduating class of 2006 as the comparison group.

=== Percentiles for total scores (1984) ===
===Percentiles for verbal and math scores (1969–70)===
The mean verbal score was 461 for students taking the SAT, 383 for the sample of all students.

The mathematical scores for 1969–70 were broken out by gender rather than reported as a whole; the mean math score for boys was 415, for girls 378. The differences for the nationally sampled population for math (not shown in table) were similar to those for the verbal section.

=== Ceilings and trends ===
The version of the SAT administered before April 1995 had a very high ceiling. For example, in the 1985–1986 school year, only 9 students out of 1.7 million test takers obtained a score of 1600.

In 2015 the average score for the Class of 2015 was 1490 out of a maximum 2400. That was down 7 points from the previous class&#x27;s mark and was the lowest composite score of the past decade.

== SAT–ACT score comparisons ==
The College Board and ACT, Inc., conducted a joint study of students who took both the SAT and the ACT between September 2004 (for the ACT) or March 2005 (for the SAT) and June 2006. Tables were provided to concord scores for students taking the SAT after January 2005 and before March 2016. In May 2016, the College Board released concordance tables to concord scores on the SAT used from March 2005 through January 2016 to the SAT used since March 2016, as well as tables to concord scores on the SAT used since March 2016 to the ACT.

In 2018, the College Board, in partnership with the ACT, introduced a new concordance table to better compare how a student would fare one test to another. This is now considered the official concordance to be used by college professionals and is replacing the one from 2016. The new concordance no longer features the old SAT (out of 2,400), just the new SAT (out of 1,600) and the ACT (out of 36).

As of 2018, the most appropriate corresponding SAT score point for the given ACT score is also shown in the table below.
== Elucidation ==
=== Preparation ===
Pioneered by Stanley Kaplan in 1946 with a 64-hour course, SAT preparation has become a highly lucrative field. Many companies and organizations offer test preparation in the form of books, classes, online courses, and tutoring. The test preparation industry began almost simultaneously with the introduction of university entrance exams in the U.S. and flourished from the start. Test-preparation scams are a genuine problem for parents and students. In general, East Asian Americans, especially Korean Americans, are the most likely to take private SAT preparation courses while African Americans typically rely more one-on-one tutoring for remedial learning.

Nevertheless, the College Board maintains that the SAT is essentially uncoachable and research by the College Board and the National Association of College Admission Counseling suggests that tutoring courses result in an average increase of about 20 points on the math section and 10 points on the verbal section. Indeed, researchers have shown time and again that preparation courses tend to offer at best a modest boost to test scores. Like IQ scores, which are a strong correlate, SAT scores tend to be stable over time, meaning SAT preparation courses offer only a limited advantage. An early meta-analysis (from 1983) found similar results and noted &quot;the size of the coaching effect estimated from the matched or randomized studies (10 points) seems too small to be practically important.&quot; Statisticians Ben Domingue and Derek C. Briggs examined data from the Education Longitudinal Survey of 2002 and found that the effects of coaching were only statistically significant for mathematics; moreover, coaching had a greater effect on certain students than others, especially those who have taken rigorous courses and those of high socioeconomic status. A 2012 systematic literature review estimated a coaching effect of 23 and 32 points for the math and verbal tests, respectively. A 2016 meta-analysis estimated the effect size to be 0.09 and 0.16 for the verbal and math sections respectively, although there was a large degree of heterogeneity. Meanwhile, a 2011 study found that the effects of one-on-one tutoring to be minimal among all ethnic groups. Public misunderstanding of how to prepare for the SAT continues to be exploited by the preparation industry.

While there is a link between family background and taking an SAT preparation course, not all students benefit equally from such an investment. In fact, any average gains in SAT scores due to such courses are primarily due to improvements among East Asian Americans. When this group is broken down even further, Korean Americans are more likely to take SAT prep courses than Chinese Americans, taking full advantage of their Church communities and ethnic economy.

The College Board announced a partnership with the non-profit organization Khan Academy to offer free test-preparation materials starting in the 2015–16 academic year to help level the playing field for students from low-income families. Students may also bypass costly preparation programs using the more affordable official guide from the College Board and with solid studying habits.

The College Board also offers a test called the Preliminary SAT/National Merit Scholarship Qualifying Test (PSAT/NMSQT), and there is some evidence that taking the PSAT at least once can help students do better on the SAT; moreover, like the case for the SAT, top scorers on the PSAT could earn scholarships. According to cognitive scientist Sian Beilock, &#x27;choking&#x27;, or substandard performance on important occasions, such as taking the SAT, can be prevented by doing plenty of practice questions and proctored exams to improve procedural memory, making use of the booklet to write down intermediate steps to avoid overloading working memory, and writing a diary entry about one&#x27;s anxieties on the day of the exam to enhance self-empathy and positive self-image. Sleep hygiene is important as the quality of sleep during the days leading to the exam can improve performance. Moreover, it has been shown that later class times (8:30 am rather than 7:30am), which better suits the shifted circadian rhythm of teenagers, can raise SAT scores enough to change the tier of the colleges and universities student might be admitted to.

In the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic, a large number of American colleges and universities decided to make standardized test scores optional for prospective students. Nevertheless, many students still chose to take the SAT and to enroll in preparation programs, which continued to be profitable.

===Predictive validity and powers===
In 2009, education researchers Richard C. Atkinson and Saul Geiser from the University of California (UC) system argued that high school GPA is better than the SAT at predicting college grades regardless of high school type or quality. In its 2020 report, the UC academic senate found that the SAT was better than high school GPA at predicting first year GPA, and just as good as high school GPA at predicting undergraduate GPA, first year retention, and graduation. This predictive validity was found to hold across demographic groups, with the report noting that standardized test scores were actually &quot;better predictors of success for students who are Underrepresented Minority students (URMs), who are first-generation, or whose families are low-income.&quot; A series of College Board reports point to similar predictive validity across demographic groups.

But a month after the UC academic senate report, Saul Geiser disputed the UC academic senate&#x27;s findings, saying &quot;that the Senate claims are &#x27;spurious&#x27;, based on a fundamental error of omitting student demographics in the prediction model&quot;. Indicating when high school GPA is combined with demographics in the prediction, the SAT is less reliable. Li Cai, a UCLA professor who directs the National Center for Research on Evaluation, Standards, and Student Testing, indicated that the UC Academic Senate did include student demographics by using a different and simpler model for the public to understand and that the discriminatory impacts of the SAT are compensated during the admissions process. Jesse Rothstein, a UC Berkeley professor of public policy and economics, countered Li&#x27;s claim, mentioning that the UC academic senate &quot;got a lot of things wrong about the SAT&quot;, overstates the value of the SAT, and &quot;no basis for its conclusion that UC admissions &#x27;compensate&#x27; for test score gaps between groups.&quot; However, by analyzing their own institutional data, Brown, Yale, and Dartmouth universities reached the conclusion that SAT scores are more reliable predictors of collegiate success than GPA. Furthermore, the scores allow them to identify &quot;more&quot; potentially qualified students from disadvantaged backgrounds than they otherwise would. At the University of Texas at Austin, students who declined to submit SAT scores when such scores were optional performed more poorly than their peers who did. These results were replicated by a study conducted by the non-profit organization Opportunity Insights analyzing data from Ivy League institutions (Brown University, Columbia University, Cornell University, Dartmouth College, Harvard University, Princeton University, the University of Pennsylvania, and Yale University) plus Stanford University, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and the University of Chicago. A 2009 study found that SAT or ACT scores along with high-school GPAs are strong predictors of cumulative university GPAs. In particular, those with standardized test scores in the 50th percentile or better had a two-thirds chance of having a cumulative university GPA in the top half. A 2010 meta-analysis by researchers from the University of Minnesota offered evidence that standardized admissions tests such as the SAT predicted not only freshman GPA but also overall collegiate GPA. A 2012 study from the same university using a multi-institutional data set revealed that even after controlling for socioeconomic status and high-school GPA, SAT scores were still as capable of predicting freshman GPA among university or college students. A 2019 study with a sample size of around a quarter of a million students suggests that together, SAT scores and high-school GPA offer an excellent predictor of freshman collegiate GPA and second-year retention. In 2018, psychologists Oren R. Shewach, Kyle D. McNeal, Nathan R. Kuncel, and Paul R. Sackett showed that both high-school GPA and SAT scores predict enrollment in advanced collegiate courses, even after controlling for Advanced Placement credits.

Education economist Jesse M. Rothstein indicated in 2005 that high-school average SAT scores were better at predicting freshman university GPAs compared to individual SAT scores. In other words, a student&#x27;s SAT scores were not as informative with regards to future academic success as his or her high school&#x27;s average. In contrast, individual high-school GPAs were a better predictor of collegiate success than average high-school GPAs. Furthermore, an admissions officer who failed to take average SAT scores into account would risk overestimating the future performance of a student from a low-scoring school and underestimating that of a student from a high-scoring school.

While the SAT is correlated with intelligence and as such estimates individual differences, it does not have anything to say about &quot;effective cognitive performance&quot; or what intelligent people do. Nor does it measure non-cognitive traits associated with academic success such as positive attitudes or conscientiousness. Psychometricians Thomas R. Coyle and David R. Pillow showed in 2008 that the SAT predicts college GPA even after removing the general factor of intelligence (&quot;g&quot;), with which it is highly correlated.

Like other standardized tests such as the ACT or the GRE, the SAT is a traditional method for assessing the academic aptitude of students who have had vastly different educational experiences and as such is focused on the common materials that the students could reasonably be expected to have encountered throughout the course of study. As such the mathematics section contains no materials above the precalculus level, for instance. Psychologist Raymond Cattell referred to this as testing for &quot;historical&quot; rather than &quot;current&quot; crystallized intelligence. Psychologist Scott Barry Kaufman further noted that the SAT can only measure a snapshot of a person&#x27;s performance at a particular moment in time. Educational psychologists Jonathan Wai, David Lubinski, and Camilla Benbow observed that one way to increase the predictive validity of the SAT is by assessing the student&#x27;s spatial reasoning ability, as the SAT at present does not contain any questions to that effect. Spatial reasoning skills are important for success in STEM. A 2006 study led by psychometrician Robert Sternberg found that the ability of SAT scores and high-school GPAs to predict collegiate performance could further be enhanced by additional assessments of analytical, creative, and practical thinking.

Experimental psychologist Meredith Frey noted that while advances in education research and neuroscience can help incrementally improve the ability to predict scholastic achievement in the future, the SAT or other standardized tests likely will remain a valuable tool to build upon. In a 2014 op-ed for &quot;The New York Times&quot;, psychologist John D. Mayer called the predictive powers of the SAT &quot;an astonishing achievement&quot; and cautioned against making it and other standardized tests optional. Research by psychometricians David Lubinsky, Camilla Benbow, and their colleagues has shown that the SAT could even predict life outcomes beyond university.

=== Difficulty and relative weight ===
The SAT rigorously assesses students&#x27; mental stamina, memory, speed, accuracy, and capacity for abstract and analytical reasoning. For American universities and colleges, standardized test scores are the most important factor in admissions, second only to high-school GPAs. By international standards, however, the SAT is not that difficult. For example, South Korea&#x27;s College Scholastic Ability Test (CSAT) and Finland&#x27;s Matriculation Examination are both longer, tougher, and count for more towards the admissibility of a student to university. In many countries around the world, exams, including university entrance exams, are the sole deciding factor of admission; school grades are simply irrelevant. In China and India, doing well on the Gaokao or the IIT-JEE, respectively, enhances the social status of the students and their families.

In an article from 2012, educational psychologist Jonathan Wai argued that the SAT was too easy to be useful to the most competitive of colleges and universities, whose applicants typically had brilliant high-school GPAs and standardized test scores. Admissions officers therefore had the burden of differentiating the top scorers from one another, not knowing whether or not the students&#x27; perfect or near-perfect scores truly reflected their scholastic aptitudes. He suggested that the College Board make the SAT more difficult, which would raise the measurement ceiling of the test, allowing the top schools to identify the best and brightest among the applicants. At that time, the College Board was already working on making the SAT tougher. The changes were announced in 2014 and implemented in 2016.

After realizing the June 2018 test was easier than usual, the College Board made adjustments resulting in lower-than-expected scores, prompting complaints from the students, though some understood this was to ensure fairness. In its analysis of the incident, the Princeton Review supported the idea of curving grades, but pointed out that the test was incapable of distinguishing students in the 86th percentile (650 points) or higher in mathematics. The Princeton Review also noted that this particular curve was unusual in that it offered no cushion against careless or last-minute mistakes for high-achieving students. The Review posted a similar blog post for the SAT of August 2019, when a similar incident happened and the College Board responded in the same manner, noting, &quot;A student who misses two questions on an easier test should not get as good a score as a student who misses two questions on a hard test. Equating takes care of that issue.&quot; It also cautioned students against retaking the SAT immediately, for they might be disappointed again, and recommended that instead, they give themselves some &quot;leeway&quot; before trying again.

=== Recognition ===
The College Board claims that outside of the United States, the SAT is considered for university admissions in approximately 70 countries, as of the 2023–24 academic year.

=== Association with general cognitive ability ===
In a 2000 study, psychometrician Ann M. Gallagher and her colleagues found that only the top students made use of intuitive reasoning in solving problems encountered on the mathematics section of the SAT. Cognitive psychologists Brenda Hannon and Mary McNaughton-Cassill discovered that having a good working memory, the ability of knowledge integration, and low levels of test anxiety predicts high performance on the SAT.

Frey and Detterman (2004) investigated associations of SAT scores with intelligence test scores. Using an estimate of general mental ability, or &quot;g&quot;, based on the Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery, they found SAT scores to be highly correlated with &quot;g&quot; (r=.82 in their sample, .857 when adjusted for non-linearity) in their sample taken from a 1979 national probability survey. Additionally, they investigated the correlation between SAT results, using the revised and recentered form of the test, and scores on the Raven&#x27;s Advanced Progressive Matrices, a test of fluid intelligence (reasoning), this time using a non-random sample. They found that the correlation of SAT results with scores on the Raven&#x27;s Advanced Progressive Matrices was .483, they estimated that this correlation would have been about 0.72 were it not for the restriction of ability range in the sample. They also noted that there appeared to be a ceiling effect on the Raven&#x27;s scores which may have suppressed the correlation. Beaujean and colleagues (2006) have reached similar conclusions to those reached by Frey and Detterman. Because the SAT is strongly correlated with general intelligence, it can be used as a proxy to measure intelligence, especially when the time-consuming traditional methods of assessment are unavailable.

Psychometrician Linda Gottfredson noted that the SAT is effective at identifying intellectually gifted college-bound students.

For decades many critics have accused designers of the verbal SAT of cultural bias as an explanation for the disparity in scores between poorer and wealthier test-takers, with the biggest critics coming from the University of California system. A famous example of this perceived bias in the SAT I was the oarsman–regatta analogy question, which is no longer part of the exam. The object of the question was to find the pair of terms that had the relationship most similar to the relationship between &quot;runner&quot; and &quot;marathon&quot;. The correct answer was &quot;oarsman&quot; and &quot;regatta&quot;. The choice of the correct answer was thought to have presupposed students&#x27; familiarity with rowing, a sport popular with the wealthy. However, for psychometricians, analogy questions are a useful tool to gauge the mental abilities of students, for, even if the meaning of two words are unclear, a student with sufficiently strong analytical thinking skills should still be able to identify their relationships. Analogy questions were removed in 2005. In their place are questions that provide more contextual information should the students be ignorant of the relevant definition of a word, making it easier for them to guess the correct answer.

=== Association with college or university majors and rankings ===
In 2010, physicists Stephen Hsu and James Schombert of the University of Oregon examined five years of student records at their school and discovered that the academic standing of students majoring in mathematics or physics (but not biology, English, sociology, or history) was strongly dependent on SAT mathematics scores. Students with SAT mathematics scores below 600 were highly unlikely to excel as a mathematics or physics major. Nevertheless, they found no such patterns between the SAT verbal, or combined SAT verbal and mathematics and the other aforementioned subjects.

In 2015, educational psychologist Jonathan Wai of Duke University analyzed average test scores from the Army General Classification Test in 1946 (10,000 students), the Selective Service College Qualification Test in 1952 (38,420), Project Talent in the early 1970s (400,000), the Graduate Record Examination between 2002 and 2005 (over 1.2 million), and the SAT Math and Verbal in 2014 (1.6 million). Wai identified one consistent pattern: those with the highest test scores tended to pick the physical sciences and engineering as their majors while those with the lowest were more likely to choose education and agriculture. (See figure below.)A 2020 paper by Laura H. Gunn and her colleagues examining data from 1389 institutions across the United States unveiled strong positive correlations between the average SAT percentiles of incoming students and the shares of graduates majoring in STEM and the social sciences. On the other hand, they found negative correlations between the former and the shares of graduates in psychology, theology, law enforcement, recreation and fitness.

Various researchers have established that average SAT or ACT scores and college ranking in the &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot; are highly correlated, almost 0.9. Between the 1980s and the 2010s, the U.S. population grew while universities and colleges did not expand their capacities as substantially. As a result, admissions rates fell considerably, meaning it has become more difficult to get admitted to a school whose alumni include one&#x27;s parents. On top of that, high-scoring students nowadays are much more likely to leave their hometowns in pursuit of higher education at prestigious institutions. Consequently, standardized tests, such as the SAT, are a more reliable measure of selectivity than admissions rates. Still, when Michael J. Petrilli and Pedro Enamorado analyzed the SAT composite scores (math and verbal) of incoming freshman classes of 1985 and 2016 of the top universities and liberal arts colleges in the United States, they found that the median scores of new students increased by 93 points for their sample, from 1216 to 1309. In particular, fourteen institutions saw an increase of at least 150 points, including the University of Notre-Dame (from 1290 to 1440, or 150 points) and Elon College (from 952 to 1192, or 240 points).

=== Association with types of schooling ===
While there seems to be evidence that private schools tend to produce students who do better on standardized tests such as the ACT or the SAT, Keven Duncan and Jonathan Sandy showed, using data from the National Longitudinal Surveys of Youth, that when student characteristics, such as age, race, and sex (7%), family background (45%), school quality (26%), and other factors were taken into account, the advantage of private schools diminished by 78%. The researchers concluded that students attending private schools already had the attributes associated with high scores on their own.

=== Association with educational and societal standings and outcomes ===
Research from the University of California system published in 2001 analyzing data of their undergraduates between Fall 1996 through Fall 1999, inclusive, found that the SAT II was the single best predictor of collegiate success in the sense of freshman GPA, followed by high-school GPA, and finally the SAT I. After controlling for family income and parental education, the already low ability of the SAT to measure aptitude and college readiness fell sharply while the more substantial aptitude and college readiness measuring abilities of high school GPA and the SAT II each remained undiminished (and even slightly increased). The University of California system required both the SAT I and the SAT II from applicants to the UC system during the four academic years of the study. This analysis is heavily publicized but is contradicted by many studies.

There is evidence that the SAT is correlated with societal and educational outcomes, including finishing a four-year university program. A 2012 paper from psychologists at the University of Minnesota analyzing multi-institutional data sets suggested that the SAT maintained its ability to predict collegiate performance even after controlling for socioeconomic status (as measured by the combination of parental educational attainment and income) and high-school GPA. This means that SAT scores were not merely a proxy for measuring socioeconomic status, the researchers concluded. This finding has been replicated and shown to hold across racial or ethnic groups and for both sexes. Moreover, the Minnesota researchers found that the socioeconomic status distributions of the student bodies of the schools examined reflected those of their respective applicant pools. Because of what it measures, a person&#x27;s SAT scores cannot be separated from their socioeconomic background. However, the correlation between SAT scores and parental income or socioeconomic status should not be taken to mean causation. It could be that high scorers have intelligent parents who work cognitively demanding jobs and as such earn higher salaries. In addition, the correlation is only significant between biological families, not adoptive ones, suggesting that this might be due to genetic heritage, not economic wealth.

In 2007, Rebecca Zwick and Jennifer Greif Green observed that a typical analysis did not take into account that heterogeneity of the high schools attended by the students in terms of not just the socioeconomic statuses of the student bodies but also the standards of grading. Zwick and Greif Green proceeded to show that when these were accounted for, the correlation between family socioeconomic status and classroom grades and rank increased whereas that between socioeconomic status and SAT scores fell. They concluded that school grades and SAT scores were similarly associated with family income.

According to the College Board, in 2019, 56% of the test takers had parents with a university degree, 27% parents with no more than a high-school diploma, and about 9% who did not graduate from high school. (8% did not respond to the question.)

=== Association with family structures ===
One of the proposed partial explanations for the gap between Asian- and European-American students in educational achievement, as measured for example by the SAT, is the general tendency of Asians to come from stable two-parent households. In their 2018 analysis of data from the National Longitudinal Surveys of the Bureau of Labor Statistics, economists Adam Blandin, Christopher Herrington, and Aaron Steelman concluded that family structure played an important role in determining educational outcomes in general and SAT scores in particular. Families with only one parent who has no degrees were designated 1L, with two parents but no degrees 2L, and two parents with at least one degree between them 2H. Children from 2H families held a significant advantage of those from 1L families, and this gap grew between 1990 and 2010. Because the median SAT composite scores (verbal and mathematics) for 2H families grew by 20 points while those of 1L families fell by one point, the gap between them increased by 21 points, or a fifth of one standard deviation.

=== Sex differences ===

==== In performance ====

In 2013, the American College Testing Board released a report stating that boys outperformed girls on the mathematics section of the test, a significant gap that has persisted for over 35 years. As of 2015, boys on average earned 32 points more than girls on the SAT mathematics section. Among those scoring in the 700–800 range, the male-to-female ratio was 1.6:1. In 2014, psychologist Stephen Ceci and his collaborators found boys did better than girls across the percentiles. For example, a girl scoring in the top 10% of her sex would only be in the top 20% among the boys. In 2010, psychologist Jonathan Wai and his colleagues showed, by analyzing data from three decades involving 1.6 million intellectually gifted seventh graders from the Duke University Talent Identification Program (TIP), that in the 1980s the gender gap in the mathematics section of the SAT among students scoring in the top 0.01% was 13.5:1 in favor of boys but dropped to 3.8:1 by the 1990s. The dramatic sex ratio from the 1980s replicates a different study using a sample from Johns Hopkins University. This ratio is similar to that observed for the ACT mathematics and science scores between the early 1990s and the late 2000s. It remained largely unaltered at the end of the 2000s. Sex differences in SAT mathematics scores began making themselves apparent at the level of 400 points and above. In the late 2000s, for every female who scored a perfect 800 on the SAT mathematics test, there were two males.

Some researchers point to evidence in support of greater male variability in verbal and quantitative reasoning skills. Greater male variability has been found in body weight, height, and cognitive abilities across cultures, leading to a larger number of males in the lowest and highest distributions of testing. Consequently, a higher number of males are found in both the upper and lower extremes of the performance distributions of the mathematics sections of standardized tests such as the SAT, resulting in the observed gender discrepancy. Paradoxically, this is at odds with the tendency of girls to have higher classroom scores than boys, proving that they do not lack scholastic aptitude. However, boys tend to do better on standardized test questions not directly related to the curriculum.

On the other hand, Wai and his colleagues found that both sexes in the top 5% appeared to be more or less at parity when it comes to the verbal section of the SAT, though girls have gained a slight but noticeable edge over boys starting in the mid-1980s. Psychologist David Lubinski, who conducted longitudinal studies of seventh graders who scored exceptionally high on the SAT, found a similar result. Girls generally had better verbal reasoning skills and boys mathematical skills. This reflects other research on the cognitive ability of the general population rather than just the 95th percentile and up.

Although aspects of testing such as stereotype threat are a concern, research on the predictive validity of the SAT has demonstrated that it tends to be a more accurate predictor of female GPA in university as compared to male GPA.

==== In strategizing ====

Mathematical problems on the SAT can be broadly categorized into two groups: conventional and unconventional. Conventional problems can be handled routinely via familiar formulas or algorithms while unconventional ones require more creative thought in order to make unusual use of familiar methods of solution or to come up with the specific insights necessary for solving those problems. In 2000, ETS psychometrician Ann M. Gallagher and her colleagues analyzed how students handled disclosed SAT mathematics questions in self-reports. They found that for both sexes, the most favored approach was to use formulas or algorithms learned in class. When that failed, however, males were more likely than females to identify the suitable methods of solution. Previous research suggested that males were more likely to explore unusual paths to solution whereas females tended to stick to what they had learned in class and that females were more likely to identify the appropriate approaches if such required nothing more than mastery of classroom materials.

==== In confidence ====
Older versions of the SAT did ask students how confident they were in their mathematical aptitude and verbal reasoning ability, specifically, whether or not they believed they were in the top 10%. Devin G. Pope analyzed data of over four million test takers from the late 1990s to the early 2000s and found that high scorers were more likely to be confident they were in the top 10%, with the top scorers reporting the highest levels of confidence. But there were some noticeable gaps between the sexes. Men tended to be much more confident in their mathematical aptitude than women. For example, among those who scored 700 on the mathematics section, 67% of men answered they believed they were in the top 10% whereas only 56% of women did the same. Women, on the other hand, were slightly more confident in their verbal reasoning ability than men.

==== In glucose metabolism ====
Cognitive neuroscientists Richard Haier and Camilla Persson Benbow employed positron emission tomography (PET) scans to investigate the rate of glucose metabolism among students who have taken the SAT. They found that among men, those with higher SAT mathematics scores exhibited higher rates of glucose metabolism in the temporal lobes than those with lower scores, contradicting the brain-efficiency hypothesis. This trend, however, was not found among women, for whom the researchers could not find any cortical regions associated with mathematical reasoning. Both sexes scored the same on average in their sample and had the same rates of cortical glucose metabolism overall. According to Haier and Benbow, this is evidence for the structural differences of the brain between the sexes.

=== Association with race and ethnicity ===
A 2001 meta-analysis of the results of 6,246,729 participants tested for cognitive ability or aptitude found a difference in average scores between black and white students of around 1.0 standard deviation, with comparable results for the SAT (2.4 million test takers). Similarly, on average, Hispanic and Amerindian students perform on the order of one standard deviation lower on the SAT than white and Asian students. Mathematics appears to be the more difficult part of the exam. In 1996, the black-white gap in the mathematics section was 0.91 standard deviations, but by 2020, it fell to 0.79. In 2013, Asian Americans as a group scored 0.38 standard deviations higher than whites in the mathematics section.

Some researchers believe that the difference in scores is closely related to the overall achievement gap in American society between students of different racial groups. This gap may be explainable in part by the fact that students of disadvantaged racial groups tend to go to schools that provide lower educational quality. This view is supported by evidence that the black-white gap is higher in cities and neighborhoods that are more racially segregated. Other research cites poorer minority proficiency in key coursework relevant to the SAT (English and math), as well as peer pressure against students who try to focus on their schoolwork (&quot;acting white&quot;). Cultural issues are also evident among black students in wealthier households, with high achieving parents. John Ogbu, a Nigerian-American professor of anthropology, concluded that instead of looking to their parents as role models, black youth chose other models like rappers and did not make an effort to be good students.

One set of studies has reported differential item functioning, namely, that some test questions function differently based on the racial group of the test taker, reflecting differences in ability to understand certain test questions or to acquire the knowledge required to answer them between groups. In 2003, Freedle published data showing that black students have had a slight advantage on the verbal questions that are labeled as difficult on the SAT, whereas white and Asian students tended to have a slight advantage on questions labeled as easy. Freedle argued that these findings suggest that &quot;easy&quot; test items use vocabulary that is easier to understand for white middle class students than for minorities, who often use a different language in the home environment, whereas the difficult items use complex language learned only through lectures and textbooks, giving both student groups equal opportunities to acquiring it. The study was severely criticized by the ETS board, but the findings were replicated in a subsequent study by Santelices and Wilson in 2010.

There is no evidence that SAT scores systematically underestimate future performance of minority students. However, the predictive validity of the SAT has been shown to depend on the dominant ethnic and racial composition of the college. Some studies have also shown that African-American students under-perform in college relative to their white peers with the same SAT scores; researchers have argued that this is likely because white students tend to benefit from social advantages outside of the educational environment (for example, high parental involvement in their education, inclusion in campus academic activities, positive bias from same-race teachers and peers) which result in better grades.

Christopher Jencks concludes that as a group, African Americans have been harmed by the introduction of standardized entrance exams such as the SAT. This, according to him, is not because the tests themselves are flawed, but because of labeling bias and selection bias; the tests measure the skills that African Americans are less likely to develop in their socialization, rather than the skills they are more likely to develop. Furthermore, standardized entrance exams are often labeled as tests of general ability, rather than of certain aspects of ability. Thus, a situation is produced in which African-American ability is consistently underestimated within the education and workplace environments, contributing in turn to selection bias against them which exacerbates underachievement.

Among the major racial or ethnic groups of the United States, gaps in SAT mathematics scores are the greatest at the tails, with Hispanic and Latino Americans being the most likely to score at the lowest range and Asian Americans the highest. In addition, there is some evidence suggesting that if the test contains more questions of both the easy and difficult varieties, which would increase the variability of the scores, the gaps would be even wider. Given the distribution for Asians, for example, many could score higher than 800 if the test allowed them to. (See figure below.)
2020 was the year in which education worldwide was disrupted by the COVID-19 pandemic and indeed, the performance of students in the United States on standardized tests, such as the SAT, suffered. Yet the gaps persisted. According to the College Board, in 2020, while 83% of Asian students met the benchmark of college readiness in reading and writing and 80% in mathematics, only 44% and 21% of black students did those respective categories. Among whites, 79% met the benchmark for reading and writing and 59% did mathematics. For Hispanics and Latinos, the numbers were 53% and 30%, respectively. (See figure below.)
=== Test-taking population ===

By analyzing data from the National Center for Education Statistics, economists Ember Smith and Richard Reeves of the Brookings Institution deduced that the number of students taking the SAT increased at a rate faster than population and high-school graduation growth rates between 2000 and 2020. The increase was especially pronounced among Hispanics and Latinos. Even among whites, whose number of high-school graduates was shrinking, the number of SAT takers rose. In 2015, for example, 1.7 million students took the SAT, up from 1.6 million in 2013. But in 2019, a record-breaking 2.2 million students took the exam, compared to 2.1 million in 2018, another record-breaking year. The rise in the number of students taking the SAT was due in part to many school districts offering to administer the SAT during school days often at no further costs to the students. Some require students to take the SAT, regardless of whether or not they are going to college. However, in 2021, in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic and the optional status of the SAT at many colleges and universities, only 1.5 million students took the test. But as testing centers reopened, ambitious students chose to take the SAT or the ACT to make themselves stand out from the competition regardless of the admissions policies of their preferred schools. Among the class of 2023, 1.9 million students took the test.

Psychologists Jean Twenge, W. Keith Campbell, and Ryne A. Sherman analyzed vocabulary test scores on the U.S. General Social Survey (formula_1) and found that after correcting for education, the use of sophisticated vocabulary has declined between the mid-1970s and the mid-2010s across all levels of education, from below high school to graduate school. However, they cautioned against the use of SAT verbal scores to track the decline for while the College Board reported that SAT verbal scores had been decreasing, these scores were an imperfect measure of the vocabulary level of the nation as a whole because the test-taking demographic has changed and because more students took the SAT in the 2010s than in the 1970s, meaning there were more with limited ability who took it. However, as the frequency of reading for pleasure and the level of reading comprehension among American high-school students continue to decline, students who take the SAT might struggle to do well, even if reforms have been introduced to shorten the duration of the test and to reduce the number of questions associated with a given passage in the verbal portion of the test.

=== Use in non-collegiate contexts ===

==== By high-IQ societies ====
Certain high IQ societies, like Mensa, Intertel, the Prometheus Society and the Triple Nine Society, use scores from certain years as one of their admission tests. For instance, Intertel accepts scores (verbal and math combined) of at least 1300 on tests taken through January 1994; the Triple Nine Society accepts scores of 1450 or greater on SAT tests taken before April 1995, and scores of at least 1520 on tests taken between April 1995 and February 2005. Mensa accepts qualifying SAT scores earned on or before January 31, 1994.

==== By researchers ====
Because it is strongly correlated with general intelligence, the SAT has often been used as a proxy to measure intelligence by researchers, especially since 2004. In particular, scientists studying mathematically gifted individuals have been using the mathematics section of the SAT to identify subjects for their research.

A growing body of research indicates that SAT scores can predict individual success decades into the future, for example in terms of income and occupational achievements. A longitudinal study published in 2005 by educational psychologists Jonathan Wai, David Lubinski, and Camilla Benbow suggests that among the intellectually precocious (the top 1%), those with higher scores in the mathematics section of the SAT at the age of 12 were more likely to earn a PhD in the STEM fields, to have a publication, to register a patent, or to secure university tenure. Wai further showed that an individual&#x27;s academic ability, as measured by the average SAT or ACT scores of the institution attended, predicted individual differences in income, even among the richest people of all, and being a member of the &#x27;American elite&#x27;, namely Fortune 500 CEOs, billionaires, federal judges, and members of Congress. Wai concluded that the American elite was also the cognitive elite. Gregory Park, Lubinski, and Benbow gave statistical evidence that intellectually gifted adolescents, as identified by SAT scores, could be expected to accomplish great feats of creativity in the future, both in the arts and in STEM.

The SAT is sometimes given to students at age 12 or 13 by organizations such as the Study of Mathematically Precocious Youth (SMPY), Johns Hopkins Center for Talented Youth, and the Duke University Talent Identification Program (TIP) to select, study, and mentor students of exceptional ability, that is, those in the top one percent. Among SMPY participants, those within the top quartile, as indicated by the SAT composite score (mathematics and verbal), were markedly more likely to have a doctoral degree, to have at least one publication in STEM, to earn income in the 95th percentile, to have at least one literary publication, or to register at least one patent than those in the bottom quartile. Duke TIP participants generally picked career tracks in STEM should they be stronger in mathematics, as indicated by SAT mathematics scores, or the humanities if they possessed greater verbal ability, as indicated by SAT verbal scores. For comparison, the bottom SMPY quartile is five times more likely than the average American to have a patent. Meanwhile, as of 2016, the shares doctorates among SMPY participants was 44% and Duke TIP 37%, compared to two percent among the general U.S. population. Consequently, the notion that beyond a certain point, differences in cognitive ability as measured by standardized tests such as the SAT cease to matter is gainsaid by the evidence.

In the 2010 paper which showed that the sex gap in SAT mathematics scores had dropped dramatically between the early 1980s and the early 1990s but had persisted for the next two decades or so, Wai and his colleagues argued that &quot;sex differences in abilities in the extreme right tail should not be dismissed as no longer part of the explanation for the dearth of women in math-intensive fields of science.&quot;

==== By employers ====
Cognitive ability is correlated with job training outcomes and job performance. As such, some employers rely on SAT scores to assess the suitability of a prospective recruit, especially if the person has limited work experience. There is nothing new about this practice. Major companies and corporations have spent princely sums on learning how to avoid hiring errors and have decided that standardized test scores are a valuable tool in deciding whether or not a person is fit for the job. In some cases, a company might need to hire someone to handle proprietary materials of its own making, such as computer software. But since the ability to work with such materials cannot be assessed via external certification, it makes sense for such a firm to rely on something that is a proxy of measuring general intelligence. In other cases, a firm may not care about academic background but needs to assess a prospective recruit&#x27;s quantitative reasoning ability, and what makes standardized test scores necessary. Several companies, especially those considered to be the most prestigious in industries such as investment banking and management consulting such as Goldman Sachs and McKinsey, have been reported to ask prospective job candidates about their SAT scores.

Nevertheless, some other top employers, such as Google, have eschewed the use of SAT or other standardized test scores unless the potential employee is a recent graduate. Google&#x27;s Laszlo Bock explained to &quot;The New York Times&quot;, &quot;We found that they don&#x27;t predict anything.&quot; Educational psychologist Jonathan Wai suggested this might be due to the inability of the SAT to differentiate the intellectual capacities of those at the extreme right end of the distribution of intelligence. Wai told &quot;The New York Times&quot;, &quot;Today the SAT is actually too easy, and that&#x27;s why Google doesn&#x27;t see a correlation. Every single person they get through the door is a super-high scorer.&quot;

== Perception ==

=== Math–verbal achievement gap ===

In 2002, &quot;New York Times&quot; columnist Richard Rothstein argued that the U.S. math averages on the SAT and ACT continued their decade-long rise over national verbal averages on the tests while the averages of verbal portions on the same tests were floundering.

===Optional SAT===
During the 1960s and 1970s, there was a movement to drop achievement scores. After some time, the countries, states, and provinces that reintroduced them agreed that academic standards had dropped, students had studied less, and had taken their education less seriously. Testing requirements were reinstated in some places after research concluded that these high-stakes tests produced benefits that outweighed the costs. However, in a 2001 speech to the American Council on Education, Richard C. Atkinson, the president of the University of California, urged the dropping of aptitude tests such as the SAT I but not achievement tests such as the SAT II as a college admissions requirement. Atkinson&#x27;s critique of the predictive validity and powers of the SAT has been contested by the University of California academic senate. In April 2020, the academic senate, which consisted of faculty members, voted 51–0 to restore the requirement of standardized test scores, but the governing board overruled the academic senate and did not reinstate the test requirement anyway. Because of the size of the Californian population, this decision might have an impact on U.S. higher education at large; schools looking to admit Californian students could have a harder time.

During the 2010s, over 1,230 American universities and colleges opted to stop requiring the SAT and the ACT for admissions, according to FairTest, an activist group opposing standardized entrance exams. Most, however, were small colleges, with the notable exceptions of the University of California system and the University of Chicago. Also on the list are institutions catering to niche students, such as religious colleges, arts and music conservatories, or nursing schools, and the majority of institutions in the Northeastern United States. In the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic, around 1,600 institutions decided to waive the requirement of the SAT or the ACT for admissions because it was challenging both to administer and to take these tests, resulting in many cancellations. Some schools chose to make them optional on a temporary basis only, either for just one year, as in the case of Princeton University, or three, like the College of William &amp; Mary. Others dropped the requirement completely. Some schools extended their moratorium on standardized entrance exams in 2021. This did not stop highly ambitious students from taking them, however, as many parents and teenagers were skeptical of the &quot;optional&quot; status of university entrance exams and wanted to make their applications more likely to catch the attention of admission officers. This led to complaints of registration sites crashing in the summer of 2020. On the other hand, the number of students applying to the more competitive of schools that had made SAT and ACT scores optional increased dramatically because the students thought they stood a chance. Ivy League institutions saw double-digit increases in the number of applications, as high as 51% in the case of Columbia University, while their admission rates, already in the single digits, fell, e.g. from 4.9% in 2020 to just 3.4% in 2021 at Harvard University. At the same time, interest in lower-status schools that did the same thing dropped precipitously; the college application process remains driven primarily by the preference for elite schools. 44% of students who used the Common Application—accepted by over 900 colleges and universities as of 2021—submitted SAT or ACT scores in the 2020–21 academic year, down from 77% in 2019–20. Those who did submit their test scores tended to hail from high-income families, to have at least one university-educated parent, and to be white or Asian.

Despite the fallout from Operation Varsity Blues, which found many wealthy parents illegally intervening to raise their children&#x27;s standardized test scores, the SAT and the ACT remain popular among American parents and college-bound seniors, who are skeptical of the process of &quot;holistic admissions&quot; because they think it is rather opaque, as schools try to access characteristics not easily discerned via a number, hence the growth in the number of test takers attempting to make themselves more competitive even if this parallels an increase in the number of schools declaring it optional. While holistic admissions might seem like a plausible alternative, the process of applying can be rather stressful for students and parents, and many get upset once they learn that someone else got into the school that rejected them despite having lower SAT scores and GPAs. Holistic admissions notwithstanding, when merit-based scholarships are considered, standardized test scores might be the tiebreakers, as these are highly competitive. Scholarships and financial aid could help students and their parents significantly cut the cost of higher education, especially in times of economic hardship. Moreover, the most selective of schools might have no better options than using standardized test scores in order to quickly prune the number of applications worth considering, for holistic admissions consume valuable time and other resources.

Following the 2023 ruling by the Supreme Court of the United States against race-based admissions as a form of affirmative action, a number of schools have signaled their intent to continue pursuing ethnic diversity. One way for them to adapt to the new legal reality is to drop the requirement of standardized testing, making it more difficult for potential plaintiffs (Asian Americans in the twin cases of &quot;SFFA v. Harvard&quot; and &quot;SFFA v UNC&quot;) to find concrete evidence for their allegations of discrimination.

On one hand, making the SAT and the ACT optional for admissions enables schools to attract a larger pool of applicants of a variety of socioeconomic backgrounds. On the other hand, letters of recommendation are not a good indicator of collegiate performance, and grade inflation is a genuine problem. If standardized tests were taken out of the picture, school grades would become more important, thereby incentivizing grade inflation. In fact, grades in American high schools have been inflating by noticeable amounts due to pressure from parents, creating an apparent oversupply of high achievers that makes actual high-performing students struggle to stand out, especially if they are from low-income families. Schools that made the SAT optional therefore lost an objective measure of academic aptitude and readiness, and they will have to formulate a new methodology for admissions or to develop their own entrance exams. Given that the selectivity of a school a student applies to is correlated with the resources of his or her high school—measured in terms of the availability of rigorous courses, such as AP classes, and the socioeconomic statuses of the student body—, making the SAT optional might exacerbate social inequities. Furthermore, since the costs of attending institutions of higher learning in the United States are high, eliminating the SAT requirement could make said institutions more likely to admit under-performing students, who might have to be removed for their low academic standing and who might be saddled with debt after attending. Another criticism of making the SAT optional is that subjective measures of an applicant&#x27;s suitability, such as application essays, could become more important, making it easier for the rich to gain admissions at the expense of the poor because their school counselors are more capable of writing good letters of recommendation and they can afford to hire external help to boost their applications.

It was due to these concerns that the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) decided to reinstate its SAT requirement in 2022. Many other universities across the U.S. followed suit in 2024. However, the University of North Carolina system will only require SAT or ACT scores from applicants whose high-school GPA is below 2.8 while the University of California system will continue to be test-blind.

=== Writing section ===
In 2005, MIT Writing Director Les Perelman plotted essay length versus essay score on the new SAT from released essays and found a high correlation between them. After studying over 50 graded essays, he found that longer essays consistently produced higher scores. In fact, he argues that by simply gauging the length of an essay without reading it, the given score of an essay could likely be determined correctly over 90% of the time. He also discovered that several of these essays were full of factual errors; the College Board does not claim to grade for factual accuracy.

Perelman, along with the National Council of Teachers of English, also criticized the 25-minute writing section of the test for damaging standards of writing teaching in the classroom. They say that writing teachers training their students for the SAT will not focus on revision, depth, accuracy, but will instead produce long, formulaic, and wordy pieces. &quot;You&#x27;re getting teachers to train students to be bad writers&quot;, concluded Perelman.

On January 19, 2021, the College Board announced that the SAT would no longer offer the optional essay section after the June 2021 administration.

== History ==
The College Board, the not-for-profit organization that owns the SAT, was organized at the beginning of the 20th century to provide uniform entrance exams for its member colleges, whose matriculating students often came from boarding and private day schools found in the Northeastern United States. The exams were essay-based, graded by hand, and required several days for the student to take them. By the early 1920s, the increasing interest in intelligence tests as a means of selection convinced the College Board to form a commission to produce such a test for college admission purposes. The leader of the commission was Carl Brigham, a psychologist at Princeton University, who originally saw the value of these types of tests through the lens of eugenic thought.

On June 23, 1926, the first SAT, then known as the Scholastic Aptitude Test, was administered to 8,040 students, 60% of whom were male, many of whom were applying to Yale University (26%) and Smith College (27%). In 1934, James Conant and Henry Chauncey used the SAT as a means to identify recipients, besides those from the traditional northeastern private schools, for scholarships to Harvard University. By 1942, the College Board suspended the use of the essay exams, replacing them with the SAT, due in part to the success of Harvard&#x27;s SAT program as well as because of the constraints from the onset of World War II. At this time, the SAT was standardized so that a test score received by a student in one year could be directly compared to a score received by a student in another year. Test scores ranged from 200 to 800 on each of two test sections (verbal and math) and the same reference group of students was used to standardize the SAT until 1995.

After the war, due to several factors including the formation of the Educational Testing Service, the use of the SAT increased rapidly: by 1951, about 80,000 SATs were taken, rising to about 1.5 million in 1971. During this time, changes made to the content of the SAT were relatively minor, and included the introduction of sentence completion questions and &quot;quantitative comparison&quot; math questions as well as changes in the timing of the test. In 1994, however, the SAT was substantially changed in an attempt to make the test more closely reflect the work done by students in school and the skills that they would need in college. Among other changes, antonym questions were removed from the verbal section, and free response questions were added to the math section along with the use of calculators. In 1995, after nearly forty years of declining scores, the SAT was recalibrated by the addition of approximately 100 points to each score to compensate for the decline in what constituted an average score.

In 2005, the SAT was changed again, in part due to criticism of the test by the University of California system, which said that the test was not closely enough aligned to high school curricula. Along with the elimination of analogies from the verbal section and quantitative comparison items from the math section, a new writing section with an essay was added. The changes introduced an additional section score, increasing the maximum SAT score to 2400.

In early 2016, the SAT would change again in the interest of alignment with typical high school curricula. The changes included making the essay optional (and returning the maximum score to 1600), changing all multiple-choice questions from having five answer options to four, and the removal of penalty for wrong answers (rights-only scoring). The essay was completely removed from the SAT by mid-2021, in the interest of reducing demands on students in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic.

== Name changes ==

The SAT has been renamed several times since its introduction in 1926. It was originally known as the Scholastic Aptitude Test. In 1990, a commission set up by the College Board to review the proposed changes to the SAT program recommended that the meaning of the initialism SAT be changed to &quot;Scholastic Assessment Test&quot; because a &quot;test that integrates measures of achievement as well as developed ability can no longer be accurately described as a test of aptitude&quot;. In 1993, the College Board changed the name of the test to SAT I: Reasoning Test; at the same time, the name of the SAT Achievement Tests was changed to SAT II: Subject Tests. The Reasoning Test and Subject Tests were to be collectively known as the Scholastic Assessment Tests. According to the president of the College Board at the time, the name change was meant &quot;to correct the impression among some people that the SAT measures something that is innate and impervious to change regardless of effort or instruction.&quot; The new SAT debuted in March 1994, and was referred to as the Scholastic Assessment Test by major news organizations. However, in 1997, the College Board announced that the SAT could not properly be called the Scholastic Assessment Test, and that the letters SAT did not stand for anything. In 2004, the Roman numeral in SAT I: Reasoning Test was dropped, making SAT Reasoning Test the name of the SAT. The &quot;Reasoning Test&quot; portion of the name was eliminated following the exam&#x27;s 2016 redesign; it is now simply called the SAT.

== Reuse of old SAT exams ==
The College Board has been accused of completely reusing old SAT papers previously given in the United States. The recycling of questions from previous exams has been exploited to allow for cheating on exams and impugned the validity of some students&#x27; test scores. Test preparation companies in Asia have been found to provide test questions to students within hours of a new SAT exam&#x27;s administration.

On August 25, 2018, the SAT test given in the United States was discovered to be a recycled October 2017 international SAT test given in China. The leaked PDF file was on the internet before the August 25, 2018, exam.

== See also ==

* ACT (test), a college entrance exam, competitor to the SAT
* College admissions in the United States
* List of admissions tests
* PSAT/NMSQT
* SAT Subject Tests
* Mathematics education in the United States

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 
* (and others)
* 
* 

== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q334113" start="4" end="7" title="SAT" label="SAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244907" start="17" end="34" title="standardized test" label="standardized test"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146580" start="51" end="90" title="college admissions in the United States" label="college admissions in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7705804" start="130" end="137" title="Test score" label="scoring"/>
<link wikidata="Q334113" start="209" end="233" title="SAT" label="Scholastic Aptitude Test"/>
<link wikidata="Q334113" start="360" end="386" title="SAT" label="Scholastic Assessment Test"/>
<link wikidata="Q334113" start="397" end="418" title="SAT" label="SAT I: Reasoning Test"/>
<link wikidata="Q334113" start="429" end="447" title="SAT" label="SAT Reasoning Test"/>
<link wikidata="Q334113" start="465" end="468" title="SAT" label="SAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109023" start="528" end="541" title="College Board" label="College Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q959089" start="569" end="596" title="Educational Testing Service" label="Educational Testing Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7388865" start="782" end="799" title="SAT Subject Tests" label="SAT Subject Tests"/>
<link wikidata="Q16208082" start="1115" end="1128" title="David Coleman (consultant)" label="David Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153317" start="1236" end="1257" title="Common Core State Standards Initiative" label="Common Core standards"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2005" end="2019" title="#By researchers" label="by researchers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2110" end="2127" title="#By employers" label="by some employers"/>
<link wikidata="Q105038092" start="2202" end="2213" title="High school (North America)" label="high school"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304533" start="2214" end="2221" title="Eleventh grade" label="juniors"/>
<link wikidata="Q986388" start="2226" end="2233" title="Twelfth grade" label="seniors"/>
<link wikidata="Q189004" start="2374" end="2381" title="college" label="college"/>
<link wikidata="Q18185" start="2607" end="2632" title="Grading in education" label="grade point average (GPA)"/>
<link wikidata="Q425265" start="2814" end="2839" title="statistically significant" label="statistically significant"/>
<link wikidata="Q186290" start="2852" end="2863" title="correlation" label="correlation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2947" end="2977" title="#Predictive validity and powers" label="predictive validity and powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7051413" start="3044" end="3064" title="norm-referenced test" label="norm-referenced test"/>
<link wikidata="Q133871" start="3104" end="3114" title="Normal distribution" label="bell curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q204886" start="3555" end="3565" title="federalism" label="federalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q83602" start="3627" end="3640" title="Homeschooling" label="home schooled"/>
<link wikidata="Q288826" start="3660" end="3663" title="ACT (test)" label="ACT"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="4496" end="4516" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="coronavirus pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q288826" start="5321" end="5324" title="ACT (test)" label="ACT"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5480" end="5488" title="#Optional SAT" label="optional"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5669" end="5691" title="#Test-taking population" label="test-taking population"/>
<link wikidata="Q199657" start="6829" end="6836" title="Reading (process)" label="Reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q37260" start="6841" end="6848" title="Writing" label="Writing"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="6854" end="6858" title="Mathematics" label="Math"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="8405" end="8422" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="10620" end="10631" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q867668" start="10812" end="10827" title="multiple choice" label="multiple choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q31087" start="11997" end="12007" title="calculator" label="calculator"/>
<link wikidata="Q830340" start="12020" end="12043" title="computer algebra system" label="computer algebra system"/>
<link wikidata="Q253" start="12473" end="12479" title="QWERTY" label="QWERTY"/>
<link wikidata="Q186290" start="12777" end="12787" title="Association (statistics)" label="associated"/>
<link wikidata="Q867668" start="13453" end="13468" title="multiple choice" label="multiple choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920411" start="16475" end="16483" title="Computerized adaptive testing" label="adaptive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913954" start="17915" end="17925" title="percentile" label="percentile"/>
<link wikidata="Q938438" start="18343" end="18364" title="statistical inference" label="statistical inference"/>
<link wikidata="Q7599718" start="21201" end="21215" title="Stanley Kaplan" label="Stanley Kaplan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17085167" start="21251" end="21262" title="test preparation" label="preparation"/>
<link wikidata="Q276879" start="21685" end="21701" title="Korean Americans" label="Korean Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="21769" end="21786" title="African Americans" label="African Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311597" start="21831" end="21848" title="Remedial education" label="remedial learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504425" start="23025" end="23053" title="systematic reviews" label="systematic literature review"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146100" start="23907" end="23924" title="Chinese Americans" label="Chinese Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7120579" start="24493" end="24503" title="PSAT/NMSQT" label="PSAT/NMSQT"/>
<link wikidata="Q16198523" start="24727" end="24739" title="Sian Beilock" label="Sian Beilock"/>
<link wikidata="Q18606" start="24923" end="24940" title="procedural memory" label="procedural memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364783" start="25163" end="25176" title="Sleep hygiene" label="Sleep hygiene"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25661" end="25669" title="SAT#Optional SAT" label="optional"/>
<link wikidata="Q184478" start="25939" end="25963" title="University of California" label="University of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q28962602" start="27103" end="27109" title="Li Cai (psychometrician)" label="Li Cai"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="27113" end="27117" title="UCLA" label="UCLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971370" start="27144" end="27218" title="National Center for Research on Evaluation, Standards, and Student Testing" label="National Center for Research on Evaluation, Standards, and Student Testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q18155143" start="27453" end="27468" title="Jesse Rothstein" label="Jesse Rothstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="27472" end="27483" title="UC Berkeley" label="UC Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q49114" start="27852" end="27857" title="Brown University" label="Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="27859" end="27863" title="Yale University" label="Yale"/>
<link wikidata="Q49116" start="27869" end="27878" title="Dartmouth College" label="Dartmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q49213" start="28152" end="28181" title="University of Texas at Austin" label="University of Texas at Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="28471" end="28490" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49115" start="28492" end="28510" title="Cornell University" label="Cornell University"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="28531" end="28549" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="28551" end="28571" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49117" start="28577" end="28603" title="University of Pennsylvania" label="University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="28631" end="28650" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="28656" end="28693" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="Massachusetts Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="28703" end="28724" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q238101" start="29057" end="29080" title="University of Minnesota" label="University of Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q379676" start="29902" end="29920" title="Advanced Placement" label="Advanced Placement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307067" start="30929" end="30946" title="conscientiousness" label="conscientiousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272845" start="31561" end="31572" title="precalculus" label="precalculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q353133" start="31607" end="31622" title="Raymond Cattell" label="Raymond Cattell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434146" start="31710" end="31735" title="Fluid and crystallized intelligence" label="crystallized intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435958" start="31750" end="31769" title="Scott Barry Kaufman" label="Scott Barry Kaufman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125339" start="32067" end="32092" title="Spatial ability" label="spatial reasoning ability"/>
<link wikidata="Q362357" start="32259" end="32275" title="Robert Sternberg" label="Robert Sternberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q170658" start="32435" end="32443" title="Creativity" label="creative"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32982" end="32990" title="#By researchers" label="Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q485104" start="33591" end="33595" title="College Scholastic Ability Test" label="CSAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q18639506" start="33616" end="33641" title="Matriculation exam (Finland)" label="Matriculation Examination"/>
<link wikidata="Q670287" start="33939" end="33945" title="Gaokao" label="Gaokao"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521140" start="33953" end="33960" title="IIT JEE" label="IIT-JEE"/>
<link wikidata="Q189970" start="33989" end="34002" title="social status" label="social status"/>
<link wikidata="Q189222" start="36376" end="36395" title="Intuition" label="intuitive reasoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q11337567" start="36563" end="36577" title="working memory" label="working memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423376" start="36594" end="36615" title="knowledge integration" label="knowledge integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426787" start="36635" end="36647" title="test anxiety" label="test anxiety"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753797" start="36805" end="36827" title="g factor (psychometrics)" label="general mental ability"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821794" start="36860" end="36902" title="Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery" label="Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510887" start="37232" end="37274" title="Raven&amp;#x27;s Progressive Matrices" label="Raven&amp;#x27;s Advanced Progressive Matrices"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434146" start="37286" end="37304" title="fluid intelligence" label="fluid intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37558" end="37586" title="Correlation and dependence#Sensitivity to the data distribution" label="restriction of ability range"/>
<link wikidata="Q1181915" start="37646" end="37660" title="Ceiling effect (statistics)" label="ceiling effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q274893" start="38055" end="38072" title="Linda Gottfredson" label="Linda Gottfredson"/>
<link wikidata="Q467677" start="38120" end="38141" title="Intellectual giftedness" label="intellectually gifted"/>
<link wikidata="Q21368803" start="38473" end="38480" title="oarsman" label="oarsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q11344830" start="38481" end="38488" title="regatta" label="regatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q159354" start="38878" end="38884" title="rowing (sport)" label="rowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794143" start="40185" end="40217" title="Army General Classification Test" label="Army General Classification Test"/>
<link wikidata="Q7249346" start="40312" end="40326" title="Project Talent" label="Project Talent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197756" start="40361" end="40388" title="Graduate Record Examinations" label="Graduate Record Examination"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974212" start="42688" end="42726" title="National Longitudinal Survey of Youth" label="National Longitudinal Surveys of Youth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42776" end="42780" title="#Association with race and ethnicity" label="race"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42786" end="42789" title="#Sex differences" label="sex"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42796" end="42813" title="#Association with family structures" label="family background"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42821" end="42835" title="#Association with educational and societal standings and outcomes" label="school quality"/>
<link wikidata="Q310486" start="45075" end="45112" title="Correlation does not imply causation" label="should not be taken to mean causation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17022593" start="45373" end="45389" title="Heritability of IQ" label="genetic heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q43046251" start="45422" end="45435" title="Rebecca Zwick" label="Rebecca Zwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q720069" start="46515" end="46543" title="Nuclear family" label="stable two-parent households"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974212" start="46585" end="46614" title="National Longitudinal Surveys" label="National Longitudinal Surveys"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928428" start="46622" end="46648" title="Bureau of Labor Statistics" label="Bureau of Labor Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7915680" start="48961" end="48985" title="Greater Male Variability Hypothesis" label="greater male variability"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326731" start="52572" end="52585" title="Richard J. Haier" label="Richard Haier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5026565" start="52590" end="52612" title="Camilla Persson Benbow" label="Camilla Persson Benbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q208376" start="52652" end="52655" title="Positron emission tomography" label="PET"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734081" start="52690" end="52708" title="glucose metabolism" label="glucose metabolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q744385" start="52868" end="52881" title="temporal lobe" label="temporal lobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q815382" start="53389" end="53402" title="meta-analysis" label="meta-analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q159375" start="53569" end="53587" title="Standard deviations" label="standard deviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q21821391" start="54749" end="54761" title="acting white" label="acting white"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701244" start="54878" end="54887" title="John Ogbu" label="John Ogbu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112640" start="56887" end="56905" title="Christopher Jencks" label="Christopher Jencks"/>
<link wikidata="Q87760968" start="58316" end="58350" title="Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on education" label="disrupted by the COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q929154" start="59035" end="59056" title="Brookings Institution" label="Brookings Institution"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59943" end="59969" title="#Optional SAT" label="optional status of the SAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q32979574" start="60323" end="60334" title="Jean Twenge" label="Jean Twenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118918" start="60419" end="60440" title="General Social Survey" label="General Social Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514395" start="61549" end="61566" title="high IQ societies" label="high IQ societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q184194" start="61573" end="61578" title="Mensa International" label="Mensa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671403" start="61580" end="61588" title="Intertel" label="Intertel"/>
<link wikidata="Q644895" start="61621" end="61640" title="Triple Nine Society" label="Triple Nine Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881523" start="62896" end="62900" title="Science, technology, engineering, and mathematics" label="STEM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7628416" start="63725" end="63765" title="Study of Mathematically Precocious Youth" label="Study of Mathematically Precocious Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q16981685" start="63839" end="63868" title="Talent Identification Program" label="Talent Identification Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q319845" start="66581" end="66599" title="investment banking" label="investment banking"/>
<link wikidata="Q130286" start="66604" end="66625" title="management consulting" label="management consulting"/>
<link wikidata="Q193326" start="66634" end="66647" title="Goldman Sachs" label="Goldman Sachs"/>
<link wikidata="Q310207" start="66652" end="66660" title="McKinsey &amp;amp; Company" label="McKinsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q95" start="66788" end="66794" title="Google" label="Google"/>
<link wikidata="Q19956290" start="66925" end="66936" title="Laszlo Bock" label="Laszlo Bock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842325" start="68269" end="68298" title="American Council on Education" label="American Council on Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q503888" start="68300" end="68319" title="Richard C. Atkinson" label="Richard C. Atkinson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="68537" end="68567" title="#Predictive validity and powers" label="predictive validity and powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5429753" start="69222" end="69230" title="FairTest" label="FairTest"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="69399" end="69420" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="69981" end="70001" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q875637" start="70022" end="70051" title="College of William &amp;amp; Mary" label="College of William &amp;amp; Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="70841" end="70860" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="70974" end="70992" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153281" start="71215" end="71233" title="Common Application" label="Common Application"/>
<link wikidata="Q62032641" start="71558" end="71581" title="Operation Varsity Blues" label="Operation Varsity Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q192891" start="71822" end="71830" title="Holism" label="holistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="73019" end="73053" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q356112" start="73097" end="73115" title="Affirmative action in the United States" label="affirmative action"/>
<link wikidata="Q20715426" start="73400" end="73415" title="Students for Fair Admissions v. Harvard" label="SFFA v. Harvard"/>
<link wikidata="Q20715426" start="73432" end="73442" title="SFFA v. UNC" label="SFFA v UNC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002022" start="73781" end="73796" title="grade inflation" label="grade inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="75525" end="75562" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="Massachusetts Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191202" start="75695" end="75723" title="University of North Carolina" label="University of North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q21063212" start="75947" end="75959" title="Les Perelman" label="Les Perelman"/>
<link wikidata="Q116834119" start="77137" end="77164" title="not-for-profit organization" label="not-for-profit organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q170277" start="77560" end="77572" title="intelligence quotient" label="intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5039942" start="77740" end="77752" title="Carl Brigham" label="Carl Brigham"/>
<link wikidata="Q170480" start="77867" end="77874" title="eugenics" label="eugenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="78051" end="78066" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49204" start="78077" end="78090" title="Smith College" label="Smith College"/>
<link wikidata="Q49355" start="78107" end="78119" title="James Bryant Conant" label="James Conant"/>
<link wikidata="Q26243398" start="78124" end="78138" title="Henry Chauncey" label="Henry Chauncey"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="78272" end="78290" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="78499" end="78511" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q959089" start="78921" end="78948" title="Educational Testing Service" label="Educational Testing Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500286" start="79577" end="79599" title="free response question" label="free response question"/>
<link wikidata="Q184478" start="79954" end="79978" title="University of California" label="University of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q185816" start="80099" end="80108" title="analogy" label="analogies"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="80806" end="80823" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q101244" start="81110" end="81120" title="initialism" label="initialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7388865" start="81451" end="81472" title="SAT Subject Tests" label="SAT Achievement Tests"/>
<link wikidata="Q101244" start="82129" end="82155" title="pseudo-acronym" label="did not stand for anything"/>
<link wikidata="Q42332" start="83008" end="83011" title="PDF" label="PDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q288826" start="83090" end="83100" title="ACT (test)" label="ACT (test)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146580" start="83151" end="83190" title="College admissions in the United States" label="College admissions in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6605041" start="83193" end="83217" title="List of admissions tests" label="List of admissions tests"/>
<link wikidata="Q7120579" start="83220" end="83230" title="PSAT/NMSQT" label="PSAT/NMSQT"/>
<link wikidata="Q7388865" start="83233" end="83250" title="SAT Subject Tests" label="SAT Subject Tests"/>
<link wikidata="Q6786903" start="83253" end="83295" title="Mathematics education in the United States" label="Mathematics education in the United States"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="144719" wikidata="Q72515523" url="?curid=144719" title="Rails (magazine)">
<text>Rails was a New Zealand–based monthly periodical covering rail transport in New Zealand published by Rails Publishing Ltd from August 1971, which in 1972 changed its name to Southern Press from August 1971 until December 2003. The company was jointly owned by Bob Stott and Robin Bromby; Bob Stott was Editor and ran the editorial content and Robin Bromby was Managing Editor mainly responsible for the business operation.

The editor for the entirety of &quot;Rails&quot; existence was Bob Stott QSM. Robin Bromby was managing editor from 1971 to 1975, at which time Bob and Jan Stott become the owners of the magazine. The magazine&#x27;s existence spanned the final years of central government control of railways in New Zealand (the New Zealand Railways Department), corporatisation in the 1980s (the New Zealand Railways Corporation), privatisation of the railways in 1993 (New Zealand Rail Limited, renamed Tranz Rail in 1995) and finally the purchase of Tranz Rail by Toll Holdings followed by the renationalisation of the rail network in 2003.

The magazine was initially printed by the Masterton Printing Company. In 1973 Robin Bromby established the Dunedin office, and the printing was transferred to Allied Press (owner of the &quot;Otago Daily Times&quot; newspaper). There were some difficult moments and, in 1973, the partners agreed to close the magazine to prevent further losses. New Zealand Railways was eager to see the magazine continue and committed to regular advertising, the revenue from that making it possible for Rails to survive. The rescue was very much at quarter to midnight; the next edition was about to go to print and the inside cover contained the closure announcement. At the last moment, that announcement was pulled and a full-page photograph of an Invercargill tram substituted. The economics of the magazine were further underpinned by the decision by Stott and Bromby to begin publishing rail books and this ancillary business enabled the company to turn the corner.

&quot;Rails&quot; and editor Bob Stott were often cited as authorities on rail-related subjects in the general news media. Stott continued to comment on railway-related matters after &quot;Rails&quot; ceased publication, and has had regular opinion columns published in &quot;Rails&quot; former competitor, &quot;Railfan&quot;.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q205651" start="58" end="87" title="rail transport in New Zealand" label="rail transport in New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q538101" start="737" end="768" title="New Zealand Railways Department" label="New Zealand Railways Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983338" start="805" end="837" title="New Zealand Railways Corporation" label="New Zealand Railways Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835507" start="879" end="903" title="Tranz Rail" label="New Zealand Rail Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674371" start="975" end="988" title="Toll Group" label="Toll Holdings"/>
<link wikidata="Q311369" start="1245" end="1262" title="Otago Daily Times" label="Otago Daily Times"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="144726" wikidata="Q203204" url="?curid=144726" title="Donatism">
<text>Donatism was a Christian sect leading to a schism in the church in the region of the Church of Carthage, from the fourth to the sixth centuries. Donatists argued that Christian clergy must be faultless for their ministry to be effective and their prayers and sacraments to be valid. Donatism had its roots in the long-established Christian community of the Roman province Africa Proconsularis (present-day Tunisia, the northeast of Algeria, and the western coast of Libya) and Mauretania Tingitana (roughly with the northern part of present-day Morocco), in the persecutions of Christians under Diocletian. Named after the Berber Christian bishop Donatus Magnus, Donatism flourished during the fourth and fifth centuries. Donatism mainly spread among the indigenous Berber population, and Donatists were able to blend Christianity with many of the Berber local customs.

==Origin and controversy==
The Roman governor of North Africa, lenient to the large Christian minority under his rule throughout the Diocletianic Persecutions, was satisfied when Christians handed over their scriptures as a token repudiation of faith. When the persecution ended, Christians who did so were called &quot;traditores&quot;—&quot;those who handed (the holy things) over&quot;—by their critics (who were mainly from the poorer classes).

Like third-century Novatianism, the Donatists were rigorists; the church must be a church of &quot;saints&quot; (not &quot;sinners&quot;), and sacraments administered by &quot;traditores&quot; were invalid. In 311 Caecilian (a new bishop of Carthage) was consecrated by Felix of Aptungi, an alleged &quot;traditor&quot;. His opponents consecrated Majorinus, a short-lived rival who was succeeded by Donatus.

Two years later, a commission appointed by Pope Miltiades condemned the Donatists. They persisted, seeing themselves as the true church with valid sacraments. Because of their association with the Circumcellions, the Donatists were repressed by Roman authorities. Although they had local support, their opponents were supported by Rome and by the rest of the Christian Church. The Donatists were still a force during the lifetime of Augustine of Hippo, and disappeared only after the seventh- and eighth-century Muslim conquest. The Donatists refused to accept the sacraments and spiritual authority of priests and bishops who were &quot;traditores&quot; during the persecution. The &quot;traditores&quot; had returned to positions of authority under Constantine I; according to the Donatists, sacraments administered by the &quot;traditores&quot; were invalid.

Whether the sacrament of Penance could reconcile a &quot;traditor&quot; to full communion was questioned, and the church&#x27;s position was that the sacrament could. The church still imposed years- (sometimes decades-) long public penance for serious sins. A penitent would first beg for the prayers of those entering a church from outside its doors. They would next be permitted to kneel inside the church during the Liturgy. After being allowed to stand with the congregation, the penitent would finally be allowed to receive the Eucharist again. According to Donatists, apostasy would permanently disqualify a man from church leadership.

The validity of sacraments administered by priests and bishops who had been &quot;traditores&quot; was denied by the Donatists. According to Augustine, a sacrament was from God and &quot;ex opere operato&quot; (Latin for &quot;from the work carried out&quot;). A priest or bishop in a state of mortal sin could continue to administer valid sacraments. The Donatists believed that a repentant apostate priest could no longer consecrate the Eucharist. Some towns had both Donatist and orthodox congregations.

==Impact==
The sect developed and grew in North Africa, with unrest and threatened riots in Carthage connected to the bishop controversy. Constantine, hoping to defuse the unrest, gave money to the non-Donatist bishop Caecilian as payment for churches damaged or confiscated during the persecution. Nothing was given to the Donatists; Constantine was apparently not fully aware of the seriousness of the dispute, which his gift exacerbated. The Donatists appealed to Rome for equal treatment; Constantine tasked Miltiades with resolving the issue, which led to the 313 commission. The Donatists refused to abide by the decision of the Roman council, demanding that a local council adjudicate the dispute and appealing directly to Constantine. In a surviving letter, a frustrated Constantine called for what became the first Council of Arles in 314. The council ruled against the Donatists, who again appealed to Constantine. The emperor ordered all parties to Rome for a hearing, ruled in favour of Caecilian and warned against unrest. A delegation from Rome travelled to Carthage in a vain attempt to seek compromise. The Donatists fomented protests and street violence, refusing to compromise in favor of the orthodox bishop.

After the Constantinian shift, when other Christians accepted the emperor&#x27;s decision, the Donatists continued to demonize him. After several attempts at reconciliation, in 317 Constantine issued an edict threatening death to anyone who disturbed the imperial peace; another edict followed, calling for the confiscation of all Donatist church property. Donatus refused to surrender his buildings in Carthage, and the local Roman governor sent troops to deal with him and his followers. Although the historical record is unclear, some Donatists were apparently killed and their clergy exiled.

Outside Carthage, Donatist churches and clergy were undisturbed. Constantine&#x27;s efforts to unite the church and the Donatists failed, and by 321 he asked the bishops to show moderation and patience to the sect in an open letter. During the brief reign of Julian, the Donatists were revitalized and, due to imperial protection, occupied churches and carried out atrocities. Laws against the Donatists were decreed by Valentinian I after the defeat of the Donatist usurper Firmus in North Africa.

==Opposition==

Augustine of Hippo campaigned against Donatism as bishop; through his efforts, orthodoxy gained the upper hand. According to Augustine and the church, the validity of sacraments was a property of the priesthood independent of individual character. Influenced by the Old Testament, he believed in discipline as a means of education.

In his letter to Vincentius, Augustine used the New Testament Parable of the Great Banquet to justify using force against the Donatists: &quot;You are of opinion that no one should be compelled to follow righteousness; and yet you read that the householder said to his servants, &#x27;Whomsoever ye shall find, compel them to come in.

In 409, Emperor Honorius&#x27;s secretary of state, Marcellinus of Carthage, issued a decree which condemned the Donatists as heretical and demanded that they surrender their churches. This was made possible by a &quot;collatio&quot; in which St. Augustine legally proved that Constantine had chosen the Nicene church over the Donatists as the imperial church. The Donatists were persecuted by the Roman authorities to such a degree that Augustine protested their treatment.

The Council of Trent (1545-1563) taught that in the divine sacrifice of the Holy Mass &quot; is contained and immolated, in an unbloody manner, the same Christ that offered Himself in a bloody manner upon the altar of the Cross. Hence, it is the same victim, the same sacrificing-priest who offers Himself now through the ministry of priests and who once offers Himself upon the Cross.&quot; The worth of the sacrifice does not depend on the celebrating priest (or bishop), but on the &quot;worth of the victim and on the dignity of the &quot;chief priest&quot;- none other than Jesus Christ Himself&quot;.

==Decline==
The effects of Augustine&#x27;s theological success and the emperor&#x27;s legal action were somewhat reversed when the Vandals conquered North Africa. Donatism may have also gradually declined because Donatists and orthodox Christians were equally marginalised by the Arian Vandals, but it survived the Vandal occupation and Justinian I&#x27;s Byzantine reconquest. Although it is unknown how long Donatism persisted, some Christian historians believe that the schism and its ensuing unrest in the Christian community facilitated the seventh-century Muslim conquest of the region.

==Related groups and individuals==
Donatism is associated with a number of other groups, including:
*The Rogatists were a pacifist breakaway faction who rejected the excesses of the Circumcellions and Donatists.
*The Claudianists, who (with the Urbanists) were reconciled to the Donatists by Donatist Bishop Primian of Carthage.
*Ticonius was an influential thinker who was expelled by the Donatists for his rejection of rebaptism.
*Followers of Maximian, who broke away from the mainline Donatist group because of perceived impurities within mainline Donatism.
*The Circumcellions, a name given by opponents based on &quot;circum cellas euntes&quot; (&quot;making a circuit around martyr shrines,&quot; but some older histories thought it meant &quot;making circuits around barns&quot;) because of their practice of living as homeless roamers. Among Donatists they were known as &quot;agonistici&quot;, which means &quot;soldiers of Christ&quot;. They regarded martyrdom as the supreme Christian virtue (disagreeing with the Episcopal see of Carthage on the primacy of chastity, sobriety, humility, and charity). Some mainline Donatists found them useful allies, but others were disgusted by their use of violence and sought to curb their influence by church councils. 
*Apostolic churches, a sect emulating the Apostles about which little is known. But it is very plausible that they were influenced by precedent gnostic Apotactics.
In Mauretania and Numidia, the &quot;Catholic Encyclopedia&quot; claims that the splinter groups were so numerous that the Donatists could not name them all.

==Bishops==
The Donatists followed a succession of bishops:
* Majorinus (311–313)
* Donatus Magnus (313–355; exiled 347)
* Parmenian (355–391)
* Primian (391–393)
* Maximianus (393–394)
* Primian (394–c. 400)

==Later influence==
* Early Kharijites, a strict sect of Islam in the same Berber region.

==Epithet==
For several centuries during the High Middle Ages and the Reformation, accusations of Donatism were levelled against church-reform movements which criticized clerical immorality on theological grounds. The early reformers John Wycliffe and Jan Hus were accused of Donatism by their theological opponents. Wycliffe taught that the moral corruption of priests invalidated their offices and sacraments, a belief characterizing Donatism. Hus similarly argued that a prelate&#x27;s moral character determined his ecclesiastical authority, a position his contemporaries compared to Donatism and condemned as heresy at the Council of Constance.

During the Reformation, Roman Catholic Counter-Reformers such as Johann Eck accused the magisterial Reformers of Donatism (although the latter had partially distanced themselves from Wycliffe&#x27;s theology to avoid such a charge). Magisterial Reformers like Ulrich Zwingli labeled radical Reformers, such as the Anabaptists, as Donatists; Roman Catholics were portrayed in Reformation rhetoric as Pelagian, another early Christian heresy. In Eastern Orthodoxy, the Bezpopovtsy (priestless) strain of Old Believers believed that because the Russian bishops acquiesced to Patriarch Nikon&#x27;s reforms they (and the other patriarchs) forfeited any claim to apostolic succession.

Accusations of Donatism remain common in contemporary intra-Christian polemics. Conservative Lutherans are sometimes called Donatists by their liberal brethren, referring to their doctrine of church fellowship and their position that churches which deny that Jesus&#x27; body and blood are eaten during the Eucharist do not celebrate a valid Lord&#x27;s Supper.

==See also==

* State church of the Roman Empire
* Meletius of Lycopolis
* Great Apostasy
* Kharjites
* Novatianism
* Maximian of Bagai

== Notes ==
== References ==

==Sources==
* 
* .
* .

==Further reading==
*.
* .
*.
* .
* .
* .

==External links==
* , a list of primary and secondary sources on the Donatists.
* , written by a Donatist leader.
* - new analysis of the textual, epigraphic and archaeological record.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q203204" start="0" end="8" title="Donatism" label="Donatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q19097" start="25" end="29" title="sect" label="sect"/>
<link wikidata="Q126287984" start="43" end="49" title="schism" label="schism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045755" start="85" end="103" title="Church of Carthage" label="Church of Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="167" end="176" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q49703" start="259" end="268" title="sacrament" label="sacrament"/>
<link wikidata="Q182547" start="357" end="371" title="Roman province" label="Roman province"/>
<link wikidata="Q181238" start="372" end="392" title="Africa (Roman province)" label="Africa Proconsularis"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="406" end="413" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="432" end="439" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="466" end="471" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244742" start="477" end="497" title="Mauretania Tingitana" label="Mauretania Tingitana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="545" end="552" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265674" start="562" end="605" title="Diocletianic Persecution" label="persecutions of Christians under Diocletian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268674" start="647" end="661" title="Donatus Magnus" label="Donatus Magnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="766" end="772" title="Berber people" label="Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265674" start="1000" end="1029" title="Diocletianic Persecution" label="the Diocletianic Persecutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q179461" start="1079" end="1088" title="scripture" label="scripture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2236670" start="1191" end="1201" title="traditors" label="traditores"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276913" start="1340" end="1351" title="Novatianism" label="Novatianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16591370" start="1372" end="1381" title="rigorists" label="rigorists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271062" start="1535" end="1544" title="Caecilianus" label="Caecilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="1562" end="1570" title="Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q27956844" start="1591" end="1607" title="Felix of Aptungi" label="Felix of Aptungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q27975261" start="1668" end="1677" title="Majorinus" label="Majorinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q162090" start="1773" end="1787" title="Pope Miltiades" label="Pope Miltiades"/>
<link wikidata="Q395317" start="1927" end="1941" title="Circumcellions" label="Circumcellions"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="2163" end="2181" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="Augustine of Hippo"/>
<link wikidata="Q925960" start="2242" end="2257" title="Muslim conquest of the Maghreb" label="Muslim conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q49482" start="2310" end="2329" title="apostolic succession" label="spiritual authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q8413" start="2481" end="2494" title="Constantine I" label="Constantine I"/>
<link wikidata="Q14955083" start="2605" end="2625" title="sacrament of Penance" label="sacrament of Penance"/>
<link wikidata="Q10909316" start="2825" end="2832" title="penance" label="penance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076567" start="3012" end="3019" title="Divine Liturgy" label="Liturgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="3126" end="3135" title="Eucharist" label="Eucharist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321540" start="3530" end="3540" title="mortal sin" label="mortal sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271062" start="3962" end="3971" title="Caecilianus" label="Caecilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174250" start="4562" end="4584" title="Synod of Arles (314)" label="first Council of Arles"/>
<link wikidata="Q311388" start="4983" end="5002" title="Constantinian shift" label="Constantinian shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454" start="5194" end="5199" title="capital punishment" label="death"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="5376" end="5384" title="Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q33941" start="5829" end="5835" title="Julian the Apostate" label="Julian"/>
<link wikidata="Q46720" start="5990" end="6003" title="Valentinian I" label="Valentinian I"/>
<link wikidata="Q11161560" start="6037" end="6044" title="Roman usurper" label="usurper"/>
<link wikidata="Q531014" start="6045" end="6051" title="Firmus (4th-century usurper)" label="Firmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="6086" end="6104" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="Augustine of Hippo"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="6352" end="6365" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="6467" end="6480" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269583" start="6481" end="6509" title="Parable of the Great Banquet" label="Parable of the Great Banquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q159798" start="6771" end="6779" title="Honorius (emperor)" label="Honorius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291016" start="6807" end="6830" title="Marcellinus of Carthage" label="Marcellinus of Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6881" end="6890" title="Heresy#Christianity" label="heretical"/>
<link wikidata="Q172991" start="7235" end="7251" title="Council of Trent" label="Council of Trent"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7307" end="7316" title="Mass in the Catholic Church#Communion rite" label="Holy Mass"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7440" end="7445" title="Altar#antiquity" label="altar"/>
<link wikidata="Q51677" start="7774" end="7786" title="High Priest of Israel" label="chief priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q42211" start="7971" end="7978" title="Vandals" label="Vandals"/>
<link wikidata="Q83922" start="8120" end="8125" title="Arian" label="Arian"/>
<link wikidata="Q41866" start="8177" end="8188" title="Justinian I" label="Justinian I"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="8196" end="8205" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q925960" start="8402" end="8417" title="Muslim conquest of the Maghreb" label="Muslim conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q29569909" start="8539" end="8548" title="Rogatists" label="Rogatists"/>
<link wikidata="Q58848" start="8556" end="8564" title="pacifist" label="pacifist"/>
<link wikidata="Q28480966" start="8742" end="8761" title="Primian of Carthage" label="Primian of Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121669" start="8764" end="8772" title="Ticonius" label="Ticonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q6102273" start="8855" end="8864" title="rebaptism" label="rebaptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q27983605" start="8880" end="8888" title="Maximian (Bishop of Carthage)" label="Maximian"/>
<link wikidata="Q395317" start="9001" end="9015" title="Circumcellions" label="Circumcellions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498826" start="9396" end="9405" title="martyrdom" label="martyrdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q157811" start="9431" end="9437" title="virtue" label="virtue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045755" start="9460" end="9485" title="Episcopal see of Carthage" label="Episcopal see of Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q207894" start="9504" end="9512" title="chastity" label="chastity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1791388" start="9514" end="9522" title="sobriety" label="sobriety"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186677" start="9524" end="9532" title="humility" label="humility"/>
<link wikidata="Q456673" start="9538" end="9545" title="Charity (virtue)" label="charity"/>
<link wikidata="Q43412" start="9747" end="9755" title="Apostles in the New Testament" label="Apostles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780730" start="9857" end="9867" title="Apotactics" label="Apotactics"/>
<link wikidata="Q309272" start="9872" end="9882" title="Mauretania" label="Mauretania"/>
<link wikidata="Q102679" start="9887" end="9894" title="Numidia" label="Numidia"/>
<link wikidata="Q302556" start="9906" end="9927" title="Catholic Encyclopedia" label="Catholic Encyclopedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27975261" start="10090" end="10099" title="Majorinus" label="Majorinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268674" start="10112" end="10126" title="Donatus Magnus" label="Donatus Magnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q28862342" start="10151" end="10160" title="Parmenian" label="Parmenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q28480966" start="10173" end="10180" title="Primian of Carthage" label="Primian"/>
<link wikidata="Q27983605" start="10193" end="10203" title="Maximian (Bishop of Carthage)" label="Maximianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q28480966" start="10216" end="10223" title="Primian of Carthage" label="Primian"/>
<link wikidata="Q189570" start="10266" end="10276" title="Kharijites" label="Kharijites"/>
<link wikidata="Q212685" start="10374" end="10390" title="High Middle Ages" label="High Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="10399" end="10410" title="Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q173893" start="10563" end="10576" title="John Wycliffe" label="John Wycliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q43977" start="10581" end="10588" title="Jan Hus" label="Jan Hus"/>
<link wikidata="Q160598" start="10943" end="10949" title="heresy" label="heresy"/>
<link wikidata="Q154001" start="10957" end="10977" title="Council of Constance" label="Council of Constance"/>
<link wikidata="Q128168" start="11019" end="11036" title="Counter-Reformation" label="Counter-Reformers"/>
<link wikidata="Q60298" start="11045" end="11055" title="Johann Eck" label="Johann Eck"/>
<link wikidata="Q6731130" start="11068" end="11089" title="Magisterial Reformation" label="magisterial Reformers"/>
<link wikidata="Q123034" start="11240" end="11254" title="Ulrich Zwingli" label="Ulrich Zwingli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786655" start="11263" end="11280" title="radical Reformation" label="radical Reformers"/>
<link wikidata="Q165580" start="11294" end="11305" title="Anabaptism" label="Anabaptists"/>
<link wikidata="Q122398" start="11379" end="11387" title="Pelagianism" label="Pelagian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333484" start="11424" end="11441" title="Eastern Orthodoxy" label="Eastern Orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2531282" start="11447" end="11458" title="Bezpopovtsy" label="Bezpopovtsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q223710" start="11482" end="11495" title="Old Believers" label="Old Believers"/>
<link wikidata="Q379587" start="11552" end="11567" title="Patriarch Nikon" label="Patriarch Nikon"/>
<link wikidata="Q49482" start="11638" end="11658" title="apostolic succession" label="apostolic succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="11754" end="11763" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutherans"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="11968" end="11977" title="Eucharist" label="Eucharist"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="12003" end="12021" title="Eucharist" label="Lord&amp;#x27;s Supper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603670" start="12040" end="12072" title="State church of the Roman Empire" label="State church of the Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352126" start="12075" end="12096" title="Meletius of Lycopolis" label="Meletius of Lycopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039460" start="12099" end="12113" title="Great Apostasy" label="Great Apostasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q189570" start="12116" end="12125" title="Kharjites" label="Kharjites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276913" start="12128" end="12139" title="Novatianism" label="Novatianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q27975268" start="12142" end="12159" title="Maximian of Bagai" label="Maximian of Bagai"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="144732" wikidata="Q687031" url="?curid=144732" title="Secession">
<text>Secession is the formal withdrawal of a group from a political entity. The process begins once a group proclaims an act of secession (such as a declaration of independence). A secession attempt might be violent or peaceful, but the goal is the creation of a new state or entity independent of the group or territory from which it seceded. Threats of secession can be a strategy for achieving more limited goals.

Notable examples of secession, and secession attempts, include:

* The United Provinces of the Netherlands breaking away from the Spanish Empire during the Eighty Years&#x27; War (1566-1648):
* The Thirteen Colonies (the later United States) revolting from the British Empire during the American Revolutionary War (1775-83);
* Hispanic America gaining independence from the Spanish Empire during Spanish American wars of independence;
* Texas leaving Mexico, during the Texas Revolution (1835-36);
* the Confederate States of America seceding from the Union, setting off the American Civil War;
* Panama seceding from Colombia in 1903, during United States acquisition of the Panama Canal;
* the Irish Republic leaving the United Kingdom;
* Finland voting to leave the Soviet Union in 1917, setting off the Finnish Civil War;
* Biafra leaving Nigeria (and returning, after losing the Nigerian Civil War);
* the former Soviet republics leaving the Soviet Union in 1991, causing its dissolution;
* the former republics leaving Yugoslavia during the 1990s, causing its dissolution.

==Secession theory==
There is no consensus on the definition of political secession despite many political theories on the subject.

According to the 2017 book &quot;Secession and Security,&quot; by political scientist Ahsan Butt, states respond violently to secessionist movements if the potential state poses a greater threat than the would-be secessionist movement. States perceive a future war with a potential new state as likely if the ethnic group driving the secessionist struggle has deep identity division with the central state, and if the regional neighborhood is violent and unstable.

=== Explanations for the 20th century increase in secessionism ===
According to political scientist Bridget L. Coggins, the academic literature contains four potential explanations for the drastic increase in secessions during the 20th century: 
* Ethnonational mobilization, where ethnic minorities have been increasingly mobilized to pursue states of their own.
* Institutional empowerment, where the growing inability of empires and ethnic federations to maintain colonies and member states increases the likelihood of success.
* Relative strength, where increasingly powerful secessionist movements are more likely to achieve statehood.
* Negotiated consent, where home states and the international community increasingly consent to secessionist demands.

Other scholars have linked secession to resource discoveries and extraction. David B. Carter, H. E. Goemans, and Ryan Griffiths find that border changes among states tend to conform to the borders of previous administrative units.

Several scholars argue that changes in the international system have made it easier for small states to survive and prosper. Tanisha Fazal and Ryan Griffiths link increased numbers of secessions to an international system that is more favorable for new states. For example, new states can obtain assistance from international organizations such as the International Monetary Fund, World Bank, and the United Nations. Alberto Alesina and Enrico Spolaore argue that greater levels of free trade and peace have reduced the benefits of being part of a larger state, thus motivating nations within larger states to seek secession.

Woodrow Wilson&#x27;s proclamations on self-determination in 1918 created a surge in secessionist demands.

== Philosophy of secession ==
The political philosophy of the rights and moral justification for secession began to develop as recently as the 1980s. American philosopher Allen Buchanan offered the first systematic account of the subject in the 1990s and contributed to the normative classification of the literature on secession. In his 1991 book &quot;Secession: The Morality of Political Divorce From Fort Sumter to Lithuania and Quebec&quot;, Buchanan outlined limited rights to secession under certain circumstances, mostly related to oppression by people of other ethnic or racial groups, and especially those previously conquered by other people. In his collection of essays from secession scholars, &quot;Secession, State, and Liberty&quot;, professor David Gordon challenges Buchanan, making a case that the moral status of the seceding state is unrelated to the issue of secession itself.

===Justifications for secession===
Some theories of secession emphasize a general right of secession for any reason (&quot;Choice Theory&quot;) while others emphasize that secession should be considered only to rectify grave injustices (&quot;Just Cause Theory&quot;). Some theories do both. A list of justifications may be presented supporting the right to secede, as described by Allen Buchanan, Robert McGee, Anthony Birch, Jane Jacobs, Frances Kendall and Leon Louw, Leopold Kohr, Kirkpatrick Sale, Donald W. Livingston and various authors in David Gordon&#x27;s &quot;Secession, State and Liberty&quot;, includes:
* United States President James Buchanan, Fourth Annual Message to Congress on the State of the Union December 3, 1860: &quot;The fact is that our Union rests upon public opinion, and can never be cemented by the blood of its citizens shed in civil war. If it cannot live in the affections of the people, it must one day perish. Congress possesses many means of preserving it by conciliation, but the sword was not placed in their hand to preserve it by force.&quot;
* Former President Thomas Jefferson, in a letter to William H. Crawford, Secretary of War under President James Madison, on June 20, 1816: &quot;In your letter to Fisk, you have fairly stated the alternatives between which we are to choose: 1, licentious commerce and gambling speculations for a few, with eternal war for the many; or, 2, restricted commerce, peace, and steady occupations for all. If any State in the Union will declare that it prefers separation with the first alternative, to a continuance in union without it, I have no hesitation in saying, &#x27;let us separate.&#x27; I would rather the States should withdraw, which are for unlimited commerce and war, and confederate with those alone which are for peace and agriculture.&quot;
* Economic enfranchisement of an economically oppressed class that is regionally concentrated within the scope of a larger national territory.
* The right to liberty, freedom of association and private property
* Recognition of the will of the majority to secede, in keeping with consent as an important democratic principle
* Increased ease for states to join with others in an experimental union
* Dissolution of such a union when goals for which it was constituted are not achieved
* Self-defense when larger group presents lethal threat to minority or the government cannot adequately defend an area
* Self-determination of peoples
* Preservation of culture, language, etc. from assimilation or destruction by a larger or more powerful group
* Furtherance of diversity by allowing diverse cultures to keep their identity
* Rectification of past injustices, especially past conquest by a larger power
* Escape from &quot;discriminatory redistribution&quot;, i.e. tax schemes, regulatory policies, economic programs, and similar policies that distribute resources away to another area, especially in an undemocratic fashion
* Enhanced efficiency when the state or empire becomes too large to administer efficiently
* Preservation of &quot;liberal purity&quot; (or &quot;conservative purity&quot;) by allowing less (or more) liberal regions to secede
* Provision of superior constitutional systems which allow flexibility of secession
* Minimizing the size of political entities and the human scale through right to secession

Political scientist Aleksander Pavkovic describes five justifications for a general right of secession within liberal political theory:
* Anarcho-Capitalism: individual liberty to form political associations and private property rights together justify right to secede and to create a &quot;viable political order&quot; with like-minded individuals.
* Democratic Secessionism: the right of secession, as a variant of the right of self-determination, is vested in a &quot;territorial community&quot; which wishes to secede from &quot;their existing political community&quot;; the group wishing to secede then proceeds to delimit &quot;its&quot; territory by the majority.
* Communitarian Secessionism: any group with a particular &quot;participation-enhancing&quot; identity, concentrated in a particular territory, which desires to improve its members&#x27; political participation has a &quot;prima facie&quot; right to secede.
* Cultural Secessionism: any group which was previously in a minority has a right to protect and develop its own culture and distinct national identity through seceding into an independent state.
* The Secessionism of Threatened Cultures: if a minority culture is threatened within a state that has a majority culture, the minority needs a right to form a state of its own which would protect its culture.

=== Arguments against secession ===
Allen Buchanan, who supports secession under limited circumstances, lists arguments that might be used against secession:
* &quot;Protecting legitimate expectations&quot; of those who now occupy territory claimed by secessionists, even in cases where that land was stolen
* &quot;Self defense&quot; if losing part of the state would make it difficult to defend the rest of it
* &quot;Protecting majority rule&quot; and the principle that minorities must abide by them
* &quot;Minimization of strategic bargaining&quot; by making it difficult to secede, such as by imposing an exit tax
* &quot;Soft paternalism&quot; because secession will be bad for secessionists or others
* &quot;Threat of anarchy&quot; because smaller and smaller entities may choose to secede until there is chaos, although this is not the true meaning of the political and philosophical concept
* &quot;Preventing wrongful taking&quot; such as the state&#x27;s previous investment in infrastructure
* &quot;Distributive justice&quot; arguments posit that wealthier areas cannot secede from poorer ones

==Types of secession==

Secession theorists have described a number of ways in which a political entity (city, county, canton, state) can secede from the larger or original state:
* Secession from federation or confederation (political entities with substantial reserved powers which have agreed to join) versus secession from a unitary state (a state governed as a single unit with few powers reserved to sub-units)
* Colonial wars of independence from an imperial state although this is decolonisation rather than secession. 
* Recursive secession, such as India decolonising from the British Empire, then Pakistan seceding from India, or Georgia seceding from the Soviet Union, then South Ossetia seceding from Georgia.
* National secession (seceding entirely from the national state) versus local secession (seceding from one entity of the national state into another entity of the same state)
* Central or enclave secession (seceding entity is completely surrounded by the original state) versus peripheral secession (along a border of the original state)
* Secession by contiguous units versus secession by non-contiguous units (exclaves)
* Separation or partition (although an entity secedes, the rest of the state retains its structure) versus dissolution (all political entities dissolve their ties and create several new states)
* Irredentism where secession is sought in order to annex the territory to another state because of common ethnicity or prior historical links
* Minority secession (a minority of the population or territory secedes) versus majority secession (a majority of the population or territory secedes)
* Secession of better-off regions versus secession of worse-off regions
* The threat of secession is sometimes used as a strategy to gain greater autonomy within the original state

==Rights to secession==

Most sovereign states do not recognize the right to self-determination through secession in their constitutions. Many expressly forbid it. However, there are several existing models of self-determination through greater autonomy and through secession.

In liberal constitutional democracies the principle of majority rule has dictated whether a minority can secede. In the United States Abraham Lincoln acknowledged that secession might be possible through amending the United States Constitution. The Supreme Court in &quot;Texas v. White&quot; held secession could occur &quot;through revolution, or through consent of the States&quot;. The British Parliament in 1933 held that Western Australia could secede from the Commonwealth of Australia only upon vote of a majority of the country as a whole; the previous two-thirds majority vote for secession via referendum in Western Australia was insufficient.

The Chinese Communist Party followed the Soviet Union in including the right of secession in its 1931 constitution in order to entice ethnic nationalities and Tibet into joining. However, the Party eliminated the right to secession in later years, and had anti-secession clause written into the Constitution before and after the founding the People&#x27;s Republic of China. The 1947 Constitution of the Union of Burma contained an express state right to secede from the union under a number of procedural conditions. It was eliminated in the 1974 constitution of the Socialist Republic of the Union of Burma (officially the &quot;Union of Myanmar&quot;). Burma still allows &quot;local autonomy under central leadership&quot;.

As of 1996, the constitutions of Austria, Ethiopia, France, and Saint Kitts and Nevis have express or implied rights to secession. Switzerland allows for the secession from current and the creation of new cantons. In the case of proposed Quebec separation from Canada, the Supreme Court of Canada in 1998 ruled that only both a clear majority of the province and a constitutional amendment confirmed by all participants in the Canadian federation could allow secession.

The European Union is not a sovereign state but an association of sovereign states formed by treaty; as such, leaving it, which is possible by simply denouncing the treaty, is not secession. Nonetheless, the 2003 draft of the European Union Constitution allowed for the voluntary withdrawal of member states from the union, although the representatives of the member-state which wanted to leave could not participate in the withdrawal discussions of the European Council or of the Council of Ministers. There was much discussion about such self-determination by minorities before the final document underwent the unsuccessful ratification process in 2005. In 2007 the Treaty on European Union included Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union, establishing a mechanism for withdrawal from the EU.

As a result of the successful constitutional referendum held in 2003, every municipality in the Principality of Liechtenstein has the right to secede from the Principality by a vote of a majority of the citizens residing in that municipality.

Indigenous peoples have a range of different forms of indigenous sovereignty and have the right of self-determination, but under current understanding of international law they have a mere &quot;remedial&quot; right to secession in extreme cases of abuse of their rights, because independence and sovereign statehood is a territorial and diplomatic claim and not one of self-determination and self-government, respectively, generally leaving rights to secession to the internal legislation of sovereign states.

==Secession movements==

National secessionist movements advocate for the claim that a population within a state is a nation that has the right to form its own nation-state. Movements that work towards political secession may describe themselves as being autonomy, separatist, independence, self-determination, partition, devolution, decentralization, sovereignty, self-governance or decolonization movements instead of, or in addition to, being secession movements.

===Australia===
During the 19th century, the single British colony in eastern mainland Australia, New South Wales (NSW) was progressively divided up by the British government as new settlements were formed and spread. Victoria (Vic) was formed in 1851 and Queensland (Qld) in 1859.

However, settlers agitated to divide the colonies throughout the later part of the century; particularly in central Queensland (centered in Rockhampton) in the 1860s and 1890s, and in North Queensland (with Bowen as a potential colonial capital) in the 1870s. Other secession (or territorial separation) movements arose and these advocated the secession of New England in northern central New South Wales, Deniliquin in the Riverina district also in NSW, and Mount Gambier in the eastern part of South Australia.

;Western Australia
Secession movements have surfaced several times in Western Australia (WA), where a 1933 referendum for secession from the Federation of Australia passed with a two-thirds majority. The referendum had to be ratified by the British Parliament, which declined to act, on the grounds that it would contravene the Australian Constitution.

The Principality of Hutt River claimed to have seceded from Australia in 1970, although its status was not recognised by Australia or any other country.

===Austria===
After being liberated by the Red Army and the U.S. Army, Austria seceded from Nazi Germany on April 27, 1945. This took place after seven years under Nazi rule, which began with the annexation of Austria into Nazi Germany in March 1938. The secession only took place once Nazi Germany had been defeated by the Allies.

===Bangladesh===
The Banga Sena (Bangabhumi) is a separatist Hindu organisation, which supports the making of a Bangabhumi/separate homeland for Bengali Hindus in the People&#x27;s Republic of Bangladesh. The group is led by Kalidas Baidya.

The Shanti Bahini (, &quot;Peace Force&quot;) is the name of the military wing of the Parbatya Chattagram Jana Sanghati Samiti - the United People&#x27;s Party of the Chittagong Hill Tracts aims are to create an indigenous Buddhist orientated Chacomas state within SE Bangladesh.

===Belgium and the Netherlands===
On August 25, 1830, during the reign of William I, the nationalistic opera &quot;La muette de Portici&quot; was performed in Brussels. Soon after, the Belgian Revolt occurred, which resulted in the Belgian secession from the Kingdom of the Netherlands.

===Brazil===
In 1825, soon after the Empire of Brazil managed to defeat the Cortes-Gerais and the Portuguese Empire in an Independence War, the Platinean nationalists in Cisplatina declared independence and joined the United Provinces, which led to a stagnated war between both, as they were both weakened, lacking manpower and politically fragile. The peace treaty accepted Uruguay&#x27;s independence, reasserted the rule of both nations over their land and some important points like free navigation in the Silver River.

Three rather disorganized secessionist rebellions happened in Grão-Pará, Bahia, and Maranhão, where the people were unhappy with the Empire (these provinces were Portuguese bastions in the Independence War). The Malê Revolt, in Bahia, was an Islamic slave revolt. These three rebellions were bloodily crushed by the Empire of Brazil.

The Pernambuco was one of the most nativist of all Brazilian regions. Over a series of five revolts (1645–1654, 1710, 1817, 1824, 1848), the province ousted the Dutch West India Company and tried to secede from the Portuguese and Brazilian Empires. In each attempt, the rebels were crushed, the leaders shot and their territory divided. Nevertheless, they kept revolting until Pernambuco&#x27;s territory was a little fraction of what it was before.

In the Ragamuffin War, the Province of Rio Grande do Sul was undergoing a (at that time common) liberal vs conservative &quot;cold&quot; war. After Emperor Pedro II of Brazil favoured the conservatives, the liberals took the Capital and declared an independent Republic, fighting their way to the Province of Santa Catarina and declaring the Juliana Republic. Eventually they were slowly forced back, and made a reunification peace with the Empire. This was not considered a secessionist war, even if it could have resulted in an independent republic if the Empire had been defeated. After the Empire agreed to aid Santa Catarina&#x27;s economy by taxing Argentina&#x27;s products (like dry meat), the rebels reunited with the Empire and joined its military ranks.

In modern times, the South Region of Brazil has been the centre of a secessionist movement led by an organization called The South is My Country since the 1990s. Reasons cited for Southern Brazil&#x27;s secession movement are taxation, due to it being one of the wealthiest regions in the country; political disputes with the northernmost states of Brazil; 2016 scandal revolving around the Workers&#x27; Party&#x27;s involvement in a kickback scheme with state-owned oil company Petrobras; and the impeachment of then-President Dilma Rousseff. Additionally, there is an ethnic divide as the South Region is predominately European, populated primarily by Germans, Italians, Portuguese and other European groups. In contrast, the rest of Brazil is a multicultural melting pot. The South Region in 2016 voted in an unofficial referendum called &quot;Plebisul&quot; in which 95% of voters supported secession and the creation of an independent South Region.

There is also a push for secession movement in the state of São Paulo, which seeks to become a country independent from the rest of Brazil.

===Cameroon===
In October 2017, Ambazonia declared its independence from Cameroon. Less than a month beforehand, tensions had escalated into open warfare between separatists and the Cameroon Armed Forces.
The conflict, known as the &quot;Anglophone Crisis&quot;, is deeply rooted in the October 1, 1961 incomplete decolonization of the former British Southern Cameroons (UNGA Resolution 1608). On January 1, 1960, French Cameroon was granted independence from France as the Republic of Cameroon and was admitted into the United Nations. The more advanced democratic and self-ruling people of British Cameroon were instead limited to two choices. Through a UN plebiscite, they were directed to either join the federation of Nigeria or the independent Republic of Cameroon as a federation of two equal states. While the Northern Cameroons voted to join Nigeria, the Southern Cameroons voted to integrate into the Republic of Cameroon, but they did so without a formal Treaty of Union on record at the UN. In 1972, Cameroon used its majority population to abolish the federation and implement a system which resulted in the occupation of the former South Cameroons territory by French-speaking Cameroon administrators. In 1984, Cameroon heightened tensions by returning to its name at independence, &quot;Republic of Cameroun&quot;, which did not include the territory of the former British Southern Cameroons or Ambazonia. 
For more than fifty years the English-speaking people of the Former British Southern Cameroons made multiple attempts both nationally and internationally to get the Cameroon government to address these issues and possibly return to the previously agreed federation at independence. In 2016, after all these attempts failed, Cameroon engaged in a military crackdown, including cutting the internet in the English-speaking regions. In response, the people of Southern Cameroon declared on October 1, 2017, the restoration of their UN state of Southern Cameroons, which they called the &quot;Federal Republic of Ambazonia&quot;.

===Canada===
Throughout Canada&#x27;s history, there has been tension between English-speaking and French-speaking Canadians. Under the Constitutional Act of 1791, the Province of Quebec (including parts of what are today Quebec, Ontario and Newfoundland and Labrador) was divided in two: Lower Canada (which retained French law and institutions and is now part of the provinces of Quebec and Newfoundland and Labrador) and Upper Canada (a new colony intended to accommodate the many new English-speaking settlers, including the United Empire Loyalists, and now part of Ontario). The intent was to provide each group with its own colony. In 1841, the two Canadas were merged into the Province of Canada. The union proved contentious, however, resulting in a legislative deadlock between English and French legislators. The difficulties of the union, among other factors, led in 1867 to the formation of the Canadian Confederation, a federal system that united the Province of Canada, Nova Scotia and New Brunswick (later joined by other British colonies in North America). The federal framework did not eliminate all tensions, however, leading to the Quebec sovereignty movement in the latter half of the 20th century.

Other occasional secessionist movements have included anti-Confederation movements in the 19th century Atlantic Canada (see Anti-Confederation Party), the North-West Rebellion of 1885, and various small separatist movements in Alberta particularly (see Alberta separatism) and Western Canada generally (see, for example, Western Canada Concept).

===Central America===
After the 1823 collapse of the First Mexican Empire, the former Captaincy-General of Guatemala was organized into a new Federal Republic of Central America. In 1838, Nicaragua seceded. The Federal Republic was formally dissolved in 1840, all but one of the states having seceded amidst general disorder.

===China===
The People&#x27;s Republic of China government claims control over Taiwan and describes the political status of Taiwan as an issue of secession, despite having never governed the territory. The Republic of China (Taiwan) government administers control over Taiwan and outlying islands but lacks widespread official international recognition. The &quot;Anti-Secession Law,&quot; passed in 2005, formalized the long-standing policy of the People&#x27;s Republic of China to use military means against Taiwan independence in the event peaceful means become otherwise impossible.

Western regions of Xinjiang (East Turkistan) and Tibet are the focus of secessionist calls by the Tibetan independence movement and East Turkestan Independence Movement. The East Turkistan Government in Exile does not view East Turkistan as a part of China but rather an occupied country, so it does not view independence from China as &quot;secession&quot; but rather &quot;decolonization&quot;.

The Special Administrative Region of Hong Kong has a secessionist movement in the city that the Chinese Communist Party has placed on the national security agenda in 2017 which is called the Hong Kong independence movement.

===Congo===
In 1960, the State of Katanga declared independence from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. United Nations troops crushed it in Operation Grand Slam.

===Cyprus===
In 1974, Greek irredentists launched a &quot;coup d&#x27;état&quot; in Cyprus, in an attempt to annex the island with Greece. Almost immediately, the Turkish Army invaded northern Cyprus to protect the interests of the ethnic Turkish minority, who in the following year formed the &quot;Turkish Federated State of Cyprus&quot; and in 1983 declared independence as the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus, recognized only by Turkey.

===East Timor===
The Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste (also known as East Timor) has been described as having &quot;seceded&quot; from Indonesia. After Portuguese sovereignty was terminated in 1975, East Timor was occupied by Indonesia. However, the United Nations and the International Court of Justice refused to recognize this incorporation. Therefore, the resulting civil war and eventual 1999 East Timorese vote for complete separation are better described as an independence movement.

===Ethiopia===
Following the May 1991 victory of Eritrean People&#x27;s Liberation Front forces against the communist Derg regime during the Eritrean War of Independence, Eritrea (formerly known as &quot;Medri Bahri&quot;) gained de facto independence from Ethiopia. Following the United Nations observation 1993 Eritrean independence referendum, Eritrea gained de jure independence.

===European Union===

Before the Treaty of Lisbon entered into force on 1December 2009, no provision in the treaties or law of the European Union outlined the ability of a state to voluntarily withdraw from the EU. The European Constitution did propose such a provision and, after the failure to ratify the Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe, that provision was then included in the Lisbon Treaty.

The treaty introduced an exit clause for members who wish to withdraw from the Union. This formalised the procedure by stating that a member state may notify the European Council that it wishes to withdraw, upon which withdrawal negotiations begin; if no other agreement is reached, the treaty ceases to apply to the withdrawing state two years after such notification.

On June 23, 2016, the United Kingdom voted to leave the European Union in a binding referendum voted for by parliament, and finally left the European Union on January 31, 2020. This is informally known as Brexit.

===Finland===
Finland successfully and peacefully seceded from the newly-formed and unstable Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic in 1917. The latter was led by Lenin, who had sought refuge in Finland during the Russian Revolution. Unsuccessful attempts at greater autonomy or peaceful secession had already been made during the preceding Russian Empire but had been denied by the Russian emperor. However, with the country still at war and under great pressure, Lenin allowed Finland to secede. Its peripheral location made it difficult to defend and less strategically important than Russia&#x27;s other territories, so he conceded sovereignty to the Finns rather than try to defend it.

===France===
France was one of the European Great Powers with populous foreign empires. Like the othersthe United Kingdom, Spain, Portugal, Italy, Belgium, the Netherlands, and formerly Germany and the Ottoman Empireits populous states abroad have all seceded, in most cases been granted independence. These secessionist movements generally took place at similar stages by continent. See decolonization of the Ottoman Empire, Americas, Asia and Africa.
As to France&#x27;s contiguous state, these have few present representatives at the national level, see:

* Alsace independence movement
* Breton independence
* Corsican nationalism
* Occitan nationalism

===Gran Colombia===
After a decade of tumultuous federalism, Ecuador and Venezuela seceded from Gran Colombia in 1830, leaving the similarly tumultuous United States of Colombia (now the Republic of Colombia), which also lost Panama in 1903.

===India===
Pakistan seceded from the British-Indian Empire in what is known as the Partition.
Today, the Constitution of India does not allow Indian states to secede from the Union.

The Indian Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir hosts some paramilitary nationalists who advocate for a Muslim state, in opposition to the Indian establishment. They are mostly in the Valley of Kashmir since 1989, where the Indian Army sometimes patrols, having bases along the nearby international border. They are supported by Pakistan, which has allegedly funded many terrorist, separatist outfits with the goal of destabilizing India, according to the Indian Research and Analysis Wing, though the country denies any direct involvement. The Kashmir insurgency reached at its peak influence in the 1990s.

Other secessionist movements in Nagaland, Assam, Manipur, Punjab (known as the Khalistan movement), Mizoram and Tripura, Tamil Nadu . The violent Naxalite–Maoist insurgency operates in eastern rural India is rarely considered secessionist as its goal is to overthrow the government of India. The Communist Party of India (Maoist)&#x27;s commanders idealise a Communist republic to be made up swathes of India.

===Iran===
Active secession movements include: Iranian Azeri, Assyrian independence movement, Bakhtiary lurs movement in 1876, Iranian Kurdistan; Kurdistan Democratic Party of Iran (KDPI), Khūzestān Province Balochistan and independence movement for free separated Balochistan, (&quot;Arab nationalist&quot;); Al-Ahwaz Arab People&#x27;s Democratic Popular Front, Democratic Solidarity Party of Al-Ahwaz (See Politics of Khūzestān Province: Arab politics and separatism), and Balochistan People&#x27;s Party (BPP) supporting Baloch Separatism.

===Italy===
The Movement for the Independence of Sicily (Movimento Indipendentista Siciliano, MIS) has its roots in the Sicilian Independence Movement of the late 1940s; it was active for around 60 years. Today, the MIS no longer exists, though many other parties have emerged. One is Nation Sicily (Sicilia Nazione), which still believes in the idea that Sicily, due to its deeply personal and ancient history, should be a sovereign country. Moreover, a common ideology shared by all the Sicilian independentist movements is to fight against Cosa Nostra and all the other Mafia organizations, which have a very deep influence over Sicily&#x27;s public and private institutions. The Sicilian branch of the Five Star Movement, which polls show is Sicily&#x27;s most popular party, has also publicly expressed the intention to start working for a possible secession from Italy if the central government would not collaborate in shifting the nation&#x27;s administrative organization from a unitary country to a federal state.

In Southern Italy, several movements have expressed a will to secede from Italy. This newborn ideology is called neo-Bourbonism, because the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies was under the control of the House of Bourbon. The Kingdom of the Two Sicilies was created in 1816 after the Congress of Vienna, and it comprised both Sicily and continental Southern Italy. The Kingdom came to an end in 1861, being annexed to the newborn Kingdom of Italy. However, the patriotic feelings shared among the southern Italian population is more ancient, starting in 1130 with the Kingdom of Sicily, which was composed by both the island and south Italy. According to the neo-Bourbonic movements the Italian regions which should secede are Sicily, Calabria, Basilicata, Apulia, Molise, Campania, Abruzzo, and Latio&#x27;s provinces of Rieti, Latina and Frosinone. The major movements and parties which believe in this ideology are Unione Mediterranea, Mo! and Briganti.

Lega Nord has been seeking the independence of the region known to separatists as Padania, which includes lands along the Po Valley in northern Italy. Some organizations separately work for the independence of Venetia or Veneto and the secession or reunification of South Tyrol with Austria. Lega Nord governing Lombardy has expressed a will to turn the region into a sovereign country. Also, the island of Sardinia is home to a notable nationalist movement.

===Japan===
The ethnic Ryukyuan (a branch of modern Okinawan) people had their own state historically (Ryukyu Kingdom). Although some Okinawan people have sought independence from Japan since they were annexed by Japan in 1879, and especially after 1972 when the islands were transferred from U.S. rule to Japan, their activism and movement have been consistently supported by single digit of Okinawan people.

===Malaysia===
When racial and partisan strife erupted, Singapore was expelled from the Malaysian federation in 1965.

===Mexico===
* Texas seceded from Mexico in 1836 (see Texas Revolution), after animosity between the Mexican government and the American settlers of the Coahuila y Tejas State. It was later annexed by the United States in 1845.
* The Republic of the Rio Grande seceded from Mexico on January 17, 1840. It rejoined Mexico on November6 of the same year.
* After the federal system was abandoned by President Santa Anna, the Congress of Yucatán approved in 1840 a declaration of independence, establishing the Republic of Yucatán. The Republic rejoined Mexico in 1843.

===Netherlands===
The United Provinces of the Netherlands, commonly referred to historiographically as the Dutch Republic, was a federal republic formally established from the formal creation of a federal state in 1581 by several Dutch provinces seceded from Spain.

===New Zealand===
Secession movements have surfaced several times in the South Island of New Zealand. A Premier of New Zealand, Sir Julius Vogel, was amongst the first people to make this call, which was voted on by the Parliament of New Zealand as early as 1865. The desire for South Island independence was one of the main factors in moving the capital of New Zealand from Auckland to Wellington in the same year.

The NZ South Island Party, with a pro-South agenda, fielded only five candidates (4.20% of electoral seats) candidates in the 1999 General Election but achieved only 0.14% (2622 votes) of the general vote. The reality today is that although South Islanders have a strong identity rooted in their geographic region, secession does not carry any real constituency; the party was not able to field any candidates in the 2008 election, as they had less than 500 paying members, a requirement by the New Zealand Electoral commission. The party is treated more as a &quot;joke&quot; party than any real political force.

===Nigeria===

Between 1967 and 1970, the Eastern Region seceded from Nigeria and established the Republic of Biafra, which led to a war that ended with the state returning to Nigeria. In 1999, at the beginning of a new democratic regime, other secessionist movements emerged, including the Indigenous People of Biafra led by Nnamdi Kanu formed as a Political wing of the Republic of Biafra.

===Norway and Sweden===
Sweden, having left the Kalmar Union with Denmark–Norway in the 16th century, entered into a loose personal union with Norway in 1814. Following a constitutional crisis, on June 7, 1905, the Norwegian Storting declared that King OscarII had failed to fulfil his constitutional duties. He was therefore removed as King of Norway. Because the union depended on the two countries sharing a king, it was dissolved. After negotiations, Sweden agreed to mutual independence on October 26 and on April 14.

===Pakistan===
After the Awami League won the 1970 national elections, negotiations to form a new government floundered, resulting in the Bangladesh Liberation War by which East Pakistan seceded, becoming Bangladesh. The Balochistan Liberation Army (also Baloch Liberation Army or Boluchistan Liberation Army) (BLA) is a Baloch nationalist militant secessionist organization. The stated goals of the organization include the establishment of an independent state of Balochistan free of Pakistani, Iranian and Afghan Federations. The name Baloch Liberation Army first became public in the summer of 2000, after the organization claimed credit for a series of bomb attacks in markets and removal of railways lines.

===Papua New Guinea===
The island of Bougainville has made several efforts to secede from Papua New Guinea.

===Somalia===
Somaliland is an autonomous region, which is part of the Federal Republic of Somalia. Those who call the area the &quot;Republic of Somaliland&quot; consider it to be the successor state of the former British Somaliland protectorate. Having established its own local government in Somalia in 1991, the region&#x27;s self-declared independence remains unrecognized by any country or international organization.

===South Africa===

In 1910, following the Boer Republics defeat by the British Empire in the Boer Wars, four self-governing colonies in the south of Africa were merged into the Union of South Africa. The four regions were the Cape Colony, Orange Free State, Natal and Transvaal. Three other territories, High Commission Territories of Bechuanaland (now Botswana), Basutoland (now Lesotho) and Swaziland (now Eswatini) later became independent states in the 1960s. Following the election of the Nationalist government in 1948, some English-speaking whites in Natal advocated either secession or a loose federation. There were also calls for secession, with Natal and the eastern part of the Cape Province breaking away following the referendum in 1960 on establishing a republic. In 1993, prior to South Africa&#x27;s first elections under universal suffrage and the end of apartheid, some Zulu leaders in KwaZulu-Natal again considered secession as did some politicians in the Cape Province.

In 2008, a political movement calling for the return to independence of the Cape resurged in the shape of the political organisation, the Cape Party. The Cape Party contested their first elections on 22 April 2009. They finished the Western Cape provincial elections in 2019 with 9,331 votes, or 0.45% of votes, gaining no seats

The idea gained popularity in the early half of the 2020s, with polling suggesting that 58% of Western Cape Voters want a referendum on independence in July 2021.

===South Sudan===
A referendum took place in Southern Sudan from 9to 15 January 2011, on whether the region should remain a part of Sudan or become independent. The referendum was one of the consequences of the 2005 Naivasha Agreement between the Khartoum central government and the Sudan People&#x27;s Liberation Army/Movement (SPLA/M).

On 7 February 2011, the referendum commission published the final results, with 98.83% voting in favour of independence. While the ballots were suspended in 10 of the 79 counties for exceeding 100% of the voter turnout, the number of votes was still well over the requirement of 60% turnout, and the majority vote for secession is not in question.

A simultaneous referendum was supposed to be held in Abyei on whether to join Southern Sudan but it has been postponed because of conflict over demarcation and residency rights. In October 2013, a symbolic referendum was held in which 99.9% of voters in Abyei voted to join Southern Sudan. However, this resolution was non-binding. As of February 2024, an official referendum still has not taken place. Abyei currently holds &quot;special administrative status&quot;.

The predetermined date for the creation of an independent state was 9July 2011.

===Soviet Union===
On November 15, 1917, the day in which Declaration of the Rights of the Peoples of Russia was declared by the Bolsheviks, Finland seceded after the non-Socialist Senate proposed that Parliament declare Finland&#x27;s independence, which was voted by the Parliament on 6 December 1917. On December 18, 1917, it was recognized by Council of People&#x27;s. It was followed by the Finnish Civil War.

The Constitution of the Soviet Union guaranteed all SSRs the right to secede from the Union. In 1990, after free elections, the Lithuanian Soviet Socialist Republic declared independence and other republics soon followed. Despite the Soviet central government&#x27;s refusal to recognize the independence of the republics, the Soviet Union dissolved in 1991.

===Spain===

Present-day Spain (known officially as &quot;the Kingdom of Spain&quot;) was assembled as a central state in the French model between the 18th and 19th centuries from various component kingdoms with varying languages, cultures and legislations. Spain has several secessionist movements, the most notable ones being in Catalonia, the Basque Country and Galicia.

===Sri Lanka===
The Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam, operated a de facto independent state for Tamils called Tamil Eelam in eastern and northern Sri Lanka until 2009.

===Switzerland===
In 1847, seven disaffected Catholic cantons formed a separate alliance because of moves to change the cantons of Switzerland from a confederation to a more centralized government federation. This effort was crushed in the Sonderbund War and a new Swiss Federal Constitution was created.

===Ukraine===
In 2014 after the start of Russian intervention in Ukraine, several groups of people declared the independence of several Ukrainian regions:

* The Donetsk People&#x27;s Republic was declared to be independent from Ukraine on 7April 2014, comprising the territory of the Donetsk Oblast. There have been military confrontations between the Ukrainian Army and the forces of the Donetsk People&#x27;s Republic when the Ukrainian Government attempted to reassert control over the oblast.
* The Lugansk Parliamentary Republic was proclaimed on 27 April 2014. before being succeeded by the Lugansk People&#x27;s Republic. The Lugansk forces have successfully occupied vital buildings in Lugansk since 8April, and controlled the City Council, prosecutor&#x27;s office, and police station since 27 April. The Government of the Luhansk Oblast announced its support for a referendum, and granted the governorship to independence leader Valeriy Bolotov.

===United Kingdom===

The Irish republicans attempted to withdraw Ireland from the United Kingdom during the Easter Rebellion of 1916. Ireland gained independence as the Irish Free State in 1922, except for four Ulster counties which chose to remain in the United Kingdom as Northern Ireland. The United Kingdom has a number of secession movements:

* In Northern Ireland, Irish republicans and nationalists have long called for the secession of Northern Ireland to join the Republic of Ireland. This is opposed by Unionists. A minority have supported the independence of Northern Ireland from the United Kingdom without joining the Republic of Ireland.
* In Scotland, the Scottish National Party (SNP) campaigns for Scottish independence and direct Scottish membership in the European Union. It has representation at all levels of Scottish politics and forms the devolved Scottish government. Later pro-independence parties have had lesser electoral success. The Scottish Greens and the Scottish Socialist Party are most widely publicised. However, all independence movements/parties are opposed by unionists. A referendum on independence in which voters were asked &quot;Should Scotland be an independent country?&quot; took place in September 2014. It saw &quot;no&quot; win, as 55.3% of voters voted against independence. 
* In Wales, Plaid Cymru &quot;(Party of Wales)&quot; stands for Welsh independence within the European Union. It is also represented at all levels of Welsh politics and has often been the second largest party in the Senedd (Welsh Parliament).
* England:
** In Cornwall, supporters of Mebyon Kernow call for the creation of a Cornish Assembly and separation from England, giving the county significant self-government, whilst remaining within the United Kingdom as a fifth home nation.
** London has supporters of an independent or semi-autonomous city-state since the 2016 EU Referendum in which Londoners voted overwhelmingly to remain in the EU. A London independence party, known as Londependence, was established in June 2019. Their calls increased after the 2019 General Election in which most Londoners voted for the Labour Party, gaining a representative, bucking the national trend.
** The Northern Independence Party is a party formed in 2020 that seeks to make Northern England an independent state under the name Northumbria.

===United States===
Discussions and threats of secession often surfaced in American politics during the first half of the 19th century, and secession was declared by the Confederate States of America in the South during the American Civil War. However, in 1869, the United States Supreme Court ruled in &quot;Texas v. White&quot; that unilateral secession was not permitted, saying that the union between a state (Texas in the case before the bar) and the other states &quot;was as complete, as perpetual, and as indissoluble as the union between the original States. There was no place for reconsideration or revocation, except through revolution or through consent of the States.&quot; Current secession movements still exist, the most notable example of which is the Hawaiian sovereignty movement which formed after the illegal annexation of the Kingdom of Hawaii by the United States under the Newlands Resolution passed by Congress in 1898. Many international organizations consider Hawaii under American occupation. 

===Yemen===
North Yemen and South Yemen merged in 1990; tensions led to a 1994 southern secession which was crushed in a civil war.

===Yugoslavia===
On June 25, 1991, Croatia and Slovenia seceded from the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. Bosnia and Herzegovina and North Macedonia also declared independence, after which the federation broke up, causing the separation of the remaining two countries Serbia and Montenegro. Several wars ensued between the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and seceding entities and among other ethnic groups in Slovenia, Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, and later, Kosovo. Montenegro peacefully separated from its union with Serbia in 2006.

Kosovo unilaterally declared independence from Serbia on February 17, 2008, and was recognized by around 100 countries, with the rest considering it remaining under United Nations administration.

==See also==
===Lists===
* List of historical autonomist and secessionist movements
* List of active autonomist and secessionist movements
* List of unrecognized countries
* List of U.S. state secession proposals
* List of U.S. county secession proposals

===Topics===
*Autonomy 
*Bioregionalism 
*City state 
*Decentralization 
*Dissolution 
*Homeland 
*Independence 
*Intersectionality 
*Irredentism 
*Micronation 
*Nullification (U.S. Constitution) 
*Partition 
*Schism (religion) 
*Separatism 
*Urban secession

===Movements===
* Balochistan Liberation Army
* Black Liberation Army
* Cape Independence
* Cascadia
* East Turkestan Independence Movement
* Essex Junto
* European Free Alliance
* Free State Project
* Hartford Convention
* Kurdistan
* League of the South
* New York City secession
* Orania, Northern Cape
* Secession of Quebec
* Scottish Secession Church
* Second Vermont Republic
* South Carolina Exposition and Protest
* Texas Secession Movement
* Tibetan Independence Movement
* Unrepresented Nations and Peoples Organization

==References==
==Further reading==

* Buchanan, Allen, &quot;Justice, Legitimacy, and Self-Determination: Moral Foundations for International Law&quot;, Oxford University Press, 2007.
* Buchanan, Allen, &quot;Secession: The Morality Of Political Divorce From Fort Sumter To Lithuania And Quebec&quot;, Westview Press, 1991.
* Coppieters, Bruno; Richard Sakwa, Richard (eds.), &quot;Contextualizing Secession: Normative Studies in Comparative Perspective&quot;, Oxford University Press, 2003
* Kohen, Marcelo G. (ed.), &quot;Secession: International Law Perspectives&quot;, Cambridge University Press, 2006.
* Kohr, Leopold, &quot;The Breakdown of Nations&quot;, Routledge &amp; K. Paul, 1957.
* Lehning, Percy, &quot;Theories of Secession&quot;, Routledge, 1998.
* López Martín, Ana Gemma and Perea Unceta, José Antonio, &quot;Statehood and Secession: Lessons from Spain and Catalonia&quot;, Routledge, 2021
* Norman, Wayne, &quot;Negotiating Nationalism: Nation-Building, Federalism, and Secession in the Multinational State&quot;, Oxford University Press, 2006.
* Roeder, Philip G. 2018. National secession: persuasion and violence in independence campaigns. Cornell University Press.
* Sorens, Jason, &quot;Secessionism: Identity, Interest, and Strategy&quot;, McGill-Queen&#x27;s University Press, 2012.
* Spencer, Metta, &quot;Separatism: Democracy and Disintegration&quot;, Rowman &amp; Littlefield, 1998.
* Weller, Marc, &quot;Autonomy, Self Governance and Conflict Resolution (Kindle Edition)&quot;, Taylor &amp; Francis, 2007.
* Wellman, Christopher Heath, &quot;A Theory of Secession&quot;, Cambridge University Press, 2005.
* &quot;Secession And International Law: Conflict Avoidanceregional Appraisals&quot;, United Nations Publications, 2006.
==External links==

* Secession (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q687031" start="0" end="9" title="Secession" label="Secession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063239" start="53" end="69" title="Polity" label="political entity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464916" start="144" end="171" title="declaration of independence" label="declaration of independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="484" end="519" title="Dutch Republic" label="United Provinces of the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="543" end="557" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q164432" start="569" end="591" title="Eighty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Eighty Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q179997" start="611" end="628" title="Thirteen Colonies" label="Thirteen Colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="640" end="653" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="674" end="688" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="700" end="726" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q653884" start="740" end="756" title="Hispanic America" label="Hispanic America"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="787" end="801" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123201" start="809" end="846" title="Spanish American wars of independence" label="Spanish American wars of independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="850" end="855" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q638530" start="883" end="899" title="Texas Revolution" label="Texas Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="917" end="946" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederate States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q214102" start="965" end="970" title="Union (American Civil War)" label="Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="988" end="1006" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="1010" end="1016" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089201" start="1017" end="1025" title="Secession of Panama from Colombia" label="seceding"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="1031" end="1039" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1056" end="1069" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350" start="1089" end="1101" title="Panama Canal" label="Panama Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140152" start="1109" end="1123" title="Irish Republic" label="Irish Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="1136" end="1150" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q27916528" start="1154" end="1194" title="Independence of Finland" label="Finland voting to leave the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q211855" start="1220" end="1237" title="Finnish Civil War" label="Finnish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q178469" start="1241" end="1247" title="Biafra" label="Biafra"/>
<link wikidata="Q829875" start="1297" end="1315" title="Nigerian Civil War" label="Nigerian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q236036" start="1331" end="1347" title="republics of the Soviet Union" label="Soviet republics"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="1360" end="1372" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="1394" end="1405" title="Dissolution of the Soviet Union" label="dissolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683569" start="1420" end="1429" title="Administrative divisions of Yugoslavia" label="republics"/>
<link wikidata="Q36704" start="1438" end="1448" title="Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4390259" start="1479" end="1490" title="breakup of Yugoslavia" label="dissolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q112524652" start="1712" end="1722" title="Ahsan I. Butt" label="Ahsan Butt"/>
<link wikidata="Q106817670" start="3209" end="3222" title="Tanisha Fazal" label="Tanisha Fazal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="3436" end="3463" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="3465" end="3475" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="3485" end="3499" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387534" start="3501" end="3516" title="Alberto Alesina" label="Alberto Alesina"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="3711" end="3725" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q157648" start="3733" end="3776" title="Fourteen Points" label="proclamations on self-determination in 1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q179805" start="3853" end="3873" title="political philosophy" label="political philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4731555" start="3990" end="4004" title="Allen Buchanan" label="Allen Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q288156" start="4093" end="4102" title="normative" label="normative"/>
<link wikidata="Q19646576" start="5131" end="5144" title="Anthony Birch" label="Anthony Birch"/>
<link wikidata="Q234335" start="5146" end="5157" title="Jane Jacobs" label="Jane Jacobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6524766" start="5179" end="5188" title="Leon Louw" label="Leon Louw"/>
<link wikidata="Q113659" start="5190" end="5202" title="Leopold Kohr" label="Leopold Kohr"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109689" start="5204" end="5220" title="Kirkpatrick Sale" label="Kirkpatrick Sale"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="5354" end="5363" title="President of the United States" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q12325" start="5364" end="5378" title="James Buchanan" label="James Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="5824" end="5840" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q175877" start="5857" end="5876" title="William H. Crawford" label="William H. Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419102" start="5878" end="5894" title="US Secretary of War" label="Secretary of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="5911" end="5924" title="James Madison" label="James Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979" start="6716" end="6723" title="liberty" label="liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q688503" start="6725" end="6747" title="freedom of association" label="freedom of association"/>
<link wikidata="Q555911" start="6752" end="6768" title="private property" label="private property"/>
<link wikidata="Q40283" start="7045" end="7057" title="Self-defense" label="Self-defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q156595" start="7164" end="7182" title="Self-determination" label="Self-determination"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914650" start="7374" end="7382" title="identity politics" label="identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q8777539" start="8046" end="8057" title="human scale" label="human scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q192424" start="8224" end="8242" title="Anarcho-capitalism" label="Anarcho-Capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q837138" start="8980" end="8991" title="prima facie" label="prima facie"/>
<link wikidata="Q43702" start="10730" end="10740" title="federation" label="federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q170156" start="10744" end="10757" title="confederation" label="confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q179164" start="10862" end="10875" title="unitary state" label="unitary state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006311" start="10952" end="10981" title="Wars of national liberation" label="Colonial wars of independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q48349" start="10990" end="11004" title="Empire" label="imperial state"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="11092" end="11097" title="British Raj" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="11120" end="11134" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="11141" end="11149" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="11164" end="11169" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q130229" start="11174" end="11181" title="Georgian Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="11200" end="11212" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q23427" start="11219" end="11232" title="South Ossetia" label="South Ossetia"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="11247" end="11254" title="Georgia (country)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621274" start="11444" end="11451" title="Enclave and exclave" label="enclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621274" start="11668" end="11676" title="Enclave and exclave" label="exclaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q194236" start="11680" end="11690" title="Separatism" label="Separation"/>
<link wikidata="Q518554" start="11694" end="11703" title="Partition (politics)" label="partition"/>
<link wikidata="Q182274" start="11874" end="11885" title="Irredentism" label="Irredentism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624078" start="12378" end="12393" title="sovereign state" label="sovereign state"/>
<link wikidata="Q27636" start="12681" end="12694" title="majority rule" label="majority rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="12760" end="12775" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q230698" start="12830" end="12838" title="List of amendments to the United States Constitution" label="amending"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="12843" end="12869" title="United States Constitution" label="United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="12875" end="12888" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407695" start="12898" end="12912" title="Texas v. White" label="Texas v. White"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="13016" end="13034" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="British Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510398" start="13053" end="13083" title="Secessionism in Western Australia" label="Western Australia could secede"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="13093" end="13118" title="Australia" label="Commonwealth of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454865" start="13231" end="13241" title="1933 Western Australian secession referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3206" start="13245" end="13262" title="Western Australia" label="Western Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="13286" end="13309" title="Communist Party of China" label="Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q858804" start="13416" end="13436" title="Ethnic minorities in China" label="ethnic nationalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q17252" start="13441" end="13446" title="Tibet" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q200800" start="13577" end="13589" title="Constitution of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="13624" end="13655" title="China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="13686" end="13700" title="Burma" label="Union of Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q13072974" start="13850" end="13890" title="Socialist Republic of the Union of Burma" label="Socialist Republic of the Union of Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062377" start="13913" end="13929" title="Union of Myanmar" label="Union of Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q700706" start="14027" end="14051" title="Constitution of Austria" label="constitutions of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135135" start="14053" end="14061" title="1995 Constitution of Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q832508" start="14063" end="14069" title="Constitution of France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q19903874" start="14075" end="14096" title="Constitution of Saint Kitts and Nevis" label="Saint Kitts and Nevis"/>
<link wikidata="Q23058" start="14216" end="14223" title="Cantons of Switzerland" label="cantons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321476" start="14249" end="14266" title="Quebec sovereignty movement" label="Quebec separation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="14272" end="14278" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q196615" start="14284" end="14307" title="Supreme Court of Canada" label="Supreme Court of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="14486" end="14500" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q189066" start="14708" end="14735" title="Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe" label="European Union Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3123616" start="14752" end="14804" title="Withdrawal from the European Union" label="voluntary withdrawal of member states from the union"/>
<link wikidata="Q185441" start="14842" end="14854" title="Member state of the European Union" label="member-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q18647563" start="15150" end="15174" title="Treaty on European Union" label="Treaty on European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3123616" start="15184" end="15226" title="Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union" label="Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932702" start="15312" end="15337" title="2003 Liechtenstein constitutional referendum" label="constitutional referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q347" start="15378" end="15407" title="Liechtenstein" label="Principality of Liechtenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q103817" start="15526" end="15544" title="Indigenous peoples" label="Indigenous peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q920486" start="15580" end="15602" title="indigenous sovereignty" label="indigenous sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q156595" start="15625" end="15643" title="self-determination" label="self-determination"/>
<link wikidata="Q37055" start="15806" end="15818" title="independence" label="independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624078" start="15823" end="15838" title="sovereign state" label="sovereign state"/>
<link wikidata="Q417633" start="15919" end="15934" title="self-government" label="self-government"/>
<link wikidata="Q788176" start="16293" end="16301" title="Autonomous entity" label="autonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q194236" start="16303" end="16313" title="separatist" label="separatist"/>
<link wikidata="Q37055" start="16315" end="16327" title="independence" label="independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q156595" start="16329" end="16347" title="self-determination" label="self-determination"/>
<link wikidata="Q518554" start="16349" end="16358" title="Partition (politics)" label="partition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139955" start="16360" end="16370" title="devolution" label="devolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q188961" start="16372" end="16388" title="decentralization" label="decentralization"/>
<link wikidata="Q42008" start="16390" end="16401" title="sovereignty" label="sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q417633" start="16403" end="16418" title="self-governance" label="self-governance"/>
<link wikidata="Q230533" start="16422" end="16436" title="decolonization" label="decolonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="16558" end="16565" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q133156" start="16566" end="16572" title="colony" label="colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q18348382" start="16604" end="16619" title="Colony of New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q56850459" start="16724" end="16732" title="Colony of Victoria" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q28401203" start="16762" end="16772" title="Colony of Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061728" start="16897" end="16915" title="central Queensland" label="central Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q606162" start="16929" end="16940" title="Rockhampton" label="Rockhampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000749" start="16973" end="16989" title="North Queensland" label="North Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q895407" start="16996" end="17001" title="Bowen, Queensland" label="Bowen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467315" start="17146" end="17157" title="New England (New South Wales)" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q18348382" start="17178" end="17193" title="Colony of New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002118" start="17195" end="17205" title="Deniliquin" label="Deniliquin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155625" start="17213" end="17221" title="Riverina" label="Riverina"/>
<link wikidata="Q327348" start="17248" end="17261" title="Mount Gambier" label="Mount Gambier"/>
<link wikidata="Q35715" start="17285" end="17300" title="South Australia" label="South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454865" start="17405" end="17420" title="1933 Western Australian secession referendum" label="1933 referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310872" start="17444" end="17467" title="Federation of Australia" label="Federation of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="17544" end="17562" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="British Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144614" start="17631" end="17654" title="Australian Constitution" label="Australian Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q591309" start="17661" end="17687" title="Principality of Hutt River" label="Principality of Hutt River"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="17854" end="17862" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="17871" end="17880" title="U.S. Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="17882" end="17889" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="17903" end="17915" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q298770" start="17969" end="17984" title="Austria under National Socialism" label="under Nazi rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q154681" start="18007" end="18046" title="Anschluss" label="annexation of Austria into Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246807" start="18177" end="18187" title="Bangabhumi" label="Bangabhumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="18205" end="18210" title="Hinduism" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246807" start="18256" end="18266" title="Bangabhumi" label="Bangabhumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347857" start="18289" end="18303" title="Hinduism in Bangladesh" label="Bengali Hindus"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="18311" end="18347" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Bangladesh" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7136347" start="18472" end="18512" title="Parbatya Chattagram Jana Sanghati Samiti" label="Parbatya Chattagram Jana Sanghati Samiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074977" start="18553" end="18575" title="Chittagong Hill Tracts" label="Chittagong Hill Tracts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000869" start="18609" end="18617" title="Buddhism in Bangladesh" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18629" end="18643" title="Chacomas state" label="Chacomas state"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="18654" end="18664" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079957" start="18741" end="18750" title="William I of the Netherlands" label="William I"/>
<link wikidata="Q470773" start="18782" end="18802" title="La muette de Portici" label="La muette de Portici"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="18826" end="18834" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q223933" start="18852" end="18866" title="Belgian Revolution" label="Belgian Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q29999" start="18926" end="18952" title="Kingdom of the Netherlands" label="Kingdom of the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q217230" start="18992" end="19008" title="Empire of Brazil" label="Empire of Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5244869" start="19031" end="19044" title="Portuguese Cortes" label="Cortes-Gerais"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="19053" end="19070" title="Portuguese Empire" label="Portuguese Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3082702" start="19077" end="19093" title="Brazilian War of Independence" label="Independence War"/>
<link wikidata="Q616523" start="19125" end="19135" title="Cisplatina" label="Cisplatina"/>
<link wikidata="Q738144" start="19173" end="19189" title="United Provinces of the Río de la Plata" label="United Provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q288251" start="19206" end="19219" title="Cisplatine War" label="stagnated war"/>
<link wikidata="Q77" start="19330" end="19337" title="Uruguay" label="Uruguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7141441" start="19542" end="19551" title="Grão-Pará Province" label="Grão-Pará"/>
<link wikidata="Q6745211" start="19692" end="19703" title="Malê Revolt" label="Malê Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5865911" start="19819" end="19829" title="History of Pernambuco" label="Pernambuco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969722" start="19850" end="19858" title="Nativism (politics)" label="nativist"/>
<link wikidata="Q692752" start="19965" end="20000" title="Pernambucan Revolt" label="ousted the Dutch West India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q209297" start="20273" end="20287" title="Ragamuffin War" label="Ragamuffin War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20293" end="20322" title="Rio Grande do Sul#History" label="Province of Rio Grande do Sul"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237979" start="20362" end="20369" title="Liberalism in Brazil" label="liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q28680488" start="20373" end="20385" title="Conservatism in Brazil" label="conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q156774" start="20422" end="20440" title="Pedro II of Brazil" label="Pedro II of Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q162192" start="20515" end="20535" title="Riograndense Republic" label="independent Republic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20563" end="20589" title="Santa Catarina (state)#History" label="Province of Santa Catarina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413855" start="20608" end="20624" title="Juliana Republic" label="Juliana Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="20921" end="20930" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060042" start="21053" end="21075" title="South Region, Brazil" label="South Region of Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408329" start="21153" end="21176" title="The South is My Country" label="The South is My Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q19595400" start="21389" end="21401" title="2015–16 protests in Brazil" label="2016 scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q657089" start="21423" end="21442" title="Workers Party (Brazil)" label="Workers&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q14743875" start="21467" end="21482" title="Kickback (bribery)" label="kickback scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q210047" start="21512" end="21521" title="Petrobras" label="Petrobras"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176750" start="21551" end="21560" title="President of Brazil" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q40722" start="21561" end="21575" title="Dilma Rousseff" label="Dilma Rousseff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995285" start="21654" end="21662" title="White Brazilian" label="European"/>
<link wikidata="Q321090" start="21687" end="21694" title="German Brazilians" label="Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3149102" start="21696" end="21704" title="Italian Brazilians" label="Italians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2615416" start="21706" end="21716" title="Portuguese Brazilians" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495420" start="21781" end="21794" title="Racial democracy" label="multicultural"/>
<link wikidata="Q862085" start="21795" end="21806" title="melting pot" label="melting pot"/>
<link wikidata="Q175" start="22048" end="22057" title="São Paulo (state)" label="São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842000" start="22161" end="22170" title="Ambazonia" label="Ambazonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009" start="22202" end="22210" title="Cameroon" label="Cameroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q55390549" start="22270" end="22282" title="Anglophone Crisis" label="open warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051657" start="22311" end="22332" title="Cameroon Armed Forces" label="Cameroon Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542471" start="22472" end="22498" title="Southern Cameroons" label="British Southern Cameroons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028848" start="22543" end="22558" title="French Cameroon" label="French Cameroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028835" start="22721" end="22737" title="British Cameroon" label="British Cameroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q43109" start="22788" end="22798" title="Referendum" label="plebiscite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="22852" end="22859" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842000" start="24140" end="24169" title="Federal Republic of Ambazonia" label="Federal Republic of Ambazonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q382834" start="24256" end="24272" title="English Canada" label="English-speaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q3082328" start="24277" end="24302" title="Francophone Canadians" label="French-speaking Canadians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090855" start="24314" end="24340" title="Constitutional Act of 1791" label="Constitutional Act of 1791"/>
<link wikidata="Q251668" start="24346" end="24364" title="Province of Quebec (1763–1791)" label="Province of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="24400" end="24406" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="24408" end="24415" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="24420" end="24445" title="Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134180" start="24467" end="24479" title="Lower Canada" label="Lower Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195493" start="24496" end="24506" title="Law of France" label="French law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="24571" end="24596" title="Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q795427" start="24602" end="24614" title="Upper Canada" label="Upper Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3829231" start="24707" end="24730" title="United Empire Loyalists" label="United Empire Loyalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="24748" end="24755" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121436" start="24862" end="24880" title="Province of Canada" label="Province of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520743" start="25085" end="25107" title="Canadian Confederation" label="Canadian Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088188" start="25111" end="25125" title="Canadian federalism" label="federal system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121436" start="25142" end="25160" title="Province of Canada" label="Province of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="25162" end="25173" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965" start="25178" end="25191" title="New Brunswick" label="New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q248452" start="25215" end="25248" title="British North America" label="British colonies in North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321476" start="25329" end="25356" title="Quebec sovereignty movement" label="Quebec sovereignty movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q246972" start="25501" end="25516" title="Atlantic Canada" label="Atlantic Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q574591" start="25522" end="25546" title="Anti-Confederation Party" label="Anti-Confederation Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506788" start="25553" end="25573" title="North-West Rebellion" label="North-West Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511037" start="25651" end="25669" title="Alberta separatism" label="Alberta separatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145847" start="25675" end="25689" title="Western Canada" label="Western Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987651" start="25719" end="25741" title="Western Canada Concept" label="Western Canada Concept"/>
<link wikidata="Q285658" start="25798" end="25818" title="First Mexican Empire" label="First Mexican Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077243" start="25831" end="25861" title="Captaincy General of Guatemala" label="Captaincy-General of Guatemala"/>
<link wikidata="Q190025" start="25887" end="25922" title="Federal Republic of Central America" label="Federal Republic of Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q811" start="25933" end="25942" title="Nicaragua" label="Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="26088" end="26119" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="26151" end="26157" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q706243" start="26176" end="26202" title="political status of Taiwan" label="political status of Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="26278" end="26295" title="Republic of China" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q574556" start="26436" end="26454" title="Anti-Secession Law" label="Anti-Secession Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q708772" start="26583" end="26602" title="Taiwan independence movement" label="Taiwan independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q34800" start="26680" end="26688" title="Xinjiang" label="Xinjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q840601" start="26690" end="26704" title="East Turkistan" label="East Turkistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17252" start="26710" end="26715" title="Tibet" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075369" start="26759" end="26788" title="Tibetan independence movement" label="Tibetan independence movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339134" start="26793" end="26829" title="East Turkestan Independence Movement" label="East Turkestan Independence Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q11103925" start="26835" end="26869" title="East Turkistan Government in Exile" label="East Turkistan Government in Exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="27063" end="27105" title="Hong Kong" label="Special Administrative Region of Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="27155" end="27178" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q113301" start="27250" end="27281" title="Hong Kong independence movement" label="Hong Kong independence movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148907" start="27309" end="27325" title="State of Katanga" label="State of Katanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="27357" end="27389" title="Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="Democratic Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="27391" end="27405" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27427" end="27447" title="Congo Crisis#UN Operation Grand Slam ends Katanga secession" label="Operation Grand Slam"/>
<link wikidata="Q182274" start="27478" end="27490" title="Irredentism" label="irredentists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069434" start="27491" end="27530" title="1974 Cypriot coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="launched a &amp;quot;coup d&amp;#x27;état&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="27534" end="27540" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="27581" end="27587" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q501053" start="27613" end="27625" title="Turkish Armed Forces" label="Turkish Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050999" start="27626" end="27649" title="Turkish invasion of Cyprus" label="invaded northern Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q245807" start="27682" end="27705" title="Turkish Cypriots" label="ethnic Turkish minority"/>
<link wikidata="Q23681" start="27831" end="27866" title="Northern Cyprus" label="Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="27887" end="27893" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q574" start="27917" end="27951" title="East Timor" label="Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="28033" end="28042" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q142965" start="28050" end="28072" title="Portuguese Timor" label="Portuguese sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665403" start="28097" end="28133" title="Indonesian occupation of East Timor" label="East Timor was occupied by Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="28148" end="28162" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801" start="28171" end="28201" title="International Court of Justice" label="International Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q889543" start="28439" end="28478" title="Eritrean People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Front" label="Eritrean People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q828005" start="28508" end="28512" title="Derg" label="Derg"/>
<link wikidata="Q607257" start="28531" end="28559" title="Eritrean War of Independence" label="Eritrean War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q986" start="28561" end="28568" title="Eritrea" label="Eritrea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3699102" start="28594" end="28605" title="Medri Bahri" label="Medri Bahri"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="28620" end="28628" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389607" start="28698" end="28735" title="1993 Eritrean independence referendum" label="1993 Eritrean independence referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q132555" start="28752" end="28759" title="de jure" label="de jure"/>
<link wikidata="Q52843" start="28808" end="28824" title="Treaty of Lisbon" label="Treaty of Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11122" start="28883" end="28891" title="Treaties of the European Union" label="treaties"/>
<link wikidata="Q208202" start="28895" end="28920" title="European Union law" label="law of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q189066" start="29082" end="29127" title="Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe" label="Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8886" start="29347" end="29363" title="European Council" label="European Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="29612" end="29626" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888194" start="29761" end="29767" title="Brexit" label="Brexit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2184" start="29863" end="29907" title="Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic" label="Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394" start="29939" end="29944" title="Vladimir Lenin" label="Lenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q184928" start="29990" end="30008" title="Russian Revolution of 1905" label="Russian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="30117" end="30131" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q185145" start="30503" end="30524" title="European Great Powers" label="European Great Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q230533" start="30856" end="30892" title="decolonization of the Ottoman Empire" label="decolonization of the Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183679" start="30894" end="30902" title="Decolonization of the Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249554" start="30904" end="30908" title="Decolonization of Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146918" start="30913" end="30919" title="Decolonization of Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q20102699" start="31029" end="31057" title="Alsace independence movement" label="Alsace independence movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742087" start="31060" end="31079" title="Breton independence" label="Breton independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712033" start="31082" end="31102" title="Corsican nationalism" label="Corsican nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3063593" start="31105" end="31124" title="Occitan nationalism" label="Occitan nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q736" start="31187" end="31194" title="Ecuador" label="Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="31199" end="31208" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q199821" start="31222" end="31235" title="Gran Colombia" label="Gran Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061488" start="31278" end="31303" title="United States of Colombia" label="United States of Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="31313" end="31333" title="Republic of Colombia" label="Republic of Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="31352" end="31358" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="31407" end="31428" title="British-Indian Empire" label="British-Indian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q129053" start="31449" end="31462" title="Partition of India" label="the Partition"/>
<link wikidata="Q477108" start="31475" end="31496" title="Constitution of India" label="Constitution of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q131541" start="31512" end="31525" title="States and union territories of India" label="Indian states"/>
<link wikidata="Q66278313" start="31557" end="31600" title="Jammu and Kashmir (union territory)" label="Indian Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q4218239" start="31612" end="31637" title="Kashmiri nationalism" label="paramilitary nationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361576" start="31737" end="31754" title="Kashmir Valley" label="Valley of Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q355771" start="31777" end="31788" title="Indian Army" label="Indian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366583" start="31831" end="31858" title="Line of Control" label="nearby international border"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092054" start="32009" end="32042" title="Research and Analysis Wing" label="Indian Research and Analysis Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q749970" start="32098" end="32116" title="Insurgency in Jammu and Kashmir" label="Kashmir insurgency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1599" start="32194" end="32202" title="Nagaland" label="Nagaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164" start="32204" end="32209" title="Assam" label="Assam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193" start="32211" end="32218" title="Manipur" label="Manipur"/>
<link wikidata="Q22424" start="32220" end="32226" title="Indian Punjab" label="Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511031" start="32241" end="32259" title="Khalistan movement" label="Khalistan movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502" start="32262" end="32269" title="Mizoram" label="Mizoram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363" start="32274" end="32281" title="Tripura" label="Tripura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445" start="32283" end="32293" title="Tamil Nadu" label="Tamil Nadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q979845" start="32308" end="32334" title="Naxalite–Maoist insurgency" label="Naxalite–Maoist insurgency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151572" start="32347" end="32366" title="East India" label="eastern rural India"/>
<link wikidata="Q2767140" start="32433" end="32452" title="government of India" label="government of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q2941659" start="32458" end="32491" title="Communist Party of India (Maoist)" label="Communist Party of India (Maoist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q849866" start="32521" end="32539" title="Communist state" label="Communist republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426677" start="32620" end="32633" title="Iranian Azeri" label="Iranian Azeri"/>
<link wikidata="Q4810460" start="32635" end="32665" title="Assyrian independence movement" label="Assyrian independence movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q508194" start="32677" end="32681" title="lurs" label="lurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2041508" start="32700" end="32717" title="Iranian Kurdistan" label="Iranian Kurdistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q785078" start="32719" end="32760" title="Kurdistan Democratic Party of Iran" label="Kurdistan Democratic Party of Iran (KDPI)"/>
<link wikidata="Q241119" start="32762" end="32780" title="Khūzestān Province" label="Khūzestān Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q181103" start="32781" end="32792" title="Balochistan" label="Balochistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q114213" start="32858" end="32874" title="Arab nationalism" label="Arab nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32982" end="33042" title="Politics of Khūzestān Province#Arab politics and separatism" label="Politics of Khūzestān Province: Arab politics and separatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q201501" start="33098" end="33104" title="Baloch people" label="Baloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4852443" start="33105" end="33115" title="Baloch nationalism" label="Separatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575707" start="33134" end="33173" title="Movement for the Independence of Sicily" label="Movement for the Independence of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575707" start="33238" end="33268" title="Sicilian Independence Movement" label="Sicilian Independence Movement"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33403" end="33416" title="Nation Sicily" label="Nation Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575707" start="33607" end="33640" title="Sicilian Independentist Movement" label="Sicilian independentist movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458155" start="33661" end="33672" title="Cosa Nostra" label="Cosa Nostra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458155" start="33691" end="33696" title="Sicilian Mafia" label="Mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q47817" start="33824" end="33842" title="Five Star Movement" label="Five Star Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773971" start="34000" end="34018" title="Government of Italy" label="central government"/>
<link wikidata="Q43702" start="34127" end="34140" title="federal state" label="federal state"/>
<link wikidata="Q48808001" start="34256" end="34270" title="neo-Bourbonism" label="neo-Bourbonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q180393" start="34284" end="34311" title="Kingdom of the Two Sicilies" label="Kingdom of the Two Sicilies"/>
<link wikidata="Q46362" start="34421" end="34439" title="Congress of Vienna" label="Congress of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="34864" end="34870" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458" start="34872" end="34880" title="Calabria" label="Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452" start="34882" end="34892" title="Basilicata" label="Basilicata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1447" start="34894" end="34900" title="Apulia" label="Apulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443" start="34902" end="34908" title="Molise" label="Molise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438" start="34910" end="34918" title="Campania" label="Campania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284" start="34920" end="34927" title="Abruzzo" label="Abruzzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048669" start="34933" end="34938" title="Latio" label="Latio"/>
<link wikidata="Q16267" start="34959" end="34964" title="Province of Rieti" label="Rieti"/>
<link wikidata="Q16196" start="34966" end="34972" title="Province of Latina" label="Latina"/>
<link wikidata="Q16181" start="34977" end="34986" title="Province of Frosinone" label="Frosinone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35055" end="35074" title="Unione Mediterranea" label="Unione Mediterranea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35076" end="35079" title="Mo!" label="Mo!"/>
<link wikidata="Q14625613" start="35084" end="35092" title="Brigandage in Southern Italy after 1861" label="Briganti"/>
<link wikidata="Q47750" start="35095" end="35104" title="Lega Nord" label="Lega Nord"/>
<link wikidata="Q505632" start="35177" end="35184" title="Padania" label="Padania"/>
<link wikidata="Q202207" start="35217" end="35226" title="Po Valley" label="Po Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345530" start="35230" end="35244" title="northern Italy" label="northern Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890981" start="35289" end="35312" title="Venetian nationalism" label="independence of Venetia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16010017" start="35331" end="35357" title="South Tyrolean secessionist movement" label="secession or reunification"/>
<link wikidata="Q15124" start="35361" end="35372" title="South Tyrol" label="South Tyrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210" start="35407" end="35415" title="Lombardy" label="Lombardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="35502" end="35510" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q547509" start="35532" end="35552" title="Sardinian nationalism" label="nationalist movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208167" start="35578" end="35586" title="Ryukyuan people" label="Ryukyuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q28025" start="35658" end="35672" title="Ryukyu Kingdom" label="Ryukyu Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7165452" start="35997" end="36012" title="PAP-UMNO relations" label="partisan strife"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="36022" end="36031" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36032" end="36074" title="Singapore in Malaysia#Expulsion" label="was expelled from the Malaysian federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q170588" start="36100" end="36105" title="Republic of Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q638530" start="36139" end="36155" title="Texas Revolution" label="Texas Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q949898" start="36238" end="36260" title="Coahuila y Tejas" label="Coahuila y Tejas State"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014442" start="36319" end="36345" title="Republic of the Rio Grande" label="Republic of the Rio Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q43702" start="36449" end="36463" title="Federal government" label="federal system"/>
<link wikidata="Q628004" start="36481" end="36490" title="President of Mexico" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q189145" start="36491" end="36501" title="Antonio López de Santa Anna" label="Santa Anna"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160907" start="36507" end="36526" title="Congress of Yucatán" label="Congress of Yucatán"/>
<link wikidata="Q671658" start="36592" end="36611" title="Republic of Yucatán" label="Republic of Yucatán"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="36674" end="36709" title="United Provinces of the Netherlands" label="United Provinces of the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="36759" end="36773" title="Dutch Republic" label="Dutch Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q512187" start="36781" end="36797" title="federal republic" label="federal republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q134390" start="36882" end="36897" title="Provinces of the Netherlands" label="Dutch provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q164432" start="36898" end="36905" title="Dutch Revolt" label="seceded"/>
<link wikidata="Q622783" start="36911" end="36916" title="Spanish Netherlands" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q120755" start="36992" end="37004" title="South Island" label="South Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071117" start="37023" end="37045" title="Prime Minister of New Zealand" label="Premier of New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363572" start="37051" end="37063" title="Julius Vogel" label="Julius Vogel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520966" start="37139" end="37164" title="Parliament of New Zealand" label="Parliament of New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q37100" start="37294" end="37302" title="Auckland" label="Auckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q23661" start="37306" end="37316" title="Wellington" label="Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q6956286" start="37340" end="37361" title="NZ South Island Party" label="NZ South Island Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016166" start="37462" end="37483" title="1999 New Zealand general election" label="1999 General Election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509795" start="37993" end="38007" title="Eastern Region, Nigeria" label="Eastern Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q178469" start="38049" end="38067" title="Biafra" label="Republic of Biafra"/>
<link wikidata="Q829875" start="38084" end="38087" title="Nigerian Civil War" label="war"/>
<link wikidata="Q5476149" start="38167" end="38188" title="Fourth Nigerian Republic" label="new democratic regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q22936432" start="38242" end="38269" title="Indigenous People of Biafra" label="Indigenous People of Biafra"/>
<link wikidata="Q21965090" start="38277" end="38288" title="Nnamdi Kanu" label="Nnamdi Kanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q178469" start="38323" end="38341" title="Republic of Biafra" label="Republic of Biafra"/>
<link wikidata="Q215443" start="38368" end="38374" title="Swedish Empire" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q62623" start="38392" end="38404" title="Kalmar Union" label="Kalmar Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q62651" start="38410" end="38424" title="Denmark–Norway" label="Denmark–Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q62589" start="38467" end="38481" title="Union between Sweden and Norway" label="personal union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2597352" start="38487" end="38493" title="Kingdom of Norway (1814)" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q380552" start="38515" end="38536" title="constitutional crisis" label="constitutional crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q109016" start="38559" end="38577" title="Storting" label="Norwegian Storting"/>
<link wikidata="Q52924" start="38597" end="38604" title="Oscar II of Norway" label="OscarII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294765" start="38681" end="38695" title="Monarchy of Norway" label="King of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281480" start="38893" end="38905" title="Awami League" label="Awami League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7125892" start="38914" end="38937" title="1970 Pakistani general election" label="1970 national elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q371394" start="39006" end="39031" title="Bangladesh Liberation War" label="Bangladesh Liberation War"/>
<link wikidata="Q842931" start="39041" end="39054" title="East Pakistan" label="East Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="39073" end="39083" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995616" start="39089" end="39116" title="Balochistan Liberation Army" label="Balochistan Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4852443" start="39189" end="39207" title="Baloch nationalist" label="Baloch nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q181103" start="39334" end="39345" title="Balochistan (region)" label="Balochistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="39365" end="39369" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q201766" start="39619" end="39631" title="Bougainville Island" label="Bougainville"/>
<link wikidata="Q691" start="39672" end="39688" title="Papua New Guinea" label="Papua New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q34754" start="39705" end="39715" title="Somaliland" label="Somaliland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045" start="39762" end="39789" title="Somalia" label="Federal Republic of Somalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q662653" start="39906" end="39924" title="British Somaliland" label="British Somaliland"/>
<link wikidata="Q164142" start="39925" end="39937" title="protectorate" label="protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058726" start="40056" end="40068" title="Diplomatic recognition" label="unrecognized"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010624" start="40159" end="40173" title="Boer Republics" label="Boer Republics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="40188" end="40202" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q215112" start="40210" end="40218" title="Boer War" label="Boer War"/>
<link wikidata="Q193619" start="40294" end="40315" title="Union of South Africa" label="Union of South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q370736" start="40343" end="40354" title="Cape Colony" label="Cape Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q218023" start="40356" end="40373" title="Orange Free State" label="Orange Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301901" start="40375" end="40380" title="Colony of Natal" label="Natal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187978" start="40385" end="40394" title="Transvaal Colony" label="Transvaal"/>
<link wikidata="Q96332845" start="40421" end="40448" title="High Commissioner for Southern Africa" label="High Commission Territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q747314" start="40452" end="40464" title="Bechuanaland" label="Bechuanaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q963" start="40470" end="40478" title="Botswana" label="Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340665" start="40481" end="40491" title="Basutoland" label="Basutoland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013" start="40497" end="40504" title="Lesotho" label="Lesotho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050" start="40510" end="40519" title="Swaziland" label="Swaziland"/>
<link wikidata="Q740718" start="40611" end="40622" title="National Party (South Africa)" label="Nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="40648" end="40664" title="English language" label="English-speaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q849164" start="40807" end="40820" title="Cape Province" label="Cape Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q2185754" start="40849" end="40859" title="1960 South African republic referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="40886" end="40894" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q129962" start="41006" end="41010" title="Zulu people" label="Zulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q81725" start="41022" end="41035" title="KwaZulu-Natal" label="KwaZulu-Natal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5034986" start="41248" end="41258" title="Cape Party" label="Cape Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q207950" start="41624" end="41663" title="2011 South Sudanese independence referendum" label="referendum took place in Southern Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424647" start="41815" end="41838" title="Comprehensive Peace Agreement" label="2005 Naivasha Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q46694" start="41851" end="41878" title="Government of Sudan" label="Khartoum central government"/>
<link wikidata="Q912908" start="41887" end="41931" title="South Sudan People&amp;#x27;s Defence Forces" label="Sudan People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army/Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047454" start="42900" end="42950" title="Declaration of the Rights of the Peoples of Russia" label="Declaration of the Rights of the Peoples of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83372" start="42971" end="42981" title="Bolsheviks" label="Bolsheviks"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="42983" end="42990" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994771" start="43102" end="43144" title="Finland&amp;#x27;s declaration of independence" label="voted by the Parliament on 6 December 1917"/>
<link wikidata="Q48220862" start="43189" end="43213" title="Council of People&amp;#x27;s Commissars of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic" label="Council of People&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q211855" start="43238" end="43255" title="Finnish Civil War" label="Finnish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2515553" start="43262" end="43294" title="Constitution of the Soviet Union" label="Constitution of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q236036" start="43310" end="43314" title="Republics of the Soviet Union" label="SSRs"/>
<link wikidata="Q173761" start="43386" end="43422" title="Lithuanian Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Lithuanian Soviet Socialist Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823577" start="43423" end="43444" title="Act of the Re-Establishment of the State of Lithuania" label="declared independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q236036" start="43455" end="43464" title="Republics of the Soviet Union" label="republics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="43585" end="43607" title="dissolution of the Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union dissolved"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="43680" end="43696" title="Spain" label="Kingdom of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q179671" start="43723" end="43756" title="Nation state" label="central state in the French model"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990620" start="43769" end="43773" title="Nueva Planta decrees" label="18th"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320835" start="43778" end="43792" title="1833 territorial division of Spain" label="19th centuries"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43894" end="43916" title="List of active separatist movements in Europe#Spain" label="secessionist movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q893331" start="43949" end="43958" title="Catalan separatism" label="Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336983" start="43964" end="43978" title="Basque separatism" label="Basque Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q3322799" start="43983" end="43990" title="Galician independence" label="Galicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q80312" start="44013" end="44045" title="Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam" label="Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam"/>
<link wikidata="Q173491" start="44089" end="44095" title="Tamils" label="Tamils"/>
<link wikidata="Q242036" start="44103" end="44114" title="Tamil Eelam" label="Tamil Eelam"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="44139" end="44148" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q689993" start="44207" end="44215" title="Catholic Church in Switzerland" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23058" start="44282" end="44304" title="cantons of Switzerland" label="cantons of Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q170156" start="44312" end="44325" title="confederation" label="confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q25585330" start="44336" end="44358" title="centralized government" label="centralized government"/>
<link wikidata="Q43702" start="44359" end="44369" title="federation" label="federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q688297" start="44402" end="44416" title="Sonderbund War" label="Sonderbund War"/>
<link wikidata="Q30921" start="44427" end="44453" title="Swiss Federal Constitution" label="Swiss Federal Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q15860072" start="44509" end="44540" title="Russian military intervention in Ukraine (2014–present)" label="Russian intervention in Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16150196" start="44630" end="44660" title="Donetsk People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="Donetsk People&amp;#x27;s Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2012050" start="44753" end="44767" title="Donetsk Oblast" label="Donetsk Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q16335075" start="44785" end="44808" title="War in Donbas (2014–2022)" label="military confrontations"/>
<link wikidata="Q682152" start="44821" end="44835" title="Ukrainian Army" label="Ukrainian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q16746854" start="45066" end="45096" title="Lugansk People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="Lugansk People&amp;#x27;s Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q134279" start="45163" end="45170" title="Lugansk" label="Lugansk"/>
<link wikidata="Q171965" start="45301" end="45315" title="Luhansk Oblast" label="Luhansk Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q16745486" start="45408" end="45423" title="Valeriy Bolotov" label="Valeriy Bolotov"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="45492" end="45499" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="45509" end="45523" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q193689" start="45535" end="45551" title="Easter Rebellion" label="Easter Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q31747" start="45596" end="45612" title="Irish Free State" label="Irish Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q93195" start="45638" end="45644" title="Province of Ulster" label="Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="45701" end="45717" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="45781" end="45797" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q517372" start="45799" end="45816" title="Irish republicanism" label="Irish republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021987" start="45821" end="45833" title="Irish nationalism" label="nationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="45901" end="45920" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q634805" start="45941" end="45950" title="Unionism in Ireland" label="Unionists"/>
<link wikidata="Q4334187" start="45982" end="46078" title="Ulster nationalism" label="independence of Northern Ireland from the United Kingdom without joining the Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="46085" end="46093" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658" start="46099" end="46122" title="Scottish National Party" label="Scottish National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q891905" start="46143" end="46164" title="Scottish independence" label="Scottish independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="46203" end="46217" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280749" start="46258" end="46275" title="politics in Scotland" label="Scottish politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q32521" start="46299" end="46318" title="Scottish government" label="Scottish government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256956" start="46390" end="46405" title="Scottish Greens" label="Scottish Greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q891900" start="46414" end="46438" title="Scottish Socialist Party" label="Scottish Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886813" start="46526" end="46535" title="Unionism in Scotland" label="unionists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458570" start="46539" end="46565" title="2014 Scottish independence referendum" label="referendum on independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="46758" end="46763" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q10691" start="46765" end="46776" title="Plaid Cymru" label="Plaid Cymru"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304490" start="46817" end="46835" title="Welsh independence" label="Welsh independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280918" start="46903" end="46917" title="Welsh politics" label="Welsh politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q493517" start="46969" end="46975" title="Senedd" label="Senedd"/>
<link wikidata="Q23148" start="47013" end="47021" title="Cornwall" label="Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q161957" start="47037" end="47050" title="Mebyon Kernow" label="Mebyon Kernow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171802" start="47078" end="47094" title="Cornish Assembly" label="Cornish Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064295" start="47154" end="47169" title="Cornish self-government movement" label="self-government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040745" start="47225" end="47236" title="home nation" label="home nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="47241" end="47247" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q7307173" start="47326" end="47339" title="EU Referendum" label="EU Referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q24885001" start="47403" end="47422" title="London independence" label="London independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q30173038" start="47516" end="47537" title="2019 United Kingdom general election" label="2019 General Election"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="47576" end="47588" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q102168393" start="47651" end="47678" title="Northern Independence Party" label="Northern Independence Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788657" start="47724" end="47740" title="Northern England" label="Northern England"/>
<link wikidata="Q107299" start="47777" end="47788" title="Northumbria" label="Northumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q330963" start="47866" end="47883" title="Politics of the United States" label="American politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="47961" end="47990" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederate States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="47998" end="48003" title="Southern United States" label="South"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="48015" end="48033" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="48057" end="48084" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="United States Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407695" start="48100" end="48114" title="Texas v. White" label="Texas v. White"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="48205" end="48210" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q156418" start="48640" end="48657" title="Kingdom of Hawaii" label="Kingdom of Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341456" start="48689" end="48708" title="Newlands Resolution" label="Newlands Resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q267584" start="48827" end="48838" title="Yemen Arab Republic" label="North Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q199841" start="48843" end="48854" title="South Yemen" label="South Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2461485" start="48936" end="48945" title="1994 civil war in Yemen" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="48983" end="48990" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="48995" end="49003" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="49021" end="49061" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="49063" end="49085" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="49090" end="49105" title="North Macedonia" label="North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="49225" end="49231" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q236" start="49236" end="49246" title="Montenegro" label="Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q242352" start="49256" end="49260" title="Yugoslav Wars" label="wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q37024" start="49280" end="49310" title="Serbia and Montenegro" label="Federal Republic of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="49366" end="49374" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="49376" end="49383" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="49385" end="49407" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246" start="49420" end="49426" title="Kosovo" label="Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q861510" start="49497" end="49538" title="2008 Kosovo declaration of independence" label="Kosovo unilaterally declared independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q504557" start="49662" end="49691" title="United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo" label="United Nations administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q24836931" start="49721" end="49777" title="List of historical autonomist and secessionist movements" label="List of historical autonomist and secessionist movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142999" start="49780" end="49832" title="List of active autonomist and secessionist movements" label="List of active autonomist and secessionist movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q199683" start="49835" end="49865" title="List of unrecognized countries" label="List of unrecognized countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q48408" start="49868" end="49906" title="List of U.S. state secession proposals" label="List of U.S. state secession proposals"/>
<link wikidata="Q6600931" start="49909" end="49948" title="List of U.S. county secession proposals" label="List of U.S. county secession proposals"/>
<link wikidata="Q484105" start="49964" end="49972" title="Autonomy" label="Autonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q864686" start="49975" end="49989" title="Bioregionalism" label="Bioregionalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q133442" start="49992" end="50002" title="City state" label="City state"/>
<link wikidata="Q188961" start="50005" end="50021" title="Decentralization" label="Decentralization"/>
<link wikidata="Q104874686" start="50024" end="50035" title="Dissolution (politics)" label="Dissolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q16513600" start="50038" end="50046" title="Homeland" label="Homeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q37055" start="50049" end="50061" title="Independence" label="Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516555" start="50064" end="50081" title="Intersectionality" label="Intersectionality"/>
<link wikidata="Q182274" start="50084" end="50095" title="Irredentism" label="Irredentism"/>
<link wikidata="Q188443" start="50098" end="50109" title="Micronation" label="Micronation"/>
<link wikidata="Q779359" start="50112" end="50145" title="Nullification (U.S. Constitution)" label="Nullification (U.S. Constitution)"/>
<link wikidata="Q518554" start="50148" end="50157" title="Partition (politics)" label="Partition"/>
<link wikidata="Q126287984" start="50160" end="50177" title="Schism (religion)" label="Schism (religion)"/>
<link wikidata="Q194236" start="50180" end="50190" title="Separatism" label="Separatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7900163" start="50193" end="50208" title="Urban secession" label="Urban secession"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995616" start="50228" end="50255" title="Balochistan Liberation Army" label="Balochistan Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2545743" start="50258" end="50279" title="Black Liberation Army" label="Black Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q108378099" start="50282" end="50299" title="Cape Independence" label="Cape Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128483" start="50302" end="50310" title="Cascadia (independence movement)" label="Cascadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339134" start="50313" end="50349" title="East Turkestan Independence Movement" label="East Turkestan Independence Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5399755" start="50352" end="50363" title="Essex Junto" label="Essex Junto"/>
<link wikidata="Q639383" start="50366" end="50388" title="European Free Alliance" label="European Free Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453448" start="50391" end="50409" title="Free State Project" label="Free State Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q5674472" start="50412" end="50431" title="Hartford Convention" label="Hartford Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q41470" start="50434" end="50443" title="Kurdistan" label="Kurdistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240534" start="50446" end="50465" title="League of the South" label="League of the South"/>
<link wikidata="Q14684280" start="50468" end="50491" title="New York City secession" label="New York City secession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011020" start="50494" end="50515" title="Orania, Northern Cape" label="Orania, Northern Cape"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321476" start="50518" end="50537" title="Quebec sovereignty movement" label="Secession of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889127" start="50540" end="50565" title="Scottish Secession Church" label="Scottish Secession Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2590465" start="50568" end="50591" title="Second Vermont Republic" label="Second Vermont Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566579" start="50594" end="50631" title="South Carolina Exposition and Protest" label="South Carolina Exposition and Protest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2690341" start="50634" end="50658" title="Texas Secession Movement" label="Texas Secession Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075369" start="50661" end="50690" title="Tibetan Independence Movement" label="Tibetan Independence Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q215613" start="50693" end="50739" title="Unrepresented Nations and Peoples Organization" label="Unrepresented Nations and Peoples Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="50894" end="50917" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q7989759" start="51043" end="51057" title="Westview Press" label="Westview Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508259" start="51487" end="51496" title="Routledge" label="Routledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6801272" start="52005" end="52041" title="McGill-Queen&amp;#x27;s University Press" label="McGill-Queen&amp;#x27;s University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q880582" start="52249" end="52269" title="Taylor &amp;amp; Francis" label="Taylor &amp;amp; Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="52462" end="52476" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="144739" wikidata="Q5246062" url="?curid=144739" title="Dean Cemetery">
<text>The Dean Cemetery is a historically important Victorian cemetery north of the Dean Village, west of Edinburgh city centre, in Scotland. It lies between Queensferry Road and the Water of Leith, bounded on its east side by Dean Path and on its west by the Dean Gallery. A 20th-century extension lies detached from the main cemetery to the north of Ravelston Terrace. The main cemetery is accessible through the main gate on its east side, through a &quot;grace and favour&quot; access door from the grounds of Dean Gallery and from Ravelston Terrace. The modern extension is only accessible at the junction of Dean Path and Queensferry Road.

==The cemetery==
Dean Cemetery, originally known as Edinburgh Western Cemetery, was laid out by David Cousin (an Edinburgh architect who also laid out Warriston Cemetery) in 1846 and was a fashionable burial ground for mainly the middle and upper-classes. The many monuments bear witness to Scottish achievement in peace and war, at home and abroad and are a rich source of Edinburgh and Victorian history.

As the cemetery plots were quickly bought up the cemetery was extended on its north side in 1871. A second set of entrance gates were built on Dean Path, matching the original entrance. Although this section was originally only accessed through this gate the extension was quickly linked to the original section by creating gaps in the mutual wall where no graves existed.

The separated section north of Ravelston Terrace (previously Edgehill Nursery) was purchased in 1877 in anticipation of a sales rate matching that of the original cemetery, but this was not to be, and the area only began to be used in 1909 (excepting John Ritchie Findlay (1898) alone for a decade). This section is relatively plain and generally unremarkable, but does include a line of Scottish judges against the north wall, perhaps trying to echo the &quot;Lord&#x27;s Row&quot; against the west wall of the original cemetery. Whilst numerically greater in its number of lords it is far less eye-catching.

The entire cemetery is privately owned by the Dean Cemetery Trust Limited, making it one of the few cemeteries still run as it was intended to be run. The resultant layout, with its mature designed landscape, can be seen as an excellent example of a cemetery actually being visible in the form it was conceived to be seen.

The southern access from Belford Road is now blocked and the entrance road here is now grassed and used for the interment of ashes.

The cemetery contains sculpture by Sir John Steell, William Brodie, John Hutchison, Francis John Williamson, Pilkington Jackson, Amelia Robertson Hill, William Birnie Rhind, John Rhind, John Stevenson Rhind, William Grant Stevenson, Henry Snell Gamley, Charles McBride, George Frampton, Walter Hubert Paton and Stewart McGlashan.

==Dean House==

The cemetery stands on the site of Dean House (built 1614), part of Dean Estate which had been purchased in 1609 by Sir William Nisbet, who became in 1616 Lord Provost of Edinburgh. The Nisbets of Dean held the office of Hereditary Poulterer to the King. The famous herald, Alexander Nisbet, of Nisbet House, near Duns, Scottish Borders, Berwickshire, is said to have written his &quot;Systems of Heraldry&quot; in Dean House. The estate house was demolished in 1845, and sculptured stones from it are incorporated into the south retaining wall supporting at the south side of the cemetery. This lower, hidden section also contains graves.

John Swinton, Lord Swinton died in the house in 1799. Sir John Stuart Hepburn Forbes was born in Dean House in 1804.

==Notable interments==

===Original cemetery===
&quot;N&quot; denotes location in the first northern extension. &quot;LR&quot; denotes location in the Lords Row.

* The 5th Baron Abercromby (1841–1924)
* Lord Adam (1824–1914), Senator of the College of Justice (N)
* Sir James Ormiston Affleck FRSE LLD (1840–1922), physician and author (N)
* Sir Stair Agnew (1831–1916)
* Rev David Aitken FRSE (1796–1875), church historian
* John Aitken (1793–1833), Scottish journalist and editor (LR)
* Robert Alexander RSA (1840–1923), artist
* Sir Archibald Alison (d. 1867), advocate and historian, plus his son, Sir Archibald Alison (LR)
* Robert Allan FRSE (1806–1863), mineralogist
* Sir Robert George Allan FRSE (1879–1972), agriculturalist
* Major General William Allan (1832–1918), a general in the Crimean War
* Sir William Allan RSA (1782–1850), artist
* John Anderson (1833–1900), sculpted by David Watson Stevenson
* Thomas Anderson FLS (1832–1870), botanist
* Thomas Annandale (1838–1907), medical pioneer and surgeon (N)
* Neil Arnott FRS (1788–1874), physician
* Lena Ashwell, Lady Simson (1869–1957), English actress
* Prof William Edmondstoune Aytoun (1813–1865), poet
* Henry Bellyse Baildon (1849–1907), poet and author
* Dr John William Ballantyne FRSE (1861–1923), founder of the science of antenatal pathology
* William Francis Beattie MC (1886–1918), sculptor
* William Hamilton Beattie (1842–1898), architect (including Jenner&#x27;s and the Balmoral Hotel)
* Dr John Beddoe (1826–1911), ethnologist
* Dr James Warburton Begbie (1826–1876), physician (N)
* Archibald Bell (1776–1854), author and advocate
* Dr Joseph Bell (1837–1911), lecturer at the medical school of the University of Edinburgh, personal surgeon of Queen Victoria
* John Bellany (1942–2013), artist
* Dr John Hughes Bennett (1812–1875), physiologist
* Isabella Bird, married name Bishop (1831–1904), traveller, writer and photographer. First female Fellow of the Royal Geographical Society (RGS)
* Alexander Black (1797–1858), architect
* Alexander William Black MP (1859–1906)
* Very Rev. James Black DD (d. 1948), Moderator of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland in 1938 and Chaplain to the King
* Lord Blackburn LLD (1864–1944), Senator of the College of Justice (N)
* John Stuart Blackie (1809–1895)
* John Blackwood (1818–1879), publisher and editor of &quot;Blackwood&#x27;s Edinburgh Magazine&quot;
* Rev Dr Robert Blair (1837–1907) (N)
* Thomas Bonnar (father (d. 1873) and son (d. 1896), a back-to-back monument by David Watson Stevenson), artists, decorators and designers
* Cunninghame Borthwick, 19th Lord Borthwick (1813–1885)
* Sir Thomas Bouch (1822–1880), railway engineer, designer of the original Tay Rail Bridge
* Samuel Bough RSA, artist, (1822–1878) (monument by William Brodie, 1879)
* Admiral James Paterson Bower (1806–1889) and his son Major General Hamilton St Clair Bower (1858–1940) (N)
* Prof Francis Darby Boyd (1866–1922), Professor of Clinical Medicine at Edinburgh University
* Mary Syme Boyd (1910–1997), sculptor
* Sir Thomas Jamieson (1818–1902), Lord Provost of Edinburgh 1877–82 (N)
* Sir Byrom Bramwell (1847–1921), brain surgeon
* Edwin Bramwell FRSE (1873–1952), brain surgeon (N)
* Sir John Clerk Brodie (1811–1888), monument by John Hutchison (including his son Thomas Dawson Brodie) (LR)
* William Brodie (1815–1881)
* Agnes Henderson Brown (1866–1943), suffragette
* Andrew Betts Brown (1841–1906), engineer and inventor, co-founder of Brown Brothers &amp; Co (N)
* James Buchanan and Jane Buchanan, philanthropists
* John Young Buchanan FRS FRSE (1844–1925), oceanographer
* Thomas Stuart Burnett (1853–1888), sculptor
* Dr John Graham MacDonald Burt FRSE (1809–1868), President of the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh
* Samuel Butcher (1850–1910), professor of Greek at Edinburgh University, President of the British Academy, Liberal Unionist MP for Cambridge University (N)
* Florence St John Cadell (1877–1966), artist (N)
* Francis Cadell (artist) (1883–1937), Scottish colourist, his actress sister Jean Cadell (1884–1967) and great nephew, comedy actor Simon Cadell (1950–1996), star of &quot;Enemy at the Door&quot; and &quot;Hi-de-Hi!&quot;
* Prof Francis Mitchell Caird (1853–1926), President of the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh 1912–14 (N)
* Edward and James Key Caird, Dundee jute barons and philanthropists
* Major Donald Fraser Callander (1918–1992), soldier
* General Sir John Campbell of the East India Company
* Richard Vary Campbell (1840–1901), legal author (N)
* James Carswell (1832–1897), civil engineer, designer of Queen Street Station, Glasgow, and the approaches to the Forth Rail Bridge (N)
* James Cassie RSA (1819–1879), artist (N)
* Sir David Patrick Chalmers (1835–1899), colonial judge (N)
* George Paul Chalmers (1838–1878), artist
* Robert Chambers (1832–1888), publisher of dictionaries and encyclopedia
* Prof John Chiene (1843–1923), surgeon
* Henry Martyn Clark (1887–1916), missionary
* Lord Cockburn (1779–1854)
* John Campbell Colquhoun (1803–1870), writer
* George Somervil Carfrae (1854–1934), civil engineer (N)
* Dr John G. S. Coghill (1834–1899), physician and medical author
* George Combe (1788–1858), lawyer and phrenologist
* Charles Alfred Cooper FRSE (1829–1916), editor of &quot;The Scotsman&quot; newspaper
* Sir Joseph Montagu Cotterill (1851–1933), surgeon and cricketer, son of Henry Cotterill
* Rev George Coventry FRSE (1791–1872), (LR)
* Lord Cowan (1798–1878), Senator of the College of Justice (LR)
* Robert Cox WS (1810–1872), medallion head by William Brodie
* Robert Cox MP (1845–1899)
* Sir James Coxe (1811–1878), psychiatrist, Commissioner in Lunacy for Scotland
* Dr Kenneth Craik (1914–1945)
* Francis Chalmers Crawford FRSE (1851–1908), botanist
* Rev Prof Thomas Jackson Crawford FRSE (1812–1875), theologian and author
* Robert Croall (1831–1898), coach- and post-master
* Prof John Halliday Croom (1847–1923), physician
* Lord Cullen (1859–1931)
* Prof Daniel John Cunningham (1850–1909) with his Dublin-born son, General Sir Alan Cunningham (1887–1983)
* Robert James Blair Cunynghame FRSE (1841–1903), forensic scientist and physiologist
* Allen Dalzell FRSE (1821–1869), pharmacologist
* Dr Robert Daun FRSE FRCP (1785–1871), military surgeon (LR)
* Marcus Dods DD (1834–1909), theologian
* Dr Andrew Halliday Douglas (1819–1908), President of the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh, and his namesake son, Rev. Prof. A.H. Douglas (d. 1902), author and Professor of Apologetic at Know College, Toronto
* Francis Brown Douglas FRSE DL (1814–1885), Lord Provost of Edinburgh 1859–62
* Sir William Fettes Douglas (1822–1891), PRSA artist
* Bishop John Dowden (1840–1910), Bishop of Edinburgh
* Thomas Drybrough (1820–1894), brewer
* Finlay Dun (1795–1853), musician and composer
* John Duncan (surgeon) FRSE (1839–1899), President of the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh 1889–91
* Henry Dunlop of Craigton (1799–1867), Lord Provost of Glasgow 1837 to 1840
* James Dunsmure FRSE (1814–1886), President of the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh
* William Ronald Dodds Fairbairn FRSE (1889–1964), psychiatrist
* Dr James Duncan (1810–1866) and his son, Dr John Duncan (1839–1899)
* James Faed (1821–1911), artist
* Rev Valentine Faithfull (1820–1894), clergyman and cricketer
* Sir James Falshaw (1810–1889), Lord Provost (N)
* Vice Admiral Charles Fellowes (1823–1880) (N)
* James Haig Ferguson FRSE (1863–1934), President of both the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh and the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh (N)
* Richard Findlay (1943–2017), broadcaster and media magnate
* Rev Robert Howie Fisher DD (1861–1934), minister and author, Chaplain to the King
* Lord Fleming (1877–1944), military hero and judge
* James Simpson Fleming FRSE (1828–1899)
* Prof John Fleming (1785–1857)
* Prof Edward Forbes (1815–1854), naturalist
* Prof James David Forbes (1809–1868), inventor of the seismometer
* Sir Patrick Johnston Ford, Baronet, MP (1880–1945)
* Major-General James George Roche Forlong (1824–1904), soldier and engineer
* Sir John Forrest, Baronet (1817–1883), with Sir William Forrest (1823–1894) and Sir James Forrest (1853–1899)
* William Hope Fowler CVO, MB, ChB, FRCSE, MRCPE, FRSE (1876–1933), x-ray pioneer, victim of his own experiments (N)
* Sir Andrew Henderson Leith Fraser (1848–1919)
* Dr John Fraser FRSE (1844–1925), Commissioner of Lunacy in Scotland 1895–1910
* Lord Fraser (1817–1889), jurist
* Patrick Neill Fraser, FRSE (d. 1905), botanist (plus a cenotaph to his daughter Margaret Neill Fraser, buried in Serbia during the First World War)
* Thomas Richard Fraser (1841–1920), pathologist (N)
* Sir William Fraser (1816–1898)
* Henry Snell Gamley (1865–1928), artist
* George Alexander Gibson (1854–1913), doctor and amateur geologist, Fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, Chief Physician at Edinburgh Royal Infirmary (N)
* Sir James Gibson, 1st Baronet (1849–1912), Lord Provost of Edinburgh 1906–1909, MP for Edinburgh 1909–1912
* James Young Gibson (1826–1886), author/translator (bronze by Francis John Williamson) plus his wife Margaret Dunlop Smith (1843–1920), also an author
* John Goodsir (1814–1867), anatomist
* Robert Anstruther Goodsir (1823–1899), doctor and Arctic explorer
* The Baron Gordon of Drumearn (1814–1879)
* Sir Alexander Grant, 10th Bt. (1826–1884), educationalist and Principal of Edinburgh University
* John Peter Grant, MP (1774–1848)
* Sir Ludovic Grant, 11th Baronet of Dalvey (1862–1836)
* Robert Kaye Greville (1794–1866), botanist
* Lord Guthrie (1849–1920), Senator of the College of Justice
* William Guy, FRSE (1860–1950), pioneer of modern dentistry
* Daniel Rutherford Haldane FRSE PRCPE (1824–1887)
* James Haliburton (1788–1862), Egyptologist
* James, 9th Baron Belhaven and Stenton (1822–1893), monument including a bronze by Pilkington Jackson
* Lord Handyside (1798–1858)
* Joseph James Hargrave (1841–1894) of the Hudson&#x27;s Bay Company (HBC)
* John Harrison FRSE CBE LLD (1847–1922), master tailor and author, son of Sir George Harrison, MP
* Sir Lewis John Erroll Hay, 9th Baronet of Park (1866–1923) (N)
* Andrew Fergus Hewat FRSE, (1884–1957)
* David Octavius Hill (1802–1870), artist and photography pioneer, Hill &amp; Adamson. The monument is by his second wife, Amelia Robertson Hill (née Paton) (1820–1904) who is buried with him
* Sir James Hodsdon (1858–1928), surgeon, President of the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh 1914–1917
* Franklin Hudson (1864–1918), American-born osteopath (N)
* Robert Gemmell Hutchison (1855–1936), artist (pair of sculpted heads by John Stevenson Rhind)
* Sir Thomas Hutchison (1866–1925), Lord Provost of Edinburgh 1921–1923
* Elsie Inglis (1864–1917), pioneer female doctor and war hero (N)
* Alexander Taylor Innes FRSE LLD (1833–1912), lawyer and historian
* John Irving (1822–1848 or 49), lieutenant aboard , part of the Franklin Expedition searching for the Northwest Passage; his body was found on King William Island (in modern-day Nunavut, Canada) 30 years later and re-interred at Dean Cemetery, 7 November 1881 (monument is carved by Stewart McGlashan)
* Sir William Allan Jamieson (1839–1916), surgeon and medical author, President of the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh 1908–1910
* Francis, Lord Jeffrey (1773–1850) (LR)
* Charles Jenner FRSE (1810–1893), founder of Jenners Department Store on Princes Street
* Lord Johnston (1844–1931), Senator of the College of Justice (N)
* Sir William Campbell Johnston FRSE LLD (1860–1938), advocate and cricketer (N)
* Artur Jurand (1914–2000), Polish born geneticist (N)
* Frederick Charles Kennedy CIE (1849–1916), Director of the Irrawaddy Flotilla Company and involved in the Third Anglo-Burmese War (N)
* Helen Kerr LLD (1859–1940), social reformer
* The Baron Kilpatrick of Kincraig (1926–2015)
* The 1st Baron Kinnear (1833–1917)
* Charles Kinnear, architect (1830–1894) of the firm Peddie &amp; Kinnear, creators of Cockburn Street, Edinburgh, etc. (N)
* All four Barons Kinross, spanning almost two centuries (LR)
* John Watson Laidlay FRSE (1808–1885), coin collector and orientalist
* William Law (1799–1878), Lord Provost of Edinburgh from 1869 to 1872
* Right Hon Lord Lee FRSE (1830–1890), Senator of the College of Justice (N)
* Rev Cameron Lees (1835–1913)
* James Leslie FRSE (1801–1889), engineer, and his son, Alexander Leslie
* John Lessels (1808–1883), City architect (N)
* David Lind (1797–1856), builder of the Scott Monument
* Dr William Lauder Lindsay FRSE FLS (1829–1880), physician and botanist
* Prof Sir Henry Duncan Littlejohn (1826–1914), public health promoter, forensic science pioneer, plus his son, Henry Harvey Littlejohn (1862–1927), forensic scientist, Edinburgh&#x27;s first Police Surgeon.
* John Gordon Lorimer (1870–1916), cenotaph
* George MacRitchie Low FRSE, FFA (1849–1922), President of the Faculty of Actuaries (N)
* Flora Macaulay (1859–1958), newspaper editor (N)
* Charles McBride (1851–1903), sculptor (bronze head by Henry Snell Gamley) (N)
* John MacGregor McCandlish WS FRSE (1821–1901), first President of the Faculty of Actuaries
* Dr John McCosh (1801–1881), early photographer (cenotaph) (N)
* Major-General Sir Hector MacDonald (d. 1903), &quot;The Fighting Mac&quot; (bronze by William Birnie Rhind) (N)
* Rev Prof Patrick Campbell MacDougall (1806–1867), Professor of Moral Philosophy
* John McEwan (1832–1875), part of the brewing family
* Very Rev. Alexander Robertson MacEwen (1851–1916)
* Lord Macfadyen (1945–2008), Senator of the College of Justice
* Dr John Lisle Hall MacFarlane (1851–1874), physician and Scotland rugby international (medallion by Sir John Steell)
* David MacGibbon (1831–1902), architect and architectural historian, partner in MacGibbon and Ross (N)
* Archibald Donald Mackenzie (1914–1944), &#x27;Captain Mack&#x27;, officer of the Cameron Highlanders and later of the Brigata Stella Rossa, commemorated annually on Liberation Day in Italy
* Lord Mackenzie (1807–1869), Senator of the College of Justice
* Very Rev Dugald Mackichan (1851–1932)
* Andrew Douglas Maclagan FRSE (1817–1900), physician and toxicologist, and his son Robert Craig Maclagan
* David Maclagan FRSE (1785–1865) military surgeon, surgeon to Queen Victoria in Scotland
* Very Rev Norman Macleod DD (1838–1911) Moderator of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland in 1900 (N)
* Donald Mackenzie (1818–1875), Scottish judge, styled Lord Mackenzie
* Rev Hugh MacMillan FRSE (1833–1903) (N)
* Sir Daniel Macnee RSA (1806–1882) artist and President of the Royal Scottish Academy (N)
* Rev Dr James Calder Macphail DD (1821–1908) Free Church minister and pioneer photographer (N)
* Robert McVitie (1854–1910) biscuit maker, creator of the digestive biscuit (N) (cenotaph)
* James Maidment (1793–1879) antiquarian (N)
* David Duncan Main (1856–1934) medical missionary
* Edward Maitland, Lord Barcaple (1803–1870)
* Dr Robert Bowes Malcolm FRSE (1807–1894) British obstetrician
* Henry Marshall FRSE (1775–1851) physician and medical statistician
* Very Rev Theodore Marshall DD (1846–1939), Moderator of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland 1908 (N)
* Robert Matheson (architect) (1808–1877)
* John Miller (1805–1883) half of the partnership Grainger &amp; Miller, railway and dock engineers
* Very Rev John Harry Miller (1869–1940) (N)
* Janet Milne Rae (1844–1933), novelist
* Very Rev James Mitchell DD (1830–1911) Moderator of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland in 1901
* Rev John Murray Mitchell (1815–1904) missionary and orientalist (N)
* Very Rev Reginald Mitchell-Innes (1848–1930)
* Sir Mitchell Mitchell-Thomson, 1st Baronet (1816–1918) Lord Provost of Edinburgh 1897–1900
* Alexander Monro (tertius) (1773–1859) physician of the Monro dynasty (LR)
* James Francis Montgomery (1818–1897) first Dean of St Marys Episcopal Cathedral
* Dr Charles Morehead (1807–1882)
* William Ambrose Morehead (1805–1863) governor of Madras
* Thomas Corsan Morton (1859–1928) artist
* Rev Dr William Muir (1787–1869) Scottish divine and theological author. Moderator of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland in 1838 (bronze head by Sir John Steell)
* James Muirhead (1830–1889) Professor of Civil Law at Edinburgh University
* David Mure, Lord Mure (1810–1891) judge
* Sir John Murray (oceanographer) KCB (d. 1914) leader of the Challenger Expedition (N)
* Robert Milne Murray (1855–1904) gynaecologist
* James Nasmyth (1808–1890), inventor of the steam hammer, monument by John Rhind (N)
* Robert Nasmyth FRSE (1792–1870) dentist to Queen Victoria
* Dr Thomas Goodall Nasmyth FRSE (1855–1937) Medical Officer of Health to Fife, medical author (N)
* Patrick Newbigging FRSE PRSSA (1813–1864)
* Rev Dr Robert Nisbet (1814–1874)
* Wilfrid Normand, Baron Normand (1884–1962) (N)
* Brownlow North (evangelist) (1810–1875)
* Very Rev James Nicoll Ogilvie DD (1860–1928) Moderator of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland in 1918.
* Emily Murray Paterson RSW (1855–1934), artist
* James Paterson RSA (1854–1932) artist
* Sir James Balfour Paul (1846–1931) (N)
* Charles Pearson, Lord Pearson (1843–1910) judge
* John More Dick Peddie (1853–1921) architect (N)
* Samuel Peploe (1871–1935) artist
* Arthur Perigal RSA (1784–1847) artist
* Alexander Mactier Pirrie (1882–1907) anthropologist (N)
* William Henry Playfair (1790–1857), architect
* Major General John Pringle (1774–1861)
* Olive Rae (1878–1933), operatic soprano
* Rev Robert Rainy (1820–1906) and his son Adam Rolland Rainy MP
* Prof Sir John Rankine (1846–1922) professor of Scots Law and legal author (N)
* Robert Reid (architect) (1774–1856) architect of much of the New Town
* Robert Carstairs Reid (1845–1894) civil engineer
* John Riddell (genealogist) (1785–1862)
* Very Rev Dr George Ritchie (1808–1888) Moderator of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland in 1870
* John Ritchie (1778–1870) and John Ritchie Findlay (1824–1898) newspaper tycoons
* Dr Robert Peel Ritchie FRSE (1835–1902) medical historian
* Joseph Robertson (1810–1866), antiquarian
* Alexander Ignatius Roche (1861–1921) artist
* Prof Henry Darwin Rogers (1808–1866) US-born geologist
* A huge red granite obelisk to Alexander Russel, editor of The Scotsman (1814–1870) (N)
* Alexander James Russell FRSE CS (1814–1887) lawyer
* Sir James Russell (1846–1918) Lord Provost of Edinburgh 1891–94
* Very Rev James Curdie Russell DD VD (1830–1925) Moderator of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland 1902 (N)
* Prof William Russell (physician) (1852–1940) discoverer of Russell bodies
* Andrew Rutherfurd, Lord Rutherfurd (1791–1852), designed by the adjacent Playfair
* Prof William Rutherford Sanders FRSE (1828–1881) pathologist
* Very Rev Dr Arcibald Scott DD (1837–1909) Moderator of the Church of Scotland in 1896
* David Scott (painter) (1807–1849)
* Andrew Edward Scougal FRSE LLD (1846–1916) chief inspector of schools
* William Seller FRSE (1798–1869) physician and botanist
* Patrick Shaw (legal writer) (1796–1872)
* Charles Shore, 2nd Baron Teignmouth (1796–1885) politician
* Brigadier General Offley Shore (1863–1922)
* Sir Henry John Forbes Simson (1872–1932) the obstetrician who delivered Queen Elizabeth II and Princess Margaret (N)
* John Sinclair, 1st Baron Pentland (1860–1925)
* Basil Skinner (1923–1995) historian and campaigner for architectural conservation
* Robert T. Skinner FRSE (1867–1946) historian and teacher
* Prof George Gregory Smith (1865–1932)
* Dr John Smith (1800–1879) President of the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh
* Robert MacKay Smith FRSE (1802–1888) meteorologist and philanthropist
* Dr John W. L. Spence (1870–1930) x-ray pioneer and martyr to radiology
* Sir James Steel (1830–1904) Lord Provost of Edinburgh (bust by John Stevenson Rhind) (N)
* David Stevenson (1815–1886), his son Charles Alexander Stevenson (1855–1950) (N) and grandson D. Alan Stevenson (1891–1971) (N), lighthouse engineers
* Flora Stevenson (1839–1905) social reformer
* Louisa Stevenson (1835–1908) women&#x27;s university education, women&#x27;s suffrage
* James Stevenson (merchant) FRSE (1786–1866) Paisley cotton manufacturer
* John James Stevenson (1831–1908) architect, son of above
* Rev Robert Horne Stevenson DD (1812–1816)
* John Stewart of Nateby Hall FRSE (1813–1867) naturalist
* Prof Sir Thomas Grainger Stewart (1837–1900) and his daughter Agnes Grainger Stewart
* William Stewart, Lord Allanbridge (1925–2012)
* James Stirling (1800–1876) railway engineer and his wife, the author Susan Stirling
* William James Stuart (1873–1958) President of the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh 1937 to 1939 (N)
* Gabriel Surenne FSA (1777–1858) historian
* Lt Gen Thomas Robert Swinburne British army officer and artist
* George Swinton (botanist) FRSE (1780–1854) Chief Secretary of the Government in India
* Major General Sir John Munro Sym (1839–1919)
* Francis Darby Syme (1818–1871) trader in China involved in the coolie riots of 1852
* John Tait (1787–1856) architect
* The Very Rev C W G Taylor CBE DD (d. 1950) Moderator of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland 1942
* Robert Tennent FRSE (1813–1890), pioneer photographer and his younger brother Hugh Lyon Tennent (1817–1874) (N)
* D&#x27;Arcy Wentworth Thompson (1860–1947) biologist
* Prof Allen Thomson FRS FRSE (1809–1884)
* Rev Dr Andrew Thomson DD (1814–1901) minister and religious author (N)
* Lt Col Frank Wyville Thomson FRSE (1860–1918) public health expert in India
* Sir Frederick Thomson, 1st Baronet MP (1875–1935) and Sir Douglas Thomson, 2nd Baronet MP (1905–1972) politician father and son
* Henry Alexis Thomson (1863–1924) Professor of Surgery
* Robert William Thomson (1822–1873) engineer and inventor of the pneumatic tyre
* Thomas Thomson (advocate) (1768–1852)
* Prof William Thomson (1802–1852), medical author, professor of medicine at the University of Glasgow
* Sir William Turner (anatomist) (1852–1916) and his son Arthur Logan Turner (1865–1939) (N)
* Dr Charles Edward Underhill FRSE (1856–1917) surgeon
* William Veitch LLD (1794–1885) classical scholar
* Major General James Conway Victor (1792–1864) military engineer
* John Waddell (1828–1888) railway engineer
* Sir Norman Walker (1862–1942), dermatologist
* Edward Arthur Walton (1860–1922) artist
* Thomas Drummond Wanliss (1830–1923) Australian politician
* Sir Patrick Heron Watson (1831–1907) Crimean War surgeon, Surgeon to the King (Scotland), first President of the Edinburgh Dental Hospital

* William Watson, Baron Watson (1827–1899) law lord
* Joseph Laing Waugh (1868–1928) author (medallion by William Birnie Rhind)
* Rev Dr Alexander Whyte (1836–1921) (N)
* Sir David Wilkie (1882–1938) surgeon and philanthropist
* Sir Henry Wellwood-Moncreiff, 10th Baronet (1809–1883)
* Aeneas Francon Williams (1886–1971) Church of Scotland Minister, Missionary, Chaplain, Writer and Poet, and his wife Clara Anne Rendall, missionary, teacher and artist.
* Rev Andrew Wallace Williamson (1856–1926)
* John Wilson (1800–1849) Scottish vocalist
* Prof John Wilson (1785–1854) author under the name of &quot;Christopher North&quot; and his brother James Wilson (1795–1856) a zoologist
* Dr Jenny Wormald (1942–2015) historian
* David Reginald Younger VC (memorial only)

===Southern Terrace===
* Alexander Hugh Freeland Barbour (1856–1927) pioneer of gynaecology
* Sir George Andreas Berry MP (1853–1940) eye surgeon
* Benjamin Hall Blyth (1849–1917) civil engineer
* Alexander Crum Brown (1838–1922) chemist
* Memorial to George Brown (Canadian politician) (1819–1880) plus the grave of Anne Nelson, his wife (1823–1906)
* Thomas Graham Brown (1882–1965) mountaineer and physiologist
* Duncan Cameron, (1825–1901), owner of &quot;The Oban Times&quot; newspaper and inventor of The &quot;Waverley&quot; nib pen and his daughter, Mary Cameron (painter) (1865–1921)
* Robert Carfrae FSAScot (1820–1900) antiquarian
* Thomas Clouston (1840–1915) psychiatrist
* Francis Brodie Imlach (1819–1891) pioneer of dentistry and anaesthesia
* Rev Dr Robert Reid Kalley (1809–1888) missionary
* Dr Peter McBride FRSE (1854–1946) physician
* William Mackintosh, Lord Kyllachy FRSE (1842–1918) Senator of the College of Justice
* Rev Angus Makellar (d. 1859) Moderator of the Church of Scotland for 1840
* Sir William Muir (1819–1905) Scottish Orientalist
* Samuel Alexander Pagan (1793–1867) President of the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh 1846 to 1848
* Joseph Noel Paton (1821–1901) artist
* Victor Noel-Paton, Baron Ferrier (1900–1992)
* Sir John Skelton (1831–1897) and his wife Dame Jane Adair Skelton (1847–1925)
* Sir David Wallace (1862–1952) urologist
* Dr Alexander Wood (1817–1884) inventor of the hypodermic syringe

===Twentieth century extension===

* Andrew Anderson, Lord Anderson (1862–1936) Senator of the College of Justice
* John George Bartholomew map-maker (cenotaph)
* Walter Lorrain Brodie (1884–1918), Victoria Cross recipient (cenotaph)
* Andrew Constable, Lord Constable (1865–1928)
* William Skeoch Cumming (1864–1929) artist
* Arthur Dewar, Lord Dewar (1860–1917)
* Charles Scott Dickson, Lord Dickson (1850–1922)
* Sir John Ritchie Findlay, 1st Baronet (1866–1930) newspaper magnate
* Sir Alexander MacPherson Fletcher (1929–1989) MP 1973 to 1987
* John Alexander Ford (1864–1925) artist
* Very Rev James Rae Forgan (1876–1966) Moderator of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland 1940
* Margaret Neill Fraser (1880–1915) lady golfer and heroine of the First World War memorialised on grave of Patrick Neill Fraser FRSE (buried in Serbia where she died)
* John George Govan (1861–1927) founder of the Faith Mission
* Herbert John Clifford Grierson (1866–1960)
* Rev Andrew Harper DD (1844–1936)
* John Robertson Henderson FRSE (1863–1925) zoologist
* Lady Caroline and Lord Walter James Hore, Baron Ruthven of Gowrie (1838–1921)
* George Hutchison (Unionist MP) (1873–1928)
* John Alexander Inglis (1873–1941) historian and author
* Ernest Auldjo Jamieson (1880–1937) architect
* George Auldjo Jamieson (1827–1900) accountant and company director
* David Smiles Jerdan FRSE (1871–1951) businessman and horticulturalist
* Christopher Nicholson Johnston, Lord Sands (1857–1934) judge and politician
* Stewart Kaye (1886–1952) architect
* Joseph Fairweather Lamb FRSE (1928–2015) physiologist
* Sir George Macdonald (1862–1940) archaeologist
* Sir Alexander MacPherson Fletcher MP (1929–1989)
* Father John Maitland Moir (1924–2013) priest
* Alexander Munro MacRobert (1873–1930) MP and Lord Advocate
* Sir Walter Mercer (1890–1971) surgeon
* George F. Merson FRSE (1866–1959) pharmacist
* Thomas Brash Morison (1868–1945) Senator of the College of Justice
* Sir Robert Muir FRS (1864–1959) pathologist, and his sister, Anne Davidson Muir RSW (1875–1951) artist
* Joseph Shield Nicholson (1850–1927) economist
* Ella Pirrie (1857–1929) friend and colleague of Florence Nightingale, first head nurse of Belfast City Hospital and first superintendent of the Deaconess Hospital in Edinburgh
* Edward Theodore Salvesen, Lord Salvesen (1857–1942) (bronze by Henry Snell Gamley) including the grave of his father-in-law, John Trayner, Lord Trayner
* Sir David William Scott-Barrett (1922–2003)
* Alistair Smart (1922–1992) art historian
* Sydney Goodsir Smith (1915–1975) poet and artist
* Lewis Spence (1874–1955) journalist, author and poet
* Douglas Strachan HRSA (1875–1950) stained glass window designer
* Sir Henry Wade (1876–1955) surgeon
* Sir Thomas Barnby Whitson (1869–1948) Lord Provost of Edinburgh 1929 to 1932

==Other monuments of interest==

* Monument to John George Bartholomew, map-maker (buried in Portugal) on the north wall of the twentieth-century cemetery extension (sculpted by Pilkington Jackson)
* Monument to Robert Dunsmure and his brothers, all of whom died abroad
* Monument to Col Lauderdale Maule and the 79th Cameron Highlanders marking their role in the Crimean War at Alma and Sevastopol. The rear of the monument commemorates their part in the Indian Mutiny at Lucknow
* Monument to the Edinburgh-born Confederate Colonel Robert A. Smith who died in 1862 at Munfordsville, Kentucky in the American Civil War
* Monument to historian John Hill Burton, who is buried at Dalmeny. Monument in Dean is by William Brodie
* Monument to John Wilson (1800–1849), vocalist (buried in Quebec), also subject of a memorial at the foot of Calton Hill
* The Cemetery contains the war graves of 39 Commonwealth service personnel, 29 from World War I and 10 from World War II, registered and maintained by the Commonwealth War Graves Commission. The oldest soldier buried is Major-General Sir John Munro Sym KCB (1839–1919) aged 80 (this is a normal grave not a CWGC grave). Most of the war graves lie in the independently accessed twentieth-century section to the north of the main cemetery.
* Robert Digby-Jones VC is memorialised on his parents&#x27; grave in the north extension.
* Monument to the orphans dying at the immediately adjacent Dean Orphanage

==References==
===Bibliography===
* &quot;The Dean Cemetery, Edinburgh&quot; edited by A. S. Cowper and Euan S. McIver, Edinburgh, 1992. .

==External links==
* Official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5246062" start="4" end="17" title="Dean Cemetery" label="Dean Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5246524" start="78" end="90" title="Dean Village" label="Dean Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="100" end="109" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566668" start="177" end="191" title="Water of Leith" label="Water of Leith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2679817" start="254" end="266" title="Dean Gallery" label="Dean Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5232612" start="737" end="749" title="David Cousin" label="David Cousin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970837" start="792" end="810" title="Warriston Cemetery" label="Warriston Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007259" start="932" end="940" title="Scottish culture" label="Scottish"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="1029" end="1038" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6255010" start="1674" end="1694" title="John Ritchie Findlay" label="John Ritchie Findlay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297902" start="2526" end="2541" title="Sir John Steell" label="Sir John Steell"/>
<link wikidata="Q8005965" start="2543" end="2557" title="William Brodie (sculptor)" label="William Brodie"/>
<link wikidata="Q17309173" start="2559" end="2573" title="John Hutchison (sculptor)" label="John Hutchison"/>
<link wikidata="Q14833533" start="2575" end="2598" title="Francis John Williamson" label="Francis John Williamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16007414" start="2600" end="2618" title="Pilkington Jackson" label="Pilkington Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q17308747" start="2620" end="2641" title="Amelia Robertson Hill" label="Amelia Robertson Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q8005562" start="2643" end="2663" title="William Birnie Rhind" label="William Birnie Rhind"/>
<link wikidata="Q16062323" start="2665" end="2675" title="John Rhind (sculptor)" label="John Rhind"/>
<link wikidata="Q17421734" start="2677" end="2697" title="John Stevenson Rhind" label="John Stevenson Rhind"/>
<link wikidata="Q8010116" start="2699" end="2722" title="William Grant Stevenson" label="William Grant Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5728472" start="2724" end="2742" title="Henry Snell Gamley" label="Henry Snell Gamley"/>
<link wikidata="Q19664373" start="2744" end="2759" title="Charles McBride" label="Charles McBride"/>
<link wikidata="Q2265709" start="2761" end="2776" title="George Frampton" label="George Frampton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2778" end="2797" title="Walter Hubert Paton" label="Walter Hubert Paton"/>
<link wikidata="Q72608542" start="2802" end="2819" title="Stewart McGlashan" label="Stewart McGlashan"/>
<link wikidata="Q61820014" start="2958" end="2972" title="William Nisbet of Dean" label="William Nisbet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577033" start="2993" end="3018" title="Lord Provost of Edinburgh" label="Lord Provost of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235593" start="3070" end="3079" title="Poulterer" label="Poulterer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4719762" start="3112" end="3128" title="Alexander Nisbet" label="Alexander Nisbet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7040190" start="3133" end="3145" title="Nisbet House" label="Nisbet House"/>
<link wikidata="Q425611" start="3152" end="3174" title="Duns, Scottish Borders" label="Duns, Scottish Borders"/>
<link wikidata="Q786649" start="3176" end="3188" title="Berwickshire" label="Berwickshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12292478" start="3269" end="3281" title="estate house" label="estate house"/>
<link wikidata="Q16859588" start="3479" end="3505" title="John Swinton, Lord Swinton" label="John Swinton, Lord Swinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q24288346" start="3537" end="3563" title="John Stuart Hepburn Forbes" label="John Stuart Hepburn Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357724" start="3762" end="3786" title="John Abercromby, 5th Baron Abercromby" label="The 5th Baron Abercromby"/>
<link wikidata="Q40605309" start="3801" end="3810" title="James Adam, Lord Adam" label="Lord Adam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7450071" start="3824" end="3857" title="Senator of the College of Justice" label="Senator of the College of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q29378517" start="3864" end="3890" title="James Ormiston Affleck" label="Sir James Ormiston Affleck"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="3891" end="3895" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q7597081" start="3940" end="3955" title="Stair Agnew" label="Sir Stair Agnew"/>
<link wikidata="Q48744272" start="3970" end="3986" title="David Aitken (minister)" label="Rev David Aitken"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="3987" end="3991" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q6218370" start="4024" end="4035" title="John Aitken (editor)" label="John Aitken"/>
<link wikidata="Q20749501" start="4087" end="4107" title="Robert Alexander (artist)" label="Robert Alexander RSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698450" start="4130" end="4150" title="Sir Archibald Alison, 1st Baronet" label="Sir Archibald Alison"/>
<link wikidata="Q5546708" start="4200" end="4220" title="Sir Archibald Alison, 2nd Baronet" label="Sir Archibald Alison"/>
<link wikidata="Q19325265" start="4228" end="4240" title="Robert Allan (mineralogist)" label="Robert Allan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="4241" end="4245" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q54878704" start="4274" end="4297" title="Robert George Allan" label="Sir Robert George Allan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="4298" end="4302" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q55637685" start="4334" end="4361" title="William Allan (British Army officer)" label="Major General William Allan"/>
<link wikidata="Q254106" start="4392" end="4403" title="Crimean War" label="Crimean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969391" start="4406" end="4427" title="William Allan (painter)" label="Sir William Allan RSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349404" start="4450" end="4463" title="John Anderson (zoologist)" label="John Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q15964470" start="4489" end="4511" title="David Watson Stevenson" label="David Watson Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q371504" start="4514" end="4529" title="Thomas Anderson (botanist)" label="Thomas Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422017" start="4558" end="4574" title="Thomas Annandale" label="Thomas Annandale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398302" start="4622" end="4633" title="Neil Arnott" label="Neil Arnott"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="4634" end="4637" title="Royal Society of London" label="FRS"/>
<link wikidata="Q4936770" start="4663" end="4675" title="Lena Ashwell" label="Lena Ashwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q771270" start="4725" end="4752" title="William Edmondstoune Aytoun" label="William Edmondstoune Aytoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q55418716" start="4773" end="4794" title="Henry Bellyse Baildon" label="Henry Bellyse Baildon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5564886" start="4829" end="4852" title="John William Ballantyne" label="John William Ballantyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="4853" end="4857" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q26263346" start="4919" end="4942" title="William Francis Beattie" label="William Francis Beattie"/>
<link wikidata="Q17515340" start="4970" end="4994" title="William Hamilton Beattie" label="William Hamilton Beattie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3700280" start="5051" end="5065" title="Balmoral Hotel" label="Balmoral Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359134" start="5072" end="5083" title="John Beddoe" label="John Beddoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6145119" start="5114" end="5136" title="James Warburton Begbie" label="James Warburton Begbie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4786211" start="5166" end="5180" title="Archibald Bell (writer)" label="Archibald Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q648680" start="5216" end="5230" title="Dr Joseph Bell" label="Dr Joseph Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q160302" start="5282" end="5305" title="University of Edinburgh" label="University of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="5327" end="5341" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6221467" start="5344" end="5356" title="John Bellany" label="John Bellany"/>
<link wikidata="Q6240327" start="5382" end="5401" title="John Hughes Bennett" label="John Hughes Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q288210" start="5430" end="5443" title="Isabella Bird" label="Isabella Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q691152" start="5541" end="5567" title="Royal Geographical Society" label="Royal Geographical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q4718373" start="5576" end="5591" title="Alexander Black (architect)" label="Alexander Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720370" start="5617" end="5640" title="Alexander William Black" label="Alexander William Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q56725536" start="5658" end="5679" title="James Black (Moderator)" label="Very Rev. James Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888514" start="5694" end="5753" title="Moderator of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland" label="Moderator of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q42348250" start="5789" end="5803" title="Robert Blackburn, Lord Blackburn" label="Lord Blackburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6259525" start="5861" end="5880" title="John Stuart Blackie" label="John Stuart Blackie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6222112" start="5895" end="5909" title="John Blackwood (publisher)" label="John Blackwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529971" start="5953" end="5988" title="Blackwood&amp;#x27;s Edinburgh Magazine" label="Blackwood&amp;#x27;s Edinburgh Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342144" start="6004" end="6016" title="Robert Blair (minister)" label="Robert Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q18736953" start="6035" end="6048" title="Thomas Bonnar" label="Thomas Bonnar"/>
<link wikidata="Q15964470" start="6113" end="6135" title="David Watson Stevenson" label="David Watson Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259372" start="6202" end="6216" title="Lord Borthwick" label="Lord Borthwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q368762" start="6231" end="6247" title="Thomas Bouch" label="Sir Thomas Bouch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6480690" start="6304" end="6319" title="Tay Rail Bridge" label="Tay Rail Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2218022" start="6322" end="6334" title="Samuel Bough" label="Samuel Bough"/>
<link wikidata="Q8005965" start="6373" end="6387" title="William Brodie (sculptor)" label="William Brodie"/>
<link wikidata="Q97849675" start="6405" end="6425" title="James Paterson Bower" label="James Paterson Bower"/>
<link wikidata="Q5644854" start="6464" end="6487" title="Hamilton Bower" label="Hamilton St Clair Bower"/>
<link wikidata="Q57163965" start="6511" end="6529" title="Francis Darby Boyd" label="Francis Darby Boyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q160302" start="6577" end="6597" title="Edinburgh University" label="Edinburgh University"/>
<link wikidata="Q23071304" start="6600" end="6614" title="Mary Syme Boyd" label="Mary Syme Boyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q18936266" start="6639" end="6658" title="Thomas Jamieson Boyd" label="Sir Thomas Jamieson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577033" start="6672" end="6697" title="Lord Provost of Edinburgh" label="Lord Provost of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018587" start="6712" end="6730" title="Byrom Bramwell" label="Sir Byrom Bramwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q16775652" start="6760" end="6774" title="Edwin Bramwell" label="Edwin Bramwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="6775" end="6779" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q17309173" start="6860" end="6874" title="John Hutchison (sculptor)" label="John Hutchison"/>
<link wikidata="Q4973040" start="6894" end="6914" title="Brodie baronets" label="Thomas Dawson Brodie"/>
<link wikidata="Q8005965" start="6923" end="6937" title="William Brodie (sculptor)" label="William Brodie"/>
<link wikidata="Q18810569" start="6952" end="6973" title="Agnes Brown (suffragist)" label="Agnes Henderson Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q27460669" start="7001" end="7019" title="Andrew Betts Brown" label="Andrew Betts Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q107024427" start="7100" end="7114" title="James Buchanan (1785–1857)" label="James Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18912236" start="7152" end="7171" title="John Young Buchanan" label="John Young Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18736955" start="7210" end="7231" title="Thomas Stuart Burnett" label="Thomas Stuart Burnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q20877006" start="7259" end="7285" title="John Graham MacDonald Burt" label="John Graham MacDonald Burt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="7286" end="7290" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q2170997" start="7321" end="7361" title="Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh" label="Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5590851" start="7364" end="7378" title="Samuel Butcher (classicist)" label="Samuel Butcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q160302" start="7414" end="7434" title="Edinburgh University" label="Edinburgh University"/>
<link wikidata="Q723551" start="7453" end="7468" title="British Academy" label="British Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754707" start="7470" end="7486" title="Liberal Unionist" label="Liberal Unionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025572" start="7487" end="7514" title="MP for Cambridge University" label="MP for Cambridge University"/>
<link wikidata="Q19961132" start="7521" end="7544" title="Florence St John Cadell" label="Florence St John Cadell"/>
<link wikidata="Q345864" start="7571" end="7594" title="Francis Cadell (artist)" label="Francis Cadell (artist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3171085" start="7647" end="7658" title="Jean Cadell" label="Jean Cadell"/>
<link wikidata="Q600632" start="7702" end="7714" title="Simon Cadell" label="Simon Cadell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3874591" start="7742" end="7759" title="Enemy at the Door" label="Enemy at the Door"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856630" start="7776" end="7785" title="Hi-de-Hi!" label="Hi-de-Hi!"/>
<link wikidata="Q42304137" start="7799" end="7821" title="Francis Mitchell Caird" label="Francis Mitchell Caird"/>
<link wikidata="Q2171012" start="7852" end="7890" title="Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh" label="Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715400" start="7916" end="7931" title="James Key Caird" label="James Key Caird"/>
<link wikidata="Q123709" start="7933" end="7939" title="Dundee" label="Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294120" start="7974" end="8003" title="Donald Callander" label="Major Donald Fraser Callander"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531654" start="8027" end="8034" title="General (United Kingdom)" label="General"/>
<link wikidata="Q18530220" start="8035" end="8052" title="John Campbell (1802–1878)" label="Sir John Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="8060" end="8078" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q20877011" start="8081" end="8102" title="Richard Vary Campbell" label="Richard Vary Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468366" start="8135" end="8149" title="James Carswell" label="James Carswell"/>
<link wikidata="Q800823" start="8191" end="8220" title="Queen Street Station, Glasgow" label="Queen Street Station, Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q275" start="8248" end="8265" title="Forth Rail Bridge" label="Forth Rail Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6131140" start="8272" end="8284" title="James Cassie" label="James Cassie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070445" start="8285" end="8288" title="Royal Scottish Academy" label="RSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q68490094" start="8315" end="8341" title="David Patrick Chalmers" label="Sir David Patrick Chalmers"/>
<link wikidata="Q15513085" start="8376" end="8396" title="George Paul Chalmers" label="George Paul Chalmers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342851" start="8419" end="8434" title="Robert Chambers (publisher born 1832)" label="Robert Chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q21176952" start="8498" end="8509" title="John Chiene" label="John Chiene"/>
<link wikidata="Q14948903" start="8533" end="8551" title="Henry Martyn Clark" label="Henry Martyn Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q5719616" start="8578" end="8591" title="Henry Cockburn, Lord Cockburn" label="Lord Cockburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q16065631" start="8606" end="8629" title="John Campbell Colquhoun" label="John Campbell Colquhoun"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8652" end="8675" title="George Somervil Carfrae" label="George Somervil Carfrae"/>
<link wikidata="Q55590227" start="8713" end="8731" title="John G. S. Coghill" label="John G. S. Coghill"/>
<link wikidata="Q550136" start="8776" end="8788" title="George Combe" label="George Combe"/>
<link wikidata="Q188584" start="8813" end="8825" title="phrenologist" label="phrenologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q18526758" start="8828" end="8849" title="Charles Alfred Cooper" label="Charles Alfred Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="8850" end="8854" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049657" start="8884" end="8896" title="The Scotsman" label="The Scotsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6282291" start="8915" end="8943" title="Joseph Cotterill (cricketer)" label="Sir Joseph Montagu Cotterill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5719840" start="8987" end="9002" title="Henry Cotterill" label="Henry Cotterill"/>
<link wikidata="Q104693432" start="9005" end="9024" title="George Coventry (minister)" label="Rev George Coventry"/>
<link wikidata="Q38137444" start="9050" end="9060" title="John Cowan, Lord Cowan" label="Lord Cowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7343165" start="9115" end="9125" title="Robert Cox (anti-Sabbatarian)" label="Robert Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q8005965" start="9160" end="9174" title="William Brodie (sculptor)" label="William Brodie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7343166" start="9177" end="9190" title="Robert Cox (Scottish politician)" label="Robert Cox MP"/>
<link wikidata="Q21932120" start="9205" end="9219" title="James Coxe" label="Sir James Coxe"/>
<link wikidata="Q65065262" start="9247" end="9282" title="Commissioners in Lunacy for Scotland" label="Commissioner in Lunacy for Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814581" start="9288" end="9301" title="Kenneth Craik" label="Kenneth Craik"/>
<link wikidata="Q21664326" start="9316" end="9341" title="Francis Chalmers Crawford" label="Francis Chalmers Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="9342" end="9346" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q18546883" start="9380" end="9403" title="Thomas Jackson Crawford" label="Thomas Jackson Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="9404" end="9408" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q16988236" start="9446" end="9459" title="John Croall &amp;amp; Sons Edinburgh" label="Robert Croall"/>
<link wikidata="Q21997475" start="9503" end="9522" title="John Halliday Croom" label="John Halliday Croom"/>
<link wikidata="Q22017481" start="9548" end="9559" title="William James Cullen, Lord Cullen" label="Lord Cullen"/>
<link wikidata="Q14948912" start="9579" end="9601" title="Daniel John Cunningham" label="Daniel John Cunningham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="9623" end="9629" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531654" start="9640" end="9647" title="General (United Kingdom)" label="General"/>
<link wikidata="Q372479" start="9648" end="9667" title="Alan Cunningham" label="Sir Alan Cunningham"/>
<link wikidata="Q22017485" start="9682" end="9711" title="Robert James Blair Cunynghame" label="Robert James Blair Cunynghame"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="9712" end="9716" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q26263345" start="9768" end="9781" title="Allen Dalzell" label="Allen Dalzell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="9782" end="9786" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q23018882" start="9820" end="9831" title="Robert Daun" label="Robert Daun"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="9832" end="9836" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q16003969" start="9837" end="9841" title="Fellow of the Royal College of Physicians" label="FRCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q6758132" start="9879" end="9890" title="Marcus Dods (theologian born 1834)" label="Marcus Dods"/>
<link wikidata="Q27827735" start="9923" end="9946" title="Andrew Halliday Douglas" label="Andrew Halliday Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2170997" start="9977" end="10017" title="Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh" label="Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="10128" end="10135" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q23585201" start="10138" end="10159" title="Francis Brown Douglas" label="Francis Brown Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="10160" end="10164" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577033" start="10181" end="10206" title="Lord Provost of Edinburgh" label="Lord Provost of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q8009008" start="10217" end="10243" title="William Fettes Douglas" label="Sir William Fettes Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6229970" start="10278" end="10289" title="John Dowden" label="John Dowden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917835" start="10303" end="10322" title="Bishop of Edinburgh" label="Bishop of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q21003884" start="10325" end="10341" title="Drybrough &amp;amp; Co" label="Thomas Drybrough"/>
<link wikidata="Q5450531" start="10364" end="10374" title="Finlay Dun" label="Finlay Dun"/>
<link wikidata="Q27122041" start="10412" end="10433" title="John Duncan (surgeon)" label="John Duncan (surgeon)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="10434" end="10438" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q2171012" start="10469" end="10507" title="Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh" label="Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q48812985" start="10518" end="10542" title="Henry Dunlop of Craigton" label="Henry Dunlop of Craigton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679884" start="10556" end="10579" title="Lord Provost of Glasgow" label="Lord Provost of Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q23758940" start="10595" end="10609" title="James Dunsmure" label="James Dunsmure"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="10610" end="10614" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q2171012" start="10645" end="10683" title="Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh" label="Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q939271" start="10686" end="10716" title="William Ronald Dodds Fairbairn" label="William Ronald Dodds Fairbairn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="10717" end="10721" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q23585408" start="10750" end="10765" title="James Duncan (surgeon)" label="Dr James Duncan"/>
<link wikidata="Q27122041" start="10791" end="10805" title="John Duncan (surgeon)" label="Dr John Duncan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6133733" start="10820" end="10830" title="James Faed" label="James Faed"/>
<link wikidata="Q17309015" start="10857" end="10876" title="Valentine Faithfull" label="Valentine Faithfull"/>
<link wikidata="Q6133762" start="10916" end="10933" title="James Falshaw" label="Sir James Falshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259398" start="10947" end="10959" title="Lord Provost" label="Lord Provost"/>
<link wikidata="Q5077618" start="10979" end="10995" title="Charles Fellowes" label="Charles Fellowes"/>
<link wikidata="Q23988399" start="11014" end="11033" title="James Haig Ferguson" label="James Haig Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="11034" end="11038" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q2170997" start="11074" end="11114" title="Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh" label="Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2171012" start="11123" end="11161" title="Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh" label="Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q65031494" start="11168" end="11183" title="Richard Findlay (broadcaster)" label="Richard Findlay"/>
<link wikidata="Q108386335" start="11233" end="11252" title="Robert Howie Fisher" label="Robert Howie Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q5233685" start="11313" end="11325" title="David Fleming, Lord Fleming" label="Lord Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q24068883" start="11365" end="11386" title="James Simpson Fleming" label="James Simpson Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="11387" end="11391" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q686875" start="11411" end="11423" title="John Fleming (naturalist)" label="John Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248394" start="11443" end="11456" title="Edward Forbes" label="Edward Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356328" start="11488" end="11506" title="James David Forbes" label="James David Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q160567" start="11536" end="11547" title="seismometer" label="seismometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7528429" start="11550" end="11575" title="Patrick Johnston Ford" label="Sir Patrick Johnston Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q282019" start="11577" end="11584" title="Baronet" label="Baronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6134077" start="11603" end="11643" title="James Forlong" label="Major-General James George Roche Forlong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470535" start="11680" end="11705" title="Forrest baronets" label="Sir John Forrest, Baronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q24579143" start="11792" end="11811" title="William Hope Fowler" label="William Hope Fowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q4759079" start="11909" end="11942" title="Andrew Henderson Leith Fraser" label="Sir Andrew Henderson Leith Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q97933203" start="11957" end="11971" title="John Fraser (physician)" label="Dr John Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="11972" end="11976" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q7146528" start="12037" end="12048" title="Patrick Fraser, Lord Fraser" label="Lord Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q21513491" start="12071" end="12091" title="Patrick Neill Fraser" label="Patrick Neill Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="12093" end="12097" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q24579366" start="12151" end="12172" title="Margaret Neill Fraser" label="Margaret Neill Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="12202" end="12217" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q446779" start="12221" end="12242" title="Thomas Richard Fraser" label="Thomas Richard Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q5741148" start="12274" end="12292" title="William Fraser (historian)" label="Sir William Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q5728472" start="12307" end="12325" title="Henry Snell Gamley" label="Henry Snell Gamley"/>
<link wikidata="Q18911981" start="12348" end="12371" title="George Alexander Gibson" label="George Alexander Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q117467" start="12429" end="12455" title="Royal Society of Edinburgh" label="Royal Society of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822734" start="12476" end="12501" title="Edinburgh Royal Infirmary" label="Edinburgh Royal Infirmary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7527421" start="12508" end="12537" title="Sir James Gibson, 1st Baronet" label="Sir James Gibson, 1st Baronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q17626680" start="12617" end="12635" title="James Young Gibson" label="James Young Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q14833533" start="12678" end="12701" title="Francis John Williamson" label="Francis John Williamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q545684" start="12717" end="12738" title="Agnes and Margaret Smith" label="Margaret Dunlop Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5764533" start="12769" end="12781" title="John Goodsir" label="John Goodsir"/>
<link wikidata="Q107577041" start="12807" end="12832" title="Robert Anstruther Goodsir" label="Robert Anstruther Goodsir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282069" start="12875" end="12903" title="Edward Gordon, Baron Gordon of Drumearn" label="The Baron Gordon of Drumearn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7525939" start="12918" end="12937" title="Alexander Grant, 10th Baronet" label="Sir Alexander Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q160302" start="12993" end="13013" title="Edinburgh University" label="Edinburgh University"/>
<link wikidata="Q17180624" start="13016" end="13032" title="John Peter Grant (MP)" label="John Peter Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5596596" start="13051" end="13068" title="Grant baronets" label="Sir Ludovic Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386773" start="13107" end="13127" title="Robert Kaye Greville" label="Robert Kaye Greville"/>
<link wikidata="Q5079528" start="13152" end="13164" title="Charles John Guthrie, Lord Guthrie" label="Lord Guthrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q19873791" start="13214" end="13225" title="William Guy (dentist)" label="William Guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5218651" start="13275" end="13300" title="Daniel Rutherford Haldane" label="Daniel Rutherford Haldane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="13301" end="13305" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356957" start="13326" end="13342" title="James Burton (Egyptologist)" label="James Haliburton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6678968" start="13371" end="13408" title="Lord Belhaven and Stenton" label="James, 9th Baron Belhaven and Stenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q16007414" start="13453" end="13471" title="Pilkington Jackson" label="Pilkington Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q26838421" start="13474" end="13488" title="Robert Handyside, Lord Handyside" label="Lord Handyside"/>
<link wikidata="Q6284328" start="13503" end="13524" title="Joseph James Hargrave" label="Joseph James Hargrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q76039" start="13544" end="13569" title="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company" label="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q42889387" start="13578" end="13591" title="John Harrison (historian)" label="John Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="13592" end="13596" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q5540269" start="13651" end="13670" title="George Harrison (Lord Provost)" label="Sir George Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q5685891" start="13677" end="13702" title="Hay baronets" label="Sir Lewis John Erroll Hay"/>
<link wikidata="Q27661939" start="13742" end="13761" title="Andrew Fergus Hewat" label="Andrew Fergus Hewat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="13762" end="13766" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q722792" start="13782" end="13801" title="David Octavius Hill" label="David Octavius Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3678920" start="13847" end="13865" title="Hill &amp;amp; Adamson" label="Hill &amp;amp; Adamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q17308747" start="13903" end="13924" title="Amelia Robertson Hill" label="Amelia Robertson Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q23305133" start="13974" end="13991" title="James Hodsdon" label="Sir James Hodsdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2171012" start="14031" end="14069" title="Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh" label="Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q61985441" start="14082" end="14097" title="Franklin Hudson" label="Franklin Hudson"/>
<link wikidata="Q18672160" start="14141" end="14165" title="Robert Gemmell Hutchison" label="Robert Gemmell Hutchison"/>
<link wikidata="Q17421734" start="14213" end="14233" title="John Stevenson Rhind" label="John Stevenson Rhind"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950755" start="14237" end="14257" title="Hutchison baronets" label="Sir Thomas Hutchison"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577033" start="14271" end="14296" title="Lord Provost of Edinburgh" label="Lord Provost of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367589" start="14309" end="14321" title="Elsie Inglis" label="Elsie Inglis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720199" start="14376" end="14398" title="Alexander Taylor Innes" label="Alexander Taylor Innes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="14399" end="14403" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q108284934" start="14444" end="14455" title="John Irving (Royal Navy officer)" label="John Irving"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305" start="14507" end="14526" title="Franklin&amp;#x27;s lost expedition" label="Franklin Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q81136" start="14545" end="14562" title="Northwest Passage" label="Northwest Passage"/>
<link wikidata="Q143246" start="14586" end="14605" title="King William Island" label="King William Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023" start="14621" end="14628" title="Nunavut" label="Nunavut"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="14630" end="14636" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q72608542" start="14726" end="14743" title="Stewart McGlashan" label="Stewart McGlashan"/>
<link wikidata="Q26266131" start="14747" end="14773" title="William Allan Jamieson" label="Sir William Allan Jamieson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2170997" start="14832" end="14872" title="Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh" label="Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5881202" start="14885" end="14906" title="Lord Francis Jeffrey" label="Francis, Lord Jeffrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6177834" start="14926" end="14940" title="Jenners" label="Charles Jenner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="14941" end="14945" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q6177834" start="14970" end="14977" title="Jenners" label="Jenners"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548664" start="14998" end="15012" title="Princes Street" label="Princes Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q42349606" start="15015" end="15028" title="Henry Johnston, Lord Johnston" label="Lord Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7450071" start="15042" end="15075" title="Senator of the College of Justice" label="Senator of the College of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q28555267" start="15082" end="15111" title="William Campbell Johnston" label="Sir William Campbell Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="15112" end="15116" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q28648789" start="15163" end="15175" title="Artur Jurand" label="Artur Jurand"/>
<link wikidata="Q55418703" start="15218" end="15243" title="Frederick Charles Kennedy" label="Frederick Charles Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3154562" start="15277" end="15303" title="Irrawaddy Flotilla Company" label="Irrawaddy Flotilla Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209946" start="15324" end="15347" title="Third Anglo-Burmese War" label="Third Anglo-Burmese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q38140632" start="15354" end="15364" title="Helen Kerr" label="Helen Kerr"/>
<link wikidata="Q775205" start="15400" end="15432" title="Robert Kilpatrick, Baron Kilpatrick of Kincraig" label="The Baron Kilpatrick of Kincraig"/>
<link wikidata="Q14948968" start="15447" end="15468" title="Alexander Kinnear, 1st Baron Kinnear" label="The 1st Baron Kinnear"/>
<link wikidata="Q18619351" start="15483" end="15498" title="Charles Kinnear" label="Charles Kinnear"/>
<link wikidata="Q6229358" start="15534" end="15540" title="John Dick Peddie" label="Peddie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139556" start="15568" end="15594" title="Cockburn Street, Edinburgh" label="Cockburn Street, Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4862547" start="15616" end="15630" title="Baron Kinross" label="Barons Kinross"/>
<link wikidata="Q28867776" start="15669" end="15688" title="John Watson Laidlay" label="John Watson Laidlay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="15689" end="15693" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q61905241" start="15740" end="15751" title="William Law (Lord Provost)" label="William Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577033" start="15765" end="15790" title="Lord Provost of Edinburgh" label="Lord Provost of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q29053967" start="15821" end="15829" title="Robert Lee, Lord Lee" label="Lord Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="15830" end="15834" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q5026286" start="15892" end="15904" title="Cameron Lees" label="Cameron Lees"/>
<link wikidata="Q27831079" start="15919" end="15931" title="James Leslie (engineer)" label="James Leslie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="15932" end="15936" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q29029527" start="15973" end="15989" title="Alexander Leslie (engineer)" label="Alexander Leslie"/>
<link wikidata="Q16063073" start="15992" end="16004" title="John Lessels" label="John Lessels"/>
<link wikidata="Q2502213" start="16078" end="16092" title="Scott Monument" label="Scott Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q18672913" start="16098" end="16120" title="William Lauder Lindsay" label="William Lauder Lindsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="16121" end="16125" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q5724975" start="16173" end="16200" title="Henry Duncan Littlejohn" label="Sir Henry Duncan Littlejohn"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16278" end="16301" title="Henry Littlejohn (surgeon born 1826)#Henry Harvey Littlejohn" label="Henry Harvey Littlejohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q18527224" start="16376" end="16395" title="John Gordon Lorimer (civil servant)" label="John Gordon Lorimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q321053" start="16409" end="16417" title="cenotaph" label="cenotaph"/>
<link wikidata="Q30069021" start="16420" end="16441" title="George MacRitchie Low" label="George MacRitchie Low"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="16442" end="16446" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428889" start="16448" end="16451" title="Faculty of Actuaries" label="FFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428889" start="16482" end="16502" title="Faculty of Actuaries" label="Faculty of Actuaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460331" start="16509" end="16523" title="Flora Macaulay" label="Flora Macaulay"/>
<link wikidata="Q19664373" start="16560" end="16575" title="Charles McBride" label="Charles McBride"/>
<link wikidata="Q5728472" start="16614" end="16632" title="Henry Snell Gamley" label="Henry Snell Gamley"/>
<link wikidata="Q30086976" start="16640" end="16665" title="John MacGregor McCandlish" label="John MacGregor McCandlish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="16669" end="16673" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428889" start="16710" end="16730" title="Faculty of Actuaries" label="Faculty of Actuaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q21079155" start="16736" end="16747" title="John McCosh" label="John McCosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q287709" start="16797" end="16810" title="Major-general (United Kingdom)" label="Major-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q737355" start="16811" end="16831" title="Hector MacDonald" label="Sir Hector MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q8005562" start="16883" end="16903" title="William Birnie Rhind" label="William Birnie Rhind"/>
<link wikidata="Q60993176" start="16920" end="16947" title="Patrick Campbell MacDougall" label="Patrick Campbell MacDougall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6801103" start="16993" end="17004" title="McEwan&amp;#x27;s" label="John McEwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4719956" start="17057" end="17084" title="Alexander Robertson MacEwen" label="Alexander Robertson MacEwen"/>
<link wikidata="Q18527739" start="17099" end="17113" title="Donald Macfadyen, Lord Macfadyen" label="Lord Macfadyen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6244935" start="17166" end="17192" title="John Lisle Hall MacFarlane" label="John Lisle Hall MacFarlane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297902" start="17263" end="17278" title="John Steell" label="Sir John Steell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6721901" start="17282" end="17297" title="MacGibbon and Ross" label="David MacGibbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6721901" start="17361" end="17379" title="MacGibbon and Ross" label="MacGibbon and Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q75863096" start="17386" end="17412" title="Archibald Donald Mackenzie" label="Archibald Donald Mackenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3413987" start="17467" end="17486" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Own Cameron Highlanders" label="Cameron Highlanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851732" start="17551" end="17565" title="Liberation Day (Italy)" label="Liberation Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q18734964" start="17577" end="17591" title="Thomas Mackenzie, Lord Mackenzie" label="Lord Mackenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7450071" start="17605" end="17638" title="Senator of the College of Justice" label="Senator of the College of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q33019637" start="17650" end="17666" title="Dugald Mackichan" label="Dugald Mackichan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301770" start="17681" end="17704" title="Andrew Douglas Maclagan" label="Andrew Douglas Maclagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="17705" end="17709" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q33252307" start="17763" end="17784" title="Robert Craig Maclagan" label="Robert Craig Maclagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q21402340" start="17787" end="17801" title="David Maclagan" label="David Maclagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="17802" end="17806" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="17848" end="17862" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q39078928" start="17877" end="17900" title="Norman Macleod (moderator)" label="Very Rev Norman Macleod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984623" start="17901" end="17903" title="Doctor of Divinity" label="DD"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888514" start="17916" end="17975" title="Moderator of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland" label="Moderator of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16065338" start="17990" end="18006" title="Donald Mackenzie (advocate)" label="Donald Mackenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q601898" start="18064" end="18078" title="Hugh MacMillan" label="Hugh MacMillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="18079" end="18083" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161629" start="18106" end="18119" title="Daniel Macnee" label="Daniel Macnee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070445" start="18164" end="18186" title="Royal Scottish Academy" label="Royal Scottish Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q42434267" start="18200" end="18221" title="James Calder Macphail" label="James Calder Macphail"/>
<link wikidata="Q557614" start="18289" end="18303" title="McVitie&amp;#x27;s" label="Robert McVitie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247120" start="18346" end="18363" title="digestive biscuit" label="digestive biscuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6138818" start="18381" end="18395" title="James Maidment" label="James Maidment"/>
<link wikidata="Q67935439" start="18426" end="18443" title="David Duncan Main" label="David Duncan Main"/>
<link wikidata="Q5344303" start="18477" end="18507" title="Edward Maitland, Lord Barcaple" label="Edward Maitland, Lord Barcaple"/>
<link wikidata="Q30103295" start="18525" end="18545" title="Robert Bowes Malcolm" label="Robert Bowes Malcolm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="18546" end="18550" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q18528625" start="18586" end="18600" title="Henry Marshall (physician)" label="Henry Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="18601" end="18605" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q31156364" start="18664" end="18681" title="Theodore Marshall" label="Theodore Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888514" start="18698" end="18757" title="Moderator of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland" label="Moderator of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q17199055" start="18769" end="18796" title="Robert Matheson (architect)" label="Robert Matheson (architect)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6248786" start="18811" end="18822" title="John Miller (engineer)" label="John Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q39931883" start="18920" end="18937" title="John Harry Miller" label="John Harry Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q16029204" start="18956" end="18971" title="Janet Milne Rae" label="Janet Milne Rae"/>
<link wikidata="Q27831114" start="18996" end="19019" title="James Mitchell (Scottish minister)" label="Very Rev James Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888514" start="19035" end="19094" title="Moderator of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland" label="Moderator of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q18534860" start="19109" end="19129" title="John Murray Mitchell (missionary)" label="John Murray Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7308817" start="19184" end="19207" title="Reginald Mitchell-Innes" label="Reginald Mitchell-Innes"/>
<link wikidata="Q11806743" start="19222" end="19264" title="Sir Mitchell Mitchell-Thomson, 1st Baronet" label="Sir Mitchell Mitchell-Thomson, 1st Baronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259398" start="19277" end="19289" title="Lord Provost" label="Lord Provost"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359982" start="19315" end="19340" title="Alexander Monro (tertius)" label="Alexander Monro (tertius)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6139947" start="19391" end="19415" title="James Montgomery (priest)" label="James Francis Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2324015" start="19442" end="19470" title="St Mary&amp;#x27;s Cathedral, Edinburgh (Episcopal)" label="St Marys Episcopal Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q18670893" start="19473" end="19492" title="Charles Morehead (physician)" label="Dr Charles Morehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q14917266" start="19507" end="19531" title="William Ambrose Morehead" label="William Ambrose Morehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423083" start="19565" end="19585" title="Thomas Corsan Morton" label="Thomas Corsan Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q18672941" start="19607" end="19626" title="William Muir (divine)" label="Rev Dr William Muir"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888514" start="19679" end="19738" title="Moderator of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland" label="Moderator of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297902" start="19763" end="19778" title="Sir John Steell" label="Sir John Steell"/>
<link wikidata="Q16867621" start="19782" end="19796" title="James Muirhead (scholar)" label="James Muirhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q160302" start="19835" end="19855" title="Edinburgh University" label="Edinburgh University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5237821" start="19858" end="19879" title="David Mure, Lord Mure" label="David Mure, Lord Mure"/>
<link wikidata="Q703564" start="19904" end="19931" title="John Murray (oceanographer)" label="John Murray (oceanographer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q644521" start="19960" end="19981" title="Challenger Expedition" label="Challenger Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q42304832" start="19988" end="20007" title="Robert Milne Murray" label="Robert Milne Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q240633" start="20036" end="20049" title="James Nasmyth" label="James Nasmyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q19767" start="20079" end="20091" title="steam hammer" label="steam hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16062323" start="20105" end="20115" title="John Rhind (sculptor)" label="John Rhind"/>
<link wikidata="Q30556764" start="20122" end="20136" title="Robert Nasmyth" label="Robert Nasmyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="20137" end="20141" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="20165" end="20179" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q30559564" start="20185" end="20207" title="Thomas Goodall Nasmyth" label="Thomas Goodall Nasmyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="20208" end="20212" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q23618325" start="20281" end="20299" title="Patrick Newbigging" label="Patrick Newbigging"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="20300" end="20304" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q42887435" start="20325" end="20345" title="Robert Nisbet (minister)" label="Rev Dr Robert Nisbet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2514411" start="20360" end="20390" title="Wilfrid Normand, Baron Normand" label="Wilfrid Normand, Baron Normand"/>
<link wikidata="Q16065344" start="20409" end="20436" title="Brownlow North (evangelist)" label="Brownlow North (evangelist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q30590906" start="20460" end="20480" title="James Nicoll Ogilvie" label="James Nicoll Ogilvie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888514" start="20496" end="20555" title="Moderator of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland" label="Moderator of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372295" start="20567" end="20588" title="Emily Murray Paterson" label="Emily Murray Paterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q177194" start="20615" end="20633" title="James Paterson (painter)" label="James Paterson RSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6129303" start="20659" end="20677" title="James Balfour Paul" label="James Balfour Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q13530020" start="20696" end="20725" title="Charles Pearson, Lord Pearson" label="Charles Pearson, Lord Pearson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6249373" start="20746" end="20767" title="John More Dick Peddie" label="John More Dick Peddie"/>
<link wikidata="Q721053" start="20796" end="20809" title="Samuel Peploe" label="Samuel Peploe"/>
<link wikidata="Q16858188" start="20831" end="20845" title="Arthur Perigal" label="Arthur Perigal"/>
<link wikidata="Q54878706" start="20871" end="20895" title="Alexander Mactier Pirrie" label="Alexander Mactier Pirrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q706350" start="20929" end="20951" title="William Henry Playfair" label="William Henry Playfair"/>
<link wikidata="Q56726634" start="20977" end="21003" title="John Pringle (British Army officer)" label="Major General John Pringle"/>
<link wikidata="Q91884859" start="21018" end="21027" title="Olive Rae" label="Olive Rae"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349145" start="21064" end="21076" title="Robert Rainy" label="Robert Rainy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4679694" start="21101" end="21119" title="Adam Rolland Rainy" label="Adam Rolland Rainy"/>
<link wikidata="Q21061806" start="21130" end="21146" title="Sir John Rankine" label="Sir John Rankine"/>
<link wikidata="Q15452830" start="21205" end="21228" title="Robert Reid (architect)" label="Robert Reid (architect)"/>
<link wikidata="Q590710" start="21266" end="21274" title="New Town, Edinburgh" label="New Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q50379898" start="21277" end="21298" title="Robert Carstairs Reid" label="Robert Carstairs Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q16066044" start="21328" end="21354" title="John Riddell (genealogist)" label="John Riddell (genealogist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q108857087" start="21369" end="21395" title="George Ritchie (moderator)" label="Very Rev Dr George Ritchie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888514" start="21408" end="21467" title="Moderator of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland" label="Moderator of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6255009" start="21478" end="21490" title="John Ritchie (newspaper owner)" label="John Ritchie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6255010" start="21507" end="21527" title="John Ritchie Findlay" label="John Ritchie Findlay"/>
<link wikidata="Q26998211" start="21563" end="21582" title="Robert Peel Ritchie" label="Robert Peel Ritchie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="21583" end="21587" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q15433798" start="21620" end="21636" title="Joseph Robertson (historian)" label="Joseph Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q281207" start="21664" end="21688" title="Alexander Ignatius Roche" label="Alexander Ignatius Roche"/>
<link wikidata="Q5720192" start="21715" end="21734" title="Henry Darwin Rogers" label="Henry Darwin Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q170980" start="21786" end="21793" title="obelisk" label="obelisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q17423709" start="21797" end="21813" title="Alexander Russel" label="Alexander Russel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049657" start="21825" end="21837" title="The Scotsman" label="The Scotsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q52198272" start="21856" end="21879" title="Alexander James Russell" label="Alexander James Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="21880" end="21884" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q6142532" start="21913" end="21926" title="James Russell (Scottish politician)" label="James Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259398" start="21939" end="21951" title="Lord Provost" label="Lord Provost"/>
<link wikidata="Q30802522" start="21984" end="22004" title="James Curdie Russell" label="James Curdie Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984623" start="22005" end="22007" title="Doctor of Divinity" label="DD"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888514" start="22023" end="22082" title="Moderator of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland" label="Moderator of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q9374876" start="22099" end="22126" title="William Russell (physician)" label="William Russell (physician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3694163" start="22153" end="22167" title="Russell bodies" label="Russell bodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758462" start="22170" end="22204" title="Andrew Rutherfurd, Lord Rutherfurd" label="Andrew Rutherfurd, Lord Rutherfurd"/>
<link wikidata="Q18811412" start="22259" end="22285" title="William Rutherford Sanders" label="William Rutherford Sanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="22286" end="22290" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q19037751" start="22317" end="22343" title="Archibald Scott (moderator)" label="Very Rev Dr Arcibald Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q5239590" start="22405" end="22426" title="David Scott (painter)" label="David Scott (painter)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20479949" start="22441" end="22462" title="Andrew Edward Scougal" label="Andrew Edward Scougal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="22463" end="22467" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q27661824" start="22513" end="22527" title="William Seller" label="William Seller"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="22528" end="22532" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q17018984" start="22570" end="22597" title="Patrick Shaw (legal writer)" label="Patrick Shaw (legal writer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082500" start="22612" end="22647" title="Charles Shore, 2nd Baron Teignmouth" label="Charles Shore, 2nd Baron Teignmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q152956" start="22673" end="22690" title="Brigadier General" label="Brigadier General"/>
<link wikidata="Q55418674" start="22722" end="22746" title="Henry Simson" label="Henry John Forbes Simson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="22796" end="22808" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q153815" start="22813" end="22830" title="Princess Margaret" label="Princess Margaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q11727985" start="22837" end="22870" title="John Sinclair, 1st Baron Pentland" label="John Sinclair, 1st Baron Pentland"/>
<link wikidata="Q62283595" start="22885" end="22898" title="Basil Skinner" label="Basil Skinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q55419677" start="22969" end="22986" title="Robert T. Skinner" label="Robert T. Skinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="22987" end="22991" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q5539901" start="23033" end="23053" title="George Gregory Smith" label="George Gregory Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q56274809" start="23068" end="23081" title="John Smith (physician)" label="Dr John Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2170997" start="23111" end="23151" title="Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh" label="Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q26997654" start="23154" end="23173" title="Robert MacKay Smith" label="Robert MacKay Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="23174" end="23178" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q26998199" start="23229" end="23246" title="John W. L. Spence" label="John W. L. Spence"/>
<link wikidata="Q19042841" start="23299" end="23314" title="Sir James Steel" label="Sir James Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577033" start="23327" end="23352" title="Lord Provost of Edinburgh" label="Lord Provost of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q17421734" start="23362" end="23382" title="John Stevenson Rhind" label="John Stevenson Rhind"/>
<link wikidata="Q343909" start="23390" end="23405" title="David Stevenson (engineer)" label="David Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q767677" start="23427" end="23454" title="Charles Alexander Stevenson" label="Charles Alexander Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5203484" start="23484" end="23501" title="D. Alan Stevenson" label="D. Alan Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460358" start="23542" end="23557" title="Flora Stevenson" label="Flora Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6688563" start="23588" end="23604" title="Louisa Stevenson" label="Louisa Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q42887914" start="23676" end="23702" title="James Stevenson (merchant)" label="James Stevenson (merchant)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="23703" end="23707" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q211870" start="23720" end="23727" title="Paisley, Renfrewshire" label="Paisley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106153" start="23750" end="23770" title="John James Stevenson" label="John James Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16062887" start="23813" end="23835" title="Robert Horne Stevenson" label="Robert Horne Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q42431412" start="23853" end="23880" title="John Stewart of Nateby Hall" label="John Stewart of Nateby Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="23881" end="23885" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552030" start="23920" end="23943" title="Thomas Grainger Stewart" label="Thomas Grainger Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q4693046" start="23973" end="23995" title="Agnes Grainger Stewart" label="Agnes Grainger Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018821" start="23998" end="24031" title="William Stewart, Lord Allanbridge" label="William Stewart, Lord Allanbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6143681" start="24046" end="24072" title="James Stirling (1800–1876)" label="James Stirling (1800–1876)"/>
<link wikidata="Q40663683" start="24132" end="24152" title="William James Stuart" label="William James Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2171012" start="24182" end="24220" title="Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh" label="Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5515695" start="24240" end="24255" title="Gabriel Surenne" label="Gabriel Surenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q57313291" start="24291" end="24314" title="Thomas Robert Swinburne" label="Thomas Robert Swinburne"/>
<link wikidata="Q60791075" start="24349" end="24374" title="George Swinton (botanist)" label="George Swinton (botanist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="24375" end="24379" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q42351203" start="24455" end="24469" title="John Munro Sym" label="John Munro Sym"/>
<link wikidata="Q57163979" start="24484" end="24502" title="Francis Darby Syme" label="Francis Darby Syme"/>
<link wikidata="Q27827615" start="24570" end="24579" title="John Tait (architect)" label="John Tait"/>
<link wikidata="Q42889455" start="24608" end="24629" title="Charles William Gray Taylor" label="Very Rev C W G Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888514" start="24647" end="24706" title="Moderator of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland" label="Moderator of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q42853025" start="24714" end="24728" title="Robert Tennent (photographer)" label="Robert Tennent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="24729" end="24733" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q42345564" start="24792" end="24809" title="Hugh Lyon Tennent" label="Hugh Lyon Tennent"/>
<link wikidata="Q739438" start="24828" end="24858" title="D&amp;#x27;Arcy Wentworth Thompson" label="D&amp;#x27;Arcy Wentworth Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3612474" start="24888" end="24901" title="Allen Thomson" label="Allen Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="24906" end="24910" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758722" start="24925" end="24946" title="Andrew Thomson (minister)" label="Rev Dr Andrew Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q59588739" start="25005" end="25026" title="Frank Wyville Thomson" label="Frank Wyville Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="25027" end="25031" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q7526794" start="25076" end="25110" title="Sir Frederick Thomson, 1st Baronet" label="Sir Frederick Thomson, 1st Baronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q16078875" start="25130" end="25162" title="Sir Douglas Thomson, 2nd Baronet" label="Sir Douglas Thomson, 2nd Baronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q15627398" start="25206" end="25226" title="Henry Alexis Thomson" label="Henry Alexis Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374031" start="25262" end="25284" title="Robert William Thomson" label="Robert William Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7794443" start="25343" end="25368" title="Thomas Thomson (advocate)" label="Thomas Thomson (advocate)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18736158" start="25383" end="25403" title="William Thomson (physician)" label="Prof William Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q192775" start="25462" end="25483" title="University of Glasgow" label="University of Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q820018" start="25490" end="25516" title="William Turner (anatomist)" label="William Turner (anatomist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q52063629" start="25541" end="25560" title="Arthur Logan Turner" label="Arthur Logan Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q52130118" start="25582" end="25606" title="Charles Edward Underhill" label="Charles Edward Underhill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="25607" end="25611" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q18531640" start="25634" end="25648" title="William Veitch" label="William Veitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q21539445" start="25699" end="25718" title="James Conway Victor" label="James Conway Victor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6262605" start="25751" end="25763" title="John Waddell (engineer)" label="John Waddell"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813323" start="25795" end="25812" title="Norman Walker (dermatologist)" label="Sir Norman Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291577" start="25842" end="25862" title="Edward Arthur Walton" label="Edward Arthur Walton"/>
<link wikidata="Q17052936" start="25884" end="25907" title="Members of the Victorian Legislative Council, 1892–1895" label="Thomas Drummond Wanliss"/>
<link wikidata="Q18954485" start="25948" end="25968" title="Patrick Heron Watson" label="Patrick Heron Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1766037" start="26086" end="26114" title="William Watson, Baron Watson" label="William Watson, Baron Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q30080460" start="26138" end="26156" title="Joseph Laing Waugh" label="Joseph Laing Waugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q8005562" start="26190" end="26210" title="William Birnie Rhind" label="William Birnie Rhind"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720362" start="26221" end="26236" title="Alexander Whyte" label="Alexander Whyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q5241090" start="26255" end="26271" title="David Wilkie (surgeon)" label="Sir David Wilkie"/>
<link wikidata="Q16063085" start="26313" end="26355" title="Sir Henry Wellwood-Moncreiff, 10th Baronet" label="Sir Henry Wellwood-Moncreiff, 10th Baronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q32128509" start="26370" end="26393" title="Aeneas Francon Williams" label="Aeneas Francon Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q32128509" start="26487" end="26505" title="Aeneas Francon Williams" label="Clara Anne Rendall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7962924" start="26541" end="26570" title="Wallace Williamson" label="Rev Andrew Wallace Williamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q18210714" start="26585" end="26596" title="John Wilson (singer)" label="John Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6264502" start="26634" end="26645" title="John Wilson (Scottish writer)" label="John Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6264502" start="26689" end="26706" title="Christopher North (writer)" label="Christopher North"/>
<link wikidata="Q15994838" start="26729" end="26741" title="James Wilson (zoologist)" label="James Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6179549" start="26771" end="26784" title="Jenny Wormald" label="Jenny Wormald"/>
<link wikidata="Q5238964" start="26809" end="26831" title="David Reginald Younger" label="David Reginald Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q19870982" start="26877" end="26908" title="Alexander Hugh Freeland Barbour" label="Alexander Hugh Freeland Barbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q5536251" start="26950" end="26970" title="George Andreas Berry" label="George Andreas Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4888301" start="27000" end="27019" title="Benjamin Blyth II" label="Benjamin Hall Blyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q364956" start="27049" end="27069" title="Alexander Crum Brown" label="Alexander Crum Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q642382" start="27104" end="27138" title="George Brown (Canadian politician)" label="George Brown (Canadian politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525171" start="27205" end="27224" title="Thomas Graham Brown" label="Thomas Graham Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5314286" start="27268" end="27282" title="Duncan Cameron (Scottish inventor)" label="Duncan Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754620" start="27312" end="27326" title="The Oban Times" label="The Oban Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q14524064" start="27384" end="27387" title="nib (pen)" label="nib"/>
<link wikidata="Q6779165" start="27410" end="27432" title="Mary Cameron (painter)" label="Mary Cameron (painter)"/>
<link wikidata="Q106165687" start="27447" end="27461" title="Robert Carfrae" label="Robert Carfrae"/>
<link wikidata="Q7788478" start="27496" end="27511" title="Thomas Clouston (psychiatrist)" label="Thomas Clouston"/>
<link wikidata="Q19585777" start="27539" end="27560" title="Francis Brodie Imlach" label="Francis Brodie Imlach"/>
<link wikidata="Q10363183" start="27619" end="27637" title="Robert Reid Kalley" label="Robert Reid Kalley"/>
<link wikidata="Q30612331" start="27663" end="27679" title="Peter McBride (physician)" label="Dr Peter McBride"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="27680" end="27684" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q33115919" start="27709" end="27742" title="William Mackintosh, Lord Kyllachy" label="William Mackintosh, Lord Kyllachy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="27743" end="27747" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q37749169" start="27800" end="27814" title="Angus Makellar" label="Angus Makellar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391199" start="27876" end="27888" title="William Muir" label="William Muir"/>
<link wikidata="Q43351776" start="27924" end="27946" title="Samuel Alexander Pagan" label="Samuel Alexander Pagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2170997" start="27976" end="28016" title="Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh" label="Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364698" start="28032" end="28049" title="Joseph Noel Paton" label="Joseph Noel Paton"/>
<link wikidata="Q11806893" start="28071" end="28103" title="Victor Noel-Paton, Baron Ferrier" label="Victor Noel-Paton, Baron Ferrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q16059814" start="28118" end="28134" title="Sir John Skelton" label="Sir John Skelton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28160" end="28183" title="Dame Jane Adair Skelton" label="Dame Jane Adair Skelton"/>
<link wikidata="Q66124085" start="28198" end="28215" title="David Wallace (surgeon)" label="Sir David Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720418" start="28240" end="28257" title="Alexander Wood (physician)" label="Dr Alexander Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q4756202" start="28343" end="28373" title="Andrew Anderson, Lord Anderson" label="Andrew Anderson, Lord Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650842" start="28422" end="28445" title="John George Bartholomew" label="John George Bartholomew"/>
<link wikidata="Q7965487" start="28469" end="28490" title="Walter Lorrain Brodie" label="Walter Lorrain Brodie"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="28504" end="28518" title="Victoria Cross" label="Victoria Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q4756663" start="28542" end="28574" title="Andrew Constable, Lord Constable" label="Andrew Constable, Lord Constable"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018482" start="28589" end="28611" title="William Skeoch Cumming" label="William Skeoch Cumming"/>
<link wikidata="Q4798455" start="28633" end="28657" title="Arthur Dewar, Lord Dewar" label="Arthur Dewar, Lord Dewar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5076862" start="28672" end="28693" title="Charles Dickson, Lord Dickson" label="Charles Scott Dickson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7528021" start="28722" end="28759" title="Sir John Ritchie Findlay, 1st Baronet" label="Sir John Ritchie Findlay, 1st Baronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4719485" start="28796" end="28825" title="Alexander MacPherson Fletcher" label="Alexander MacPherson Fletcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q106705014" start="28856" end="28875" title="John Alexander Ford" label="John Alexander Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q28530997" start="28906" end="28922" title="James Rae Forgan" label="James Rae Forgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888514" start="28935" end="28994" title="Moderator of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland" label="Moderator of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q24579366" start="29002" end="29023" title="Margaret Neill Fraser" label="Margaret Neill Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="29067" end="29082" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="29129" end="29133" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="29145" end="29151" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700191" start="29170" end="29187" title="John George Govan" label="John George Govan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5734709" start="29231" end="29261" title="Herbert John Clifford Grierson" label="Herbert John Clifford Grierson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4757234" start="29280" end="29293" title="Andrew Harper" label="Andrew Harper"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106835" start="29311" end="29335" title="John Robertson Henderson" label="John Robertson Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="29336" end="29340" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q4862773" start="29407" end="29430" title="Baron Ruthven of Gowrie" label="Baron Ruthven of Gowrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5536108" start="29445" end="29475" title="George Hutchison (Unionist MP)" label="George Hutchison (Unionist MP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q27916029" start="29490" end="29511" title="John Alexander Inglis" label="John Alexander Inglis"/>
<link wikidata="Q27662070" start="29547" end="29569" title="Ernest Auldjo Jamieson" label="Ernest Auldjo Jamieson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5536510" start="29594" end="29616" title="George Auldjo Jamieson" label="George Auldjo Jamieson"/>
<link wikidata="Q28312903" start="29663" end="29682" title="David Smiles Jerdan" label="David Smiles Jerdan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="29683" end="29687" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112958" start="29735" end="29765" title="Christopher Nicholson Johnston" label="Christopher Nicholson Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112958" start="29767" end="29777" title="Lord Sands" label="Lord Sands"/>
<link wikidata="Q106619415" start="29813" end="29825" title="Stewart Kaye" label="Stewart Kaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q6283029" start="29850" end="29873" title="Joseph Fairweather Lamb" label="Joseph Fairweather Lamb"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="29874" end="29878" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q15994747" start="29906" end="29926" title="George Macdonald (archaeologist)" label="Sir George Macdonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q4719485" start="29959" end="29988" title="Alexander MacPherson Fletcher" label="Alexander MacPherson Fletcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q19845204" start="30018" end="30031" title="Maitland Moir" label="Maitland Moir"/>
<link wikidata="Q4719709" start="30053" end="30078" title="Alexander Munro MacRobert" label="Alexander Munro MacRobert"/>
<link wikidata="Q18530978" start="30118" end="30131" title="Walter Mercer" label="Walter Mercer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5539124" start="30154" end="30170" title="George F. Merson" label="George F. Merson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="30171" end="30175" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q7787844" start="30201" end="30221" title="Thomas Brash Morison" label="Thomas Brash Morison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801172" start="30270" end="30285" title="Robert Muir (pathologist)" label="Sir Robert Muir"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30331" end="30349" title="Anne Davidson Muir" label="Anne Davidson Muir"/>
<link wikidata="Q6286974" start="30375" end="30398" title="Joseph Shield Nicholson" label="Joseph Shield Nicholson"/>
<link wikidata="Q73119315" start="30423" end="30434" title="Ella Pirrie" label="Ella Pirrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q37103" start="30471" end="30491" title="Florence Nightingale" label="Florence Nightingale"/>
<link wikidata="Q4882257" start="30513" end="30534" title="Belfast City Hospital" label="Belfast City Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5345583" start="30601" end="30625" title="Edward Theodore Salvesen" label="Edward Theodore Salvesen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5728472" start="30664" end="30682" title="Henry Snell Gamley" label="Henry Snell Gamley"/>
<link wikidata="Q44954484" start="30726" end="30752" title="John Trayner, Lord Trayner" label="John Trayner, Lord Trayner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5239578" start="30755" end="30786" title="David Scott-Barrett" label="Sir David William Scott-Barrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q46131718" start="30801" end="30815" title="Alistair Smart" label="Alistair Smart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7659945" start="30844" end="30864" title="Sydney Goodsir Smith" label="Sydney Goodsir Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q325589" start="30895" end="30907" title="Lewis Spence" label="Lewis Spence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302003" start="30950" end="30966" title="Douglas Strachan" label="Douglas Strachan"/>
<link wikidata="Q30314250" start="31016" end="31030" title="Henry Wade (surgeon)" label="Sir Henry Wade"/>
<link wikidata="Q28977153" start="31057" end="31078" title="Thomas Barnby Whitson" label="Thomas Barnby Whitson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577033" start="31091" end="31116" title="Lord Provost of Edinburgh" label="Lord Provost of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650842" start="31178" end="31201" title="John George Bartholomew" label="John George Bartholomew"/>
<link wikidata="Q16007414" start="31309" end="31327" title="Pilkington Jackson" label="Pilkington Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q24189746" start="31343" end="31358" title="Robert Dunsmure" label="Robert Dunsmure"/>
<link wikidata="Q11806802" start="31419" end="31435" title="Lauderdale Maule" label="Lauderdale Maule"/>
<link wikidata="Q3413987" start="31449" end="31468" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Own Cameron Highlanders" label="Cameron Highlanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q254106" start="31495" end="31506" title="Crimean War" label="Crimean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q864843" start="31510" end="31514" title="Alma River (Ukraine)" label="Alma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7525" start="31519" end="31529" title="Sevastopol" label="Sevastopol"/>
<link wikidata="Q47916" start="31604" end="31611" title="Lucknow" label="Lucknow"/>
<link wikidata="Q979915" start="31657" end="31680" title="Colonel Robert A. Smith Monument" label="Colonel Robert A. Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277971" start="31701" end="31714" title="Munfordsville, Kentucky" label="Munfordsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="31732" end="31750" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5590671" start="31775" end="31791" title="John Hill Burton" label="John Hill Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5211552" start="31810" end="31817" title="Dalmeny" label="Dalmeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q8005965" start="31842" end="31856" title="William Brodie (sculptor)" label="William Brodie"/>
<link wikidata="Q18210714" start="31871" end="31882" title="John Wilson (singer)" label="John Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199959" start="31967" end="31978" title="Calton Hill" label="Calton Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="32064" end="32075" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="32088" end="32100" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117074" start="32135" end="32169" title="Commonwealth War Graves Commission" label="Commonwealth War Graves Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346053" start="32420" end="32438" title="Robert Digby-Jones" label="Robert Digby-Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="32439" end="32441" title="Victoria Cross" label="VC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2679817" start="32569" end="32583" title="Dean Orphanage" label="Dean Orphanage"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="144740" wikidata="Q3566668" url="?curid=144740" title="Water of Leith">
<text>The Water of Leith (Scottish Gaelic: &quot;Uisge Lìte&quot;) is the main river flowing through central Edinburgh, Scotland, that starts in the Pentlands Hills and flows into the port of Leith and then into the sea via the Firth of Forth.

==Name==
The name &quot;Leith&quot; may be of Brittonic origin and derived from &quot;*lejth&quot; meaning &#x27;damp, moist&#x27; (Welsh &quot;llaith&quot;). It is less likely that the name derives from the Old Norse &quot;lodda&quot; meaning a river. The Gaelic form of the name is &quot;Lìte&quot; (Leith), with &quot;Uisge Lìte&quot; being the full translation of &quot;Water of Leith&quot;.

The &quot;Dictionary of the Scots Language&quot; defines the term &quot;water&quot; here as &quot;A large stream, usu. thought of as intermediate in size between a Burn and a river.&quot;

==Course==

The length of the main stream is . Its source is the Colzium Springs in the Pentland Hills. The river travels through Harperrig Reservoir, past the ruins of Cairns Castle, on to Balerno, Currie, Juniper Green, Colinton, Slateford, Longstone, Saughton, Balgreen, Roseburn and West Coates. The river nears Edinburgh city centre between West End and Dean Village; the site of old watermills in a deep gorge. The ravine is dramatically spanned by the Dean Bridge, designed by Thomas Telford and built in 1832 for the road to Queensferry.
The river flows on past Stockbridge, Inverleith, Canonmills and Warriston where it passes through shallows at a place known as Puddocky which is commonly thought to refer to &quot;puddocks&quot;, the Scots language term for frogs, but actually took its name from the former Paddock Hall sited nearby. The river continues past Bonnington, the site of another watermill, to Leith where it widens into the old harbour and port at the Shore. Leith Docks have been extended considerably out into the firth from the old shoreline.

== Water of Leith Walkway ==
The Water of Leith Walkway is beside the river for from Balerno to Leith. The route forms an attractive haven for wildlife, passing through areas of woodland, often well separated from roads. For some distance the walkway follows the route of former railway tracks, and the remains of tunnels, bridges and other features of more than one railway may be seen at many places along the route including the Colinton Tunnel Mural.

== Water of Leith Conservation Trust ==
The Water of Leith Conservation Trust, founded in 1988 is a registered charity whose objective is to &quot;conserve the Water of Leith and its environs&quot; and &quot;promote the natural and built heritage of the river . . . &quot;. The Trust runs educational programs and operates a visitor centre close to where the Union Canal passes over the Water of Leith via the Slateford Aqueduct in south-west Edinburgh.

==Wildlife==

The river contains 15 different types of fish including brown trout, wild grayling, eels, stone loach, minnow, three-spined stickleback and flounder. A few sea-trout run the river, and occasional Atlantic salmon are reported, although those from which scale samples have been obtained have turned out to be from other catchments. 

Until the weirs are either demolished or furnished with effective fish-passes, there is little chance of a population of salmon establishing themselves in this river again. Roe deer, badgers, otters and other mammals are often seen. The river and its environs are the haunt of a wide variety of woodland and water birds, including kingfisher, grey heron, pied wagtail, great spotted woodpecker and white-throated dipper.

==See also==
*Rivers of Scotland
*River Almond, which flows through Cramond and Kirkliston
*River Esk, Lothian
*Water of Leith, a river which flows through Dunedin, New Zealand

==References==
==External links==

*Water of Leith Conservation Trust: The River, Visitor Center, Education, Conservation
*Scottish Government, 16/03/07: Water of Leith Flood Prevention Scheme
*Water of Leith
*Water of Leith Millennium Bid document. The bid was successful and paid for new sections of the Walkway and the Visitor Centre.
* &quot;Forth District Salmon Fishery Board&quot;
* &quot;River Forth Fisheries Trust&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3566668" start="4" end="18" title="Water of Leith" label="Water of Leith"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022" start="73" end="78" title="river" label="river"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="103" end="112" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018540" start="186" end="191" title="Leith" label="Leith"/>
<link wikidata="Q202083" start="222" end="236" title="Firth of Forth" label="Firth of Forth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248800" start="285" end="294" title="Common Brittonic" label="Brittonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="371" end="376" title="Welsh language" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="447" end="456" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q9314" start="496" end="502" title="Scottish Gaelic" label="Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481891" start="646" end="678" title="Dictionary of the Scots Language" label="Dictionary of the Scots Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016714" start="800" end="804" title="Burn (landform)" label="Burn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7165251" start="913" end="927" title="Pentland Hills" label="Pentland Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q5663476" start="955" end="974" title="Harperrig Reservoir" label="Harperrig Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q17852573" start="994" end="1007" title="Cairns Castle" label="Cairns Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2880785" start="1015" end="1022" title="Balerno" label="Balerno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144879" start="1024" end="1030" title="Currie" label="Currie"/>
<link wikidata="Q964410" start="1032" end="1045" title="Juniper Green" label="Juniper Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145731" start="1047" end="1055" title="Colinton" label="Colinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7538872" start="1057" end="1066" title="Slateford" label="Slateford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6674314" start="1068" end="1077" title="Longstone, Edinburgh" label="Longstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7427216" start="1079" end="1087" title="Saughton" label="Saughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3633322" start="1089" end="1097" title="Balgreen" label="Balgreen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368119" start="1099" end="1107" title="Roseburn" label="Roseburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984852" start="1112" end="1123" title="West Coates" label="West Coates"/>
<link wikidata="Q4109563" start="1171" end="1179" title="West End, Edinburgh" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q5246524" start="1184" end="1196" title="Dean Village" label="Dean Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q185187" start="1214" end="1223" title="watermill" label="watermill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042028" start="1246" end="1252" title="ravine" label="ravine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5246025" start="1284" end="1295" title="Dean Bridge" label="Dean Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q380875" start="1309" end="1323" title="Thomas Telford" label="Thomas Telford"/>
<link wikidata="Q767798" start="1358" end="1369" title="South Queensferry" label="Queensferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617942" start="1395" end="1406" title="Stockbridge, Edinburgh" label="Stockbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q24052" start="1408" end="1418" title="Inverleith" label="Inverleith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5033398" start="1420" end="1430" title="Canonmills" label="Canonmills"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970835" start="1435" end="1444" title="Warriston" label="Warriston"/>
<link wikidata="Q14549" start="1571" end="1585" title="Scots language" label="Scots language"/>
<link wikidata="Q892827" start="1697" end="1707" title="Bonnington, Edinburgh" label="Bonnington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018540" start="1743" end="1748" title="Leith" label="Leith"/>
<link wikidata="Q107924208" start="1802" end="1807" title="The Shore, Leith" label="Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q558116" start="1866" end="1871" title="firth" label="firth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7973563" start="1930" end="1952" title="Water of Leith Walkway" label="Water of Leith Walkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q940770" start="2712" end="2723" title="Union Canal (Scotland)" label="Union Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7538876" start="2763" end="2781" title="Slateford Aqueduct" label="Slateford Aqueduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q2857311" start="2878" end="2889" title="brown trout" label="brown trout"/>
<link wikidata="Q627960" start="2896" end="2904" title="Thymallus thymallus" label="grayling"/>
<link wikidata="Q128685" start="2906" end="2909" title="eel" label="eel"/>
<link wikidata="Q502228" start="2912" end="2923" title="stone loach" label="stone loach"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333234" start="2925" end="2931" title="minnow" label="minnow"/>
<link wikidata="Q203572" start="2933" end="2957" title="three-spined stickleback" label="three-spined stickleback"/>
<link wikidata="Q4246303" start="2962" end="2970" title="flounder" label="flounder"/>
<link wikidata="Q79915" start="3485" end="3495" title="common kingfisher" label="kingfisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q25273" start="3497" end="3507" title="grey heron" label="grey heron"/>
<link wikidata="Q25399" start="3509" end="3521" title="pied wagtail" label="pied wagtail"/>
<link wikidata="Q26209" start="3523" end="3547" title="great spotted woodpecker" label="great spotted woodpecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q201831" start="3552" end="3573" title="white-throated dipper" label="white-throated dipper"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099378" start="3590" end="3608" title="Rivers of Scotland" label="Rivers of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337073" start="3610" end="3622" title="River Almond, Lothian" label="River Almond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249896" start="3644" end="3651" title="Cramond" label="Cramond"/>
<link wikidata="Q239193" start="3656" end="3666" title="Kirkliston" label="Kirkliston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337399" start="3668" end="3686" title="River Esk, Lothian" label="River Esk, Lothian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7973564" start="3688" end="3702" title="Water of Leith (New Zealand)" label="Water of Leith"/>
<link wikidata="Q133073" start="3732" end="3739" title="Dunedin" label="Dunedin"/>
</links>
</doc>
