<doc id="145401" wikidata="Q214426" url="?curid=145401" title="Mexican Revolution">
<text>The Mexican Revolution () was an extended sequence of armed regional conflicts in Mexico from 20 November 1910 to 1 December 1920. It has been called &quot;the defining event of modern Mexican history&quot;. It saw the destruction of the Federal Army, its replacement by a revolutionary army, and the transformation of Mexican culture and government. The northern Constitutionalist faction prevailed on the battlefield and drafted the present-day Constitution of Mexico, which aimed to create a strong central government. Revolutionary generals held power from 1920 to 1940. The revolutionary conflict was primarily a civil war, but foreign powers, having important economic and strategic interests in Mexico, figured in the outcome of Mexico&#x27;s power struggles; the U.S. involvement was particularly high. The conflict led to the deaths of around one million people, mostly non-combatants.

Although the decades-long regime of President Porfirio Díaz (1876–1911) was increasingly unpopular, there was no foreboding in 1910 that a revolution was about to break out. The aging Díaz failed to find a controlled solution to presidential succession, resulting in a power struggle among competing elites and the middle classes, which occurred during a period of intense labor unrest, exemplified by the Cananea and Río Blanco strikes. When wealthy northern landowner Francisco I. Madero challenged Díaz in the 1910 presidential election and Díaz jailed him, Madero called for an armed uprising against Díaz in the Plan of San Luis Potosí. Rebellions broke out first in Morelos and then to a much greater extent in northern Mexico. The Federal Army could not suppress the widespread uprisings, showing the military&#x27;s weakness and encouraging the rebels. Díaz resigned in May 1911 and went into exile, an interim government was installed until elections could be held, the Federal Army was retained, and revolutionary forces demobilized. The first phase of the Revolution was relatively bloodless and short-lived.

Madero was elected President, taking office in November 1911. He immediately faced the armed rebellion of Emiliano Zapata in Morelos, where peasants demanded rapid action on agrarian reform. Politically inexperienced, Madero&#x27;s government was fragile, and further regional rebellions broke out. In February 1913, prominent army generals from the Díaz regime staged a coup d&#x27;etat in Mexico City, forcing Madero and Vice President Pino Suárez to resign. Days later, both men were assassinated by orders of the new President, Victoriano Huerta. This initiated a new and bloody phase of the Revolution, as a coalition of northerners opposed to the counter-revolutionary regime of Huerta, the Constitutionalist Army led by the Governor of Coahuila Venustiano Carranza, entered the conflict. Zapata&#x27;s forces continued their armed rebellion in Morelos. Huerta&#x27;s regime lasted from February 1913 to July 1914, and the Federal Army was defeated by revolutionary armies. The revolutionary armies then fought each other, with the Constitutionalist faction under Carranza defeating the army of former ally Francisco &quot;Pancho&quot; Villa by the summer of 1915.

Carranza consolidated power and a new constitution was promulgated in February 1917. The Mexican Constitution of 1917 established universal male suffrage, promoted secularism, workers&#x27; rights, economic nationalism, and land reform, and enhanced the power of the federal government. Carranza became President of Mexico in 1917, serving a term ending in 1920. He attempted to impose a civilian successor, prompting northern revolutionary generals to rebel. Carranza fled Mexico City and was killed. From 1920 to 1940, revolutionary generals held the office of president, each completing their terms (except from 1928-1934). This was a period when state power became more centralized, and revolutionary reform implemented, bringing the military under the civilian government&#x27;s control. The Revolution was a decade-long civil war, with new political leadership that gained power and legitimacy through their participation in revolutionary conflicts. The political party those leaders founded in 1929, which would become the Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI), ruled Mexico until the presidential election of 2000. When the Revolution ended is not well defined, and even the conservative winner of the 2000 election, Vicente Fox, contended his election was heir to the 1910 democratic election of Francisco Madero, thereby claiming the heritage and legitimacy of the Revolution.

Father Miguel Hidalgo is the man who initiated the military aspects of this revolt, in efforts to acquire Mexico’s independence and propel the movement forward. He is honored as a hero to the nation and ideals of enlightenment are continuously studied.

The Hidalgo Rebellion beginning in the city of Querétaro started as a clandestine movement including Mexican born Spaniards. Their initial aim was to obtain autonomy from the Spanish Crown. In the early stages of rebellion they debated between a criollo only rebellion or including a broader alliance, weighing risks. The rebellion transformed to become militant under the leadership of Father Miguel Hidalgo. On September 16, 1810 Father Hidalgo began “Grito de Dolores”. This acted to encourage indigenous people, mesitzos and crillos to work with Hidalgo against the Spanish Crown and unfair government. The put together “army” were armed with unsophisticated weapons, and marched to Guanajuato. Upon arrival violence began, massacring both peninsulares and criollos. The slaughter caused potential allies to turn against Hidalgo and revoke trust. Because of many tactical errors, internal conflicts and retribution weakened the group and led to Hidalgo’s capture and soon execution in 1811. Even with the rebellion&#x27;s failure and gory outcome as a warning to others with simmilar ideas of actions; Father Hidalgo continues to be celebrated as the “Father of Mexican Independence”. His legacy and efforts are remembered and he is celebrated through Mexico’s Independence Day celebrations. 

==Prelude to revolution: the Porfiriato and the 1910 election==


Liberal general and war veteran Porfirio Díaz came to the presidency of Mexico in 1876 and remained almost continuously in office until 1911 in an era now called Porfiriato. Coming to power after a coup to oppose the re-election of Sebastián Lerdo de Tejada, he could not run for re-election in 1880. His close ally, General Manuel González, was elected president (1880–1884). Díaz saw himself as indispensable, and after that interruption, he ran for the presidency again and served in office continuously until 1911. The constitution had been amended to allow unlimited presidential re-election. During the Porfiriato, there were regular elections, widely considered sham exercises, marked by contentious irregularities.

In his early years in the presidency, Díaz consolidated power by playing opposing factions against each other and by expanding the , an armed police militia directly under his control that seized land from local peasants. Peasants were forced to make futile attempts to win back their land through courts and petitions. By 1900, over ninety percent of Mexico&#x27;s communal lands were sold, with an estimated 9.5 million peasants forced into the service of wealthy landowners or &quot;hacendados&quot;. Diaz rigged elections, arguing that only he knew what was best for his country, and he enforced his belief with a strong hand. &quot;Order and Progress&quot; were the watchwords of his rule.

Díaz&#x27;s presidency was characterized by the promotion of industry and the development of infrastructure by opening the country to foreign investment. Díaz suppressed opposition and promoted stability to reassure foreign investors. Farmers and peasants both complained of oppression and exploitation. The situation was further exacerbated by the drought that lasted from 1907 to 1909. The economy took a great leap during the Porfiriato, through the construction of factories, industries and infrastructure such as railroads and dams, as well as improving agriculture. Foreign investors bought large tracts of land to cultivate crops and range cattle for export. The cultivation of exportable goods such as coffee, tobacco, henequen for cordage, and sugar replaced the domestic production of wheat, corn and livestock that peasants had lived on. Wealth, political power and access to education were concentrated among a handful of elite landholding families mainly of European and mixed descent. These controlled vast swaths of the country through their huge estates (for example, the Terrazas had one estate in Sonora that alone comprised more than a million acres). Many Mexicans became landless peasants laboring on these vast estates or industrial workers toiling long hours for low wages. Foreign companies (mostly from the United Kingdom, France, and the U.S.) also exercised influence in Mexico.

===Díaz and the military===
Díaz had legitimacy as a leader through his battlefield accomplishments. He knew that the long tradition of military intervention in politics and its resistance to civilian control would prove challenging to his remaining in power. He set about curbing the power of the military, reining in provincial military chieftains, and making them subordinate to the central government. He contended with a whole new group of generals who had fought for the liberal cause and who expected rewards for their services. He systematically dealt with them, providing some rivals with opportunities to enrich themselves, ensuring the loyalty of others with high salaries, and others were bought off by rewards of landed estates and redirecting their political ambitions. Military rivals who did not accept the alternatives often rebelled and were crushed. It took him some 15 years to accomplish the transformation, reducing the army by 500 officers and 25 generals, creating an army subordinate to central power. He also created the military academy to train officers, but their training aimed to repel foreign invasions. Díaz expanded the rural police force, the as an elite guard, including many former bandits, under the direct control of the president. With these forces, Díaz attempted to appease the Mexican countryside, led by a stable government that was nominally civilian, and the conditions to develop the country economically with the infusion of foreign investments.

During Díaz&#x27;s long tenure in office, the Federal Army became overstaffed and top-heavy with officers, many of them elderly who last saw active military service against the French in the 1860s. Some 9,000 officers commanded the 25,000 rank-and-file on the books, with some 7,000 padding the rosters and nonexistent so that officers could receive the subsidies for the numbers they commanded. Officers used their positions for personal enrichment through salary and opportunities for graft. Although Mexicans had enthusiastically volunteered in the war against the French, the ranks were now filled by draftees. There was a vast gulf between officers and the lower ranks. &quot;The officer corps epitomized everything the masses resented about the Díaz system.&quot; With multiple rebellions breaking out in the wake of the fraudulent 1910 election, the military was unable to suppress them, revealing the regime&#x27;s weakness and leading to Díaz&#x27;s resignation in May 1911.

===Political system===
Although the Díaz regime was authoritarian and centralizing, it was not a military dictatorship. His first presidential cabinet was staffed with military men, but over successive terms as president, important posts were held by able and loyal civilians. He did not create a personal dynasty, excluding family from the realms of power, although his nephew Félix attempted to seize power after the fall of the regime in 1911. Díaz created a political machine, first working with regional strongmen and bringing them into his regime, then replacing them with (political bosses) who were loyal to him. He skillfully managed political conflict and reined in tendencies toward autonomy. He appointed several military officers to state governorships, including General Bernardo Reyes, who became governor of the northern state of Nuevo León, but over the years military men were largely replaced by civilians loyal to Díaz.

As a military man himself, and one who had intervened directly in politics to seize the presidency in 1876, Díaz was acutely aware that the Federal Army could oppose him. He augmented the , a police force created by Benito Juárez, making them his private armed force. The were only 2,500 in number, as opposed to the 30,000 in the army and another 30,000 in the federal auxiliaries, irregulars and National Guard. Despite their small numbers, the were highly effective in controlling the countryside, especially along the 12,000 miles of railway lines. They were a mobile force, often sent on trains with their horses to put down rebellions in relatively remote areas of Mexico.

The construction of railways had been transformative in Mexico (as well as elsewhere in Latin America), accelerating economic activity and increasing the power of the Mexican state. The isolation from the central government that many remote areas had enjoyed or suffered was ending. Telegraph lines constructed next to the railroad tracks meant instant communication between distant states and the capital.

The political acumen and flexibility Díaz exhibited in his early years in office began to decline after 1900. He brought the state governors under his control, replacing them at will. The Federal Army, while large, was increasingly an ineffective force with aging leadership and troops conscripted into service. Díaz attempted the same kind of manipulation he executed with the Mexican political system with business interests, showing favoritism to European interests against those of the U.S.

Rival interests, particularly those of the foreign powers with a presence in Mexico, further complicated an already complex system of favoritism. As economic activity increased and industries thrived, industrial workers began organizing for better conditions. Díaz enacted policies that encouraged large landowners to intrude upon the villagers&#x27; land and water rights. With the expansion of Mexican agriculture, landless peasants were forced to work for low wages or move to the cities. Peasant agriculture was under pressure as &quot;haciendas&quot; expanded, such as in the state of Morelos, just south of Mexico City, with its burgeoning sugar plantations. There was what one scholar has called &quot;agrarian compression&quot;, in which &quot;population growth intersected with land loss, declining wages and insecure tenancies to produce widespread economic deterioration&quot;, but the regions under the greatest stress were not the ones that rebelled.

===Opposition to Díaz===

Díaz effectively suppressed strikes, rebellions, and political opposition until the early 1900s. Mexicans began to organize in opposition to Díaz, who had welcomed foreign capital and capitalists, suppressed nascent labor unions, and consistently moved against peasants as agriculture flourished. In 1905 the group of Mexican intellectuals and political agitators who had created the Mexican Liberal Party () drew up a radical program of reform, specifically addressing what they considered to be the worst aspects of the Díaz regime. Most prominent in the PLM were Ricardo Flores Magón and his two brothers, Enrique and Jesús. They, along with Luis Cabrera and Antonio Díaz Soto y Gama, were connected to the anti-Díaz publication . Political cartoons by José Guadalupe Posada lampooned politicians and cultural elites with mordant humor, portraying them as skeletons. The Liberal Party of Mexico founded the anti-Díaz anarchist newspaper , which appeared in both Spanish and English. In exile in the United States, Práxedis Guerrero began publishing an anti-Díaz newspaper, (&quot;Red Dawn&quot;), in San Francisco, California. Although leftist groups were small, they became influential through their publications, articulating their opposition to the Díaz regime. Francisco Bulnes described these men as the &quot;true authors&quot; of the Mexican Revolution for agitating the masses. As the 1910 election approached, Francisco I. Madero, an emerging political figure and member of one of Mexico&#x27;s richest families, funded the newspaper , in opposition to the continual re-election of Díaz.

Organized labor conducted strikes for better wages and just treatment. Demands for better labor conditions were central to the Liberal Party program, drawn up in 1905. Mexican copper miners in the northern state of Sonora took action in the 1906 Cananea strike. Starting June 1, 1906, 5,400 miners began organizing labor strikes. Among other grievances, they were paid less than U.S. nationals working in the mines. In the state of Veracruz, textile workers rioted in January 1907 at the huge Río Blanco factory, the world&#x27;s largest, protesting against unfair labor practices. They were paid in credit that could be used only at the company store, binding them to the company.

These strikes were ruthlessly suppressed, with factory owners receiving support from government forces. In the Cananea strike, mine owner William Cornell Greene received support from Díaz&#x27;s rurales in Sonora as well as Arizona Rangers called in from across the U.S. border. This Arizona Rangers were ordered to use violence to combat labor unrest. In the state of Veracruz, the Mexican army gunned down Rio Blanco textile workers and put the bodies on train cars that transported them to Veracruz, &quot;where the bodies were dumped in the harbor as food for sharks&quot;.

Since the press was censored in Mexico under Díaz, little was published that was critical of the regime. Newspapers barely reported on the Rio Blanco textile strike, the Cananea strike or harsh labor practices on plantations in Oaxaca and Yucatán. Leftist Mexican opponents of the Díaz regime, such as Ricardo Flores Magón and Práxedis Guerrero, went into exile in the relative safety of the United States, but cooperation between the U.S. government and Díaz&#x27;s agents resulted in the arrest of some radicals.

===Presidential succession in 1910===


Díaz had ruled continuously since 1884. The question of presidential succession was an issue as early as 1900 when he turned 70. Díaz re-established the office of vice president in 1906, choosing Ramón Corral. Rather than managing political succession, Díaz marginalized Corral, keeping him away from decision-making. Díaz publicly announced in an interview with journalist James Creelman for &quot;Pearson&#x27;s Magazine&quot; that he would not run in the 1910 election. At age 80, this set the scene for a possible peaceful transition in the presidency. It set off a flurry of political activity. To the dismay of potential candidates to replace him, he reversed himself and ran again. His later reversal on retiring from the presidency set off tremendous activity among opposition groups.

Díaz seems to have initially considered Finance Minister José Yves Limantour as his successor. Limantour was a key member of the , the circle of technocratic advisers steeped in positivist political science. Another potential successor was General Bernardo Reyes, Díaz&#x27;s Minister of War, who also served as governor of Nuevo León. Reyes, an opponent of the Científicos, was a moderate reformer with a considerable base of support. Díaz became concerned about him as a rival and forced him to resign from his cabinet. He attempted to marginalize Reyes by sending him on a &quot;military mission&quot; to Europe, distancing him from Mexico and potential political supporters. &quot;The potential challenge from Reyes would remain one of Díaz&#x27;s political obsessions through the rest of the decade, which ultimately blinded him to the danger of the challenge of Francisco Madero&#x27;s anti-re-electionist campaign.&quot;

In 1910, Francisco I. Madero, a young man from a wealthy landowning family in the northern state of Coahuila, announced his intent to challenge Díaz for the presidency in the next election, under the banner of the Anti-Reelectionist Party. Madero chose as his running mate Francisco Vázquez Gómez, a physician who had opposed Díaz. Madero campaigned vigorously and effectively. To ensure Madero did not win, Díaz had him jailed before the election. He escaped and fled for a short period to San Antonio, Texas. Díaz was announced the winner of the election by a &quot;landslide&quot;.

==End of the Porfiriato: November 1910 – May 1911==
 

On 5 October 1910, Madero issued a &quot;letter from jail&quot;, known as the Plan de San Luis Potosí, with its main slogan (&quot;effective voting, no re-election&quot;). It declared the Díaz presidency illegal and called for a revolt against him, starting on 20 November 1910. Madero&#x27;s political plan did not outline a major socioeconomic revolution but offered hopes of change for many disadvantaged Mexicans. The plan strongly opposed militarism in Mexico as it was constituted under Díaz, calling on Federal Army generals to resign before true democracy could prevail in Mexico. Madero realized he needed a revolutionary armed force, enticing men to join with the promise of formal rank, and encouraged to join the revolutionary forces with the promise of promotion.

Madero&#x27;s plan was aimed at fomenting a popular uprising against Díaz, but he also understood that the support of the United States and U.S. financiers would be of crucial importance in undermining the regime. The rich and powerful Madero family drew on its resources to make regime change possible, with Madero&#x27;s brother Gustavo A. Madero hiring, in October 1910, the firm of Washington lawyer Sherburne Hopkins, the &quot;world&#x27;s best rigger of Latin-American revolutions&quot;, to encourage support in the U.S. A strategy to discredit Díaz with U.S. business and the U.S. government achieved some success, with Standard Oil representatives engaging in talks with Gustavo Madero. More importantly, the U.S. government &quot;bent neutrality laws for the revolutionaries&quot;.

In late 1910, revolutionary movements arose in response to Madero&#x27;s Plan de San Luis Potosí. Still, their ultimate success resulted from the Federal Army&#x27;s weakness and inability to suppress them. Madero&#x27;s vague promises of land reform attracted many peasants throughout the country. Spontaneous rebellions arose in which ordinary farm laborers, miners and other working-class Mexicans, along with much of the country&#x27;s population of indigenous peoples, fought Díaz&#x27;s forces with some success. Madero attracted the forces of rebel leaders such as Pascual Orozco, Pancho Villa, Emiliano Zapata, and Venustiano Carranza. A young and able revolutionary, Orozco—along with Chihuahua Governor Abraham González—formed a powerful military union in the north and, although they were not especially committed to Madero, took Mexicali and Chihuahua City. These victories encouraged alliances with other revolutionary leaders, including Villa. Against Madero&#x27;s wishes, Orozco and Villa fought for and won Ciudad Juárez, bordering El Paso, Texas, on the south side of the Rio Grande. Madero&#x27;s call to action had unanticipated results, such as the Magonista rebellion of 1911 in Baja California.

==Interim presidency: May–November 1911==
With the Federal Army defeated in several battles with irregular, voluntary forces, Díaz&#x27;s government began negotiations with the revolutionaries in the north. In historian Edwin Lieuwen&#x27;s assessment, &quot;Victors always attribute their success to their own heroic deeds and superior fighting abilities ... In the spring of 1911, armed bands under self-appointed chiefs arose all over the republic, drove Díaz officials from the vicinity, seized money and stamps, and staked out spheres of local authority. Towns, cities, and the countryside passed into the hands of the Maderistas.&quot;

Díaz sued for peace with Madero, who himself did not want a prolonged and bloody conflict. The result was the Treaty of Ciudad Juárez, signed on 21 May 1911. The signed treaty stated that Díaz would abdicate the presidency along with his vice president, Ramón Corral, by the end of May 1911 to be replaced by an interim president, Francisco León de la Barra, until elections were held. Díaz and his family and a number of top supporters were allowed to go into exile. When Díaz left for exile in Paris, he was reported as saying, &quot;Madero has unleashed a tiger; let us see if he can control it.&quot;

With Díaz in exile and new elections to be called in October, the power structure of the old regime remained firmly in place. Francisco León de la Barra became interim president, pending an election to be held in October 1911. Madero considered De la Barra an acceptable figure for the interim presidency since he was not a or politician, but rather a Catholic lawyer and diplomat. He appeared to be a moderate, but the German ambassador to Mexico, Paul von Hintze, who associated with the Interim President, said of him that &quot;De la Barra wants to accommodate himself with dignity to the inevitable advance of the ex-revolutionary influence, while accelerating the widespread collapse of the Madero party.&quot; The Federal Army, despite its numerous defeats by the revolutionaries, remained intact as the government&#x27;s force. Madero called on revolutionary fighters to lay down their arms and demobilize, which Emiliano Zapata and the revolutionaries in Morelos refused to do.

The cabinet of De la Barra and the Mexican congress was filled with supporters of the Díaz regime. Madero campaigned vigorously for the presidency during this interim period, but revolutionaries who had supported him and brought about Díaz&#x27;s resignation were dismayed that the sweeping reforms they sought were not immediately instituted. He did introduce some progressive reforms, including improved funding for rural schools; promoting some aspects of agrarian reform to increase the amount of productive land; labor reforms including workman&#x27;s compensation and the eight-hour day; but also defended the right of the government to intervene in strikes. According to historian Peter V. N. Henderson, De la Barra&#x27;s and congress&#x27;s actions &quot;suggests that few Porfirians wished to return to the status quo of the dictatorship. Rather, the thoughtful, progressive members of the Porfirian meritocracy recognized the need for change.&quot; De la Barra&#x27;s government sent General Victoriano Huerta to fight in Morelos against the Zapatistas, burning villages and wreaking havoc. His actions drove a wedge between Zapata and Madero, which widened when Madero was inaugurated as president. Zapata remained in arms continuously until his assassination in 1919.

Madero won the 1911 election decisively and was inaugurated as president in November 1911, but his movement had lost crucial momentum and revolutionary supporters in the months of the Interim Presidency and left in place the Federal Army.

==Madero presidency: November 1911 – February 1913==


Madero had drawn some loyal and militarily adept supporters who brought down the Díaz regime by force of arms. Madero himself was not a natural soldier, and his decision to dismiss the revolutionary forces that brought him to power isolated him politically. He was an inexperienced politician, who had never held office before. He firmly held to democratic ideals, which many consider evidence of naivete. His election as president in October 1911 raised high expectations among many Mexicans for positive change. The Treaty of Ciudad Juárez guaranteed that the essential structure of the Díaz regime, including the Federal Army, was kept in place. Madero fervently held to his position that Mexico needed real democracy, which included regime change by free elections, a free press, and the right of labor to organize and strike.

The rebels who brought him to power were demobilized and Madero called on these men of action to return to civilian life. According to a story told by Pancho Villa, a leader who had defeated Díaz&#x27;s army and forced his resignation and exile, he told Madero at a banquet in Ciudad Juárez in 1911, &quot;You [Madero], sir, have destroyed the revolution ... It&#x27;s simple: this bunch of dandies have made a fool of you, and this will eventually cost us our necks, yours included.&quot; Ignoring the warning, Madero increasingly relied on the Federal Army as armed rebellions broke out in Mexico in 1911–12, with particularly threatening insurrections led by Emiliano Zapata in Morelos and Pascual Orozco in the north. Both Zapata and Orozco had led revolts that had put pressure on Díaz to resign, and both felt betrayed by Madero once he became president.

The press embraced its newfound freedom and Madero became a target of its criticism. Organized labor, which had been suppressed under Díaz, could and did stage strikes, which foreign entrepreneurs saw as threatening their interests. Although there had been labor unrest under Díaz, labor&#x27;s new freedom to organize also came with anti-American currents. The anarcho-syndicalist (House of the World Worker) was founded in September 1912 by Antonio Díaz Soto y Gama, Manuel Sarabia, and Lázaro Gutiérrez de Lara and served as a center of agitation and propaganda, but it was not a formal labor union.

Political parties proliferated. One of the most important was the National Catholic Party, which in several regions of the country was particularly strong. Several Catholic newspapers were in circulation during the Madero era, including and , only to be later suppressed under the Victoriano Huerta regime (1913–1914). Under Díaz relations between the Roman Catholic Church and the Mexican government were stable, with the anticlerical laws of the Mexican Constitution of 1857 remaining in place, but not enforced, so conflict was muted. During Madero&#x27;s presidency, Church-state conflict was channeled peacefully. The National Catholic Party became an important political opposition force during the Madero presidency. In the June 1912 congressional elections, &quot;militarily quiescent states ... the Catholic Party (PCN) did conspicuously well.&quot; During that period, the Catholic Association of Mexican Youth (ACJM) was founded. Although the National Catholic Party was an opposition party to the Madero regime, &quot;Madero clearly welcomed the emergence of a kind of two-party system (Catholic and liberal); he encouraged Catholic political involvement, echoing the exhortations of the episcopate.&quot; What was emerging during the Madero regime was &quot;Díaz&#x27;s old policy of Church-state detente was being continued, perhaps more rapidly and on surer foundations.&quot; The Catholic Church in Mexico was working within the new democratic system promoted by Madero, but it had its interests to promote, some of which were the forces of the old conservative Church, while the new, progressive Church supporting social Catholicism of the 1891 papal encyclical was also a current. When Madero was overthrown in February 1913 by counter-revolutionaries, the conservative wing of the Church supported the coup.

Madero did not have the experience or the ideological inclination to reward men who had helped bring him to power. Some revolutionary leaders expected personal rewards, such as Pascual Orozco of Chihuahua. Others wanted major reforms, most especially Emiliano Zapata and Andrés Molina Enríquez, who had long worked for land reform. Madero met personally with Zapata, telling the guerrilla leader that the agrarian question needed careful study. His meaning was clear: Madero, a member of a rich northern family, was not about to implement comprehensive agrarian reform for aggrieved peasants.
In response to this lack of action, Zapata promulgated the Plan de Ayala in November 1911, declaring himself in rebellion against Madero. He renewed guerrilla warfare in the state of Morelos. Madero sent the Federal Army to deal with Zapata, unsuccessfully. Zapata remained true to the demands of the Plan de Ayala and in rebellion against every central government up until his assassination by an agent of President Venustiano Carranza in 1919.

The northern revolutionary General Pascual Orozco, a leader in taking Ciudad Juárez, had expected to become governor of Chihuahua. In 1911, although Orozco was &quot;the man of the hour&quot;, Madero gave the governorship instead to Abraham González, a respectable revolutionary, with the explanation that Orozco had not reached the legal age to serve as governor, a tactic that was &quot;a useful constitutional alibi for thwarting the ambitions of young, popular, revolutionary leaders&quot;. Madero had put Orozco in charge of the large force of in Chihuahua, but to a gifted revolutionary fighter who had helped bring about Díaz&#x27;s fall, Madero&#x27;s reward was insulting. After Madero refused to agree to social reforms calling for better working hours, pay, and conditions, Orozco organized his army, the , also called the (&quot;Red Flaggers&quot;) and issued his on 25 March 1912, enumerating why he was rising in revolt against Madero.

In April 1912, Madero dispatched General Victoriano Huerta of the Federal Army to put down Orozco&#x27;s dangerous revolt. Madero had kept the army intact as an institution, using it to put down domestic rebellions against his regime. Huerta was a professional soldier and continued to serve in the army under the new commander-in-chief. Huerta&#x27;s loyalty lay with General Bernardo Reyes rather than with the civilian Madero. In 1912, under pressure from his cabinet, Madero called on Huerta to suppress Orozco&#x27;s rebellion. With Huerta&#x27;s success against Orozco, he emerged as a powerful figure for conservative forces opposing the Madero regime. During the Orozco revolt, the governor of Chihuahua mobilized the state militia to support the Federal Army. Pancho Villa, now a colonel in the militia, was called up at this time. In mid-April, at the head of 400 irregular troops, he joined the forces commanded by Huerta. Huerta, however, viewed Villa as an ambitious competitor. During a visit to Huerta&#x27;s headquarters in June 1912, after an incident in which he refused to return a number of stolen horses, Villa was imprisoned on charges of insubordination and robbery and sentenced to death. Raúl Madero, the President&#x27;s brother, intervened to save Villa&#x27;s life. Jailed in Mexico City, Villa escaped and fled to the United States, later to return and play a major role in the civil wars of 1913–1915.

There were other rebellions, one led by Bernardo Reyes and another by Félix Díaz, nephew of the former president, that were quickly put down and the generals jailed. They were both in Mexico City prisons and, despite their geographical separation, they were able to foment yet another rebellion in February 1913. This period came to be known as the Ten Tragic Days (), which ended with Madero&#x27;s resignation and assassination and Huerta assuming the presidency. Although Madero had reason to distrust Victoriano Huerta, Madero placed him in charge of suppressing the Mexico City revolt as interim commander. He did not know that Huerta had been invited to join the conspiracy, but had initially held back. During the fighting that took place in the capital, the civilian population was subjected to artillery exchanges, street fighting and economic disruption, perhaps deliberately caused by the coupists to demonstrate that Madero was unable to keep order.

==A military coup overthrows Madero: 9–22 February 1913==

The Madero presidency was unravelling, to no one&#x27;s surprise except perhaps Madero&#x27;s, whose support continued to deteriorate, even among his political allies. Madero&#x27;s supporters in congress before the coup, the so-called (&quot;the renewers&quot;), criticized him, saying, &quot;The revolution is heading toward collapse and is pulling the government to which it gave rise down with it, for the simple reason that it is not governing with revolutionaries. Compromises and concessions to the supporters of the old [Díaz] regime are the main causes of the unsettling situation in which the government that emerged from the revolution finds itself ... The regime appears relentlessly bent on suicide.&quot;

Huerta, formally in charge of the defense of Madero&#x27;s regime, allowed the rebels to hold the armory in Mexico City—the Ciudadela—while he consolidated his political power. He changed allegiance from Madero to the rebels under Félix Díaz (Bernardo Reyes having been killed on the first day of the open armed conflict). U.S. Ambassador Henry Lane Wilson, who had done all he could to undermine U.S. confidence in Madero&#x27;s presidency, brokered the Pact of the Embassy, which formalized the alliance between Félix Díaz and Huerta, with the backing of the United States. Huerta was to become provisional president following the resignations of Madero and his vice president, José María Pino Suárez. Rather than being sent into exile with their families, the two were murdered while being transported to prison—a shocking event, but one that did not prevent the Huerta regime&#x27;s recognition by most world governments, with the notable exception of the U.S.

Historian Friedrich Katz considers Madero&#x27;s retention of the Federal Army, which was defeated by the revolutionary forces and resulted in Díaz&#x27;s resignation, &quot;was the basic cause of his fall&quot;. His failure is also attributable to &quot;the failure of the social class to which he belonged and whose interests he considered to be identical to those of Mexico: the liberal hacendados&quot; (owners of large estates). Madero had created no political organization that could survive his death and had alienated and demobilized the revolutionary fighters who had helped bring him to power. In the aftermath of his assassination and Huerta&#x27;s seizure of power via a military coup, former revolutionaries had no formal organization through which to raise opposition to Huerta.

==Huerta regime and civil war: February 1913 – July 1914==


Madero&#x27;s &quot;martyrdom accomplished what he was unable to do while alive: unite all the revolutionists under one banner.&quot; Within 16 months, revolutionary armies defeated the Federal Army and the Huerta regime fell. Like Porfirio Díaz, Huerta went into exile. The Federal Army was disbanded, leaving only revolutionary military forces.

Upon taking power, Huerta had moved swiftly to consolidate his hold in the North, having learned the lesson from Díaz&#x27;s fall that the north was a crucial region to hold. Within a month of the coup, rebellions began to spread throughout Mexico, most prominently led by the governor of the state of Coahuila, Venustiano Carranza, along with Pablo González. Huerta expected state governors to fall into line with the new government. But Carranza and Abraham González, Governor of Chihuahua did not. Carranza issued the Plan of Guadalupe, a strictly political plan to reject the legitimacy of the Huerta government, and called on revolutionaries to take up arms. Revolutionaries who had brought Madero to power only to be dismissed in favor of the Federal Army eagerly responded to the call, most prominently Pancho Villa. Alvaro Obregón of Sonora, a successful rancher and businessman who had not participated in the Madero revolution, now joined the revolutionary forces in the north, the Constitutionalist Army under the (&quot;First Chief&quot;) Venustiano Carranza. Huerta had Governor González arrested and murdered, for fear he would foment rebellion. When northern General Pancho Villa became governor of Chihuahua in 1914, following the defeat of Huerta, he located González&#x27;s bones and had them reburied with full honors. In Morelos, Emiliano Zapata continued his rebellion under the Plan of Ayala (while expunging the name of counter-revolutionary Pascual Orozco from it), calling for the expropriation of land and redistribution to peasants. Huerta offered peace to Zapata, who rejected it. The Huerta government was thus challenged by revolutionary forces in the north of Mexico and the strategic state of Morelos, just south of the capital.

Huerta&#x27;s presidency is usually characterized as a dictatorship. From the point of view of revolutionaries at the time and the construction of historical memory of the Revolution, it is without any positive aspects. &quot;Despite recent attempts to portray Victoriano Huerta as a reformer, there is little question that he was a self-serving dictator.&quot; There are few biographies of Huerta, but one strongly asserts that Huerta should not be labeled simply as a counter-revolutionary, arguing that his regime consisted of two distinct periods: from the coup in February 1913 up to October 1913. During that time he attempted to legitimize his regime and demonstrate its legality by pursuing reformist policies; and after October 1913, when he dropped all attempts to rule within a legal framework and began murdering political opponents while battling revolutionary forces that had united in opposition to his regime.
Supporting the Huerta regime initially were business interests in Mexico, both foreign and domestic; landed elites; the Roman Catholic Church; and the German and British governments. The U.S. President Woodrow Wilson did not recognize the Huerta regime, since it had come to power by coup. Huerta and Carranza were in contact for two weeks immediately after the February coup, but they did not come to an agreement. Carranza then declared himself opposed to Huerta and became the leader of the anti-Huerta forces in the north. Huerta gained the support of revolutionary general Pascual Orozco, who had helped topple the Díaz regime, then rebelled against Madero because of his lack of action on agrarian issues. Huerta&#x27;s first cabinet comprised men who had supported the February 1913 Pact of the Embassy, among them some who had supported Madero, such as Jesús Flores Magón; supporters of General Bernardo Reyes; supporters of Félix Díaz; and former Interim President Francisco León de la Barra.

During the counter-revolutionary regime of Huerta, the Catholic Church in Mexico initially supported him. &quot;The Church represented a force for reaction, especially in the countryside.&quot; However, when Huerta cracked down on political parties and conservative opposition, he had &quot;Gabriel Somellera, president of the [National] Catholic Party arrested; , which, like other Catholic papers, had protested Congress&#x27;s dissolution and the rigged elections [of October 1913], locked horns with the official press and was finally closed down. , the main Catholic newspaper, survived for a time.&quot;

Huerta was even able to briefly muster the support of Andrés Molina Enríquez, author of &quot;The Great National Problems&quot; (), a key work urging land reform in Mexico. Huerta was seemingly deeply concerned with the issue of land reform, since it was a persistent spur of peasant unrest. Specifically, he moved to restore &quot;ejido lands to the Yaquis and Mayos of Sonora and [advanced] proposals for distribution of government lands to small-scale farmers.&quot; When Huerta refused to move faster on land reform, Molina Enríquez disavowed the regime in June 1913, later going on to advise the 1917 constitutional convention on land reform.
U.S. President Taft left the decision of whether to recognize the new government up to the incoming president, Woodrow Wilson. Despite the urging of U.S. ambassador Henry Lane Wilson, who had played a key role in the coup d&#x27;état, President Wilson not only declined to recognize Huerta&#x27;s government but first supplanted the ambassador by sending his &quot;personal representative&quot; John Lind, a progressive who sympathized with the Mexican revolutionaries, and the president recalled Ambassador Wilson. The United States lifted the arms embargo imposed by Taft in order to supply weapons to the landlocked rebels; while under the complete embargo Huerta had still been able to receive shipments from the British by sea. Wilson urged European powers to not recognize Huerta&#x27;s government, and attempted to persuade Huerta to call prompt elections &quot;and not present himself as a candidate&quot;. The United States offered Mexico a loan on the condition that Huerta accept the proposal. He refused. Lind &quot;clearly threatened a military intervention in case the demands were not met&quot;.
In the summer of 1913, Mexican conservatives who had supported Huerta sought a constitutionally-elected, civilian alternative to Huerta, brought together in a body called the National Unifying Junta. Political parties proliferated in this period, a sign that democracy had taken hold, and there were 26 by the time of the October congressional elections. From Huerta&#x27;s point of view, the fragmentation of the conservative political landscape strengthened his own position. For the country&#x27;s conservative elite, &quot;there was a growing disillusionment with Huerta, and disgust at his strong-arm methods.&quot; Huerta closed the legislature on 26 October 1913, having the army surround its building and arresting congressmen perceived to be hostile to his regime. Despite that, congressional elections went ahead, but given that congress was dissolved and some members were in jail, opposition candidates&#x27; fervor disappeared. The sham election &quot;brought home to [Woodrow] Wilson&#x27;s administration the fatuity of relying on elections to demonstrate genuine democracy.&quot; The October 1913 elections were the end of any pretension to constitutional rule in Mexico, with civilian political activity banned. Prominent Catholics were arrested and Catholic newspapers were suppressed.

Huerta militarized Mexico to a greater extent than it already was. When Huerta seized power in 1913, the army had on the books approximately 50,000 men, but Huerta mandated the number rise to 150,000, then 200,000 and, finally in spring 1914, 250,000. Raising that number of men in so short a time would not occur with volunteers, and the army resorted to the , forced conscription. The revolutionary forces had no problem with voluntary recruitment. Most Mexican men avoided government conscription at all costs and the ones dragooned into the forces were sent to areas far away from home and were reluctant to fight. Conscripts deserted, mutinied and attacked and murdered their officers.
In April 1914 U.S. opposition to Huerta culminated in the seizure and occupation of the port of Veracruz by U.S. Marines and sailors. Initially intended to prevent a German merchant vessel from delivering a shipment of arms to the Huerta regime, the muddled operation evolved into a seven-month stalemate resulting in the death of 193 Mexican soldiers, 19 U.S. servicemen and an unknown number of civilians. The German ship landed its cargo—largely U.S.-made rifles—in a deal brokered by U.S. businessmen (at a different port). U.S. forces eventually left Veracruz in the hands of the Carrancistas, but with lasting damage to U.S.-Mexican relations.

In Mexico&#x27;s south, Zapata took Chilpancingo, Guerrero in mid-March; he followed this soon afterward with the capture of the Pacific coast port of Acapulco; Iguala; Taxco; and Buenavista de Cuellar. He confronted the federal garrisons in Morelos, the majority of which defected to him with their weapons. Finally he moved against the capital, by sending his subordinates into Mexico state.

Constitutionalist forces made major gains against the Federal Army. In early 1914 Pancho Villa had moved against the Federal Army in the border town of Ojinaga, Chihuahua, sending the federal soldiers fleeing to Fort Bliss, in the U.S. state of New Mexico. In mid-March he took Torreón, a well-defended railway hub city. After bitter fighting for the hills surrounding Torreón, and later point-blank bombardment, on April 3 Villa&#x27;s troops entered the devastated city. The Federal Army made a last stand at San Pedro de las Colonias, only to be undone by squabbling between the two commanding officers, General Velasco and General Maas, over who had the higher rank. As of mid-April, Mexico City sat undefended before Constitutionalist forces under Villa. Obregón moved south from Sonora along the Pacific Coast. When his way was blocked by federal gunboats, Obregón attacked these boats with an airplane, an early use of an airplane for military purposes. In early July he defeated federal troops at Orendain, Jalisco, leaving 8,000 federals dead and capturing a large trove of armaments. He was now in a position to arrive at Mexico City ahead of Villa, who was diverted by orders from Carranza to take Saltillo. Carranza, the civilian First Chief, and Villa, the bold and successful commander of the Division of the North, were on the verge of splitting. Obregón, the other highly successful Constitutionalist general, sought to keep the northern coalition intact.

The Federal Army&#x27;s defeats caused Huerta&#x27;s position to continue to deteriorate and in mid-July 1914, he stepped down and fled to the Gulf Coast port of Puerto México, seeking to get himself and his family out of Mexico rather than face the fate of Madero. He turned to the German government, which had generally supported his presidency. The Germans were not eager to allow him to be transported into exile on one of their ships, but relented. Huerta carried &quot;roughly half a million marks in gold with him&quot; as well as paper currency and checks. In exile, Huerta sought to return to Mexico via the United States. U.S. authorities arrested him and he was imprisoned in Fort Bliss, Texas. He died in January 1916, six months after going into exile.

Huerta&#x27;s resignation marked the end of an era. The Federal Army, a spectacularly ineffective fighting force against the revolutionaries, ceased to exist. The revolutionary factions that had united in opposition to Huerta&#x27;s regime now faced a new political landscape with the counter-revolutionaries decisively defeated. The revolutionary armies now contended for power and a new era of civil war began after an attempt at an agreement among the winners at a Convention of Aguascalientes.

==Meeting of the winners, then civil war: 1914–1915==

With Huerta&#x27;s ouster in July 1914 and the dissolution of the Federal Army in August, the revolutionary factions agreed to meet and make &quot;a last-ditch effort to avert more intense warfare than that which unseated Huerta&quot;. Commander of the Division of the North, Pancho Villa, and the Division of the Northeast, Pablo González had drawn up the Pact of Torreón in early July, pushing for a more radical agenda than Carranza&#x27;s Plan of Guadalupe. It also called for a meeting of revolutionary generals to decide Mexico&#x27;s political future.

Carranza called for a meeting in October 1914 Mexico City, which he now controlled with Obregón, but other revolutionaries opposed to Carranza&#x27;s influence successfully moved the venue to Aguascalientes. The Convention of Aguascalientes did not, in fact, reconcile the various victorious factions in the Mexican Revolution. The break between Carranza and Villa became definitive during the Convention. &quot;Carranza spurned it, and Villa effectively hijacked it. Mexico&#x27;s lesser were forced to choose&quot; between those two forces. It was a brief pause in revolutionary violence before another all-out period of civil war ensued.
Carranza had expected to be confirmed in his position as First Chief of revolutionary forces, but his supporters &quot;lost control of the proceedings&quot;. Opposition to Carranza was strongest in areas where there were popular and fierce demands for reform, particularly in Chihuahua where Villa was powerful, and in Morelos where Zapata held sway. The Convention of Aguascalientes brought that opposition out in an open forum.

The revolutionary generals of the Convention called on Carranza to resign executive power. Although he agreed to do so, he laid out conditions for it. He would resign if both Pancho Villa and Emiliano Zapata, his main rivals for power, would resign and go into exile, and that there should be a so-called pre-constitutionalist government &quot;that would take charge of carrying out the social and political reforms the country needs before a fully constitutional government is re-established.&quot;

Rather than First Chief Carranza being named president of Mexico at the convention, General Eulalio Gutiérrez was chosen for a term of 20 days. The Convention declared Carranza in rebellion against it. Civil war resumed, this time between revolutionary armies that had fought in a united cause to oust Huerta in 1913–1914. During the Convention, Constitutionalist General Álvaro Obregón had attempted to be a moderating force and had been the one to convey the Convention&#x27;s call for Carranza to resign.

The lines were now drawn. When the Convention forces declared Carranza in rebellion against it, Obregón supported Carranza rather than Villa and Zapata. Villa and Zapata went into a loose alliance. Their forces moved separately on Mexico City, and took it when Carranza&#x27;s forces evacuated it in December 1914 for Veracruz. The famous picture of Zapata and Villa in the National Palace, with Villa sitting in the presidential chair, is a classic image of the Revolution. Villa is reported to have said to Zapata that the presidential chair &quot;is too big for us&quot;.

In practice, the alliance between Villa and Zapata as the Army of the Convention did not function beyond this initial victory against the Constitutionalists. Villa and Zapata left the capital, with Zapata returning to his southern stronghold in Morelos, where he continued to engage in warfare under the Plan of Ayala. Lacking a firm center of power and leadership, the Convention government was plagued by instability. Villa was the real power emerging from the Convention, and he prepared to strengthen his position by winning a decisive victory against the Constitutionalist Army.

Villa had a well-earned reputation as a fierce and successful general, and the combination of forces arrayed against Carranza by Villa, other northern generals and Zapata was larger than the Constitutionalist Army, so it was not at all clear that Carranza&#x27;s faction would prevail. He did have the advantage of the loyalty of General Álvaro Obregón. Despite Obregón&#x27;s moderating actions at the Convention of Aguascalientes, even trying to persuade Carranza to resign his position, he ultimately sided with Carranza.

Another advantage of Carranza&#x27;s position was the Constitutionalists&#x27; control of Veracruz, even though the United States still occupied it. The United States had concluded that both Villa and Zapata were too radical and hostile to its interests and sided with the moderate Carranza in the factional fighting. The U.S. timed its exit from Veracruz, brokered at the Niagara Falls peace conference, to benefit Carranza and allowed munitions to flow to the Constitutionalists. The U.S. granted Carranza&#x27;s government diplomatic recognition in October 1915.

The rival armies of Villa and Obregón clashed in April 1915 in the Battle of Celaya, which lasted from the sixth to the 15th. The frontal cavalry charges of Villa&#x27;s forces were met by the shrewd, modern military tactics of Obregón. The victory of the Constitutionalists was complete, and Carranza emerged as the political leader of Mexico with a victorious army to keep him in that position. Villa retreated north. Carranza and the Constitutionalists consolidated their position as the winning faction, with Zapata remaining a threat until his assassination in 1919. Villa also remained a threat to the Constitutionalists, complicating their relationship with the United States when elements of Villa&#x27;s forces raided Columbus, New Mexico, in March 1916, prompting the U.S. to launch a punitive expedition into Mexico in an unsuccessful attempt to capture him.

==Constitutionalists in power under Carranza: 1915–1920==

Carranza&#x27;s 1913 Plan of Guadalupe was narrowly political, designed to unite the anti-Huerta forces in the north. But once Huerta was ousted, the Federal Army dissolved, and former Constitutionalist Pancho Villa defeated, Carranza sought to consolidate his position. The Constitutionalists retook Mexico City, which had been held by the Zapatistas, and held it permanently. He did not take the title of provisional or interim President of Mexico, since in doing so he would have been ineligible to become the constitutional president. Until the promulgation of the 1917 Constitution was framed as the &quot;preconstitutional government&quot;.

In October 1915, the U.S. recognized Carranza&#x27;s government as the de facto ruling power, following Obregón&#x27;s victories. This gave Carranza&#x27;s Constitutionalists legitimacy internationally and access to the legal flow of arms from the U.S. The Carranza government still had active opponents, including Villa, who retreated north. Zapata remained active in the south, even though he was losing support, Zapata remained a threat to the Carranza regime until his assassination by order of Carranza on 10 April 1919. Disorder and violence in the countryside was largely due to anti-Carranza forces, but banditry as well as military and police misconduct contributed to the unsettled situation. The government&#x27;s inability to keep order gave an opening to supporters of the old order headed by Félix Díaz (nephew of former President Porfirio Diaz). Some 36 generals of the dissolved Federal Army stood with Díaz.

The Constitutionalist Army was renamed the &quot;Mexican National Army&quot; and Carranza sent some of its most able generals to eliminate threats. In Morelos, he sent General Pablo González to fight Zapata&#x27;s Liberating Army of the South. Morelos was very close to Mexico City, so Zapata&#x27;s control of it and parts of the adjacent state of Puebla made Carranza&#x27;s government vulnerable. Constitutionalist Army soldiers assassinated Zapata in an ambush in 1919, after their commanding officer tricked Zapata by pretending that he intended to defect to Zapata&#x27;s side. Carranza sent General Francisco Murguía and General Manuel M. Diéguez to track down and eliminate Villa, but they were unsuccessful. They did capture and execute one of Villa&#x27;s top men, General Felipe Angeles, the only general of the old Federal Army to join the revolutionaries. Revolutionary generals asserted their &quot;right to rule&quot;, having been victorious in the Revolution, but &quot;they ruled in a manner which was a credit neither to themselves, their institution, nor the Carranza government. More often than not, they were predatory, venal, cruel and corrupt.&quot; The system of central government control over states that Díaz had created over decades had broken down during the revolutionary fighting. Autonomous fiefdoms arose in which governors simply ignored orders by the Carranza government. One of these was Governor of Sonora, General Plutarco Elías Calles, who later joined in the 1920 successful coup against Carranza.

The 1914 Pact of Torreón had contained far more radical language and promises of land reform and support for peasants and workers than Carranza&#x27;s original plan. Carranza issued the &quot;Additions to the Plan of Guadalupe&quot;, which for the first time promised significant reform. He also issued an agrarian reform law in 1915, drafted by Luis Cabrera, sanctioning the return of all village lands illegally seized in contravention of an 1856 law passed under Benito Juárez. The Carranza reform declared village lands were to be divided among individuals, aiming at creating a class of small holders, and not to revive the old structure of communities of communal landholders. In practice, land was transferred not to villagers, but rather redistributed to Constitutional army generals, and created new large-scale enterprises as rewards to the victorious military leaders.

Carranza did not move on land reform, despite his rhetoric. Rather, he returned confiscated estates to their owners. Not only did he oppose large-scale land reform, he vetoed laws that would have increased agricultural production by giving peasants temporary access to lands not under cultivation. In places where peasants had fought for land reform, Carranza&#x27;s policy was to repress them and deny their demands. In the southeast, where hacienda owners held strong, Carranza sent the most radical of his supporters, Francisco Múgica in Tabasco and Salvador Alvarado in Yucatan, to mobilize peasants and be a counterweight to the hacienda owners. After taking control of Yucatán in 1915, Salvador Alvarado organized a large Socialist Party and carried out extensive land reform. He confiscated the large landed estates and redistributed the land in smaller plots to the liberated peasants. Maximo Castillo, a revolutionary brigadier general from Chihuahua was frustrated by the slow pace of land reform under the Madero presidency. He ordered the subdivision of six haciendas belonging to Luis Terrazas, which were given to sharecroppers and tenants.
Carranza&#x27;s relationship with the United States had initially benefited from its recognition of his government, with the Constitutionalist Army being able to buy arms. In 1915 and early 1916, there is evidence that Carranza was seeking a loan from the U.S. with the backing of U.S. bankers and a formal alliance with the U.S. Mexican nationalists in Mexico were seeking a stronger stance against the colossus of the north, by taxing foreign holdings and limiting their influence. Villa&#x27;s raid against Columbus, New Mexico in March 1916, ended the possibility of a closer relationship with the U.S. Under heavy pressure from public opinion in the U.S. to punish the attackers (stoked mainly by the papers of ultra-conservative publisher William Randolph Hearst, who owned a large estate in Mexico), U.S. President Woodrow Wilson sent General John J. Pershing and around 5,000 troops into Mexico in an attempt to capture Villa.
The U.S. Army intervention, known as the Punitive Expedition, was limited to the western Sierras of Chihuahua. From the Mexican perspective, as much as Carranza sought the elimination of his rival Villa, but as a Mexican nationalist he could not countenance the extended U.S. incursion into its sovereign territory. Villa knew the inhospitable terrain intimately and operating with guerrilla tactics, he had little trouble evading his U.S. Army pursuers. Villa was deeply entrenched in the mountains of northern Mexico and knew the terrain too well to be captured. U.S. General John J. Pershing could not continue with his unsuccessful mission; declaring victory the troops returned to the U.S. after nearly a year. They were shortly thereafter deployed to Europe when the U.S. entered World War I on the side of the Allies. The Punitive Mission not only damaged the fragile United States-Mexico relationship, but also caused a rise in anti-American sentiment among the Mexicans. Carranza asserted Mexican sovereignty and forced the U.S. to withdraw in 1917.

With the outbreak of World War I in Europe in 1914, foreign powers with significant economic and strategic interests in Mexico—particularly the U.S., Great Britain and Germany—made efforts to sway Mexico to their side, but Mexico maintained a policy of neutrality. In the Zimmermann Telegram, a coded cable from the German government to Carranza&#x27;s government, Germany attempted to draw Mexico into war with the United States, which was itself neutral at the time. Germany hoped to draw U.S. troops from deployment to Europe and as a reward in the event of a German victory to return the territory lost to Mexico to the U.S. in the Mexican–American War. Carranza did not pursue this policy, but the leaking of the telegram pushed the U.S. into war against Germany in 1917.

==1917 Constitution==


The Constitutionalist Army fought in the name of the 1857 Constitution promulgated by liberals during the Reform era, sparking a decade-long armed conflict between liberals and conservatives. In contrast, the 1917 Constitution came at the culmination of revolutionary struggle. Drafting a new constitution was not a given at the outbreak of the Revolution. Carranza&#x27;s 1913 Plan of Guadalupe was a narrow political plan to unite Mexicans against the Huerta regime and named Carranza as the head of the Constitutionalist Army. Increasingly revolutionaries called for radical reform. Carranza had consolidated power and his advisers persuaded him that a new constitution would better accomplish incorporating major reforms than a piecemeal revision of the 1857 constitution.

In 1916 Carranza was only acting president at the time, and the expectation was to hold presidential elections. He called for a constituent congress to draft a new document based on liberal and revolutionary principles. Labor had supported the Constitutionalists and Red Battalions had fought against the Zapatistas, the peasant revolutionaries of Morelos. As revolutionary violence subsided in 1916, leaders of the Constitutionalist faction met in Querétaro to revise the 1857 constitution. The delegates were elected by jurisdiction and population, with the exclusion of those who served the Huerta regime, continued to follow Villa after the split with Carranza, as well as Zapatistas. The election of delegates was to frame the creation of the new constitution as the result of popular participation. Carranza provided a draft revision for the delegates to consider.

Once the convention was in session after disputes about delegates, delegates reviewed Carranza&#x27;s draft constitution. That document was a minor revision of the 1857 constitution and included none of the social, economic, and political demands for which revolutionary forces fought and died. The convention was divided between conservatives, mostly politicians who had supported Madero and then Carranza, and progressives, who were soldiers who had fought in revolutionary battles. The progressives, deemed radical Jacobins by the conservatives, &quot;sought to integrate deep political and social reforms into the political structure of the country.&quot; making principles for which many of the revolutionaries had fought into law.

The Mexican Constitution of 1917 was strongly nationalist, giving the government the power to expropriate foreign ownership of resources and enabling land reform (Article 27). It also had a strong code protecting organized labor (Article 123) and extended state power over the Roman Catholic Church in Mexico in its role in education (Article 3).

 and were excluded from the Constituent Congress, but their political challenge pushed the delegates to radicalize the Constitution, which in turn was far more radical than Carranza himself. While he was elected constitutional president in 1917, he did not implement its most revolutionary elements, particularly those dealing with land reform. Carranza came from the old Porfirian landowning class and was repulsed by peasant demand for redistribution of land and their expectation that land seized would not revert to their previous owners.

Although revolutionary generals were not part formal delegates to the convention, Álvaro Obregón indirectly, then directly, sided with the progressives against Carranza. In historian Frank Tannenbaum&#x27;s assessment, &quot;The Constitution was written by the &quot;soldiers&quot; of the Revolution, not by the lawyers, who were there [at the convention], but were generally in opposition.&quot; The constitution was drafted and ratified quickly, in February 1917. In December 1916, Villa had captured the major northern city of Torreón, with Obregón especially realizing that Villa was a continuing threat to the Constitutionalist regime. Zapata and his peasant followers in Morelos also never put down their guns and remained a threat to the government in Mexico City. Incorporating radical aspects of Villa&#x27;s program and the Zapatistas&#x27; Plan of Ayala, the constitution became a way to outflank the two opposing revolutionary factions.

Carranza was elected president under the new constitution, and once formally in office, largely ignored or actively undermined the more radical aspects of the constitution. Obregón returned to Sonora and began building a power base that would launch his presidential campaign in 1919, which included the new labor organization headed by Luis N. Morones, the Regional Confederation of Mexican Workers (CROM). Carranza increasingly lost support of labor, crushing strikes against his government. Carranza did not move forward on land reform, fueling increasing opposition from peasants. In an attempt to suppress the continuing armed opposition conflict in Morelos, Carranza sent General Pablo González with troops. Going further, Carranza ordered the assassination of Emiliano Zapata in 1919. It was a huge blow, but Zapatista General Genovevo de la O continued to lead the armed struggle there.

==Emiliano Zapata and the Revolution in Morelos==


From the late Porfiriato until his assassination by an agent of President Carranza in 1919, Emiliano Zapata played an important role in the Mexican Revolution, the only revolutionary of first rank from southern Mexico. His home territory in Morelos was of strategic importance just south of Mexico City. Of the revolutionary factions, it was the most homogeneous, with most fighters being free peasants and only few peons on haciendas. With no industry to speak of in Morelos, there were no industrial workers in the movement and no middle-class participants. A few intellectuals supported the Zapatistas. The Zapatistas&#x27; armed opposition movement just south of the capital needed to be heeded by those in power in Mexico City. Unlike northern Mexico, close to the U.S. border and access to arms sales from there, the Zapatista territory in Morelos was geographically isolated from access to arms. The Zapatistas did not appeal for support to international interests nor play a role in international politics the way Pancho Villa, the other major populist leader, did. The movement&#x27;s goal was for land reform in Morelos and restoration of the rights of communities. The Zapatistas were divided into guerrilla fighting forces that joined together for major battles before returning to their home villages. Zapata was not a peasant himself but led peasants in his home state in regionally concentrated warfare to regain village lands and return to subsistence agriculture. Morelos was the only region where land reform was enacted during the years of fighting.

Zapata initially supported Madero, since his Plan de San Luis Potosí had promised land reform. But Madero negotiated a settlement with the Díaz regime that continued its power. Once elected in November 1911, Madero did not move on land reform, prompting Zapata to rebel against him and draft the Plan of Ayala (1911).

With the overthrow of Madero and murder, Zapata disavowed his previous admiration of Pascual Orozco and directed warfare against the Huerta government, as did northern states of Mexico in the Constitutionalist movement, but Zapata did not ally or coordinate with it. With the defeat of Huerta in July 1914, Zapata loosely allied with Pancho Villa, who had split from Venustiano Carranza and the Constitutionalist Army. The loose Zapata-Villa alliance lasted until Obregón decisively defeated Villa in a series of battles in 1915, including the Battle of Celaya. Zapata continued to oppose the Constitutionalists, but lost support in his own area and attempted to entice defectors back to his movement. That was a fatal error. He was ambushed and killed on 10 April 1919 by agents of now President Venustiano Carranza. Photos were taken of his corpse, demonstrating that he had indeed been killed.

Although Zapata was assassinated, the agrarian reforms that peasants themselves enacted in Morelos were impossible to reverse. The central government came to terms with that state of affairs. Zapata had fought for land and for those who tilled it in Morelos and succeeded. His credentials as a steadfast revolutionary made him an enduring hero of the Revolution. His name and image were invoked in the 1994 uprising in Chiapas, with the Zapatista Army of National Liberation.

==The last successful coup: 1920==
Even as Carranza&#x27;s political authority was waning, he attempted to impose a political nobody, Mexico&#x27;s ambassador to the U.S., Ignacio Bonillas, as his successor. Under the Plan of Agua Prieta, a triumvirate of Sonoran generals, Álvaro Obregón, Plutarco Elías Calles, and Adolfo de la Huerta, with elements from the military and labor supporters in the CROM, rose in successful rebellion against Carranza, the last successful coup of the revolution. Carranza fled Mexico City by train toward Veracruz, but continued on horseback and died in an ambush, perhaps an assassination, but also possibly by suicide. Carranza&#x27;s attempt to impose his choice was considered a betrayal of the Revolution and his remains were not placed in the Monument to the Revolution until 1942.

&quot;Obregón and the Sonorans, the architects of Carranza&#x27;s rise and fall, shared his hard headed opportunism, but they displayed a better grasp of the mechanisms of popular mobilization, allied to social reform, that would form the bases of a durable revolutionary regime after 1920.&quot; The interim government of Adolfo de la Huerta negotiated Pancho Villa&#x27;s surrender in 1920, rewarding him with an hacienda where he lived in peace until he floated political interest in the 1924 election. Villa was assassinated in July 1923. Álvaro Obregón was elected president in October 1920, the first of a string of revolutionary generals – Calles, Rodríguez, Cárdenas, and Ávila Camacho—to hold the presidency until 1946, when Miguel Alemán, the son of a revolutionary general, was elected.

==Consolidation of the Revolution: 1920–1940==
The period 1920–1940 is generally considered to be one of revolutionary consolidation, with the leaders seeking to return Mexico to the level of development it had reached in 1910, but under new parameters of state control. Authoritarian tendencies rather than Liberal democratic principles characterized the period, with generals of the revolution holding the presidency and designating their successors. Revolutionary generals continued to revolt against the new political arrangements, particularly at the juncture of an election. General Adolfo de la Huerta rose in rebellion in 1923, contesting Obregón&#x27;s choice of Calles as his successor; Generals Arnulfo Gómez and Francisco Serrano revolted in 1928, contesting Obregón&#x27;s bid for a second term as president; and General José Gonzalo Escobar revolted in 1929 against Calles, who remained a power behind the presidency with the assassination of Obregón in 1928. All these revolts were unsuccessful. In the late 1920s, anticlerical provisions of the 1917 Constitution were stringently enforced, leading to a major grassroots uprising against the government, the bloody Cristero War that lasted from 1926 to 1929. Although the period is characterized as a consolidation of the Revolution, who ruled Mexico and the policies the government pursued were met with violence.

===Sonoran generals in the presidency: 1920–1928===


There is no consensus when the Revolution ended, but the majority of scholars consider the 1920s and 1930s as being on the continuum of revolutionary change.The end date of revolutionary consolidation has also been set at 1946, with the last general serving as president and the political party morphing into the Institutional Revolutionary Party.

In 1920, Sonoran revolutionary general Álvaro Obregón was elected President of Mexico and inaugurated in December 1920, following the coup engineered by him and revolutionary generals Plutarco Elías Calles, and Adolfo de la Huerta. The coup was supported by other revolutionary generals against the civilian Carranza attempting to impose another civilian, Ignacio Bonillas as his successor. Obregón did not have to deal with two major revolutionary leaders. De la Huerta managed to persuade revolutionary general Pancho Villa to lay down his arms against the regime in return for a large estate in Durango, in northern Mexico. Carranza&#x27;s agents had assassinated Emiliano Zapata in 1919, removing a consistent and effective opponent. Some counterrevolutionaries in Chiapas laid down their arms. The only pro-Carranza governor to resist the regime change was Esteban Cantú in Baja California, suppressed by northern revolutionary general Abelardo Rodríguez, later to become president of Mexico. Although the 1917 Constitution was not fully implemented and parts of the country were still controlled by local strongmen, &quot;caciques&quot;, Obregón&#x27;s presidency did begin consolidation of parts of the revolutionary agenda, including expanded rights of labor and the peasantry.

Obregón was a pragmatist and not an ideologue, so that domestically he had to appeal to both the left and the right to ensure Mexico would not fall back into civil war. Securing labor rights built on Obregón&#x27;s existing relationship with urban labor. The Constitutionists had made an alliance with labor during the revolution, mobilizing the Red Battalions against Zapata&#x27;s and Villa&#x27;s force. This alliance continued under Obregón&#x27;s and Calles&#x27;s terms as president. Obregón also focused on land reform. He had governors in various states push forward the reforms promised in the 1917 constitution. These were, however, quite limited. Former Zapatistas still had strong influence in the post-revolutionary government, so most of the reforms began in Morelos, the birthplace of the Zapatista movement.

Obregón&#x27;s government was faced with the need for stabilizing Mexico after a decade of civil war. With the revolutionary armies having defeated the old federal army, Obregón now dealt with military leaders who were used to wielding power violently. Enticing them to leave the political arena in exchange for material rewards was one tactic. De la Huerta had already successfully used it with Pancho Villa. Not trusting Villa to remain on the sidelines, Obregón had him assassinated in 1923. In 1923 De la Huerta rebelled against Obregón and his choice of Calles as his successor as president, leading to a split in the military. The rebellion was suppressed and Obregón began to professionalize the military, reduced the number of troops by half, and forced officers to retire. Obregón (1920–24) followed by Calles (1924–28) viewed bringing the armed forces under state control as essential to stabilizing Mexico. Downsizing the military meant that state funds were freed up for other priorities, especially education. Obregón&#x27;s Minister of Education, José Vasconcelos, initiated innovative broad educational and cultural programs.

Obregón sought diplomatic recognition by the U.S. in order to be considered legitimately holding power. He believed that once U.S. recognition was secured, other nations would follow suit. The U.S. and foreign interests were alarmed at provision in the new constitution powering the government to expropriate private property, and foreigners also had claims against Mexico for damage to their property during the decade of turmoil. U.S. and British entrepreneurs had developed the petroleum industry in Mexico and had claims to oil still in the ground. Foreigners held extensive agricultural land that was now at risk to be distributed to landless Mexicans. Obregón and the U.S. entered in talks to sort out many issues, the Bucareli Treaty, concluded in 1923, with the U.S. recognizing Obregón&#x27;s government. In Mexico the agreement was controversial, with it being perceived as making major concessions to the U.S. and undermining revolutionary goals, but Obregón pushed it through the legislature and got U.S. recognition. When his fellow Sonoran general De La Huerta rebelled later in 1923, the U.S. supplied Obregón with arms to put down the challenge.
In an attempt to buffer his regime against further coups, Calles began arming peasants and factory workers with surplus weapons. He continued other reforms pushed by his predecessor, but Calles was virulently anti-clerical and unlike Obregón who largely avoided direct conflict with the Catholic Church, Calles as president enforced the anticlerical provisions of the 1917 Constitution. Calles also put into effect a national school system that was largely secular to combat church influence in late 1924. After two years the state crackdown, the Catholic Church protested by going on its version of a strike, refusing to baptize, marry, give last rites, or give communion to parishioners. Many peasants also joined in opposition to the state&#x27;s crackdown on religion, beginning the Cristero War, named for their clarion call &quot;Viva Cristo Rey&quot; (&quot;long live Christ the king&quot;). It was a lengthy, major uprising against the revolutionary vision of the Mexican state in central Mexico, not a short-lived, localized rebellion. Calles&#x27;s stringent enforcement of anticlerical laws had an impact on the presidential succession, with Calles&#x27;s comrade and chosen successor, ex-President and President-elect Obregón being assassinated by a religious fanatic in 1928, plunging the political system into a major crisis. By law Calles could not be re-elected, but a solution needed to be found to keep political power in the hands of the revolutionary elite and prevent the country from reverting to civil war.

===Political crisis and the founding of the revolutionary party===
With the 1917 Constitution enshrining the principle of &quot;no re-election&quot;, revolutionaries who had fought for the principle could not ignore it. Elections were when disgruntled aspirants to the presidency made their move, because it was a period of political transition. The Sonoran triumvirate had done so in 1920. In 1923, De la Huerta rebelled against Obregón&#x27;s choice of Calles rather than himself as candidate. When Calles designated ex-president Obregón to succeed him, permitted by a constitutional amendment, the principle of no re-elected was technically adhered to, but there was the clear possibility of an endless alternation of the two powerful men. Other rebellions of revolutionary generals broke out in 1927, by Francisco Serrano and Arnulfo R. Gómez, which was suppressed, and the leaders executed. Obregón was elected, but assassinated before he took office, plunging the country into a political crisis over presidential succession. Since the Mexican Revolution had been sparked by the 1910 re-election of Díaz, Calles and others were well aware that the situation could spiral out of control. This political crisis came when the bloody Cristero War raged across central Mexico. A managed political solution to the crisis of presidential succession had to be found. The answer was the founding of the &quot;Partido Nacional Revolucionario&quot;. In 1929 Calles brought together the various factions, mainly regional strongmen. Calles himself could not become president again, but he remained a powerful figure, the &quot;Jefe Máximo&quot;, in a period called the &quot;Maximato&quot; (1928-34). Three men (Emilio Portes Gil, Pascual Ortiz Rubio, and Abelardo L. Rodríguez) held the presidency in what would have been Obregón&#x27;s second term. To avoid alternation of the presidency by men who had previously held the office, the constitution was revised, reverted to the principle of no re-election.

An achievement in this period was the 1929 peace agreement between the Catholic Church and the Mexican state, brokered by Dwight Morrow, U.S. Ambassador to Mexico. The church-state conflict went into hibernation following the designation of General Manuel Ávila Camacho to succeed President Lázaro Cárdenas in 1940.

===Revitalization under Lázaro Cárdenas: 1934–1940===
In 1934, Calles chose Lázaro Cárdenas as the PNR&#x27;s presidential candidate. Unlike his three predecessors controlled by Calles, Cárdenas threw off the &quot;jefe máximo&#x27;s&quot; power and set about implementing a re-vitalilzed revolutionary agenda. He vastly expanded agrarian reform, expropriated commercial landed estates; nationalized the railways and the petroleum industry; kept the peace with the Catholic Church as an institution; put down a major rebellion by Saturnino Cedillo; founded a new political party that created sectoral representation of industrial workers, peasants, urban office workers, and the army; engineered the succession of his hand-picked candidate; and then, perhaps the most radical act of all, stepped away from presidential power, letting his successor, General Manuel Ávila Camacho, exercise fully presidential power.

Cárdenas came from the southern state of Michoacan, but during the revolution had fought in the north, rising to the rank of general, and becoming a part of the northern dynasty. He returned to Michoacan after the revolution, and implemented a number of reforms that were precursors of those he enacted as president. With Calles&#x27;s founding of the PNR, Cárdenas became part of the party apparatus. Calles had no idea that Cárdenas was as politically savvy as he turned out to be, managing to oust Calles from his role as the power behind the presidency and forcing him into exile. Calles had increasingly moved to the political right, abandoning support for land reform. Peasants who had joined the revolution with the hope that land reform would be enacted, and the constitution had empowered the state to expropriate land and other resources. During Cárdenas&#x27;s presidency, he expropriated and distributed land and organized peasant leagues, incorporating them into the political system. Although in theory peasants and workers could come together as a single powerful sector, the PNR ruled that peasant organizations were to be separate from industrial labor, and organizing the countryside should be under the control of the party.

Cárdenas encouraged working class organizations and sought to bring them into the political system under state control. The CROM, an umbrella labor organization, had declined in power with the ouster of Calles. Radical labor leader Vicente Lombardo Toledano helped create the Confederation of Mexican Workers (CTM), a nationalist, autonomous, non-politically affiliated organization. Communists in the labor movement were aligned with the Moscow-controlled Communist International, and Cárdenas sought to strengthen the Mexican labor organization aligned with the Mexican revolutionary state.

His first acts of reform in 1935, were aimed towards peasants. Former strongmen within the land owning community were losing political power, so he began to side with the peasants more and more. He also tried to further centralize the government&#x27;s power by removing regional caciques, allowing him to push reforms easier. To fill the political vacuum, Cárdenas helped the formation of PNR-sponsored peasant leagues, empowering both peasants and the government. Other reforms included nationalization of key industries such as petroleum and the railroads. To appease workers, Cárdenas furthered provisions to end debt peonage and company stores, which were largely eliminated under his rule, except in the most backwater areas of Mexico. To prevent conservative factions in the military from plotting and to put idle soldiers to work, Cárdenas mobilized the military to build public works projects. That same year another Cristero revolt occurred. This was partially caused by Cárdenas&#x27; mandate for secular education early in his presidency in 1934. The Cristeros were not supported by the Catholic hierarchy and Cárdenas quashed the revolt. The Catholic Church told rebels to surrender themselves to the government.
In the next year, 1936, to further stabilize his rule, Cárdenas further armed the peasants and workers and begins to organize them into formal militias. This proved to be useful later in his presidency as the militias came to his aid in an attempted military coup in 1938. Seeing no opposition from the bourgeoisie, generals, or conservative landlords, in 1936 Cárdenas began building collective agricultural enterprises called &quot;ejidos&quot; to help give peasants access to land, mostly in southern Mexico. These appeased some agriculturalists, but many peasants would have preferred receiving individual plots of land to which they had title. The aim of ejidos was to replace the large-scale landed estates, many of which were foreign owned. Andrés Molina Enríquez, the intellectual father of article 27 of the constitution empowering the state to expropriate property, criticized the move, saying that the state itself was replacing private landowners, while the peasants remained tied to the land. Ejidos were not very good at feeding large populations, causing an urban food crisis. To alleviate this, Cárdenas co-opted the support of capitalists to build large commercial farms to feed the urban population. This put the final nail in the coffin of the feudal hacienda system, making Mexico a mixed economy, combining agrarian socialism and industrial capitalism by 1940. 

Cárdenas dissolved the revolutionary party founded by Calles, and established a new party, the &quot;Partido de la Revolución Mexicana&quot;, organized by sectors. There were four sectors: industrial workers, peasants, middle class workers, largely employed by the government, and the army. Bringing the military into the party structure was controversial, privately opposed by General Manuel Avila Camacho, who succeeded Cárdenas and in the final reformulation of the party, removed the military sector. Cárdenas calculated to manage the military politically and to remove it from independently intervening in politics and to keep it from becoming a separate caste. This new party organization was a resurrection of corporatism, essentially organization by estates or interest groups. The party was reorganized once again in 1946 as the Institutional Revolutionary Party, which kept sectoral representation but eliminated the military as a sector.

Cárdenas left office in 1940 at age 45. His departure marked the end of the social revolution and ushering in half a century of relative stability. However, in the assessment of historian Alan Knight, the 1940 election was &quot;a requiem for Cardenismo: it revealed that hopes of a democratic succession were illusory; that electoral endorsement of the regime had to be manufactured; and that the Cardenista reforms, while creating certain loyal clienteles (some loyal from conviction, some by virtue of co-optation) had also raised up formidable opponents who now looked to take the offensive.&quot; He had a long and lustrous post-presidency, remaining influential in political life, and considered &quot;the moral conscience of the Revolution&quot;. Cárdenas and his supporters carried &quot;reforms further than any of their predecessors in Mexico or their counterparts in other Latin American countries.&quot;

==Characteristics==

===Violence in the Revolution===


The most obvious acts of violence which occurred during the Revolution involved soldiers participating in combat or summary executions. The actual fighting which occurred during the Maderista phase of the Revolution (1910–11) did not result in a large number of casualties, but during the Huerta era, the Federal Army summarily executed rebel soldiers, and the Constitutionalist Army executed Federal Army officers. There were no prisoner of war internment camps. Often rank-and-file soldiers of a losing faction were incorporated as troops by the ones who defeated them. The revolutionaries were not ideologically-driven, so they did not target their rivals for reprisals and they did not wage a &quot;revolutionary terror&quot; against them after they triumphed, in contrast to the French and Russian Revolutions. An exception to this pattern of behavior in the history of Mexico occurred in the aftermath of its nineteenth-century wars against indigenous rebels.

The death toll of the combatants was not as large as it might have been, because the opposing armies rarely engaged in open-field combat. The revolutionaries initially operated as guerrilla bands, and they launched hit-and-run strikes against the enemy. They drew the Federal Army into combat on terms which were favorable to them, they did not engage in open battle nor did they attack heavily defended positions. They acquired weapons and ammunition which were abandoned by Federal forces and they also commandeered resources from landed estates and used them to feed their men. The Federal Army was unable to stray from the railway lines that transported them to contested areas, and they were unable to pursue the revolutionaries when they were attacked.

The death toll and the displacement of the population due to the Revolution is difficult to calculate. Mexico&#x27;s population loss of 15 million was high, but numerical estimates vary greatly. Perhaps 1.5 million people died, and nearly 200,000 refugees fled abroad, especially to the United States. The violence caused by the Mexican Revolution resulted in Mexican immigration to the United States increasing five-fold from 1910 to 1920, with 100,000 Mexicans entering the United States by 1920 , seeking better economic conditions, social stability, and political stability. 

The violence which occurred during the Revolution did not just involve the largely male combatants, it also involved civilian populations of men, women, and children. Some ethnic groups were deliberately targeted, most particularly, the Chinese in northern Mexico. During the Maderista campaign in northern Mexico, there was anti-Chinese violence, particularly, the May 1911 massacre at Torreón, a major railway hub. In 1905, anti-Chinese sentiment was espoused in the Liberal Party Program of 1905.

Landed estates, many of which were owned by foreigners, were targeted for looting, the crops and animals were sold or they were used by the revolutionaries. The owners of some estates were killed. In the wake of the Revolution, a joint American-Mexican Claims Commission assessed the monetary damage and the amount of the monetary compensation which was due.

Cities were the prizes in revolutionary clashes, and many of them were severely damaged. A notable exception is Mexico City, which only sustained damage during the days leading up to the ouster and murder of Madero, when rebels shelled the central core of the capital, causing the death of many civilians and animals. The rebels launched the attack in an attempt to convince observers in Mexico and the world that Madero had completely lost control. The capital changed hands several times during the post-Huerta period. When the Conventionists held power, Villa and his men committed acts of violence against major supporters of Huerta and those who were considered revolutionary traitors with impunity. Villa&#x27;s terror was not on the same scale as the reigns of terror which occurred during the French and Bolshevik Revolutions, but the assassinations and the kidnappings of wealthy people for ransom damaged Villa&#x27;s reputation and they also caused the U.S. government&#x27;s enthusiasm for him to cool.
Political assassination became a frequent way to eliminate rivals both during and after the Revolution. All of the major leaders of the Revolution were later assassinated: Madero in 1913, Zapata in 1919, Carranza in 1920, Villa in 1923, and Obregón in 1928. Porfirio Díaz, Victoriano Huerta, and Pascual Orozco had gone into exile. Believing that he would also go into exile, Madero turned himself into Huerta&#x27;s custody. Huerta considered that too dangerous a course, since he could have been a rallying point. Huerta did not want to execute Madero publicly. The cover story of Madero and Pino Suárez being caught in the crossfire gave Huerta plausible deniability. He needed it, since he only had a thin veil of legitimacy in his ascention to the presidency. The bodies of Madero and Pino Suárez were not photographed nor were they displayed, but pictures of Madero&#x27;s clothing were taken, showing bullet holes in the back. Zapata&#x27;s death in 1919 was at the hands of Carranza&#x27;s military. There was no need for a coverup since he had remained a threat to the Carranza regime. Photos of the dead Zapata were taken and published, as proof of his demise, but Carranza was tainted by the deed. 

The economic damage which the revolution caused lasted for years. the Population losses which were due to military and civilian casualties, the displacement of populations which migrated to safer areas, and the damage to the infrastructure all had significant impacts. The nation would not regain the level of development which it reached in 1910 for another twenty years.

The railway lines which were constructed during the Porfiriato facilitated the movement of men, horses, and artillery and they were extensively used by all of the factions. This was much greater in northern Mexico, it was less so in the areas controlled by Zapata. When men and horses were transported by rail, the soldiers rode on the tops of boxcars. Railway lines, engines, and rolling stock were targeted for sabotage and the rebuilding of tracks and bridges was an ongoing issue. Major battles in the north were fought along railway lines or railway junctions, such as Torreón. Early on, northern revolutionaries also added hospital cars so the wounded could be treated. Horses remained important in troop movements, they were either directly ridden to combat zones or they were loaded on trains. Infantry also still played a role. Arms purchases, mainly from the United States, gave northern armies almost inexhaustible access to rifles and ammunition so long as they had the means to pay for them. New military technology, particularly machine guns, mechanized death on a large scale. El Paso, Texas became a major supplier of weaponry to the Constitutionalist Army.

===Cultural aspects of the Mexican Revolution===
There was considerable cultural production during the Revolution itself, including printmaking, music and photography, while in the post revolutionary era, revolutionary themes in painting and literature shaped historical memory and understanding of the Revolution.

====Journalism and propaganda====
Anti-Díaz publications before the outbreak of the Revolution helped galvanize opposition to him, and he cracked down with censorship. As President Madero believed in freedom of the press, which helped galvanize opposition to his own regime. The Constitutionalists had an active propaganda program, paying writers to draft appeals to opinion in the U.S. and to disparage the reputations of Villa and Zapata as reactionaries, bandits, and unenlightened peasants. El Paso, Texas just across from Ciudad Juárez was an important site for revolutionary journalism in English and Spanish. Mariano Azuela wrote &quot;Los de Abajo&quot; (&quot;The Underdogs&quot;) in El Paso and published in serial form there. The alliance Carranza made with the Casa del Obrero Mundial helped fund that appealed to the urban working class, particularly in early 1915 before Obregón&#x27;s victories over Villa and González&#x27;s over Zapata. Once the armed opposition was less of a threat, Carranza dissolved &quot;Vanguardia&quot; as a publication.

Meanwhile, in the United States, Mexican-Americans created newspapers to help with the war effort, denouncing Diaz&#x27;s regime as well as professing their support to the revolution. There were multiple newspapers written in the Spanish language, most notably, &quot;La Cronica&quot;, (The Chronicle in English) created by Nicasio Idar and his family in Laredo, Texas, a city which saw much action as a border town. &quot;La Cronica&quot;, as well as other Chicano newspapers, would mostly cover stories about the Mexican-American and Tejano communities in the border regions, as well as supporting the revolution. These articles were named &quot;fronterizo&quot; (&quot;by the border&quot; in English), a newspaper dedicated to describing life in the border regions which would write about Mexican-Americans and their long rooted history and culture pertaining to these lands, as people living by the international border would be called &quot;fronterizos&quot; (border-dwellers). These &quot;fronterizos&quot; would start out with two goals: to decry the racism and discrimination experienced by Mexicans and Mexicans-Americans in the United States, and to support the ongoing reforms in Mexico, equating the tyranny of Porfirio Díaz to that of white Texan politicians. A month after the start of the conflict, Idar from &quot;La Cronica&quot; argued that Mexican immigrants and American born Mexican-Americans should be inspired by the revolution&#x27;s promise of land reform to fight for more civil rights in the United States. &quot;Fronterizos&quot; worked to produce a nationalistic perspective placing the borderlands as an integral part of Mexican culture, history, and as a crucial part to the revolution, as the borderlands and its communities have been ignored by both the United States and Mexican governments.

====Prints and cartoons====
During the late Porfiriato, political cartooning and print making developed as popular forms of art. The most well known print maker of that period is José Guadalupe Posada, whose satirical prints, particularly featuring skeletons, circulated widely. Posada died in early 1913, so his caricatures are only of the early revolution. One published in &quot;El Vale Panchito&quot; entitled &quot;oratory and music&quot; shows Madero atop a pile of papers and the Plan of San Luis Potosí, haranguing a dark-skinned Mexican whose large sombrero has the label &quot;pueblo&quot; (people). Madero is in a dapper suit. The caption reads &quot;offerings to the people to rise to the presidency.&quot; Political cartoons by Mexicans as well as Americans caricatured the situation in Mexico for a mass readership. Political broadsides including songs of the revolutionary period were also a popular form of visual art. After 1920, Mexican muralism and printmaking were two major forms of revolutionary art. Prints were easily reproducible and circulated widely, while murals commissioned by the Mexican government necessitated a journey to view them. Printmaking &quot;emerged as a favored medium, alongside government sponsored mural painting among artists ready to do battle for a new aesthetic as well as a new political order.&quot; Diego Rivera, better known for his painting than printmaking, reproduced his depiction of Zapata in the murals in the Cortés Palace in Cuernavaca in a 1932 print.

====Photography, motion pictures, and propaganda====
The Mexican Revolution was extensively photographed as well as filmed, so that there is a large, contemporaneous visual record. &quot;The Mexican Revolution and photography were intertwined.&quot; There was a large foreign viewership for still and moving images of the Revolution. The photographic record is by no means complete since much of the violence took place in relatively remote places, but it was a media event covered by photographers, photojournalists, and professional cinematographers. Those behind the lens were hampered by the large, heavy cameras that impeded capturing action images, but no longer was written text enough, with photographs illustrating and verifying the written word.

The revolution &quot;depended heavily, from its inception, on visual representations and, in particular, on photographs.&quot; The large number of Mexican and foreign photographers followed the action and stoked public interest in it. Among the foreign photographers were Jimmy Hare, Otis A. Aultman, Homer Scott, and Walter Horne. Images appeared in newspapers and magazines, as well as postcards. Horne was associated with the Mexican War Postcard Company.

Most prominent of the documentary film makers were Salvador Toscano and Jesús H. Abitía, and some 80 cameramen from the U.S. filmed as freelancers or employed by film companies. The footage has been edited and reconstructed into documentary films, &quot;Memories of a Mexican&quot; (Carmen Toscano de Moreno 1950) and &quot;Epics of the Mexican Revolution&quot; (Gustavo Carrera). Principal leaders of the Revolution were well aware of the propaganda element of documentary film making, and Pancho Villa contracted with an American film company to record for viewers in the U.S. his leadership on the battlefield. The film has been lost, but the story of the film making was interpreted in the HBO scripted film &quot;And Starring Pancho Villa as Himself&quot;. The largest collection of still photographs of the Revolution is the Casasola Archive, named for photographer Agustín Casasola (1874–1938), with nearly 500,000 images held by the Fototeca Nacional in Pachuca. A multivolume history of the Revolution, &quot;Historia Gráfica de la Revolución Mexicana, 1900–1960&quot; contains hundreds of images from the era, along with explanatory text.

====Painting====
Venustiano Carranza attracted artists and intellectuals to the Constitutionalist cause. Painter, sculptor and essayist Gerardo Murillo, known as Dr. Atl, was ardently involved in art production in the cause of the revolution. He was involved with the anarcho-syndicalist labor organization, the Casa del Obrero Mundial and in met and encouraged José Clemente Orozco and David Alfaro Siqueiros in producing political art. The government of Álvaro Obregón (1920–24) and his Minister of Education, José Vasconcelos commissioned artists to decorate government buildings of the colonial era with murals depicting Mexico&#x27;s history. Many of these focused on aspects of the Revolution. The &quot;Big Three&quot; of Mexican muralism, Diego Rivera, Orozco, and Siqueiros produced narratives of the Revolution, shaping historical memory and interpretation.

====Music====

A number of traditional Mexican songs or &quot;corridos&quot; were written at the time, serving as a kind of news report and functioned as propaganda, memorializing aspects of the Mexican Revolution. The term &quot;Adelitas&quot; an alternative word for &quot;soldaderas&quot;, is from a corrido titled &quot;La Adelita&quot;. The song &quot;La Cucaracha&quot;, with numerous verses, was popular at the time of the Revolution, and subsequently, and is too in the present day. Published corridos often had images of particular revolutionary heroes along with the verses.

====Literature====
Few novels of the Mexican Revolution were written at the time: Mariano Azuela&#x27;s &quot;Los de Abajo&quot; (translated as &quot;The Underdogs&quot;) is a notable one, originally published in serial form in newspapers. Literature is a lens through which to see the Revolution. Nellie Campobello is one of the few women writers of the Revolution; her &quot;Cartucho&quot; (1931) is an account of the Revolution in northern Mexico, emphasizing the role of Villistas, when official discourse was erasing Villa&#x27;s memory and emphasizing nationalist and centralized ideas of the Revolution. Martín Luis Guzmán&#x27;s &quot;El águila y el serpiente&quot; (1928) and &quot;La sombra del caudillo&quot;(1929) drew on his experiences in the Constitutionalist Army. In the fiction of Carlos Fuentes, particularly &quot;The Death of Artemio Cruz&quot;, the Revolution and its perceived betrayal are key factors in driving the narrative.

====Gender====
The revolution that occurred during 1910 greatly affected gender roles present in Mexico. However, it continued to create a strict separation between genders although both men and women were involved in the revolution. Women were involved by promoting political reform as well as enlisting in the military. Women who were involved in political reform would create reports that outlined the changes people wanted to see in their area. That type of activism was seen inside and outside of the cities. Women not only took political action but also enlisted in the military and became teachers to contribute to the change that they wanted to see after the revolution. Women were seen as prizes by many men involved in the military. Being involved in the military gave men a greater sense of superiority over women, which gave women the connotation of being a prize. That idea often lead to violence against women, which meanwhile increased. After the revolution, the ideas women contributed to the revolution were put on hold for many years. Women would often promote the ideas of establishing a greater justice system and creating ideals surrounded by democracy. The revolution caused many people to further reinstate the idea that women were meant to be taking care of the household. Women were also put in the lower part of the social class because of this idea.

====Female soldiers during the revolution====
Women who had been discarded by their families would often join the military. Being involved in the military would lead to scrutiny amongst some male participants. In order to avoid sexual abuse many women would make themselves appear more masculine. They would also dress more masculine in order to gain more experience with handling weapons, and learning more about military jobs.

=====María de Jesús González=====
An example of this is presented by María de Jesús González who was a secret agent involved in Carranza&#x27;s army. She would often present herself as a man in order to complete certain tasks assigned to her. After she completed these tasks she would return to her feminine appearance.

=====Rosa Bobadilla=====
Rosa Bodilla, however, maintained her feminine appearance throughout her military career. She joined the Zapata&#x27;s military with her husband. When he died, she was given his title, which became &quot;Colonel Rosa Bobadila widow of Casas.&quot; She gave orders to men while continuing to dress as a woman.

=====Amelio Robles=====
After the revolution, Amelio Robles continued to look like and identify as a male for the rest of his life. Robles abandoned his home in order to join the Zapata military. Throughout the war, Robles began to assume a more masculine identity. After the war, he did not return to his former appearance like other females had. Robles carried on with his life as Amelio, and remained to look as well as act masculine. He reestablished himself into the community as a male, and was recognized as a male on his military documents.

==Interpreting the history of the revolution==
There is a vast historiography on the Mexican Revolution, with many different interpretations of the history. Over time it has become more fragmented. There is consensus as to when the revolution began, that is in 1910, but there is no consensus when it ended. The Constitutionalists defeated their major rivals and called the constitutional convention that drafted the 1917 Constitution, but did not effectively control all regions. The year 1920 was the last successful military rebellion, bringing the northern revolutionary generals to power. According to Álvaro Matute, &quot;By the time Obregón was sworn in as president on December 1, 1920, the armed stage of the Mexican Revolution was effectively over.&quot; The year 1940 saw revolutionary general and President Lázaro Cárdenas choose Manuel Avila Camacho, a moderate, to succeed him. A 1966 anthology by scholars of the revolution was entitled &quot;Is the Mexican Revolution Dead?&quot;. Historian Alan Knight has identified &quot;orthodox&quot; interpretation of the revolution as a monolithic, popular, nationalist revolution, while revisionism has focused on regional differences, and challenges its credentials revolution. One scholar classifies the conflict as a &quot;great rebellion&quot; rather than a revolution.

Major leaders of the Revolution have been the subject of biographies, including the martyred Francisco I. Madero. There are many biographies of Zapata and Villa, whose movements did not achieve power, along with studies of the presidential career of revolutionary general Lázaro Cárdenas. In recent years, biographies of the victorious northerners Carranza, Obregón, and Calles have reassessed their roles in the Revolution. Sonorans in the Mexican Revolution have not yet collectively been the subject of a major study.

Often studied as an event solely of Mexican history, or one also involving Mexico&#x27;s northern neighbor, scholars now recognize that &quot;From the beginning to the end, foreign activities figured crucially in the Revolution&#x27;s course, not simple antagonism from the U.S. government, but complicated Euro-American imperialist rivalries, extremely intricate during the first world war.&quot; A key work illuminating the international aspects of the Revolution is Friedrich Katz&#x27;s 1981 work &quot;The Secret War in Mexico: Europe, the United States, and the Mexican Revolution&quot;.

==Historical memory==
The centennial of the Mexican Revolution was another occasion to construct of historical of the events and leaders. In 2010, the Centennial of the Revolution and the Bicentennial of Independence was an occasion to take account of Mexico&#x27;s history. The centennial of independence in 1910 had been the swan song of the Porfiriato. With President Felipe Calderón (2006–2012) of the conservative National Action Party, there was considerable emphasis on the bicentennial of independence rather than on the Mexican Revolution.

===Heroes and villains===
The popular heroes of the Mexican Revolution are the two radicals who lost: Emiliano Zapata and Pancho Villa. As early as 1921, the Mexican government began appropriating the memory and legacy of Zapata for its own purposes. Pancho Villa fought against those who won the Revolution and he was excluded from the revolutionary pantheon for a considerable time, but his memory and legend remained alive among the Mexican people. The government recognized his continued potency and had his remains reburied in the Monument of the Revolution after considerable controversy.

With the exception of Zapata who rebelled against him in 1911, Francisco Madero was revered as &quot;the apostle of democracy&quot;. Madero&#x27;s murder in the 1913 counterrevolutionary coup elevated him as a &quot;martyr&quot; of the Revolution, whose memory unified the Constitutionalist coalition against Huerta. Venustiano Carranza gained considerable legitimacy as a civilian leader of the Constitutionalists, having supported Madero in life and led the successful coalition that ousted Huerta. But then Carranza downplayed Madero&#x27;s role in the revolution in order to substitute himself as the origin of the true revolution. Carranza owned &quot;the bullets taken from the body of Francisco I. Madero after his murder. Carranza had kept them in his home, perhaps because they were a symbol of a fate and a passive denouement he had always hoped to avoid.&quot;

Huerta remains the enduring villain of the Mexican Revolution for his coup against Madero. Díaz is still popularly and officially reviled, although there was an attempt to rehabilitate his reputation in the 1990s by President Carlos Salinas de Gortari, who was implementing the North American Free Trade Agreement and amending the constitution to eliminate further land reform. Pascual Orozco, who with Villa captured Ciudad Juárez in May 1911, continues to have an ambiguous status, since he led a major rebellion against Madero in 1912 and then threw his lot in with Huerta. Orozco much more than Madero was considered a manly man of action.

===Monuments===
The most permanent manifestations of historical are in the built landscape, especially the Monument to the Revolution in Mexico City and statues and monuments to particular leaders. The Monument to the Revolution was created from the partially built &quot;Palacio Legislativo&quot;, a major project of Díaz&#x27;s government. The construction was abandoned with the outbreak of the Revolution in 1910. In 1933, during the Maximato of Plutarco Elías Calles, the shell was re-purposed to commemorate the Revolution. Buried in the four pillars are the remains of Francisco I. Madero, Venustiano Carranza, Plutarco Elías Calles, Lázaro Cárdenas, and Francisco [Pancho] Villa. In life, Villa fought Carranza and Calles, but his remains were transferred to the monument in 1979 during the administration of President José López Portillo. Prior to the construction of that monument, one was built in 1935 to the amputated arm of General Álvaro Obregón, lost in victorious battle against Villa in the 1915 Battle of Celaya. The monument is on the site of the restaurant La Bombilla, where he was assassinated in 1928. The arm was cremated in 1989, but the monument remains.

===Naming===
Names are a standard way governments commemorate people and events. Many towns and cities of Mexico recall the revolution. In Mexico City, there are &quot;delegaciones&quot; (boroughs) named for Álvaro Obregón, Venustiano Carranza, and Gustavo A. Madero, brother of murdered president. There is a portion of the old colonial street Calle de los Plateros leading to the main square zócalo of the capital named Francisco I. Madero.

The Mexico City Metro has stations commemorating aspects of the Revolution and the revolutionary era. When it opened in 1969, with line 1 (the &quot;Pink Line&quot;), two stations alluded to the revolution. Most directly referencing the Revolution was Metro Pino Suárez, named after Francisco I. Madero&#x27;s vice president, who was murdered with him in February 1913. There is no Metro stop named for Madero. The other was Metro Balderas, whose icon is a cannon, alluding to the Ciudadela armory where the coup against Madero was launched. In 1970, Metro Revolución opened, with the station at the Monument to the Revolution. As the Metro expanded, further stations with names from the revolutionary era opened. In 1980, two popular heroes of the Revolution were honored, with Metro Zapata explicitly commemorating the peasant revolutionary from Morelos. A sideways commemoration was Metro División del Norte, named after the Army that Pancho Villa commanded until its demise in the Battle of Celaya in 1915. The year 1997 saw the opening of the Metro Lázaro Cárdenas station. In 1988, Metro Aquiles Serdán honors the first martyr of the Revolution Aquiles Serdán. In 1994, Metro Constitución de 1917 opened, as did Metro Garibaldi, named after the grandson of Italian fighter for independence, Giuseppi Garibaldi. The grandson had been a participant in the Mexican Revolution. In 1999, the radical anarchist Ricardo Flores Magón was honored with the Metro Ricardo Flores Magón station. Also opening in 1999 was Metro Romero Rubio, named after the leader of Porfirio Díaz&#x27;s Científicos, whose daughter Carmen Romero Rubio became Díaz&#x27;s second wife. In 2012, a new Metro line opened with a Metro Hospital 20 de Noviembre stop, a hospital named after the date that Madero set in 1910 for rebellion against Díaz. There are no Metro stops named for revolutionary generals and presidents of Mexico, Carranza, Obregón, or Calles, and only an oblique reference to Villa in Metro División del Norte.

===Role of women===
The role of women in the Mexican Revolution has not been an important aspect of official historical memory, although the situation is changing. Carranza pushed for the rights of women, and gained women&#x27;s support. During his presidency he relied on his personal secretary and close aide, Hermila Galindo de Topete, to rally and secure support for him. Through her efforts he was able to gain the support of women, workers and peasants. Carranza rewarded her efforts by lobbying for women&#x27;s equality. He helped change and reform the legal status of women in Mexico. In the Historical Museum of the Mexican Revolution, there is a recreation of Adelita, the idealized female revolutionary combatant or &quot;soldadera&quot;. The typical image of a &quot;soldadera&quot; is of a woman with braids, wearing female attire, with ammunition belts across her chest. There were a few revolutionary women, known as &quot;coronelas&quot;, who commanded troops, some of whom dressed and identified as male; they do not fit the stereotypical image of &quot;soldadera&quot; and are not celebrated in historical memory at present.

==Legacies==

===Strong central government, civilian subordination of military===
Although the ignominious end of Venustiano Carranza&#x27;s presidency in 1920 cast a shadow over his legacy in the Revolution, sometimes viewed as a conservative revolutionary, he and his northern allies laid &quot;the foundation of a more ambitious, centralizing state dedicated to national integration and national self-assertion.&quot; In the assessment of historian Alan Knight, &quot;a victory of Villa and Zapata would probably have resulted in a weak, fragmented state, a collage of revolutionary fiefs of varied political hues presided over by a feeble central government.&quot; Porfirio Díaz had successfully centralized power during his long presidency. Carranza was an old politico of the Díaz regime, considered a kind of bridge between the old Porfirian order and the new revolutionary. The northern generals seized power in 1920, with the &quot;Sonoran hegemony prov[ing] complete and long lasting.&quot; The Sonorans, particularly Álvaro Obregón, were battle-tested leaders and pragmatic politicians able to consolidate centralized power immediately after 1920. The revolutionary struggle destroyed the professional army and brought to power men who joined the Revolution as citizen-soldiers. Once in power, successive revolutionary generals holding the presidency, Obregón, Calles, and Cárdenas, systematically downsized the army and instituted reforms to create a professionalized force subordinate to civilian politicians. By 1940, the government had controlled the power of the revolutionary generals, making the Mexican military subordinate to the strong central government, breaking the cycle of military intervention in politics dating to the independence era. It is also in contrast to the pattern of military power in many Latin American countries.

===Constitution of 1917===
An important element the revolution&#x27;s legacy is the 1917 Constitution. The document brought numerous reforms demanded by populist factions of the revolution, with article 27 empowering the state to expropriate resources deemed vital to the nation. These powers included expropriation of hacienda lands and redistribution to peasants. Article 27 also empowered the government to expropriate holdings of foreign companies, most prominently seen in the 1938 expropriation of oil. In Article 123 the constitution codified major labor reforms, including an 8-hour workday, a right to strike, equal pay laws for women, and an end to exploitative practices such as child labor and company stores. The constitution strengthened restrictions on the Catholic Church in Mexico, which when enforced by the Calles government, resulted in the Cristero War and a negotiated settlement of the conflict. The restrictions on the religion in the Constitution remained in place until the early 1990s. The Salinas government introduced reforms to the constitution that rolled back the government&#x27;s power to expropriate property and its restrictions on religious institutions, as part of his policy to join the U.S. and Canada Free Trade Agreement. Just as the government of Carlos Salinas de Gortari was amending significant provisions of the constitution, Metro Constitución de 1917 station was opened.

===Institutional Revolutionary Party===

The creation of the Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI) emerged as a way to manage political power and succession without resorting to violence. It was established in 1929 by President Calles, in the wake of the assassination of President-elect Obregón and two rebellions by disgruntled revolutionary generals with presidential ambitions. Initially, Calles remained the power behind the presidency, during a period known as the Maximato, but his hand-picked presidential candidate, Lázaro Cárdenas, won a power struggle with Calles, expelling him from the country. Cárdenas reorganized the party that Calles founded, creating formal sectors for interest groups, including one for the Mexican military. The reorganized party was named Party of the Mexican Revolution. In 1946, the party again changed its name to the Institutional Revolutionary Party. The party under its various names held the presidency uninterruptedly from 1929 to 2000, and again from 2012 to 2018 under President Enrique Peña Nieto. In 1988, Cuauhtémoc Cárdenas, son of president Lázaro Cárdenas, broke with the PRI, forming an independent leftist party, the Party of the Democratic Revolution, or PRD. It is not by chance that the party used the word &quot;Revolution&quot; in its name, challenging the Institutional Revolutionary Party&#x27;s appropriation of the Mexican Revolution.

The PRI was built as a big-tent corporatist party, to bring many political factions and interest groups (peasantry, labor, urban professionals) together, while excluding conservatives and Catholics, who eventually formed the opposition National Action Party in 1939. To incorporate the populace into the party, Presidents Calles and Cárdenas created an institutional structure to bring in popular, agrarian, labor, and popular sectors. Cárdenas reorganized the party in 1938, controversially bringing in the military as a sector. His successor President Avila Camacho reorganized the party into its final form, removing the military. This channeled both political patronage and limited political options of those sectors. This structure strengthened the power of the PRI and the government. Union and peasant leaders themselves gained power of patronage, and the discontent of the membership was channeled through them. If organizational leaders could not resolve a situation or gain benefits for their members, it was they who were blamed for being ineffective brokers. There was the appearance of union and peasant leagues&#x27; power, but the effective power was in the hands of the PRI. Under PRI leadership before the 2000 elections which saw the conservative National Action Party elected most power came from a Central Executive Committee, which budgeted all government projects. This in effect turned the legislature into a rubber stamp for the PRI&#x27;s leadership. The Party&#x27;s name is aimed at expressing the Mexican state&#x27;s incorporation of the idea of revolution, and especially a continuous, nationalist, anti-imperialist, Mexican revolution, into political discourse, and its legitimization as a popular, revolutionary party. According to historian Alan Knight, the memory of the revolution became a sort of &quot;secular religion&quot; that justified the Party&#x27;s rule.

===Social changes===
The Mexican Revolution brought about various social changes. First, the leaders of the Porfiriato lost their political power (but kept their economic power), and the middle class started to enter the public administration. &quot;At this moment the bureaucrat, the government officer, the leader were born […]&quot;. The army opened the sociopolitical system and the leaders in the Constitutionalist faction, particularly Álvaro Obregón and Plutarco Elías Calles, controlled the central government for more than a decade after the military phase ended in 1920. The creation of the PNR in 1929 brought generals into the political system, but as an institution, the army&#x27;s power as an interventionist force was tamed, most directly under Lázaro Cárdenas, who in 1936 incorporated the army as a sector in the new iteration of the party, the Revolutionary Party of Mexico (PRM). The old federal army had been destroyed during the revolution, and the new collection of revolutionary fighters were brought under state control.

Although the proportion between rural and urban population, and the number of workers and the middle class remained practically the same, the Mexican Revolution brought substantial qualitative changes to the cities. Big rural landlords moved to the city escaping from chaos in the rural areas. Some poor farmers also migrated to the cities, and they settled on neighborhoods where the Porfiriato elite used to live. The standard of living in the cities grew: it went from contributing to 42% of the national GDP to 60% by 1940. However, social inequality remained.

The greatest change occurred among the rural population. The agrarian reform allowed some revolutionary men to have access to land, (ejidos), that remained under control of the government. However, the structure of land ownership for &quot;ejidetarios&quot; did not promote rural development and impoverished the rural population even further. &quot;From 1934 to 1940 wages fell 25% on rural areas, while for city workers wages increased by 20%&quot;. &quot;There was a lack of food, there was not much to sell and even less to buy. […] the habit of sleeping in the floor remains, […] diet is limited to beans, tortilla, and chili pepper; clothing is poor&quot;. Peasants temporarily migrated to other regions to work in the production of certain crops where they were frequently exploited, abused, and suffered from various diseases. Others decided to migrate to the United States.

A modern legacy of revolution in the rural sphere is the Chiapas insurgency of the 1990s, taking its name from Emiliano Zapata, the Zapatista Army of National Liberation (). The neo-Zapatista revolt began in Chiapas, which was very reliant and supportive of the revolutionary reforms, especially the ejido system, which it had pioneered before Cárdenas took power. Most revolutionary gains were reversed in the early 1990s by President Salinas, who began moving away from the agrarian policies of the late post revolution period in favor of modern capitalism. This culminated in the dismantling of the ejido system in Chiapas, removing many landless peasants&#x27; hope of achieving access to land. Calling to Mexico&#x27;s revolutionary heritage, the EZLN draws heavily on early revolutionary rhetoric. It is inspired by many of Zapata&#x27;s policies, including a call for decentralized local rule.

===Reaction of Mexican Americans===
While the war was raging in Mexico, Mexicans and Mexican Americans  living in the United States had a multitude of reaction and responses to the war. These responses were not unified, however, as class, race, regional origins, and political ideologies contributed to a large amount of different reactions from the Mexican diaspora in the United States. Furthermore, not all Mexicans had the same citizenship status, with some being immigrants, refugees, exiles, or people whose family had lived in the south-western states from Texas to California since before the Mexican–American War. Within Mexicans and Mexican Americans, there was a wide political spectrum present, from extreme anarchists, to conservative counterrevolutionaries. Some of these groups included Tejano Progressives who supported the revolution and actively helped out by raising awareness to social justice, and Border Anarchists who were a more radical group that participated in violence.

===Memory and myth of the Revolution===
The violence of the Revolution is a powerful memory. Mexican survivors of the Revolution desired a lasting peace and were willing to accept a level of &quot;political deficiencies&quot; to maintain peace and stability. The memory of the revolution was used as justification for the [Institutional Revolutionary] party&#x27;s policies with regard to economic nationalism, educational policies, labour policies, and land reform. Mexico commemorates the Revolution in monuments, statues, school textbooks, naming of cities, neighborhoods, and streets, images on peso notes and coins.

==See also==

* United States involvement in the Mexican Revolution
* Mexican Border War (1910–1919)
* Military history of Mexico
* List of factions in the Mexican Revolution
* List of wars involving Mexico
* List of Mexican Revolution and Cristero War films
* Partido Revolucionario Institucional
* Sonora in the Mexican Revolution
* Bourgeois revolution

==References==
:&quot;Many portions of this article are translations of excerpts from the article Revolución Mexicana in the Spanish Wikipedia.&quot;

===Bibliography===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==Further reading==
There is a huge bibliography of works in Spanish on the Mexican Revolution. Below are works in English, some of which have been translated from Spanish. Some of the works in English have been translated to Spanish.

===Mexican Revolution – general histories===

* Brenner, Anita. &quot;The Wind that Swept Mexico&quot;. New Edition. Austin, TX: University of Texas Press, 1984.
* Cumberland, Charles C. &quot;Mexican Revolution: Genesis under Madero&quot;. Austin, TX: University of Texas Press, 1952.
* Cumberland, Charles C. &quot;Mexican Revolution: The Constitutionalist Years&quot;. Austin, T: University of Texas Press, 1972.
* Gilly, A. &quot;The Mexican Revolution&quot;. London, 1983. Translated from Spanish.
* Gonzales, Michael J. &quot;The Mexican Revolution: 1910–1940&quot;. Albuquerque, NM: University of New Mexico Press, 2002.
* Hart, John Mason. &quot;Revolutionary Mexico: The Coming and Process of the Mexican Revolution&quot;. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1987.
* Joseph, Gilbert M. and Jűrgen Buchanau. &quot;Mexico&#x27;s Once and Future Revolution: Social Upheaval and the Challenge of Rule since the Late Nineteenth Century&quot;. Durham: Duke University Press 2013.
* Krauze, Enrique. &quot;Mexico: Biography of Power&quot;. New York: HarperCollins, 1997. Translated from Spanish.
* Niemeyer, Victor E. &quot;Revolution at Querétaro: The Mexican Constitutional Convention of 1916–1917&quot;. Austin: University of Texas Press, 1974.
* Quirk, Robert E. &quot;The Mexican Revolution, 1914–1915: The Convention of Aguascalientes&quot;. New York: The Citadel Press, 1981.
* Quirk, Robert E. &quot;The Mexican Revolution and the Catholic Church 1910–1919&quot;. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1973
* Ruiz, Ramón Eduardo. &quot;The Great Rebellion: Mexico, 1905–1924&quot;. New York: Norton, 1980. 
* Tutino, John. &quot;From Insurrection to Revolution&quot;. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1985.
* Wasserman, Mark. &quot;The Mexican Revolution: A Brief History with Documents&quot;. (Bedford Cultural Editions Series) first edition, 2012.
* Womack, John, Jr. &quot;The Mexican Revolution&quot; in &quot;The Cambridge History of Latin America&quot;, vol. 5, ed. Leslie Bethell. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986.
===Biography and social history===

* Baldwin, Deborah J. &quot;Protestants and the Mexican Revolution: Missionaries, Ministers, and Social Change&quot;. Urbana: University of Illinois Press 1990.
* Beezley, William H. &quot;Insurgent Governor: Abraham González and the Mexican Revolution in Chihuahua&quot;. Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press, 1973.
* Brunk, Samuel. &quot;Emiliano Zapata: Revolution and Betrayal in Mexico&quot;. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press 1995.
* Buchenau, Jürgen, &quot;Plutarco Elías Calles and the Mexican Revolution&quot;. Lanham MD: Rowman and Littlefied 2007.
* Buchenau, Jürgen. &quot;The Last Caudillo: Alvaro Obregón and the Mexican Revolution&quot;. Malden MA: Wiley-Blackwell 2011.
* Cockcroft, James D. &quot;Intellectual Precursors of the Mexican Revolution&quot;. Austin: University of Texas Press 1968.
* Fisher, Lillian Estelle. &quot;The Influence of the Present Mexican Revolution upon the Status of Mexican Women,&quot; Hispanic American Historical Review, Vol. 22, No. 1 (Feb. 1942), pp. 211–228.
* Garner, Paul. &quot;Porfirio Díaz&quot;. New York: Pearson 2001.
* Guzmán, Martín Luis. &quot;Memoirs of Pancho Villa&quot;. Translated by Virginia H. Taylor. Austin: University of Texas Press 1966.
* Hall, Linda. &quot;Alvaro Obregón, Power, and Revolution in Mexico, 1911–1920&quot;. College Station: Texas A&amp;M Press 1981.
* Henderson, Peter V. N. &quot;In the Absence of Don Porfirio: Francisco León de la Barra and the Mexican Revolution&quot;. Wilmington, DE: Scholarly Resources, 2000
* Lomnitz, Claudio. &quot;The Return of Comrade Ricardo Flores Magón&quot;. Brooklyn NY: Zone Books 2014.
* Lucas, Jeffrey Kent. &quot;The Rightward Drift of Mexico&#x27;s Former Revolutionaries: The Case of Antonio Díaz Soto y Gama&quot;. Lewiston, New York: Edwin Mellen Press, 2010.
* McCaa, Robert. &quot;Missing millions: The demographic costs of the Mexican Revolution.&quot; &quot;Mexican Studies&quot; 19.2 (2003): 367–400. online
* Macias, Anna. &quot;Women and the Mexican Revolution, 1910–1920&quot;. &quot;The Americas&quot;, 37:1 (Jul. 1980), 53–82.
* Meyer, Michael. &quot;Mexican Rebel: Pascual Orozco and the Mexican Revolution, 1910–1915&quot;. Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press, 1967.
* Poniatowska, Elena. &quot;Las Soldaderas: Women of the Mexican Revolution&quot;. Texas: Cinco Puntos Press; First Edition, November 2006
* Reséndez, Andrés. &quot;Battleground Women: Soldaderas and Female Soldiers in the Mexican Revolution.&quot; &quot;The Americas&quot; 51, 4 (April 1995).
* Ross, Stanley R. &quot;Francisco I. Madero: Apostle of Democracy&quot;. New York: Columbia University Press 1955.
* Richmond, Douglas W. &quot;Venustiano Carranza&#x27;s Nationalist Struggle: 1893–1920&quot;. Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press, 1983.
* Smith, Stephanie J. &quot;Gender and the Mexican Revolution: Yucatán Women and the Realities of Patriarchy&quot;. North Carolina: University of North Carolina Press, 2009
* Womack, John, Jr. &quot;Zapata and the Mexican Revolution&quot;. New York: Vintage Press 1970.
===Regional histories===

* Benjamin, Thomas and Mark Wasserman, eds. &quot;Provinces of the Revolution&quot;. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1990.
* Blaisdell, Lowell. &quot;The Desert Revolution, Baja California 1911&quot;. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1962. 
* Brading, D. A., ed. &quot;Caudillo and Peasant in the Mexican Revolution&quot;. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1980.
* Buchenau, Jürgen and William H. Beezley, eds. &quot;State Governors in the Mexican Revolution, 1910–1952&quot;. Lanham MD: Rowman and Littlefield 2009. 
* Joseph, Gilbert. &quot;Revolution from Without: Yucatán, Mexico, and the United States, 1880–1924&quot;. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982.
* Harris, Charles H. III. &quot;The Secret War in El Paso: Mexican Revolutionary Intrigue, 1906–1920&quot;. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 2009.
* Jacobs, Ian. &quot;Ranchero Revolt: The Mexican Revolution in Guerrero&quot;. Austin: University of Texas Press, 1983.
* LaFrance, David G. &quot;The Mexican Revolution in Puebla, 1908–1913: The Maderista Movement and Failure of Liberal Reform&quot;. Wilmington, DE: Scholarly Resources, 1989.
* Lear, John. &quot;Workers, Neighbors, and Citizens: The Revolution in Mexico City&quot;. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press 2001.
* Snodgrass, Michael. &quot;Deference and Defiance in Monterrey: Workers, Paternalism, and Revolution in Mexico, 1890–1950&quot;. Cambridge University Press, 2003.
* Wasserman, Robert. &quot;Capitalists, Caciques, and Revolution: The Native Elites and Foreign Enterprise in Chihuahua, Mexico, 1854–1911&quot;. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1984.
===International dimensions===

* Clendenin, Clarence C. &quot;The United States and Pancho Villa: A study in unconventional diplomacy&quot;. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1981.
* Frank, Lucas N. &quot;Playing with Fire: Woodrow Wilson, Self‐Determination, Democracy, and Revolution in Mexico.&quot; &quot;Historian&quot; 76.1 (2014): 71–96. online
* Gilderhus, M. T. &quot;Diplomacy and Revolution: U.S.-Mexican Relations under Wilson and Carranza&quot;. Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1977.
* Grieb, K. J. &quot;The United States and Huerta&quot;. Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press, 1969.
* Haley, P. E. &quot;Revolution and Intervention: The diplomacy of Taft and Wilson with Mexico, 1910–1917&quot;. Cambridge, 1970.
* Hart, John Mason. &quot;Empire and Revolution: The Americans in Mexico since the Civil War&quot;. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 2002.
* Katz, Friedrich. &quot;The Secret War in Mexico: Europe, the United States, and the Mexican Revolution&quot;. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1981.
* Meyer, Lorenzo. &quot;The Mexican Revolution and the Anglo-Saxon Powers&quot;. LaJolla: Center for U.S.-Mexico Studies. University of California San Diego, 1985.
* Quirk, Robert E. &quot;An Affair of Honor: Woodrow Wilson and the Occupation of Veracruz&quot;. Louisville: University of Kentucky Press 1962.
* Rinke, Stefan, Michael Wildt (eds.): &quot;Revolutions and Counter-Revolutions. 1917 and its Aftermath from a Global Perspective&quot;. Campus 2017.
* Smith, Robert Freeman. &quot;The United States and Revolutionary Nationalism in Mexico 1916–1932&quot;. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1972.
* Teitelbaum, Louis M. &quot;Woodrow Wilson and the Mexican Revolution&quot;. New York: Exposition Press, 1967.
===Memory and cultural dimensions===

* Benjamin, Thomas. &quot;La Revolución: Mexico&#x27;s Great Revolution as Memory, Myth, and History&quot;. Austin: University of Texas Press, 2000.
* Brunk, Samuel. &quot;The Posthumous Career of Emiliano Zapata: Myth, Memory, and Mexico&#x27;s Twentieth Century&quot;. Austin: University of Texas Press, 2008.
* Buchenau, Jürgen. &quot;The Arm and Body of a Revolution: Remembering Mexico&#x27;s Last Caudillo, Álvaro Obregón&quot; in Lyman L. Johnson, ed. &quot;Body Politics: Death, Dismemberment, and Memory in Latin America&quot;. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 2004, pp. 179–207
* Foster, David, W., ed. &quot;Mexican Literature: A History&quot;. Austin: University of Texas Press, 1994.
* Hoy, Terry. &quot;Octavio Paz: The Search for Mexican Identity&quot;. &quot;The Review of Politics&quot; 44:3 (July 1982), 370–385.
* Gonzales, Michael J. &quot;Imagining Mexico in 1921: Visions of the Revolutionary State and Society in the Centennial Celebration in Mexico City&quot;, &quot;Mexican Studies/Estudios Mexicanos&quot; vol. 25. No 2, summer 2009, pp. 247–270.
* Herrera Sobek, María, &quot;The Mexican Corrido: A Feminist Analysis&quot;. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1990.
* Oles, James, ed. &quot;South of the Border, Mexico in the American Imagination, 1914–1947&quot;. New Haven: Yale University Art Gallery, 1993.
* O&#x27;Malley, Ilene V. 1986. &quot;The Myth of the Revolution: Hero Cults and the Institutionalization of the Mexican State, 1920–1940&quot;. Westport: Greenwood Press
* Ross, Stanley, ed. &quot;Is the Mexican Revolution Dead?&quot;. Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1975.
* Rutherford, John D. &quot;Mexican society during the Revolution: a literary approach&quot;. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1971.
* Simmons, Merle. &quot;The Mexican corrido as a source of interpretive study of modern Mexico, 1900–1970&quot;. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1957.
* Vaughn, Mary K. &quot;Negotiating Revolutionary Culture: Mexico, 1930–1940&quot;. Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1997.
* Weinstock, Herbert. &quot;Carlos Chavez&quot;. &quot;The Musical Quarterly&quot; 22:4 (October 1936), 435–445.
===Visual culture: prints, painting, film, photography===

* Barajas, Rafael. &quot;Myth and Mitote: The Political Caricature of José Guadalupe Posada and Manuel Alfonso Manila&quot;. Mexico City: Fondo de Cultura Económica, 2009
* Britton, John A. &quot;Revolution and Ideology Images of the Mexican Revolution in the United States&quot;. Louisville: University Press of Kentucky, 1995.
* Coffey, Mary. &quot;How a Revolutionary Art Became Official Culture: Murals, Museums, and the Mexican State&quot;. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2012.
* Doremus, Anne T. &quot;Culture, Politics, and National Identity in Mexican Literature and Film, 1929–1952&quot;. New York: Peter Lang Publishing Inc., 2001.
* Flores, Tatiana. &quot;Mexico&#x27;s Revolutionary Avant-Gardes: From Estridentismo to ¡30–30!&quot;. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2013.
* Folgarait, Leonard. &quot;Mural Painting and Social Revolution in Mexico, 1920–1940&quot;. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998.
* Ittman, John, ed. &quot;Mexico and Modern Printmaking, A Revolution in the Graphic Arts, 1920 to 1950&quot;. Philadelphia: Philadelphia Museum of Art, 2006.
* Lear, John. (2017) &quot;Picturing the Proletariat: Artists and Labor in Revolutionary Mexico, 1908–1940&quot;. Austin: University of Texas Press.
* McCard, Victoria L. &quot;&quot;Soldaderas&quot; of the Mexican revolution&quot; (The Evolution of War and Its Representation in Literature and Film), &quot;West Virginia University Philological Papers&quot; 51 (2006), 43–51.
* Mora, Carl J., &quot;Mexican Cinema: Reflections of a Society 1896–2004&quot;. Berkeley: University of California Press, 3rd edition, 2005
* Mraz, John. &quot;Photographing the Mexican Revolution: Commitments, Testimonies, Icons&quot;. Austin: University of Texas Press 2012.
* Noble, Andrea, &quot;Photography and Memory in Mexico: Icons of Revolution&quot;. Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2010.
* Orellana, Margarita de, &quot;Filming Pancho Villa: How Hollywood Shaped the Mexican Revolution: North American Cinema and Mexico, 1911–1917&quot;. New York: Verso Books, 2007.
* Ortiz Monasterio, Pablo. &quot;Mexico: The Revolution and Beyond: Photographs by Agustín Victor Casasola, 1900–1940&quot;. New York: Aperture 2003.
* Pick, Zuzana M. &quot;Constructing the Image of the Mexican Revolution: Cinema and the Archive&quot;. Austin: University of Texas Press, 2010.
* Pineda, Franco, Adela. The Mexican Revolution on the World Stage: Intellectuals and Film in the Twentieth Century, SUNY Press, 2019. 
* &quot;¡Tierra y Libertad! Photographs of Mexico 1900–1935 from the Casasola Archive&quot;. Oxford: Museum of Modern Art, 1985. 
===Historiography===

* Bailey, D. M. &quot;Revisionism and the recent historiography of the Mexican Revolution.&quot; &quot;Hispanic American Historical Review&quot; 58#1 (1978), 62–79. online
* Bantjes, Adrien A. &quot;The Mexican Revolution&quot; in &quot;A Companion to Latin American History&quot;, Thomas Holloway, ed. London: Wiley-Blackwell 2011, 330–346. 
* Brunk, Samuel. &quot;The Posthumous Career of Emiliano Zapata&quot;. (U of Texas Press 2008)
* Golland, David Hamilton. &quot;Recent Works on the Mexican Revolution.&quot; &quot;Estudios Interdisciplinarios de América Latina y el Caribe&quot; 16.1 (2014). online
* Knight, Alan. &quot;Mexican Revolution: Interpretations&quot; in &quot;Encyclopedia of Mexico&quot;, vol. 2, pp. 869–873. Chicago: Fitzroy Dearborn 1997.
* Knight, Alan. &quot;The Mexican Revolution: Bourgeois? Nationalist? Or Just a &#x27;Great Rebellion&#x27;?&quot; &quot;Bulletin of Latin American Research&quot; (1985) 4#2 pp. 1–37 in JSTOR
* Knight, Alan. &quot;Viewpoint: Revisionism and Revolution&quot;, &quot;Past and Present&quot; 134 (1992).
* McNamara, Patrick J. &quot;Rewriting Zapata: Generational Conflict on the Eve of the Mexican Revolution.&quot; &quot;Mexican Studies-Estudios Mexicanos&quot; 30.1 (2014): 122–149.
* Wasserman, Mark. &quot;You Can Teach An Old Revolutionary Historiography New Tricks: Regions, Popular Movements, Culture, and Gender in Mexico, 1820–1940&quot;, &quot;Latin American Research Review&quot; (2008) 43#2 260–271 in Project MUSE
* Womack, John Jr. &quot;Mexican Revolution: Bibliographical Essay&quot; in &quot;Mexico Since Independence&quot;, Leslie Bethell, ed. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991, pp. 405–414.
===Primary sources===

* Angelini, Erin. &quot;The Bigger Truth About Mexico&quot;
* Bulnes, Francisco. &quot;The Whole Truth About Mexico: The Mexican Revolution and President Wilson&#x27;s Part Therein, as seen by a Cientifico&quot;. New York: M. Bulnes Book Company 1916.
* O&#x27;Shaunessy, Edith. &quot;A Diplomat&#x27;s Wife in Mexico&quot;. New York: Harper 1916.
* Reed, John. &quot;Insurgent México&quot;. New York: International Publishers, 1969.
* Wasserman, Mark. &quot;The Mexican Revolution: A Brief History with Documents&quot;. (Bedford Cultural Editions Series) first edition, 2012.
===Online===
* Brunk, Samuel. The Banditry of Zapatismo in the Mexican Revolution The American Historical Review. Washington: April 1996, Volume 101, Issue 2, Page 331.
* Brunk, Samuel. “‘The Sad Situation of Civilians and Soldiers’: The Banditry of Zapatismo in the Mexican Revolution.” &quot;The American Historical Review&quot; 101, no. 2 (1996): 331–53. &quot;The Sad Situation of Civilians and Soldiers&quot;: The Banditry of Zapatismo in the Mexican Revolution. 
* Brunk, Samuel. &quot;Zapata and the City Boys: In Search of a Piece of Revolution&quot;. Hispanic American Historical Review. Duke University Press, 1993.
* &quot;From Soldaderas to Comandantes&quot; Zapatista Direct Solidarity Committee. University of Texas.
* Gilbert, Dennis. &quot;Emiliano Zapata: Textbook Hero.&quot; Mexican Studies. Berkley: Winter 2003, Volume 19, Issue 1, Page 127.
* Hardman, John. &quot;Soldiers of Fortune&quot; in the Mexican Revolution . &quot;Postcards of the Mexican Revolution&quot;
* Merewether Charles, Collections Curator, Getty Research Institute, &quot;Mexico: From Empire to Revolution&quot;, January 2002.
* Rausch George Jr. &quot;The Exile and Death of Victoriano Huerta&quot;, The Hispanic American Historical Review, Vol. 42, No. 2, May 1963 pp. 133–151.
* Tuck, Jim. &quot;Zapata and the Intellectuals.&quot; Mexico Connect, 1996–2006.

==External links==
* Library of Congress – Hispanic Reading Room portal, Distant Neighbors: The U.S. and the Mexican Revolution
* Mexican Revolution – &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot;
* EDSITEment&#x27;s Spotlight: The Centennial of the Mexican Revolution, 1910–2010 from EDSITEment, &quot;The Best of the Humanities on the Web&quot;
* U.S. Library of Congress Country Study: Mexico
* Mexican Revolution of 1910 and Its Legacy, latinoartcommunity.org
* Stephanie Creed, Kelcie McLaughlin, Christina Miller, Vince Struble, Mexican Revolution 1910–1920 , Latin American Revolutions, course material for History 328, Truman State University (Missouri)
* Mexico: From Empire to Revolution, photographs and commentary on the site of the J. Paul Getty Trust
* Mexican Revolution, ca. 1910–1917 Photos and postcards in color and in black and white, some with manuscript letters, postmarks, and stamps from the collection at the Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library at Yale University
* Papers of E. K. Warren &amp; Sons, 1884–1973, ranchers in Mexico, Texas and New Mexico, held at Southwest Collection/Special Collections Library at Texas Tech University
* Mexican Revolution, in the &quot;Children in History&quot; website. This is an overview of the Revolution with a treatment of the impact on children.
* Mexico: Photographs, Manuscripts, and Imprints from the DeGolyer Library contains photographs related to the Mexican Revolution.
* Time line of the Mexican Revolution
* Elmer and Diane Powell Collection on Mexico and the Mexican Revolution from the DeGolyer Library, SMU.
* Collection: &quot;Era of the Mexican Revolution and the Mexican Muralist Movement&quot; from the University of Michigan Museum of Art</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q214426" start="4" end="22" title="Mexican Revolution" label="Mexican Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="82" end="88" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q2939552" start="238" end="250" title="Federal Army" label="Federal Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865323" start="273" end="291" title="Liberation Army of the South" label="revolutionary army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2317008" start="319" end="334" title="Mexican culture" label="Mexican culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440529" start="339" end="349" title="Federal government of Mexico" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164339" start="364" end="381" title="Constitutionalists in the Mexican Revolution" label="Constitutionalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2170072" start="447" end="469" title="Constitution of Mexico" label="Constitution of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q8465" start="618" end="627" title="civil war" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892540" start="767" end="787" title="United States involvement in the Mexican Revolution" label="the U.S. involvement"/>
<link wikidata="Q150688" start="942" end="955" title="Porfirio Díaz" label="Porfirio Díaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q10931" start="1035" end="1045" title="revolution" label="revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030779" start="1302" end="1309" title="Cananea strike" label="Cananea"/>
<link wikidata="Q9005176" start="1314" end="1324" title="Río Blanco strike" label="Río Blanco"/>
<link wikidata="Q216766" start="1366" end="1385" title="Francisco I. Madero" label="Francisco I. Madero"/>
<link wikidata="Q5828154" start="1409" end="1435" title="1910 Mexican general election" label="1910 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q263249" start="1513" end="1536" title="Plan of San Luis Potosí" label="Plan of San Luis Potosí"/>
<link wikidata="Q66117" start="1568" end="1575" title="Morelos" label="Morelos"/>
<link wikidata="Q41718" start="2123" end="2138" title="Emiliano Zapata" label="Emiliano Zapata"/>
<link wikidata="Q208128" start="2191" end="2206" title="agrarian reform" label="agrarian reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187198" start="2379" end="2419" title="Ten Tragic Days" label="staged a coup d&amp;#x27;etat in Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1826849" start="2455" end="2466" title="José María Pino Suárez" label="Pino Suárez"/>
<link wikidata="Q299168" start="2549" end="2566" title="Victoriano Huerta" label="Victoriano Huerta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929386" start="2714" end="2736" title="Constitutionalist Army" label="Constitutionalist Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q313122" start="2769" end="2788" title="Venustiano Carranza" label="Venustiano Carranza"/>
<link wikidata="Q192278" start="3130" end="3164" title="Pancho Villa" label="Francisco &amp;quot;Pancho&amp;quot; Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2170072" start="3278" end="3306" title="Constitution of Mexico" label="Mexican Constitution of 1917"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895489" start="3319" end="3342" title="Universal manhood suffrage" label="universal male suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q216920" start="3353" end="3363" title="secularism" label="secularism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915476" start="3365" end="3385" title="Labor rights" label="workers&amp;#x27; rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q555887" start="3387" end="3407" title="economic nationalism" label="economic nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4693764" start="3413" end="3424" title="Land reform in Mexico" label="land reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q682969" start="4219" end="4252" title="Institutional Revolutionary Party" label="Institutional Revolutionary Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3645480" start="4283" end="4312" title="2000 Mexican general election" label="presidential election of 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q190572" start="4416" end="4427" title="Vicente Fox" label="Vicente Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q150688" start="6229" end="6242" title="Porfirio Díaz" label="Porfirio Díaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755467" start="6359" end="6369" title="Porfiriato" label="Porfiriato"/>
<link wikidata="Q7200933" start="6393" end="6399" title="Plan of Tuxtepec" label="a coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q316210" start="6429" end="6454" title="Sebastián Lerdo de Tejada" label="Sebastián Lerdo de Tejada"/>
<link wikidata="Q380975" start="6522" end="6537" title="Manuel González Flores" label="Manuel González"/>
<link wikidata="Q917730" start="7407" end="7417" title="Hacienda" label="hacendados"/>
<link wikidata="Q161157" start="7592" end="7601" title="watchword" label="watchword"/>
<link wikidata="Q136120" start="8344" end="8352" title="henequen" label="henequen"/>
<link wikidata="Q845132" start="9750" end="9763" title="landed estate" label="landed estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q10968653" start="10243" end="10250" title="Banditry" label="bandits"/>
<link wikidata="Q952881" start="11067" end="11093" title="Second French intervention in Mexico" label="the war against the French"/>
<link wikidata="Q580750" start="11124" end="11131" title="draftee" label="draftee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394953" start="11882" end="11887" title="Félix Díaz (politician)" label="Félix"/>
<link wikidata="Q2159676" start="12289" end="12303" title="Bernardo Reyes" label="Bernardo Reyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q15282" start="12350" end="12360" title="Nuevo León" label="Nuevo León"/>
<link wikidata="Q2939552" start="12585" end="12597" title="Federal Army" label="Federal Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q182276" start="12661" end="12674" title="Benito Juárez" label="Benito Juárez"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501061" start="13408" end="13422" title="Telegraph line" label="Telegraph line"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14230" end="14265" title="Trade union#Mexico" label="industrial workers began organizing"/>
<link wikidata="Q66117" start="14619" end="14626" title="Morelos" label="Morelos"/>
<link wikidata="Q15809898" start="14816" end="14825" title="land consumption" label="land loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q613206" start="15404" end="15425" title="Mexican Liberal Party" label="Mexican Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q146948" start="15586" end="15606" title="Ricardo Flores Magón" label="Ricardo Flores Magón"/>
<link wikidata="Q2290535" start="15629" end="15636" title="Enrique Flores Magón" label="Enrique"/>
<link wikidata="Q971225" start="15641" end="15646" title="Jesús Flores Magón" label="Jesús"/>
<link wikidata="Q6700395" start="15665" end="15677" title="Luis Cabrera Lobato" label="Luis Cabrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q506713" start="15682" end="15706" title="Antonio Díaz Soto y Gama" label="Antonio Díaz Soto y Gama"/>
<link wikidata="Q732526" start="15776" end="15797" title="José Guadalupe Posada" label="José Guadalupe Posada"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199" start="15940" end="15949" title="Anarchism" label="anarchist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340533" start="16037" end="16054" title="Práxedis Guerrero" label="Práxedis Guerrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q5485590" start="16288" end="16304" title="Francisco Bulnes (politician)" label="Francisco Bulnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q216766" start="16442" end="16461" title="Francisco I. Madero" label="Francisco I. Madero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030779" start="16867" end="16881" title="Cananea strike" label="Cananea strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q9005176" start="17063" end="17101" title="Río Blanco strike" label="textile workers rioted in January 1907"/>
<link wikidata="Q2179073" start="17114" end="17124" title="Río Blanco, Veracruz" label="Río Blanco"/>
<link wikidata="Q13418006" start="17259" end="17272" title="company store" label="company store"/>
<link wikidata="Q5839185" start="17442" end="17464" title="William Cornell Greene" label="William Cornell Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q278032" start="17528" end="17543" title="Arizona Rangers" label="Arizona Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372429" start="18635" end="18647" title="Ramón Corral" label="Ramón Corral"/>
<link wikidata="Q6131924" start="18813" end="18827" title="James Creelman" label="James Creelman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7158311" start="18838" end="18861" title="Pearson&amp;#x27;s Magazine" label="Pearson&amp;#x27;s Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q684289" start="19290" end="19309" title="José Yves Limantour" label="José Yves Limantour"/>
<link wikidata="Q190044" start="19378" end="19390" title="Technocracy" label="technocratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q131015" start="19411" end="19421" title="Positivism" label="positivist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2159676" start="19481" end="19495" title="Bernardo Reyes" label="Bernardo Reyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q216766" start="20171" end="20190" title="Francisco I. Madero" label="Francisco I. Madero"/>
<link wikidata="Q53079" start="20262" end="20270" title="Coahuila" label="Coahuila"/>
<link wikidata="Q5828154" start="20337" end="20350" title="1910 Mexican general election" label="next election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030763" start="20435" end="20458" title="Francisco Vázquez Gómez" label="Francisco Vázquez Gómez"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="20653" end="20671" title="San Antonio, Texas" label="San Antonio, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q263249" start="20881" end="20904" title="Plan de San Luis Potosí" label="Plan de San Luis Potosí"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732074" start="21912" end="21929" title="Gustavo A. Madero" label="Gustavo A. Madero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1795731" start="21985" end="22002" title="Sherburne Hopkins" label="Sherburne Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q375791" start="22209" end="22221" title="Standard Oil" label="Standard Oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q263249" start="22447" end="22470" title="Plan de San Luis Potosí" label="Plan de San Luis Potosí"/>
<link wikidata="Q208128" start="22613" end="22624" title="land reform" label="land reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722826" start="22946" end="22960" title="Pascual Orozco" label="Pascual Orozco"/>
<link wikidata="Q192278" start="22962" end="22974" title="Pancho Villa" label="Pancho Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q41718" start="22976" end="22991" title="Emiliano Zapata" label="Emiliano Zapata"/>
<link wikidata="Q313122" start="22997" end="23016" title="Venustiano Carranza" label="Venustiano Carranza"/>
<link wikidata="Q2104242" start="23087" end="23103" title="Abraham González (governor)" label="Abraham González"/>
<link wikidata="Q199440" start="23215" end="23223" title="Mexicali" label="Mexicali"/>
<link wikidata="Q61302" start="23228" end="23242" title="Chihuahua, Chihuahua" label="Chihuahua City"/>
<link wikidata="Q16562" start="23423" end="23430" title="El Paso" label="El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q160636" start="23464" end="23474" title="Rio Grande" label="Rio Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q9067174" start="23544" end="23571" title="Magonista rebellion of 1911" label="Magonista rebellion of 1911"/>
<link wikidata="Q2939552" start="23644" end="23656" title="Federal Army" label="Federal Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298181" start="24346" end="24369" title="Treaty of Ciudad Juárez" label="Treaty of Ciudad Juárez"/>
<link wikidata="Q365409" start="24567" end="24593" title="Francisco León de la Barra" label="Francisco León de la Barra"/>
<link wikidata="Q365409" start="24968" end="24994" title="Francisco León de la Barra" label="Francisco León de la Barra"/>
<link wikidata="Q215821" start="25291" end="25306" title="Paul von Hintze" label="Paul von Hintze"/>
<link wikidata="Q41718" start="25763" end="25778" title="Emiliano Zapata" label="Emiliano Zapata"/>
<link wikidata="Q299168" start="26833" end="26850" title="Victoriano Huerta" label="Victoriano Huerta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5828124" start="27123" end="27140" title="1911 Mexican general election" label="the 1911 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298181" start="27925" end="27948" title="Treaty of Ciudad Juárez" label="Treaty of Ciudad Juárez"/>
<link wikidata="Q192278" start="28390" end="28402" title="Pancho Villa" label="Pancho Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q41718" start="28901" end="28916" title="Emiliano Zapata" label="Emiliano Zapata"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722826" start="28932" end="28946" title="Pascual Orozco" label="Pascual Orozco"/>
<link wikidata="Q188993" start="29463" end="29482" title="anarcho-syndicalist" label="anarcho-syndicalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q506713" start="29544" end="29568" title="Antonio Díaz Soto y Gama" label="Antonio Díaz Soto y Gama"/>
<link wikidata="Q299168" start="29986" end="30003" title="Victoriano Huerta" label="Victoriano Huerta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009194" start="30153" end="30181" title="Mexican Constitution of 1857" label="Mexican Constitution of 1857"/>
<link wikidata="Q979079" start="31101" end="31126" title="Catholic Church in Mexico" label="Catholic Church in Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722826" start="31710" end="31724" title="Pascual Orozco" label="Pascual Orozco"/>
<link wikidata="Q41718" start="31784" end="31799" title="Emiliano Zapata" label="Emiliano Zapata"/>
<link wikidata="Q2235212" start="31804" end="31826" title="Andrés Molina Enríquez" label="Andrés Molina Enríquez"/>
<link wikidata="Q208128" start="31852" end="31863" title="land reform" label="land reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781472" start="32185" end="32198" title="Plan de Ayala" label="Plan de Ayala"/>
<link wikidata="Q66117" start="32309" end="32316" title="Morelos" label="Morelos"/>
<link wikidata="Q313122" start="32543" end="32562" title="Venustiano Carranza" label="Venustiano Carranza"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722826" start="32608" end="32622" title="Pascual Orozco" label="Pascual Orozco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2104242" start="32806" end="32822" title="Abraham González (governor)" label="Abraham González"/>
<link wikidata="Q299168" start="33565" end="33582" title="Victoriano Huerta" label="Victoriano Huerta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2159676" start="33901" end="33915" title="Bernardo Reyes" label="Bernardo Reyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q192278" start="34293" end="34305" title="Pancho Villa" label="Pancho Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2159676" start="34997" end="35011" title="Bernardo Reyes" label="Bernardo Reyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394953" start="35027" end="35037" title="Félix Díaz (politician)" label="Félix Díaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187198" start="35306" end="35321" title="Ten Tragic Days" label="Ten Tragic Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q2126571" start="37038" end="37055" title="Henry Lane Wilson" label="Henry Lane Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q10343441" start="37154" end="37173" title="Pact of the Embassy" label="Pact of the Embassy"/>
<link wikidata="Q84848" start="37675" end="37689" title="Friedrich Katz" label="Friedrich Katz"/>
<link wikidata="Q313122" start="39180" end="39199" title="Venustiano Carranza" label="Venustiano Carranza"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562974" start="39212" end="39226" title="Pablo González Garza" label="Pablo González"/>
<link wikidata="Q2104242" start="39320" end="39336" title="Abraham González (governor)" label="Abraham González"/>
<link wikidata="Q9282520" start="39338" end="39359" title="Governor of Chihuahua" label="Governor of Chihuahua"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213137" start="39389" end="39406" title="Plan of Guadalupe" label="Plan of Guadalupe"/>
<link wikidata="Q217498" start="39692" end="39706" title="Alvaro Obregón" label="Alvaro Obregón"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929386" start="39860" end="39882" title="Constitutionalist Army" label="Constitutionalist Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q192278" start="40050" end="40062" title="Pancho Villa" label="Pancho Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q41718" start="40218" end="40233" title="Emiliano Zapata" label="Emiliano Zapata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781472" start="40268" end="40281" title="Plan of Ayala" label="Plan of Ayala"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="41758" end="41772" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722826" start="42134" end="42148" title="Pascual Orozco" label="Pascual Orozco"/>
<link wikidata="Q10343441" start="42346" end="42365" title="Pact of the Embassy" label="Pact of the Embassy"/>
<link wikidata="Q971225" start="42417" end="42435" title="Jesús Flores Magón" label="Jesús Flores Magón"/>
<link wikidata="Q2159676" start="42459" end="42473" title="Bernardo Reyes" label="Bernardo Reyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394953" start="42489" end="42499" title="Félix Díaz (politician)" label="Félix Díaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2235212" start="43224" end="43246" title="Andrés Molina Enríquez" label="Andrés Molina Enríquez"/>
<link wikidata="Q4693764" start="43320" end="43341" title="land reform in Mexico" label="land reform in Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q35648" start="43833" end="43837" title="William Howard Taft" label="Taft"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="43929" end="43943" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2126571" start="43983" end="44000" title="Henry Lane Wilson" label="Henry Lane Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q885133" start="44213" end="44222" title="John Lind (politician)" label="John Lind"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316711" start="46995" end="47029" title="United States occupation of Veracruz" label="occupation of the port of Veracruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q207935" start="47612" end="47624" title="Chilpancingo" label="Chilpancingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q81398" start="47727" end="47735" title="Acapulco" label="Acapulco"/>
<link wikidata="Q607167" start="47737" end="47743" title="Iguala" label="Iguala"/>
<link wikidata="Q990095" start="47745" end="47750" title="Taxco" label="Taxco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311271" start="47756" end="47777" title="Buenavista de Cuellar" label="Buenavista de Cuellar"/>
<link wikidata="Q66117" start="47818" end="47825" title="Morelos" label="Morelos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971351" start="48123" end="48130" title="Ojinaga" label="Ojinaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q707110" start="48183" end="48193" title="Fort Bliss" label="Fort Bliss"/>
<link wikidata="Q386991" start="48249" end="48256" title="Torreón" label="Torreón"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449386" start="48482" end="48507" title="San Pedro de las Colonias" label="San Pedro de las Colonias"/>
<link wikidata="Q53077" start="49180" end="49188" title="Saltillo" label="Saltillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q502023" start="49606" end="49619" title="Coatzacoalcos" label="Puerto México"/>
<link wikidata="Q2939552" start="50267" end="50279" title="Federal Army" label="Federal Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562974" start="51090" end="51104" title="Pablo González Garza" label="Pablo González"/>
<link wikidata="Q109927975" start="51122" end="51137" title="Pact of Torreon" label="Pact of Torreón"/>
<link wikidata="Q3689657" start="51537" end="51565" title="Convention of Aguascalientes" label="Convention of Aguascalientes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428692" start="51617" end="51651" title="factions in the Mexican Revolution" label="factions in the Mexican Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q192278" start="52572" end="52584" title="Pancho Villa" label="Pancho Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q41718" start="52589" end="52604" title="Emiliano Zapata" label="Emiliano Zapata"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001442" start="52990" end="53007" title="Eulalio Gutiérrez" label="Eulalio Gutiérrez"/>
<link wikidata="Q217498" start="53270" end="53284" title="Álvaro Obregón" label="Álvaro Obregón"/>
<link wikidata="Q7023695" start="55467" end="55497" title="Niagara Falls peace conference" label="Niagara Falls peace conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q8244123" start="55728" end="55744" title="Battle of Celaya" label="Battle of Celaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2488483" start="56349" end="56408" title="Battle of Columbus (1916)" label="elements of Villa&amp;#x27;s forces raided Columbus, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1926257" start="56444" end="56475" title="Pancho Villa Expedition" label="to launch a punitive expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562974" start="58341" end="58355" title="Pablo González Garza" label="Pablo González"/>
<link wikidata="Q2247374" start="58948" end="58962" title="Felipe Angeles" label="Felipe Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2939552" start="58992" end="59004" title="Federal Army" label="Federal Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q315066" start="59617" end="59638" title="Plutarco Elías Calles" label="Plutarco Elías Calles"/>
<link wikidata="Q109927975" start="59713" end="59728" title="Pact of Torreon" label="Pact of Torreón"/>
<link wikidata="Q6700395" start="60050" end="60062" title="Luis Cabrera Lobato" label="Luis Cabrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q182276" start="60170" end="60183" title="Benito Juárez" label="Benito Juárez"/>
<link wikidata="Q8962509" start="61106" end="61122" title="Francisco Múgica" label="Francisco Múgica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2150484" start="61138" end="61155" title="Salvador Alvarado" label="Salvador Alvarado"/>
<link wikidata="Q60176" start="61260" end="61267" title="Yucatán (state)" label="Yucatán"/>
<link wikidata="Q6035621" start="61479" end="61494" title="Máximo Castillo" label="Maximo Castillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q938677" start="61678" end="61691" title="Luis Terrazas" label="Luis Terrazas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2488483" start="62250" end="62270" title="Battle of Columbus (1916)" label="Columbus, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q294931" start="62485" end="62508" title="William Randolph Hearst" label="William Randolph Hearst"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="62562" end="62576" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q272383" start="62590" end="62606" title="John J. Pershing" label="John J. Pershing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1926257" start="62716" end="62735" title="Pancho Villa Expedition" label="Punitive Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q655" start="62775" end="62784" title="Chihuahua (state)" label="Chihuahua"/>
<link wikidata="Q272383" start="63253" end="63269" title="John J. Pershing" label="John J. Pershing"/>
<link wikidata="Q574827" start="63611" end="63634" title="anti-Americanism" label="anti-American sentiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="63756" end="63767" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q154091" start="64007" end="64026" title="Zimmermann Telegram" label="Zimmermann Telegram"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="64371" end="64391" title="Mexican–American War" label="Mexican–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258685" start="64643" end="64653" title="La Reforma" label="Reform era"/>
<link wikidata="Q2229867" start="65582" end="65596" title="Red Battalions" label="Red Battalions"/>
<link wikidata="Q179885" start="66705" end="66713" title="Jacobins" label="Jacobins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2170072" start="66929" end="66957" title="Mexican Constitution of 1917" label="Mexican Constitution of 1917"/>
<link wikidata="Q979079" start="67202" end="67233" title="Roman Catholic Church in Mexico" label="Roman Catholic Church in Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444299" start="68000" end="68016" title="Frank Tannenbaum" label="Frank Tannenbaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316247" start="69104" end="69119" title="Luis N. Morones" label="Luis N. Morones"/>
<link wikidata="Q4885002" start="69125" end="69166" title="Regional Confederation of Mexican Workers" label="Regional Confederation of Mexican Workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562974" start="69453" end="69467" title="Pablo González Garza" label="Pablo González"/>
<link wikidata="Q2223835" start="69601" end="69617" title="Genovevo de la O" label="Genovevo de la O"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755467" start="69729" end="69739" title="Porfiriato" label="Porfiriato"/>
<link wikidata="Q263249" start="71330" end="71353" title="Plan de San Luis Potosí" label="Plan de San Luis Potosí"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781472" start="71581" end="71594" title="Plan of Ayala" label="Plan of Ayala"/>
<link wikidata="Q8244123" start="72148" end="72164" title="Battle of Celaya" label="Battle of Celaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q313122" start="72401" end="72420" title="Venustiano Carranza" label="Venustiano Carranza"/>
<link wikidata="Q188590" start="72939" end="72976" title="Zapatista Army of National Liberation" label="Zapatista Army of National Liberation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3176278" start="73151" end="73167" title="Ignacio Bonillas" label="Ignacio Bonillas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2182925" start="73197" end="73216" title="Plan of Agua Prieta" label="Plan of Agua Prieta"/>
<link wikidata="Q217498" start="73253" end="73267" title="Álvaro Obregón" label="Álvaro Obregón"/>
<link wikidata="Q315066" start="73269" end="73290" title="Plutarco Elías Calles" label="Plutarco Elías Calles"/>
<link wikidata="Q137865" start="73296" end="73315" title="Adolfo de la Huerta" label="Adolfo de la Huerta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389520" start="73760" end="73786" title="Monumento a la Revolución" label="Monument to the Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5828156" start="74370" end="74395" title="1920 Mexican general election" label="president in October 1920"/>
<link wikidata="Q315066" start="74447" end="74453" title="Plutarco Elías Calles" label="Calles"/>
<link wikidata="Q115328" start="74455" end="74464" title="Abelardo L. Rodríguez" label="Rodríguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q296718" start="74466" end="74474" title="Lázaro Cárdenas" label="Cárdenas"/>
<link wikidata="Q315626" start="74480" end="74493" title="Manuel Avila Camacho" label="Ávila Camacho"/>
<link wikidata="Q315615" start="74534" end="74547" title="Miguel Alemán Valdés" label="Miguel Alemán"/>
<link wikidata="" start="75305" end="75318" title=":es:Arnulfo Gómez" label="Arnulfo Gómez"/>
<link wikidata="" start="75323" end="75340" title=":es:Francisco R. Serrano" label="Francisco Serrano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052925" start="75433" end="75453" title="José Gonzalo Escobar" label="José Gonzalo Escobar"/>
<link wikidata="Q478004" start="75629" end="75641" title="anticlerical" label="anticlerical"/>
<link wikidata="Q279662" start="75779" end="75791" title="Cristero War" label="Cristero War"/>
<link wikidata="Q682969" start="76347" end="76380" title="Institutional Revolutionary Party" label="Institutional Revolutionary Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q315066" start="76567" end="76588" title="Plutarco Elías Calles" label="Plutarco Elías Calles"/>
<link wikidata="Q137865" start="76594" end="76613" title="Adolfo de la Huerta" label="Adolfo de la Huerta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3176278" start="76739" end="76755" title="Ignacio Bonillas" label="Ignacio Bonillas"/>
<link wikidata="" start="77245" end="77258" title=":es:Esteban Cantú" label="Esteban Cantú"/>
<link wikidata="Q115328" start="77324" end="77342" title="Abelardo Rodríguez" label="Abelardo Rodríguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q599898" start="77511" end="77519" title="caciques" label="caciques"/>
<link wikidata="Q2229867" start="78016" end="78030" title="Red Battalions" label="Red Battalions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091141" start="79556" end="79572" title="José Vasconcelos" label="José Vasconcelos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481963" start="80362" end="80377" title="Bucareli Treaty" label="Bucareli Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q478004" start="81008" end="81021" title="anti-clerical" label="anti-clerical"/>
<link wikidata="Q279662" start="81586" end="81598" title="Cristero War" label="Cristero War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="83138" end="83155" title="Francisco R. Serrano" label="Francisco Serrano"/>
<link wikidata="" start="83160" end="83176" title=":es:Arnulfo R. Gómez" label="Arnulfo R. Gómez"/>
<link wikidata="Q682969" start="83736" end="83767" title="National Revolutionary Party (Mexico)" label="Partido Nacional Revolucionario"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128892" start="83998" end="84006" title="Maximato" label="Maximato"/>
<link wikidata="Q380982" start="84035" end="84052" title="Emilio Portes Gil" label="Emilio Portes Gil"/>
<link wikidata="Q455683" start="84054" end="84073" title="Pascual Ortiz Rubio" label="Pascual Ortiz Rubio"/>
<link wikidata="Q115328" start="84079" end="84100" title="Abelardo L. Rodríguez" label="Abelardo L. Rodríguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665468" start="84454" end="84467" title="Dwight Morrow" label="Dwight Morrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q315626" start="84581" end="84601" title="Manuel Ávila Camacho" label="Manuel Ávila Camacho"/>
<link wikidata="Q296718" start="84623" end="84638" title="Lázaro Cárdenas" label="Lázaro Cárdenas"/>
<link wikidata="Q296718" start="84725" end="84740" title="Lázaro Cárdenas" label="Lázaro Cárdenas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2210237" start="85179" end="85196" title="Saturnino Cedillo" label="Saturnino Cedillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q315626" start="85506" end="85526" title="Manuel Ávila Camacho" label="Manuel Ávila Camacho"/>
<link wikidata="Q79861" start="85605" end="85614" title="Michoacan" label="Michoacan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4885002" start="86933" end="86937" title="CROM" label="CROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q741341" start="87041" end="87066" title="Vicente Lombardo Toledano" label="Vicente Lombardo Toledano"/>
<link wikidata="Q387282" start="87085" end="87117" title="Confederation of Mexican Workers" label="Confederation of Mexican Workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q163931" start="87266" end="87289" title="Communist International" label="Communist International"/>
<link wikidata="Q599898" start="87683" end="87691" title="caciques" label="caciques"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165988" start="88020" end="88032" title="debt peonage" label="debt peonage"/>
<link wikidata="Q16857885" start="88037" end="88051" title="company stores" label="company stores"/>
<link wikidata="Q52090" start="88932" end="88943" title="bourgeoisie" label="bourgeoisie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321919" start="89063" end="89069" title="ejidos" label="ejidos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2235212" start="89377" end="89399" title="Andrés Molina Enríquez" label="Andrés Molina Enríquez"/>
<link wikidata="Q396287" start="89892" end="89914" title="Encomienda" label="feudal hacienda system"/>
<link wikidata="Q191675" start="89932" end="89945" title="mixed economy" label="mixed economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981930" start="89957" end="89975" title="agrarian socialism" label="agrarian socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183163" start="89980" end="90001" title="industrial capitalism" label="industrial capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q315626" start="90399" end="90419" title="Manuel Avila Camacho" label="Manuel Avila Camacho"/>
<link wikidata="Q192886" start="90730" end="90741" title="corporatism" label="corporatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q657326" start="90771" end="90778" title="Estates of the realm" label="estates"/>
<link wikidata="Q682969" start="90851" end="90884" title="Institutional Revolutionary Party" label="Institutional Revolutionary Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="92720" end="92726" title="French Revolution" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q8729" start="92731" end="92749" title="Russian Revolution" label="Russian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309633" start="94031" end="94063" title="immigration to the United States" label="immigration to the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q18653444" start="94619" end="94638" title="Torreón massacre" label="massacre at Torreón"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144708" start="94670" end="94692" title="anti-Chinese sentiment" label="anti-Chinese sentiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114669" start="94981" end="95015" title="American-Mexican Claims Commission" label="American-Mexican Claims Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187198" start="95269" end="95273" title="Ten Tragic Days" label="days"/>
<link wikidata="Q41718" start="96308" end="96314" title="Emiliano Zapata" label="Zapata"/>
<link wikidata="Q313122" start="96324" end="96332" title="Venustiano Carranza" label="Carranza"/>
<link wikidata="Q192278" start="96342" end="96347" title="Pancho Villa" label="Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q217498" start="96361" end="96368" title="Álvaro Obregón" label="Obregón"/>
<link wikidata="Q5755529" start="99969" end="99992" title="Casa del Obrero Mundial" label="Casa del Obrero Mundial"/>
<link wikidata="Q16868" start="100614" end="100620" title="Laredo, Texas" label="Laredo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307911" start="100717" end="100724" title="Chicano" label="Chicano"/>
<link wikidata="Q45321045" start="100795" end="100801" title="Tejanos" label="Tejano"/>
<link wikidata="Q150688" start="101482" end="101495" title="Porfirio Diaz" label="Porfirio Díaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q191600" start="101758" end="101770" title="civil rights" label="civil rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q732526" start="102265" end="102286" title="José Guadalupe Posada" label="José Guadalupe Posada"/>
<link wikidata="Q506858" start="104103" end="104119" title="Photojournalism" label="photojournalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q6200287" start="104632" end="104642" title="Jimmy Hare" label="Jimmy Hare"/>
<link wikidata="Q28561002" start="104644" end="104659" title="Aultman Studio" label="Otis A. Aultman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="104892" end="104907" title="Jesús H. Abitía" label="Jesús H. Abitía"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="105514" end="105517" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049232" start="105538" end="105574" title="And Starring Pancho Villa as Himself" label="And Starring Pancho Villa as Himself"/>
<link wikidata="Q5575146" start="105651" end="105667" title="Casasola Archive" label="Casasola Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q4694662" start="105692" end="105708" title="Agustín Casasola" label="Agustín Casasola"/>
<link wikidata="" start="105761" end="105778" title=":es:Fototeca Nacional (México)" label="Fototeca Nacional"/>
<link wikidata="Q160750" start="105782" end="105789" title="Pachuca" label="Pachuca"/>
<link wikidata="Q266092" start="106132" end="106139" title="Dr. Atl" label="Dr. Atl"/>
<link wikidata="Q5755529" start="106282" end="106305" title="Casa del Obrero Mundial" label="Casa del Obrero Mundial"/>
<link wikidata="Q332041" start="106332" end="106352" title="José Clemente Orozco" label="José Clemente Orozco"/>
<link wikidata="Q315647" start="106357" end="106379" title="David Alfaro Siqueiros" label="David Alfaro Siqueiros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091141" start="106482" end="106498" title="José Vasconcelos" label="José Vasconcelos"/>
<link wikidata="Q938864" start="106699" end="106715" title="Mexican muralism" label="Mexican muralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q171128" start="106717" end="106729" title="Diego Rivera" label="Diego Rivera"/>
<link wikidata="Q869210" start="106901" end="106908" title="corrido" label="corrido"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298558" start="107114" end="107124" title="soldaderas" label="soldaderas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789003" start="107163" end="107173" title="La Adelita" label="La Adelita"/>
<link wikidata="Q118018" start="107196" end="107208" title="La Cucaracha" label="La Cucaracha"/>
<link wikidata="Q355676" start="107507" end="107521" title="Mariano Azuela" label="Mariano Azuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q3890709" start="107535" end="107547" title="The Underdogs (novel)" label="Los de Abajo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6937625" start="107723" end="107740" title="Nellie Campobello" label="Nellie Campobello"/>
<link wikidata="Q5047445" start="107802" end="107810" title="Cartucho" label="Cartucho"/>
<link wikidata="Q192278" start="107900" end="107909" title="Pancho Villa" label="Villistas"/>
<link wikidata="Q267209" start="108036" end="108054" title="Martín Luis Guzmán" label="Martín Luis Guzmán"/>
<link wikidata="Q154691" start="108224" end="108238" title="Carlos Fuentes" label="Carlos Fuentes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030203" start="108259" end="108284" title="The Death of Artemio Cruz" label="The Death of Artemio Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q50675" start="111454" end="111468" title="historiography" label="historiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q315626" start="112233" end="112253" title="Manuel Avila Camacho" label="Manuel Avila Camacho"/>
<link wikidata="Q4707081" start="112398" end="112409" title="Alan Knight (historian)" label="Alan Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q296718" start="112995" end="113010" title="Lázaro Cárdenas" label="Lázaro Cárdenas"/>
<link wikidata="Q108546976" start="113148" end="113182" title="Sonora in the Mexican Revolution" label="Sonorans in the Mexican Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q84848" start="113714" end="113728" title="Friedrich Katz" label="Friedrich Katz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5057652" start="113991" end="114056" title="Celebration of Mexican political anniversaries in 2010" label="Centennial of the Revolution and the Bicentennial of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509918" start="114167" end="114176" title="swan song" label="swan song"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755467" start="114184" end="114194" title="Porfiriato" label="Porfiriato"/>
<link wikidata="Q57269" start="114211" end="114226" title="Felipe Calderón" label="Felipe Calderón"/>
<link wikidata="Q851087" start="114259" end="114280" title="National Action Party (Mexico)" label="National Action Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q315633" start="116085" end="116110" title="Carlos Salinas de Gortari" label="Carlos Salinas de Gortari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389520" start="116611" end="116637" title="Monumento a la Revolución" label="Monument to the Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128892" start="116942" end="116950" title="Maximato" label="Maximato"/>
<link wikidata="Q315066" start="116954" end="116975" title="Plutarco Elías Calles" label="Plutarco Elías Calles"/>
<link wikidata="Q315613" start="117331" end="117350" title="José López Portillo" label="José López Portillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732074" start="117936" end="117953" title="Gustavo A. Madero" label="Gustavo A. Madero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348507" start="118081" end="118087" title="zócalo" label="zócalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q735042" start="118135" end="118152" title="Mexico City Metro" label="Mexico City Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3357008" start="118383" end="118400" title="Metro Pino Suárez" label="Metro Pino Suárez"/>
<link wikidata="Q216766" start="118414" end="118433" title="Francisco I. Madero" label="Francisco I. Madero"/>
<link wikidata="Q3356947" start="118556" end="118570" title="Metro Balderas" label="Metro Balderas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3357042" start="118682" end="118698" title="Metro Revolución" label="Metro Revolución"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389520" start="118731" end="118757" title="Monumento a la Revolución" label="Monument to the Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824782" start="118910" end="118922" title="Metro Zapata" label="Metro Zapata"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824558" start="119017" end="119041" title="Metro División del Norte" label="Metro División del Norte"/>
<link wikidata="Q192278" start="119069" end="119081" title="Pancho Villa" label="Pancho Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q8244123" start="119116" end="119132" title="Battle of Celaya" label="Battle of Celaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824617" start="119179" end="119200" title="Metro Lázaro Cárdenas" label="Metro Lázaro Cárdenas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824477" start="119219" end="119239" title="Metro Aquiles Serdán" label="Metro Aquiles Serdán"/>
<link wikidata="Q2514465" start="119282" end="119296" title="Aquiles Serdán" label="Aquiles Serdán"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824546" start="119307" end="119333" title="Metro Constitución de 1917" label="Metro Constitución de 1917"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147620" start="119349" end="119364" title="Metro Garibaldi" label="Metro Garibaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q539" start="119428" end="119446" title="Giuseppi Garibaldi" label="Giuseppi Garibaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q146948" start="119542" end="119562" title="Ricardo Flores Magón" label="Ricardo Flores Magón"/>
<link wikidata="Q601519" start="119584" end="119610" title="Metro Ricardo Flores Magón" label="Metro Ricardo Flores Magón"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824691" start="119645" end="119663" title="Metro Romero Rubio" label="Metro Romero Rubio"/>
<link wikidata="Q150688" start="119691" end="119704" title="Porfirio Díaz" label="Porfirio Díaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091796" start="119712" end="119722" title="Científico" label="Científico"/>
<link wikidata="Q5902535" start="119832" end="119862" title="Metro Hospital 20 de Noviembre" label="Metro Hospital 20 de Noviembre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824558" start="120109" end="120133" title="Metro División del Norte" label="Metro División del Norte"/>
<link wikidata="Q5741532" start="120448" end="120473" title="Hermila Galindo" label="Hermila Galindo de Topete"/>
<link wikidata="Q24568871" start="120737" end="120780" title="Historical Museum of the Mexican Revolution" label="Historical Museum of the Mexican Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789003" start="120807" end="120814" title="La Adelita" label="Adelita"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298558" start="120870" end="120879" title="soldadera" label="soldadera"/>
<link wikidata="Q4707081" start="121733" end="121744" title="Alan Knight (historian)" label="Alan Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q279662" start="123998" end="124010" title="Cristero War" label="Cristero War"/>
<link wikidata="Q315633" start="124427" end="124452" title="Carlos Salinas de Gortari" label="Carlos Salinas de Gortari"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824546" start="124510" end="124536" title="Metro Constitución de 1917" label="Metro Constitución de 1917"/>
<link wikidata="Q682969" start="124619" end="124652" title="Institutional Revolutionary Party" label="Institutional Revolutionary Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128892" start="125031" end="125039" title="Maximato" label="Maximato"/>
<link wikidata="Q296741" start="125587" end="125605" title="Enrique Peña Nieto" label="Enrique Peña Nieto"/>
<link wikidata="Q922837" start="125616" end="125635" title="Cuauhtémoc Cárdenas" label="Cuauhtémoc Cárdenas"/>
<link wikidata="Q767010" start="125733" end="125767" title="Party of the Democratic Revolution" label="Party of the Democratic Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q851087" start="126197" end="126218" title="National Action Party (Mexico)" label="National Action Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q208128" start="129536" end="129551" title="agrarian reform" label="agrarian reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321919" start="129608" end="129613" title="ejido" label="ejido"/>
<link wikidata="Q188590" start="130491" end="130528" title="Zapatista Army of National Liberation" label="Zapatista Army of National Liberation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309660" start="130537" end="130550" title="Neozapatismo" label="neo-Zapatista"/>
<link wikidata="Q60123" start="130567" end="130574" title="Chiapas" label="Chiapas"/>
<link wikidata="Q162719" start="130900" end="130917" title="neo-liberalism" label="modern capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="131346" end="131364" title="Mexican Americans " label="Mexican Americans "/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="131862" end="131882" title="Mexican–American War" label="Mexican–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892540" start="132898" end="132949" title="United States involvement in the Mexican Revolution" label="United States involvement in the Mexican Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2615472" start="132952" end="132982" title="Mexican Border War (1910–1919)" label="Mexican Border War (1910–1919)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6857611" start="132985" end="133011" title="Military history of Mexico" label="Military history of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428692" start="133014" end="133056" title="List of factions in the Mexican Revolution" label="List of factions in the Mexican Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3425213" start="133059" end="133088" title="List of wars involving Mexico" label="List of wars involving Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q124153832" start="133091" end="133140" title="List of Mexican Revolution and Cristero War films" label="List of Mexican Revolution and Cristero War films"/>
<link wikidata="Q682969" start="133143" end="133179" title="Partido Revolucionario Institucional" label="Partido Revolucionario Institucional"/>
<link wikidata="Q108546976" start="133182" end="133214" title="Sonora in the Mexican Revolution" label="Sonora in the Mexican Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q751967" start="133217" end="133237" title="Bourgeois revolution" label="Bourgeois revolution"/>
<link wikidata="" start="133337" end="133356" title=":es:Revolución Mexicana" label="Revolución Mexicana"/>
<link wikidata="Q528185" start="134668" end="134683" title="Enrique Krauze" label="Krauze, Enrique"/>
<link wikidata="Q1708210" start="135373" end="135399" title="Princeton University Press" label="Princeton University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q912887" start="135699" end="135725" title="Cambridge University Press" label="Cambridge University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551355" start="136055" end="136083" title="University of Nebraska Press" label="University of Nebraska Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q27927783" start="136597" end="136620" title="Lillian Estelle Fisher" label="Fisher, Lillian Estelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q15759585" start="136716" end="136751" title="Hispanic American Historical Review" label="Hispanic American Historical Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q261397" start="138004" end="138022" title="Elena Poniatowska" label="Poniatowska, Elena"/>
<link wikidata="Q4760258" start="138143" end="138159" title="Andrés Reséndez" label="Reséndez, Andrés"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080179" start="138380" end="138405" title="Columbia University Press" label="Columbia University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551355" start="138520" end="138548" title="University of Nebraska Press" label="University of Nebraska Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895937" start="138688" end="138722" title="University of North Carolina Press" label="University of North Carolina Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q9012491" start="138731" end="138748" title="John Womack" label="Womack, John, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q912887" start="139206" end="139232" title="Cambridge University Press" label="Cambridge University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997531" start="140656" end="140680" title="Cornell University Press" label="Cornell University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551355" start="141079" end="141107" title="University of Nebraska Press" label="University of Nebraska Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q19796567" start="141880" end="141893" title="Stefan Rinke" label="Rinke, Stefan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551345" start="144847" end="144875" title="University Press of Kentucky" label="University Press of Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q255147" start="145315" end="145336" title="Yale University Press" label="Yale University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q912887" start="145448" end="145474" title="Cambridge University Press" label="Cambridge University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q4005866" start="145763" end="145788" title="University of Texas Press" label="University of Texas Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q27816" start="146109" end="146139" title="University of California Press" label="University of California Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q4010248" start="146587" end="146598" title="Verso Books" label="Verso Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q4005866" start="146868" end="146893" title="University of Texas Press" label="University of Texas Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q55074756" start="147870" end="147892" title="Encyclopedia of Mexico" label="Encyclopedia of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q4707081" start="147955" end="147967" title="Alan Knight (historian)" label="Knight, Alan"/>
<link wikidata="Q912887" start="148823" end="148849" title="Cambridge University Press" label="Cambridge University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q5485590" start="148955" end="148972" title="Francisco Bulnes" label="Bulnes, Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q310800" start="149243" end="149253" title="John Reed (journalist)" label="Reed, John"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495870" start="152506" end="152542" title="University of Michigan Museum of Art" label="University of Michigan Museum of Art"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="145406" wikidata="Q7576017" url="?curid=145406" title="Spencer Churches">
<text>The Spencer Churches (less commonly called the Union Churches) are two African-American Christian denominations in the United States that resulted from a 1860s schism in the Union Church of Africans (also known as African Union Church). That denomination was founded by Peter Spencer, a freed slave, in Wilmington, Delaware in 1813.

== History ==
The Union American Methodist Episcopal Church was formed in 1865. The following year, a church in Maryland joined the African Union Church, and it was renamed as the African Union First Colored Methodist Protestant Church and Connection, known as the A.U.M.P. Church. 

In May 2012, these two denominations and three other black denominations (the African Methodist Episcopal Church, African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church, and Christian Methodist Episcopal Church) entered into full communion with each other and with the United Methodist Church, which had been predominantly white for much of the late 19th and 20th centuries. The churches had been negotiating such action for ten years, after the United Methodist Church had formally apologized for racial discrimination of the past.

In the early 19th century, some African Americans had founded independent denominations in order to have full authority in their own churches. The AME Church was founded in Philadelphia, the AME Zion Church in New York, and the African Union Church in Wilmington. After the American Civil War, the Christian Methodist Episcopal Church was founded in the South as a black congregation.

Before the American Civil War, the Methodist Episcopal Church had split into Northern and Southern denominations, dividing over the Northern churches&#x27; opposition to slavery. In the 20th century, those churches had reunited as the United Methodist Church.

These five denominations agreed to &quot;recognize each other’s churches, share sacraments, and affirm their clergy and ministries.&quot;

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7576017" start="4" end="20" title="Spencer Churches" label="Spencer Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q7576017" start="47" end="61" title="Spencer Churches" label="Union Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q879146" start="88" end="111" title="Christian denomination" label="Christian denominations"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="119" end="132" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q126287984" start="160" end="166" title="Schism (religion)" label="schism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7177049" start="270" end="283" title="Peter Spencer (religious leader)" label="Peter Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q174224" start="303" end="323" title="Wilmington, Delaware" label="Wilmington, Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885354" start="352" end="393" title="Union American Methodist Episcopal Church" label="Union American Methodist Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q4647424" start="514" end="584" title="A.U.M.P. Church" label="African Union First Colored Methodist Protestant Church and Connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q384121" start="696" end="730" title="African Methodist Episcopal Church" label="African Methodist Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q384125" start="732" end="771" title="African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church" label="African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081108" start="777" end="813" title="Christian Methodist Episcopal Church" label="Christian Methodist Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q649499" start="828" end="842" title="full communion" label="full communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q329646" start="872" end="895" title="United Methodist Church" label="United Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081108" start="1435" end="1471" title="Christian Methodist Episcopal Church" label="Christian Methodist Episcopal Church"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="145408" wikidata="Q2712069" url="?curid=145408" title="Sarek">
<text>Sarek is a fictional character in the &quot;Star Trek&quot; media franchise. He is a Vulcan astrophysicist, the Vulcan ambassador to the United Federation of Planets, and father of Spock. The character was originally played by Mark Lenard in the episode &quot;Journey to Babel&quot; in 1967. Lenard later voiced Sarek in the animated series, and appeared in Star Trek films and the series &quot;Star Trek: The Next Generation&quot;.

Actor Jonathan Simpson played a younger Sarek in a brief scene in &quot;Star Trek V: The Final Frontier&quot;, with voice-over provided by Lenard. Ben Cross portrayed Sarek in the 2009 &quot;Star Trek&quot; film. James Frain plays Sarek in the television series &quot;Star Trek: Discovery&quot;.

The character appears in the original &quot;Star Trek&quot; series, the animated series, five &quot;Star Trek&quot; films, two episodes of &quot;Star Trek: The Next Generation&quot;, &quot;Star Trek: Discovery&quot; and numerous &quot;Star Trek&quot; novels and comics.

==Character biography==

===&quot;Star Trek: The Original Series&quot;===
Sarek was born in 2165. He is the son of Skon of Vulcan and the grandson of Solkar (the first Vulcan ambassador to Earth). Sarek was married twice, and had two sons. Prior to his first marriage, he had a relationship with a Vulcan princess which produced Sarek&#x27;s first son Sybok, a character not developed until the fifth feature film in the late 1980s. Sarek later married Amanda Grayson, a native of the planet Earth, with whom he had Spock. After Amanda&#x27;s death, Sarek married Perrin, also human, who survived his death. Sarek and Perrin had no children together.

Sarek&#x27;s second son, Spock, entered Starfleet Academy. Sarek opposed the decision because he wanted Spock to enter the Vulcan Science Academy which he had arranged for years before and the two were estranged for 18 years. Following a mission on the &quot;Enterprise&quot; where Spock helped save Sarek&#x27;s life, father and son are reconciled in the episode &quot;Journey to Babel&quot;, with Mark Lenard portraying the first appearance of Sarek.

=== Animated series ===
Mark Lenard voiced Sarek in the &quot;Star Trek: The Animated Series&quot; episode &quot;Yesteryear&quot;. In this episode Spock must travel back in time to his childhood, and keep his younger self from dying and being replaced by an Andorian as First Officer of the &quot;Enterprise&quot;. Spock, posing as a relative, meets a younger version of Sarek.

=== TOS films ===
Mark Lenard portrayed Sarek in movies based on the original &quot;Star Trek&quot; series. In &quot;Star Trek III: The Search for Spock&quot; (1984), Sarek confronts James T. Kirk at his apartment, thinking that Spock placed his &quot;katra&quot;, or living essence, into Kirk&#x27;s mind (since Kirk was the last person to be with the dying Spock), and asking Kirk why he did not return Spock to Vulcan. Unknown to either Sarek or Kirk, Spock had actually placed his &quot;katra&quot; in the mind of his friend Leonard McCoy for safekeeping. Kirk later discovers this through the security tapes during the last moments of Spock&#x27;s life in his fight to save the &quot;Enterprise&quot; from Khan. Sarek asks Kirk to bring Spock&#x27;s body back along with his &quot;katra&quot; to Vulcan; Kirk promises to do so. The Genesis Device regenerates Spock&#x27;s body and restores his life; Kirk and his crew manage to get Spock off the planet and return him to his home planet of Vulcan. There, Sarek asks the priestess T&#x27;Lar to perform a &quot;fal-tor-pan&quot;, reuniting Spock&#x27;s mind and body. Sarek thanks Kirk for the rescue of Spock, which took place at the expense of the destruction of the &quot;Enterprise&quot; and the death of Kirk&#x27;s son. Kirk admitted if he did not try to save Spock, he would have faced a deeper guilt in his soul.

&quot;Star Trek IV: The Voyage Home&quot; (1986) begins with Kirk, Spock, and the rest of the &quot;Enterprise&quot; crew still in exile on Vulcan. Sarek travels to Earth to speak on behalf of Kirk (who is facing charges from the Klingon Empire), and is subsequently trapped on the planet when Earth is threatened by destruction by an alien probe. After Kirk and his crew return and save Earth, and are largely exonerated at their subsequent trial, Sarek has a private audience with his son. Sarek states that he is pleased with Spock, and admits that he was wrong in opposing Spock&#x27;s induction into Starfleet, praising his comrades as people of good character.

Actor Jonathan Simpson briefly played a younger Sarek during &quot;Star Trek V: The Final Frontier&quot; (1989), with a voice-over provided by Lenard. The scene is in reference to Spock&#x27;s birth and Sarek remarking he is &quot;so human.&quot;

Mark Lenard&#x27;s final filmed appearance in the role of Sarek was in &quot;Star Trek VI: The Undiscovered Country&quot; (1991). This film was recorded after, but released before, his last broadcast appearance in &quot;The Next Generation&quot;. It takes place in the time period of the original series, in the year 2293. Sarek is once again shown as a diplomat participating in the Khitomer Conference, the first diplomatic meeting between the Klingons and the Federation.

===&quot;Star Trek: The Next Generation&quot;===
Lenard made two appearances as the character in &quot;Star Trek: The Next Generation&quot;. In the first, in an episode named after him, Sarek suffers from Bendii syndrome, an incurable and terminal neurological degenerative illness that causes him to lose control of his emotions. For example, when Data and a quartet play Brahms&#x27; first sextet, second movement, he is moved to tears. Having established a mind meld with Captain Jean-Luc Picard, Sarek is able to continue with an important diplomatic mission, but his emotions are expressed through Picard, among them his deep love for Amanda, Spock, and his current human wife Perrin, causing Picard to almost go insane. His death from Bendii syndrome occurs in the first part of the &quot;TNG&quot; episode &quot;Unification&quot;.

=== &quot;Star Trek&quot; (2009) ===
Sarek, played by Ben Cross, appears in the &quot;Star Trek&quot; reboot (2009). Though respectful of Spock&#x27;s ability to make his own choices, Sarek clearly encourages him to maintain his logical Vulcan nature. Sarek maintains that he married Amanda because it was logical to do so, since as the Vulcan ambassador, it would of course fall upon Sarek to observe human behavior. Later, Sarek is on the board of the Vulcan Science Academy, and is disappointed to learn that his son has turned down admission in favor of joining Starfleet.

When the vengeful Romulan captain, Nero, makes clear his intention to destroy Vulcan, Spock arrives to transport Sarek, Amanda, and the rest of the Vulcan council to safety; however, Amanda is lost in the attempt. When Cadet Kirk provokes Spock to force him to relinquish command, it is only Sarek&#x27;s stern &quot;Spock!&quot; that calms the enraged half-Vulcan. When Spock leaves the bridge, Sarek is clearly displeased by the events and follows him. Sarek advises Spock that if he feels anger (at Vulcan&#x27;s destruction and Amanda&#x27;s death), then he should not try to hide it. Sarek also admits to his son: &quot;You once asked me why I married your mother... I married her because I loved her.&quot; Sarek affirms to his son that not all Vulcans are as emotionless as they appear to be; even Sarek is painfully grieved over the loss of his beloved wife. At this moment, father and son have reconciled as they grieve together over the losses of their world and loved ones, before Spock leaves to stop Nero from destroying Earth and to avenge his mother&#x27;s untimely death.

===&quot;Star Trek: Discovery&quot;===

James Frain played the role of Sarek in &quot;Star Trek: Discovery&quot;.

==Family relationships==
Spock&#x27;s ongoing conflict between emotion and logic is countered by his parents, Sarek and human Amanda Grayson, a seemingly loving and devoted couple. The character of Sarek and his relationship with Spock and Amanda have been explored in depth in amateur fiction, several authorized novels, and in the animated episode &quot;Yesteryear&quot;. Movies and episodes of &quot;Star Trek: The Next Generation&quot; have also added to background on these relationships. Spock and Sarek&#x27;s relationship is formal and respectful, but strained. Captain Jean-Luc Picard, who mind melded with Sarek before he died, also mind melds with Spock in order to share Sarek&#x27;s thoughts and feelings about his son. Little is known about Sarek&#x27;s relationship with his oldest son Sybok, but presumably it was a difficult one since Sybok rejected Vulcan ways and was banished from the planet.

Sarek&#x27;s adoptive daughter Michael Burnham was added in &quot;Star Trek: Discovery&quot;. Sarek in many ways is closer to Burnham because he shared part of his Katra with her. Still, when forced to choose between Spock and Burnham, Sarek favored his biological son. This is a central theme of the &quot;Discovery&quot; episode &quot;Lethe&quot;, in which Sarek attempts to have both of his children accepted to the Vulcan Expeditionary Group, but is told that only one could be chosen. Sarek ultimately chose Spock, who opted to join Starfleet instead, rendering Sarek&#x27;s decision futile and causing him to feel terrible guilt over having to make the choice (and over misleading Burnham about her application since he had originally told her that she was rejected).

==Mirror Universe==
The Mirror Universe counterpart of Sarek appeared in the &quot;Discovery&quot; episode &quot;The Wolf Inside&quot;, in which he is a member of the rebellion against the Terran Empire. (Like Spock&#x27;s mirror counterpart, this Sarek sports a Van Dyke beard.) He is revered as a prophet by the other rebels, due to his Vulcan mental abilities. Unlike the regular universe Sarek, this version never adopted Michael Burnham and has never met her before. When Burnham arrives at the rebel encampment and claims to want to assist the rebellion, the rebels assume she is her own mirror counterpart (who has orders to eliminate the rebels), but Sarek performs a mind meld and pronounces that she is telling the truth.

==Appearances==
Sarek appears in the following episodes and films:

; &quot;Star Trek: The Original Series&quot;
* &quot;Journey to Babel&quot;

; &quot;Star Trek: The Animated Series&quot;
* &quot;Yesteryear&quot;

; Star Trek films
* &quot;Star Trek III: The Search for Spock&quot;
* &quot;Star Trek IV: The Voyage Home&quot;
* &quot;Star Trek V: The Final Frontier&quot;
* &quot;Star Trek VI: The Undiscovered Country&quot;
* &quot;Star Trek&quot;

; &quot;Star Trek: The Next Generation&quot;
* &quot;Sarek&quot;
* &quot;Unification, Part I&quot;

; &quot;Star Trek: Discovery&quot;
* &quot;The Vulcan Hello&quot;
* &quot;Battle at the Binary Stars&quot;
* &quot;Lethe&quot;
* &quot;The Wolf Inside&quot; (mirror)
* &quot;The War Without, The War Within&quot;
* &quot;Will You Take My Hand?&quot;
* &quot;Light and Shadows&quot;

==Reception==
In 2009, IGN ranked Sarek as the 13th best character of &quot;Star Trek&quot; overall. In 2015, SyFy rated Sarek as among the top 21 most interesting supporting characters of &quot;Star Trek&quot;.

In 2016, ScreenRant rated Sarek as the 11th best character in &quot;Star Trek&quot; overall as presented in television series and films up to that time, highlighting the character&#x27;s relationship with his son Spock. They note how Sarek appears across multiple incarnations of &quot;Star Trek&quot;, and both Spock and Sarek try to understand each other and their own feelings.

In 2017, Den of Geek ranked Mark Lenard&#x27;s Sarek as the number one best guest acting performance on &quot;Star Trek: The Next Generation&quot;, for his performances in &quot;Sarek&quot; and &quot;Unification, Part I&quot;.

In 2018, CBR ranked Sarek the 5th best recurring character of all &quot;Star Trek&quot;, noting strong performances by Mark Lenard and multiple appearances across different films and shows.

==References==
==External links==


* Startrek.com article on Sarek </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2712069" start="0" end="5" title="Sarek" label="Sarek"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497384" start="85" end="91" title="Vulcan (Star Trek)" label="Vulcan"/>
<link wikidata="Q37547" start="92" end="106" title="astrophysicist" label="astrophysicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q121998" start="119" end="129" title="ambassador" label="ambassador"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110" start="137" end="165" title="United Federation of Planets" label="United Federation of Planets"/>
<link wikidata="Q16341" start="181" end="186" title="Spock" label="Spock"/>
<link wikidata="Q940971" start="227" end="238" title="Mark Lenard" label="Mark Lenard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251725" start="260" end="276" title="Journey to Babel" label="Journey to Babel"/>
<link wikidata="" start="325" end="340" title="Star Trek: The Animated Series" label="animated series"/>
<link wikidata="" start="395" end="425" title="Star Trek: The Next Generation" label="Star Trek: The Next Generation"/>
<link wikidata="" start="506" end="537" title="Star Trek V: The Final Frontier" label="Star Trek V: The Final Frontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146822" start="550" end="560" title="voice-over" label="voice-over"/>
<link wikidata="Q708256" start="581" end="590" title="Ben Cross" label="Ben Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q213081" start="625" end="634" title="Star Trek (2009 film)" label="Star Trek"/>
<link wikidata="Q535507" start="647" end="658" title="James Frain" label="James Frain"/>
<link wikidata="" start="702" end="722" title="Star Trek: Discovery" label="Star Trek: Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="" start="775" end="784" title="Star Trek: The Original Series" label="Star Trek"/>
<link wikidata="" start="803" end="818" title="Star Trek: The Animated Series" label="animated series"/>
<link wikidata="" start="876" end="906" title="Star Trek: The Next Generation" label="Star Trek: The Next Generation"/>
<link wikidata="" start="920" end="940" title="Star Trek: Discovery" label="Star Trek: Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341051" start="1354" end="1359" title="Sybok" label="Sybok"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1397" end="1415" title="Star Trek V: The Final Frontier" label="fifth feature film"/>
<link wikidata="Q6598240" start="1455" end="1469" title="Amanda Grayson" label="Amanda Grayson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16341" start="1679" end="1684" title="Spock" label="Spock"/>
<link wikidata="Q718644" start="1694" end="1711" title="Starfleet Academy" label="Starfleet Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q834003" start="1913" end="1923" title="USS Enterprise (NCC-1701)" label="Enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251725" start="2024" end="2040" title="Journey to Babel" label="Journey to Babel"/>
<link wikidata="Q940971" start="2053" end="2064" title="Mark Lenard" label="Mark Lenard"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2170" end="2200" title="Star Trek: The Animated Series" label="Star Trek: The Animated Series"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2221" end="2231" title="Yesteryear (Star Trek: The Animated Series)" label="Yesteryear"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2571" end="2580" title="Star Trek: The Original Series" label="Star Trek"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2604" end="2639" title="Star Trek III: The Search for Spock" label="Star Trek III: The Search for Spock"/>
<link wikidata="Q16311" start="2670" end="2683" title="James T. Kirk" label="James T. Kirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497384" start="2739" end="2744" title="Katra (Star Trek)" label="katra"/>
<link wikidata="Q16351" start="3016" end="3029" title="Leonard McCoy" label="Leonard McCoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6598240" start="3750" end="3765" title="David Marcus (Star Trek)" label="Kirk&amp;#x27;s son"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3869" end="3898" title="Star Trek IV: The Voyage Home" label="Star Trek IV: The Voyage Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q54259" start="4093" end="4107" title="Klingon Empire" label="Klingon Empire"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4598" end="4629" title="Star Trek V: The Final Frontier" label="Star Trek V: The Final Frontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146822" start="4651" end="4661" title="voice-over" label="voice-over"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4856" end="4894" title="Star Trek VI: The Undiscovered Country" label="Star Trek VI: The Undiscovered Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q54259" start="5225" end="5232" title="Klingon" label="Klingon"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5358" end="5388" title="Star Trek: The Next Generation" label="Star Trek: The Next Generation"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5424" end="5439" title="Sarek (Star Trek: The Next Generation)" label="named after him"/>
<link wikidata="Q16276" start="5738" end="5753" title="Jean-Luc Picard" label="Jean-Luc Picard"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6074" end="6085" title="Unification (Star Trek: The Next Generation)" label="Unification"/>
<link wikidata="Q708256" start="6148" end="6157" title="Ben Cross" label="Ben Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q213081" start="6180" end="6189" title="Star Trek (2009 film)" label="Star Trek"/>
<link wikidata="Q718644" start="6660" end="6669" title="Starfleet" label="Starfleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q268082" start="6690" end="6697" title="Romulan" label="Romulan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341051" start="6707" end="6711" title="Nero (Star Trek)" label="Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="7706" end="7711" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q535507" start="7801" end="7812" title="James Frain" label="James Frain"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7847" end="7867" title="Star Trek: Discovery" label="Star Trek: Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6598240" start="8002" end="8016" title="Amanda Grayson" label="Amanda Grayson"/>
<link wikidata="Q461524" start="8154" end="8169" title="fanfiction" label="amateur fiction"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8232" end="8242" title="Yesteryear (Star Trek: The Animated Series)" label="Yesteryear"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8279" end="8309" title="Star Trek: The Next Generation" label="Star Trek: The Next Generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16276" start="8454" end="8469" title="Jean-Luc Picard" label="Jean-Luc Picard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8677" end="8682" title="List of Star Trek characters (N–S)#S" label="Sybok"/>
<link wikidata="Q40935468" start="8821" end="8836" title="Michael Burnham" label="Michael Burnham"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8856" end="8876" title="Star Trek: Discovery" label="Star Trek: Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9127" end="9132" title="Lethe (Star Trek: Discovery)" label="Lethe"/>
<link wikidata="Q718644" start="9328" end="9337" title="Starfleet" label="Starfleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q674612" start="9589" end="9604" title="Mirror Universe" label="Mirror Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q41477806" start="9678" end="9693" title="The Wolf Inside" label="The Wolf Inside"/>
<link wikidata="Q1776959" start="9828" end="9842" title="Van Dyke beard" label="Van Dyke beard"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10374" end="10404" title="Star Trek: The Original Series" label="Star Trek: The Original Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251725" start="10419" end="10435" title="Journey to Babel" label="Journey to Babel"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10451" end="10481" title="Star Trek: The Animated Series" label="Star Trek: The Animated Series"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10496" end="10506" title="Yesteryear (Star Trek: The Animated Series)" label="Yesteryear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102217" start="10516" end="10531" title="Star Trek (film series)" label="Star Trek films"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10540" end="10575" title="Star Trek III: The Search for Spock" label="Star Trek III: The Search for Spock"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10590" end="10619" title="Star Trek IV: The Voyage Home" label="Star Trek IV: The Voyage Home"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10634" end="10665" title="Star Trek V: The Final Frontier" label="Star Trek V: The Final Frontier"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10680" end="10718" title="Star Trek VI: The Undiscovered Country" label="Star Trek VI: The Undiscovered Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q213081" start="10733" end="10742" title="Star Trek (2009 film)" label="Star Trek"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10758" end="10788" title="Star Trek: The Next Generation" label="Star Trek: The Next Generation"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10803" end="10808" title="Sarek (Star Trek: The Next Generation)" label="Sarek"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10823" end="10842" title="Unification (Star Trek: The Next Generation)" label="Unification, Part I"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10858" end="10878" title="Star Trek: Discovery" label="Star Trek: Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q40916805" start="10893" end="10909" title="The Vulcan Hello" label="The Vulcan Hello"/>
<link wikidata="Q40925890" start="10924" end="10950" title="Battle at the Binary Stars" label="Battle at the Binary Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q207708" start="11155" end="11158" title="IGN" label="IGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q276542" start="11242" end="11246" title="Syfy" label="SyFy"/>
<link wikidata="Q27559777" start="11354" end="11364" title="Screen Rant" label="ScreenRant"/>
<link wikidata="Q65073063" start="11736" end="11747" title="Den of Geek" label="Den of Geek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985197" start="11964" end="11967" title="Comic Book Resources" label="CBR"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="145410" wikidata="Q6537132" url="?curid=145410" title="Lewis V. Baldwin">
<text>Lewis V. Baldwin is an American historian, author, and professor specializing in the history of the black churches in the United States. He is an acknowledged expert on the Spencer Churches, the oldest black denominations in the country. He currently teaches at Vanderbilt University.

==External links==
*Vanderbilt&#x27;s webpage about Dr. Baldwin
*South Africa with Prof. Lewis V. Baldwin; Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., 1993-10-01, In Black America; KUT Radio, American Archive of Public Broadcasting (WGBH and the Library of Congress)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6537132" start="0" end="16" title="Lewis V. Baldwin" label="Lewis V. Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7576017" start="173" end="189" title="Spencer Churches" label="Spencer Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q13414953" start="208" end="220" title="religious denomination" label="denomination"/>
<link wikidata="Q29052" start="262" end="283" title="Vanderbilt University" label="Vanderbilt University"/>
<link wikidata="Q63314083" start="433" end="449" title="In Black America" label="In Black America"/>
<link wikidata="Q6339755" start="451" end="460" title="KUT" label="KUT Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q28403064" start="462" end="501" title="American Archive of Public Broadcasting" label="American Archive of Public Broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q18395870" start="503" end="507" title="WGBH Educational Foundation" label="WGBH"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="145414" wikidata="Q3783335" url="?curid=145414" title="Hard Rock (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Hard rock]] is a genre of rock music.

Hard rock or Hard Rock may also refer to:
==Brands and enterprises==
* Hard Rock Cafe, a chain of theme restaurants and hotels owned by the Seminole Tribe of Florida
** Freestyle Music Park in Myrtle Beach, South Carolina, formerly Hard Rock Park
** Hard Rock Cafe, at The Printworks in Manchester, United Kingdom (closed)
** Hard Rock Hotel, at the City of Dreams in Macau, China
** Hard Rock Hotel, at the Resorts World Sentosa in Singapore
** Hard Rock Hotel and Casino (Atlantic City), in Atlantic City, New Jersey 
** Hard Rock Hotel and Casino (Biloxi), in Biloxi, Mississippi
** Hard Rock Hotel and Casino (Stateline), in Stateline, Nevada, owned and operated by Warner Hospitality
** Hard Rock Hotel Orlando at the Universal Orlando Resort, a joint venture between Hard Rock Cafe and Loews Hotels
** Hard Rock Hotel Penang
** Seminole Hard Rock Hotel and Casino Hollywood, in Hollywood, Florida
** Seminole Hard Rock Hotel and Casino Tampa, in Tampa, Florida

==Sports==
* Hard Rock FC, a Grenadian football club that competes in the Grenadian Premier Division league
* Hardrock Hundred Mile Endurance Run, or &quot;Hardrock 100&quot;, a long-distance endurance run in Colorado
* Hard Rock Stadium, a stadium in Miami, Florida

==Other uses==
* Hard Rock, a DC Comics character
* Hard rock mining, mining of metals and other hard minerals
* Hard ROCK!, a difficulty level in the 2006 rhythm video game &quot;Elite Beat Agents&quot;
* Hard Rock (exercise), a planned 1982 British civil defence exercise
* Hard Rock, Arizona, a census designated place

==See also==
* Hard music (disambiguation)
* Heavy rock (disambiguation)
* Soft Rock (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3783335" start="0" end="13" title="Hard Rock (disambiguation)" label="[[Hard rock]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783335" start="41" end="50" title="Hard Rock (disambiguation)" label="Hard rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783335" start="54" end="63" title="Hard Rock (disambiguation)" label="Hard Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q918151" start="112" end="126" title="Hard Rock Cafe" label="Hard Rock Cafe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087377" start="210" end="230" title="Freestyle Music Park" label="Freestyle Music Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522324" start="310" end="324" title="The Printworks (Manchester)" label="The Printworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123666" start="391" end="405" title="City of Dreams (casino)" label="City of Dreams"/>
<link wikidata="Q5955134" start="449" end="470" title="Resorts World Sentosa" label="Resorts World Sentosa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="487" end="529" title="List_of_Atlantic_City_casinos_that_never_opened#Hard_Rock_Hotel_and_Casino_(Atlantic_City)" label="Hard Rock Hotel and Casino (Atlantic City)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5655376" start="564" end="599" title="Hard Rock Hotel and Casino (Biloxi)" label="Hard Rock Hotel and Casino (Biloxi)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5903378" start="627" end="665" title="Hard Rock Hotel and Casino (Stateline)" label="Hard Rock Hotel and Casino (Stateline)"/>
<link wikidata="Q778011" start="733" end="756" title="Hard Rock Hotel Orlando" label="Hard Rock Hotel Orlando"/>
<link wikidata="Q7449511" start="875" end="920" title="Seminole Hard Rock Hotel and Casino Hollywood" label="Seminole Hard Rock Hotel and Casino Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7449512" start="947" end="988" title="Seminole Hard Rock Hotel and Casino Tampa" label="Seminole Hard Rock Hotel and Casino Tampa"/>
<link wikidata="Q25238335" start="1022" end="1034" title="Hard Rock FC" label="Hard Rock FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320341" start="1083" end="1109" title="Grenada League" label="Grenadian Premier Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q5656297" start="1119" end="1154" title="Hardrock Hundred Mile Endurance Run" label="Hardrock Hundred Mile Endurance Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q864339" start="1229" end="1246" title="Hard Rock Stadium" label="Hard Rock Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924461" start="1307" end="1316" title="DC Comics" label="DC Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883681" start="1329" end="1345" title="Hard rock mining" label="Hard rock mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196429" start="1457" end="1474" title="Elite Beat Agents" label="Elite Beat Agents"/>
<link wikidata="Q116973860" start="1483" end="1503" title="Hard Rock (exercise)" label="Hard Rock (exercise)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5892270" start="1553" end="1571" title="Hard Rock, Arizona" label="Hard Rock, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q110375484" start="1615" end="1642" title="Hard music (disambiguation)" label="Hard music (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783335" start="1645" end="1672" title="Heavy rock (disambiguation)" label="Heavy rock (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q110251576" start="1675" end="1701" title="Soft Rock (disambiguation)" label="Soft Rock (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="145415" wikidata="Q169534" url="?curid=145415" title="Division (military)">
<text>A division is a large military unit or formation, usually consisting of between 10,000 and 25,000 soldiers. In most armies, a division is composed of several regiments or brigades; in turn, several divisions typically make up a corps.

Historically, the division has been the default combined arms unit capable of independent operations. Smaller combined arms units, such as the American regimental combat team (RCT) during World War II, were used when conditions favored them. In recent times, modern Western militaries have begun adopting the smaller brigade combat team (similar to the RCT) as the default combined arms unit, with the division to which they belong, being less important.

A similar word, &quot;divizion/divizijun/dywizjon&quot;, is also used in languages such as Russian, Serbian, Croatian and Polish, for a battalion-size artillery or cavalry unit. In naval usage &quot;division&quot; has a completely different range of meanings. Aboard ships of British Royal Navy tradition, the terms &quot;division&quot; or &quot;department&quot; are often used interchangeably and refer to the administrative organization used to manage personnel. Aboard US navy ships (including US coastguard vessels), in shore commands and in US naval aviation units (including US navy, marine corps, and coastguard aviation) it refers to an administrative/functional sub-unit of a department (e.g., fire control division of the weapons department). Alternatively it refers to a sub-unit of several ships within a flotilla or squadron, or to two or three sections of aircraft operating under a designated division leader.

== History ==
=== Origins ===
In the West, the first general to think of organizing an army into smaller combined-arms units was Maurice de Saxe (d. 1750), Marshal General of France, in his book &quot;Mes Rêveries&quot;. He died at the age of 54, without having implemented his idea. Victor-François de Broglie put the ideas into practice. He conducted successful practical experiments of the divisional system in the Seven Years&#x27; War.

=== Early divisions ===
The first war in which the divisional system was used systematically was the French Revolutionary War. Lazare Carnot of the Committee of Public Safety, who was in charge of military affairs, came to the same conclusion about it as the previous royal government, and the army was organised into divisions.

It made the armies more flexible and easy to maneuver, and it also made the large French Revolutionary Army manageable. Under Napoleon, the divisions were grouped together into corps, because of their increasing size. Napoleon&#x27;s military success spread the divisional and corps system all over Europe; by the end of the Napoleonic Wars, all armies in Europe had adopted it.

=== World War I ===
The composition of divisions varied significantly during the two world wars and, in addition, there was no uniformity of quality, even when divisions had the same composition.

The size of infantry divisions deployed by the major belligerents at start of the Great War ranged from about 16,000 in the French and Russian armies to 17,500 in the German imperial army and about 18,000 in Austro-Hungarian and British armies.

As World War I went on, the size of divisions decreased significantly from those of 1914, with both British and Germans reducing the number of divisions&#x27; sub-units. But, while the number of soldiers was lower, by 1917, divisions were much better armed.

On the other hand, in 1917, the American infantry divisions that arrived in France numbered 28,061 officers and men, of which 17,666 were riflemen.

=== World War II ===
The divisional system reached its numerical height during the Second World War. Beside the infantry and cavalry divisions created since Napoleonic era, new division types appeared during the Second World War, such as airborne, tank, mechanized, motorized.

The Soviet Union&#x27;s Red Army consisted of more than a thousand division-sized units at any one time, and the number of rifle divisions raised during the Great Patriotic War of 1941–1945 is estimated at 2,000. Nazi Germany had hundreds of numbered or named divisions, while the United States employed up to 91 divisions.

A notable change to divisional structures during the war was completion of the shift from square divisions (composed of two brigades each with two regiments) to triangular divisions (composed of three regiments with no brigade level) that many European armies had started using in World War I. This was done to increase flexibility and to pare down chain-of-command overhead. The triangular division structure allowed the tactic of &quot;two forward, one back&quot;, where two of the division&#x27;s regiments could engage the enemy with one regiment in reserve.

All divisions in World War II were expected to have their own artillery formations, usually (depending upon the nation) the size of a regiment. Divisional artillery was occasionally seconded by corps-level command to increase firepower in larger engagements.

During the war the US also used regimental combat teams, whereby attached and/or organic divisional units were parceled out to infantry regiments, creating smaller combined-arms units with their own armor and artillery and support units. These combat teams would still be under divisional command but had some level of autonomy on the battlefield.

Organic units within divisions were units which operated directly under divisional command and were not normally controlled by the regiments. These units were mainly support units in nature, and included signal companies, medical battalions, supply trains and administration.

Attached units were smaller units that were placed under divisional command temporarily for the purpose of completing a particular mission. These units were usually combat units such as tank battalions, tank-destroyer battalions or cavalry-reconnaissance squadrons.

=== Modern divisions ===
In modern times, most military forces have standardized their divisional structures. This does not mean that divisions are equal in size or structure from country to country, but divisions have, in most cases, come to be units of 10,000 to 15,000 soldiers with enough organic support to be capable of independent operations. Usually, the direct organization of the division consists of one to four brigades or battle groups of its primary combat arm, along with a brigade or regiment of combat support (usually artillery) and a number of direct-reporting battalions for necessary specialized support tasks, such as intelligence, logistics, reconnaissance, and combat engineers. Most militaries standardize ideal organization strength for each type of division, encapsulated in a Table of Organization and Equipment (TO&amp;E) which specifies exact assignments of units, personnel, and equipment for a division.

The modern division became the primary identifiable combat unit in many militaries during the second half of the 20th century, supplanting the brigade; however, the trend started to reverse since the end of the Cold War. The peak use of the division as the primary combat unit occurred during World War II, when the belligerents deployed over a thousand divisions. With technological advances since then, the combat power of each division has increased.

== Types ==
Divisions are often formed to organize units of a particular type together with appropriate support units to allow independent operations. In more recent times, divisions have mainly been organized as combined arms units with subordinate units representing various combat arms. In this case, the division often retains the name of a more specialized division, and may still be tasked with a primary role suited to that specialization.

=== Infantry division ===
An &quot;infantry division&quot; is a military formation composed primarily of infantry units, also supported by units from other combat arms. In the Soviet Union and Russia, an infantry division is often referred to as a &quot;rifle division&quot;. A &quot;motorised infantry&quot; division is a division with a majority of infantry subunits transported on soft-skinned motor vehicles. A &quot;mechanized infantry&quot; division is a division with a majority of infantry subunits transported on armored personnel carriers (APCs) or infantry fighting vehicles (IFVs) or both, or even some other class of armored fighting vehicles designed for the transportation of infantry. Mechanized infantry divisions in Nazi Germany were called &quot; divisions&quot;. In Russia, they were known as &quot;motor rifle divisions&quot;.

Because of the ease and simplicity involved in forming divisions of infantry compared to other formations, infantry divisions have often been the most numerous in historical warfare. Most US divisions during World War II were infantry divisions.

Infantry divisions were also expected to travel by foot from place to place, with transport vehicles or pack horses used to augment their travel. Divisions evolved over the course of time. For instance, in 1944, Nazi Germany designated some of their infantry formations as &quot;Volksgrenadier&quot; divisions, which were slightly smaller than the regular divisions, with wider issue of sub-machine guns, automatic and anti-tank weapons to reflect the reality that they were to be used in defensive warfare. In 1945, Nazi Germany seconded members of the &quot;Kriegsmarine&quot; to create &quot;naval divisions&quot;, which were of lower quality than the infantry divisions of the &quot;Heer&quot;. They also created &quot;&quot;Luftwaffe&quot; field divisions&quot; from members of the &quot;Luftwaffe&quot;.

Infantry divisions were sometimes given the responsibility of garrison work. These were named &quot;frontier guard divisions&quot;, &quot;static infantry divisions&quot; and &quot;fortress divisions&quot;, and were used often by Nazi Germany. The Soviet Union organised Machine-Gun Artillery Divisions of artillery, multiple rocket launchers, and static gun positions for use East of the Urals. A 1997 report said they were generally composed of four brigades, though later data suggests this was inaccurate.

=== Cavalry division ===
For most nations, cavalry was deployed in smaller units and was not therefore organized into divisions, but for larger militaries, such as that of the British Empire, United States, First French Empire, France, German Empire, Nazi Germany, Russian Empire, Empire of Japan, Second Polish Republic and Soviet Union, a number of cavalry divisions were formed. They were most often similar to the nations&#x27; infantry divisions in structure, although they usually had fewer and lighter support elements, with cavalry brigades or regiments replacing the infantry units, and supporting units, such as artillery and supply, being horse-drawn. For the most part, large cavalry units did not remain after World War II.

While horse cavalry had been found to be obsolete, the concept of cavalry as a fast force capable of missions traditionally fulfilled by horse cavalry made a return to military thinking during the Cold War. In general, two new types of cavalry were developed: air cavalry or airmobile, relying on helicopter mobility, and armored cavalry, based on an autonomous armored formation. The former was pioneered by the 11th Air Assault Division (Test), formed on 1 February 1963 at Fort Benning, Georgia. On 29 June 1965, the division was renamed the 1st Cavalry Division (Airmobile), before its departure for the Vietnam War.

After the end of the Vietnam War, the 1st Cavalry Division was reorganised and re-equipped with tanks and armored scout vehicles to form armored cavalry.

The concept of a fast-moving, armored reconnaissance force has remained in modern armies, but these units are now smaller and make up a combined arms force used in modern brigades and divisions, and are no longer granted divisional status.

&quot;Light divisions&quot; were German horse cavalry divisions organized early in World War II which included motorized units.

=== Armored division ===

The development of the tank during World War I prompted some nations to experiment with forming them into division-size units. Many did this the same way as they did cavalry divisions, by merely replacing cavalry with AFVs (including tanks) and motorizing the supporting units. This proved unwieldy in combat, as the units had many tanks but few infantry units. Instead, a more balanced approach was taken by adjusting the number of tank, infantry, artillery, and support units.

The terms &quot;tank division&quot; or &quot;mechanized division&quot; are alternative names for armored divisions. A &quot;Panzer division&quot; was an armoured division of the &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; and the &quot;Waffen-SS&quot; of Germany during World War II.

Since the end of the war, most armoured and infantry divisions have had significant numbers of both tank and infantry units within them. The difference has usually been in the mix of battalions assigned. Additionally, in some militaries, armoured divisions are equipped with more advanced or powerful tanks than other divisions.

=== Mountain division ===
Mountain divisions are infantry divisions given special training and equipment to operate in hilly, mountainous or arctic areas. Some examples of these formations include the US 10th Mountain Division, the German 1st Ski Division or the French 27th Alpine Infantry Division.

Nazi Germany also organized &quot;&quot;Jäger&quot; divisions&quot; to operate in more adverse terrain.

Italian Mountain divisions are called &quot;Alpini&quot; divisions&quot;.

=== Airborne division ===
An airborne division is an infantry division given special training and equipment for arrival on the battlefield by air (typically via parachute or glider-borne).

The US, Britain, and Germany experimented during World War II with specialized light infantry divisions capable of being quickly transported by transport aircraft or dropped into an area by parachute or glider. This required both high-quality equipment and training, creating elite units in the process and usually crewed by volunteers rather than conscripts.

The German 1st Parachute Division, which was part of the Luftwaffe and not the Heer, was instrumental in the 1941 Battle of Crete. US and British airborne troops first participated during the 1943 invasion of Sicily. The use of airborne divisions during the Invasion of Normandy was crucial to its success. Further allied paratroop operations were made during the 1944 Operation Market Garden and the 1945 Operation Varsity.

When not being used for a specific airborne mission, airborne divisions usually functioned as light infantry divisions.

An &quot;air assault division&quot; is an airborne division that mainly uses helicopters to transport its troops.

=== Artillery division ===
The Soviet Union developed the concept of the specialized &quot;artillery division&quot; during the Eastern Front of the Second World War in 1942, although plans were in place since the later stages of the Russian Civil War. An artillery division serves as a specialized division using only artillery howitzers, anti-tank guns, rocket artillery (MRLs and tactical missiles) and mortars (both towed and self-propelled) (and historically siege artillery) and are usually tasked with providing concentrated firepower support to higher combined arms formations. They are mainly combat support formations most performing operations in support of the infantry and armor.

=== Security division ===
Nazi Germany organized Security divisions to operate in captured territory to provide rear-echelon security against partisans and maintain order among civilians. Structured like an infantry division, a security division was more likely to contain lower quality troops and was not intended to serve directly at the front. SS units of this type were called &quot;SS &quot;Polizei&quot; divisions&quot;.

The Soviet Union&#x27;s People&#x27;s Commissariat for Internal Affairs (the NKVD) organized security divisions (see :Category:Divisions of the NKVD in World War II). In a few cases, NKVD divisions were employed in front-line combat as rifle divisions.

== Nomenclature ==
Divisions are commonly designated by combining an ordinal number and a type name (e.g.: &quot;13th Infantry Division&quot;). Nicknames are often assigned or adopted, although these often are not considered an official part of the unit&#x27;s , with divisions of the Italian Army being one of the exceptions. In some cases, divisional titles lack an ordinal number, often in the case of unique units or units serving as elite or special troops. For clarity in histories and reports, the nation is identified before the number. This also helps in historical studies, but due to the nature of intelligence on the battlefield, division names and assignments are at times obscured. However, the size of the division rarely makes such obfuscation necessary.

In the years leading up to the end of the cold war and beyond, the type names of various divisions became less important. The majority of US Infantry divisions were now mechanized and had significant numbers of tanks and IFVs, becoming de facto armored divisions. US armored divisions had more tanks but less infantry than these infantry divisions. Moreover, the sole cavalry division was structured the same way as an armored division.

With the introduction of modular brigade combat teams (BCT) in modern divisions, the nomenclature type is even less important, since a division can now be made of up any combination of light infantry, Stryker and armored BCTs. For example, the US 1st Infantry Division currently consists of two armored BCTs along with support troops, with no light infantry units at all. By contrast, the current 1st Armored Division consists of two armored BCTs and a Stryker BCT along with its support troops.

Nevertheless, some US division types will retain their mission: The 82nd and 11th airborne divisions have airborne infantry BCTs, while the 10th Mountain Division has only light infantry BCTs.

== National organizations ==
=== Australia ===
Historically, the Australian Army has fielded a number of divisions. During World War I, a total of six infantry divisions were raised as part of the all-volunteer Australian Imperial Force: 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th and 6th. The 1st Division and part of the 2nd saw service during the Gallipoli Campaign in 1915 before later taking part in the fighting on the Western Front between 1916 and 1918 along with the 3rd, 4th and 5th. The 6th Division existed only briefly in 1917, but was disbanded without seeing combat to make up for manpower shortages in the other divisions. Another infantry division, known as the New Zealand and Australian Division, was also formed from Australian and New Zealand troops and saw service at Gallipoli. Two divisions of Australian Light Horse were also formedthe Australian Mounted Division (which also included some British and French units) and the ANZAC Mounted Divisionboth of which served in the Sinai and Palestine Campaign during the war.

In the inter-war years, on paper the Australian Army was organised into seven divisions: five infantry (1st through to 5th) and two cavalry, albeit on a reduced manning scale. During World War II, the size of Australia&#x27;s force was expanded to eventually include 12 infantry divisions: 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th, 6th, 7th, 8th, 9th, 10th, 11th and 12th. Of these, fourthe 6th, 7th, 8th and 9thwere raised as part of the all-volunteer Second Australian Imperial Force, while the others formed part of the Militia, and were maintained through a mixture of volunteers and conscripts. In addition to the infantry divisions, three armoured divisions were formed: 1st, 2nd and 3rd. The Australian divisions were used in various campaigns, ranging from North Africa, Greece,
Syria and Lebanon, to the South West Pacific.

The Australian army currently has two divisions. The 1st Division is a skeleton organisation that acts as a deployable force headquarters, while the 2nd is a Reserve formation.

=== Bangladesh ===

The 9th Infantry Division was raised on 20 November 1975 in Dhaka as the first division of the Bangladesh Army. Currently, Bangladesh Army has ten infantry divisions under its command. Each infantry division consists of one artillery brigade, 3 or 4 infantry brigades/regiments. In addition, few divisions have one armored brigade each. The active infantry divisions are:
* 7th Infantry Division, headquartered at Sheikh Hasina cantonment, Patuakhali
* 9th Infantry Division, headquartered at Savar Cantonment, Dhaka
* 10th Infantry Division, headquartered at Ramu Cantonment, Cox&#x27;s Bazar
* 11th Infantry Division, headquartered at Bogra Cantonment, Bogra
* 17th Infantry Division, headquartered at Jalalabad Cantonment, Sylhet
* 19th Infantry Division, headquartered at Shahid Salahuddin Cantonment, Tangail
* 24th Infantry Division, headquartered at Chittagong Cantonment, Chittagong
* 33rd Infantry Division, headquartered at Comilla Cantonment, Comilla
* 55th Infantry Division, headquartered at Jessore Cantonment, Jessore
* 66th Infantry Division, headquartered at Rangpur Cantonment, Rangpur

=== Brazil ===
The Brazilian Army currently has five army divisions: the 1st Army Division based in Rio de Janeiro and subordinated to the Eastern Military Command, the 2nd Army Division, based in São Paulo and subordinated to the Southeastern Military Command and 3rd Army Division, based in Santa MariaRS, the 5th Army Division based in CuritibaPR, the 6th Army Division based in Porto AlegreRS, the latter three being linked to the Southern Military Command and the 7th Army Division based in RecifePE subordinated to the Northeastern Military Command.

The other military forces of the Brazilian Army are subordinated directly to the area military commands, not having a commanding division. In this case, the employment of these troops is coordinated by the operations coordinating center of the area military commands.

=== Canada ===
The first division-sized formation raised by the Canadian military was the First Contingent of the Canadian Expeditionary Force; raised in 1914, it was renamed the Canadian Division in early 1915 when it took to the field, and became the 1st Canadian Division when a 2nd Canadian Division took to the field later that year. A 3rd Canadian Division and 4th Canadian Division saw service in France and Flanders, and a Fifth Canadian Division was disbanded in the United Kingdom and broken up for reinforcements. The four divisions (collectively under the command of the Canadian Corps) were disbanded in 1919.

Canada had nominal divisions on paper between the wars, overseeing the Militia (part-time reserve forces), but no active duty divisions. On 1 September 1939, two divisions were raised as part of the Canadian Active Service Force; a Third Division was raised in 1940, followed by a First Canadian (Armoured) Division and Fourth Canadian Division. The First Armoured was renamed the Fifth Canadian (Armoured) Division and the Fourth Division also became an armoured formation. The 1st and 5th Divisions fought in the Mediterranean between 1943 and early 1945; the 2nd, 3rd and 4th Divisions served in Northwest Europe. A Sixth, Seventh and Eighth Division were raised for service in Canada, with one brigade of the Sixth Division going to Kiska in 1943. By 1945, the latter three divisions were disbanded as the threat to North America diminished. A Third Canadian Division (Canadian Army Occupation Force) was raised in 1945 for occupation duty in Germany, organized parallel to the combatant Third Division, and a Sixth Canadian Division (Canadian Army Pacific Force) was undergoing formation and training for the invasion of Japan when the latter country surrendered in September 1945. All five combatant divisions, as well as the CAOF and CAPF, were disbanded by the end of 1946.

A First Canadian Division Headquarters (later renamed simply First Division) was authorized once again in April 1946, but remained dormant until formally disbanded in July 1954. Simultaneously, however, another &quot;Headquarters, First Canadian Infantry Division&quot; was authorized as part of the Canadian Army Active Force (the Regular forces of the Canadian military), in October 1953. This, the first peacetime division in Canadian history, consisted of a brigade in Germany, one in Edmonton and one at Valcartier. This division was disbanded in April 1958.

The First Canadian Division was reactivated in 1988 and served until the 1990s when the headquarters of the division was transformed into the Canadian Forces Joint Headquarters and placed under the control of the Canadian Expeditionary Force Command. The CFJHQ was transformed back into Headquarters, 1st Canadian Division, on 23 June 2010, under command of the Canadian Joint Operations Command. The unit is based at Kingston. Canada currently has four other divisions and all these are under command of the Canadian Army.
* 1st Canadian Division, headquarters is located in Kingston.
* 2nd Canadian Division, headquarters is located in Montreal.
* 3rd Canadian Division, headquarters is located in Edmonton.
* 4th Canadian Division, headquarters is located in Toronto.
* 5th Canadian Division, headquarters is located in Halifax.

The 1st Canadian Division has approximately 2000 troops under its command, while the 2nd Canadian Division, 3rd Canadian Division, 4th Canadian Division, and 5th Canadian Division have approximately 10,000 troops each.

=== China ===
==== People&#x27;s Republic ====
The People&#x27;s Liberation Army Ground Force (PLAGF) is divided into five Theater Commands. The regular forces of the ground forces consist of 18 group armies: corps-size combined arms units each with 24,000–50,000 personnel. The group armies contained among them:
* 25 infantry divisions
* 9 armored divisions
* 2 artillery divisions

As of 2011, the PLA went from a division-dominated structure to a brigade-dominated one. Until 2017, there were a further three airborne divisions in the 15th Airborne Corps, but these were reformed into six airborne brigades and a special operations brigade as part of a reform program aimed at reorganizing all PLA divisions into brigades.

==== National Revolutionary Army ====
The NRA Division () was a military unit of the Republic of China. The original pattern of the infantry division organization of the early Republic was a square division. It was formed with two infantry brigades of two infantry regiments of three infantry battalions, an artillery regiment of fifty-four guns and eighteen machineguns, a cavalry regiment of twelve squadrons, an engineer battalion of four companies, a transport battalion of four companies, and other minor support units.

In the mid-1930s, the Nationalist government with the help of German advisors attempted to modernize their army and intended to form sixty Reorganized Divisions and a number of reserve divisions. Under the strains and losses of the early campaigns of the Second Sino-Japanese War, the Chinese decided in mid-1938 to standardize their Divisions as triangular divisions as part of their effort to simplify the command structure and placed them under Corps, which became the basic tactical units. The remaining scarce artillery and the other support formations were withdrawn from the Division and were held at Corps or Army level or even higher. During the Second Sino-Japanese War, the Chinese Republic mobilized at least 310 infantry divisions, 23 cavalry divisions, and one mechanized division (the 200th Division).

=== Colombia ===
In the Colombian Army, a division is formed by two or more brigades and is usually commanded by a major general. Today, the Colombian Army has eight active divisions:
* 1st Division (Santa Marta) – Its jurisdiction covers the Northern Region of Colombia in which there are the departments of Cesar, La Guajira, Magdalena, Sucre, Bolívar and Atlántico.
* 2nd Division (Bucaramanga) – Its jurisdiction covers the north eastern Colombia in which there are the departments of Norte de Santander, Santander and Arauca.
* 3rd Division (Popayán) – Its jurisdiction covers the South West of Colombia in which there are the departamentos of Nariño, Valle del Cauca, Cauca, Caldas, Quindio, part of Santander and the southern part of the Chocó.
* 4th Division (Villavicencio) – Its jurisdiction covers the eastern region of Colombia in which there are the departments of Meta, Guaviare, and part of Vaupés.
* 5th Division (Bogotá) – Its jurisdiction covers the Central Region of Colombia in which there are the departments of Cundinamarca, Boyaca, Huila and Tolima.
* 6th Division (Florencia) – Its jurisdiction covers the southern region of Colombia in which there are the departments of Amazonas, Caquetá, Putumayo and southern Vaupés.
* 7th Division (Medellin) – Its jurisdiction covers the western region of Colombia in which there are the departments of Cordoba, Antioquia, and part of the Chocó.
* 8th Division (Yopal) – Its jurisdiction covers the northeastern region of Colombia in which there are the departments of Casanare, Arauca, Vichada, Guainía, and the municipalities of Boyaca of Cubará, Pisba, Paya, Labranzagrande and Pajarito.

=== Egypt ===
In the Egyptian Army, a division has four or five brigades and is usually commanded by Major General, however, a Brigadier General can also command a division. Today the Egyptian Army has 14 divisions (8 mechanized, 1 infantry, 4 armored, 1 Republican Guard). Mechanized divisions have more infantry and fewer tanks than armored divisions while armored divisions have less troops and more tanks than mechanized ones.
* 2nd Infantry Division (Egypt)One of the oldest units in the Egyptian Army, formed in 1947 and currently part of the Central Military Region (Egypt) the division was originally foot infantry but turned into mechanized in the late 1980s.
* 3rd Mechanized Infantry Division (Egypt)formed in 1951 as foot infantry and was fully mechanized in 1972. Currently part of the Northern Military Region (Egypt) alongside the 11th independent armored brigade. The division saw service in the Gulf War alongside the Egyptian 4th Armored Division during Operation Desert Shield.
* 7th Mechanized Infantry Divisionformed as foot infantry division in the mid-1960s (before Six-Day War). Currently a part of the Second Army (Egypt).
* 16th Mechanized Infantry Divisionformed in 1972 and participated in October 1973 War and currently part of the Second Army (Egypt)
* 18th Mechanized Infantry Divisionformed in 1972 and played a vital role in the October 1973 War as it accomplished its task of storming the El Qantara fortified points of the Bar Lev Line and liberating the town of El Qantara itself within 6/7 October and successfully halted &amp; destroyed several Israeli counterattacks on its sector. Currently part of the Second Army (Egypt)
* 19th Infantry DivisionFormed in 1972 and participated in October 1973 War and considered one of the most notable units of the Egyptian Army due to its heroic actions during October 1973 War where it was the only division to not lose a single battle. One of these battles was Battle of Suez. Currently part of the Third Army (Egypt).
* 20th Palestinian/Gaza Division during Suez Crisis.
* 23rd Mechanized Infantry Divisionformed in 1972 and participated in the October 1973 War. Currently part of the Third Army (Egypt)
* 33rd Mechanized Infantry Divisionformed in the early 2000s and currently part of the Western Military Region (Egypt).
* 4th Armoured Division (Egypt)the Division is considered one of the greatest, respected and oldest active formations in the Egyptian Army. It was formed in 1956 and participated in all of Egypt&#x27;s modern conflicts and because of that, the division is nicknamed the Knights of Egypt and Crown of the Third Army. Its most notable service was during October 1973 War when the 3rd Armored Brigade advanced 12 kilometers deep into Sinai (over the actual sector) without the air, anti-tank and infantry support it requested. As the brigade surprise attacked the much larger Israeli forces, they gave them heavy casualties but since the Israeli units had air support, the brigade couldn&#x27;t survive and lost its commander and most of its tanks in action. Still part of Third Army.
* 6th Armored Divisionformed in the mid-1960s as a Mechanized Division then by the late 1990s it was transformed into Armored Division. Currently part of the Second Army (Egypt).
* 9th Armored Divisionformed in 1987 with the main objective of protecting Southern Cairo and currently serves as part of the Central Military Region (Egypt).
* 21st Armored Divisionformed in the mid-1960s and participated in the Six-Day War and October 1973 War. Currently serving in the Western Military Region (Egypt).

=== France ===
On 1 July 1999, all French divisions were disbanded or converted into brigades. Four Task force headquarters (&quot;état-major de force&quot;) were created in order to oversee NATO standard divisions in case of emergency.

The divisional level (&quot;niveau divisionnaire&quot;) was reintroduced on 1 July 2016. The French Army has now two active combined divisions:

* 1 division (HQ in Besançon)
* 3 division (HQ in Marseille)

Each division consists of 25,000 personnel and is made up of three brigades (one light, one medium, and one heavy). The 1st Division also included the French elements of the Franco-German Brigade.

There are also several &quot;divisional level&quot; (&quot;niveau divisionnaire&quot;) specialized commands:
* &quot;Commandement des actions dans la profondeur et du renseignement&quot; (Strasbourg)
* &quot;Commandement de l&#x27;appui terrestre numérique et cyber&quot; (Cesson-Sévigné)
* &quot;Commandement de l&#x27;appui et de la logistique de théâtre&quot; (Lille)
* &quot;Commandement des actions spéciales Terre&quot; (Pau)
* &quot;Commandement de l&#x27;entraînement au combat interarmes&quot; (Mourmelon-le-Grand)

=== Germany ===
The German Army has three divisions:
* 1st Panzerdivision, stationed in Hannover.
* 10th Panzerdivision, stationed in Sigmaringen.
* Rapid Forces Division, stationed in Veitshöchheim.

=== India ===
An Indian Army division is intermediate between a corps and a brigade. Each division is headed by a General Officer Commanding (GOC) holding the rank of major general. It usually consists of 15,000 combat troops and 8,000 support elements. Currently, the Indian Army has 40 divisions: four RAPIDs (&quot;Reorganised Army Plains Infantry Divisions&quot;), 16 infantry, 14 mountain, three armoured, and three artillery. Each division consists of several brigades.

=== Indonesia ===
The Indonesian Army has 3 infantry divisions (Indonesian: &quot;Divisi Infanteri&quot;) within the Kostrad strategic reserves command which plays a role for strategic defense operations. Aside from the infantry divisions, the Indonesian Army also hosts operational combat units from the territorial commands known as &quot;Kodams&quot;, which are equivalent to divisions and are similarly organized as infantry divisions. The infantry divisions from the Kostrad are:
* 1st Kostrad Infantry Division at Depok, West Java
* 2nd Kostrad Infantry Division at Malang, East Java
* 3rd Kostrad Infantry Division at Gowa, South Sulawesi

The Kodam territorial commands are:
* I Military Regional Command/Bukit Barisan at Medan, North Sumatra
* II Military Regional Command/Sriwijaya at Palembang, South Sumatra
* III Military Regional Command/Siliwangi at Bandung, West Java
* IV Military Regional Command/Diponegoro at Semarang, Central Java
* V Military Regional Command/Brawijaya at Surabaya, East Java
* VI Military Regional Command/Mulawarman at Balikpapan, East Kalimantan
* IX Military Regional Command/Udayana at Denpasar, Bali
* XII Military Regional Command/Tanjungpura at Kubu Raya Regency, West Kalimantan
* XIII Military Regional Command/Merdeka at Manado, North Sulawesi
* XIV Military Regional Command/Hasanuddin at Makassar, South Sulawesi
* XV Military Regional Command/Pattimura at Ambon, Maluku
* XVII Military Regional Command/Cenderawasih at Jayapura, Papua
* XVIII Military Regional Command/Kasuari at Manokwari, West Papua
* Military Regional Command Jayakarta at East Jakarta, Jakarta
* Military Regional Command Iskandar Muda at Banda Aceh, Aceh

The Indonesian Marine Corps also operates 3 divisions which are:
* 1st Marine Forces (Pasmar-1) at Sidoarjo, East Java
* 2nd Marine Forces (Pasmar-2) at Cilandak, South Jakarta
* 3rd Marine Forces (Pasmar-3) at Sorong, West Papua

Kostrad infantry divisions are organized into two brigades of infantry (Raider qualified) and a field artillery regiment (the 3rd Division has no artillery regiment, instead it has artillery battalion, the 6th Field Artillery Battalion) as well as combat and service support elements. The regional commands&#x27; combat and combat support formations, organized operationally as infantry divisions, have one infantry brigade, an operational second brigade made up of battalions administratively under Military Areas and directly reporting infantry battalions under divisional command, and combat and service support battalions, plus an optional armoured cavalry reconnaissance troop. This organization may be adjusted to the individual needs of the regional commands, Kodam Jayakarta&#x27;s infantry division is made up of one infantry brigade, one armored cavalry brigade and one air defense artillery regiment, together with the support elements. The Marine Corps divisions are organized into an infantry brigade, an armored regiment (assault amphibian), an artillery regiment and a combat support regiment, plus an administrative regiment responsible for Marine Corps battalions deployed in support of naval bases and shipyards.

=== Israel ===
The Israeli Defense Forces operates 11 divisions of various sizes that are separated into three categories: regular, territorial and reserve. Regardless of type divisions are organized into brigades.

Regular divisions:
* 36th Armored Division
* 98th Paratrooper Division
* 162nd Armored Division
Territorial divisions:
* 80th Territorial Division (&quot;Negev&quot;)
* 91st Territorial Division (&quot;Galilee&quot;)
* 143rd Territorial Division (&quot;Gaza&quot;)
* 210th Territorial Division (&quot;Bashan&quot;)
* 877th Territorial Division (&quot;Judea and Samaria&quot;)
Divisions in reserve:
* 99th Infantry Division (&quot;Reserve&quot;)
* 146th Armored Division (&quot;Reserve&quot;)
* 252nd Armored Division (&quot;Reserve&quot;)

=== Japan ===
Japan Ground Self-Defense Force divisions are combined arms units with infantry, armored, and artillery units, combat support units and logistical support units. They are regionally independent and permanent entities. The divisions strength varies from 6,000 to 9,000 personnel. The division commander is a lieutenant general.

JGSDF currently has nine active duty divisions (one armored, eight infantry):
* 1st Division, in Nerima
* 2nd Division, in Asahikawa
* 3rd Division, in Itami
* 4th Division, in Kasuga
* 6th Division, in Higashine
* 7th Division (Armored), in Chitose
* 8th Division, in Kumamoto
* 9th Division, in Aomori
* 10th Division, in Nagoya

=== Pakistan ===
An Army division in the Pakistan Army is an intermediate between a corps and a brigade. It is the largest striking force in the army. Each division is headed by a General Officer Commanding (GOC) holding the rank of major general. It usually consists of 15,000 combat troops and 8,000 support elements. Currently, the Pakistani Army has 29 divisions: 20 infantry, two armoured, two mechanized, two air defence, two strategic and one artillery. Each division consists of several brigades.

=== Philippines ===
The Philippine Army is currently organized into 11 Infantry Divisions and 1 Mechanized Infantry Division across the Archipelago. A division is usually led by a major general and comprises 3–4 Brigades of infantry or armor.

* 1st Infantry &quot;Tabak&quot; Division
* 2nd Infantry &quot;Jungle Fighter&quot; Division
* 3rd Infantry &quot;Spearhead Troopers&quot; Division
* 4th Infantry &quot;Diamond&quot; Division
* 5th Infantry &quot;Star&quot; Division
* 6th Infantry &quot;Kampilan&quot; Division
* 7th Infantry &quot;Kaugnay&quot; Division
* 8th Infantry &quot;Storm Trooper&quot; Division
* 9th Infantry &quot;Spear&quot; Division
* 10th Infantry &quot;Agila&quot; Division
* 11th Infantry &quot;Alakdan&quot; Division
* Armor &quot;Pambato&quot; Division

=== Russia ===
==== USSR ====
In the Soviet Armed Forces, a division (, дивизия) may have referred to a formation in any of the armed services, and included subunits appropriate to the service such as regiments and battalions, squadrons or naval vessels. Almost all divisions, irrespective of the service branch, had the 3+1+1 structure of major sub-units, which were usually regiments.

There is also a similarly sounding unit of military organization in Russian military terminology, called &quot;divizion&quot; (дивизион). A &quot;divizion&quot; is used to refer to an artillery or cavalry battalion, a specific part of a ship&#x27;s crew (, &#x27;ship battalion&#x27;), or a group of naval vessels ().

In Imperial Russia, infantry formations were designated as (), &#x27;infantry&#x27;. But on 11 October 1918, all such formations in the new Red Army were re-designated as (), &#x27;rifle&#x27;. This was deliberately chosen as a means of breaking with the Imperial past, while also giving these troops a sense of being an elite; in the Imperial Army, the riflemen had been the best of the foot soldiers outside the Guards. The new designation also hearkened back to the Streltsy of the 16th to early 18th Centuries, which were also elite troops.

All Soviet Army infantry, cavalry (until the 1950s) and tank divisions were organized in accordance with a &quot;shtat&quot; (&quot;state&quot;; establishment):

* Division HQ
* 3 infantry, cavalry or tank regiments (with an additional infantry (motor rifle) or tank regiment depending on divisional specialization)
* Divisional artillery brigade or later just one artillery regiment (horse artillery regiment and tachanka battalion for cavalry)
** One light and one heavy howitzer field artillery regiment for brigades
* Divisional tactical ballistic missile battalion/brigade
* Divisional anti-air defense artillery regiment or battalion (air defense guns, later argumented by air defense surface to air missile battalions)
* Divisional anti-tank artillery battalion
* Combat and service support companies or battalions
** CBRN defense
** Combat engineers
** Divisional reconnaissance
** Medical company
** Rear services (including transport)
** Signals
** Electronic warfare

Artillery and Anti-Aircraft Artillery Divisions were organized differently.

Before the Second World War, besides the mechanised corps, there were independent tank battalions within rifle divisions. These were meant to reinforce rifle units for the purpose of breaching enemy defences. They had to act in cooperation with the infantry without breaking away from it and were called tanks for immediate infantry support ().

After 1945, some Red Army rifle divisions were converted to mechanised (infantry) divisions. From 1957, all rifle and mechanised divisions became &quot;motor rifle divisions&quot; (MRDs). These divisions usually had approximately 12,000 soldiers. During the Soviet era, 25 different MRD staffing and equipage tables existed to reflect different requirements of divisions stationed in different parts of the Soviet Union, the Warsaw Pact countries and Mongolia. From 1970 to 1983, a motor rifle regiment was added to tank divisions and an independent tank battalion to motor rifle divisions, and major increases in artillery, mortars, and armoured personnel carriers, in line with the evolution of Soviet doctrine, which began to recognise the need for a conventional phrase, away from the previously expected purely nuclear operations.

A typical tank division had some 10,000 soldiers, less than those of the infantry, with near identical organization. During the Soviet era, 15 different TD staffing and equipage tables existed to reflect different requirements of divisions stationed in different parts of the Soviet Union, the Warsaw Pact countries and Mongolia.

The Soviet Union organised Machine-Gun Artillery Divisions of artillery, multiple rocket launchers, and static gun positions for use East of the Urals from 1989.

Similar organizations of units were and still are a part of the Russian Airborne Forces.

A typical Soviet &quot;frontal aviation division&quot; consisted of three air regiments, a transport squadron, and associated maintenance units. The number of aircraft within a regiment varied. Fighter and fighter-bomber regiments were usually equipped with about 40 aircraft (36 of the primary unit type and a few utility and spares), while bomber regiments typically consisted of 32 aircraft. Divisions were typically commanded by colonels or major generals, or colonels or major generals of aviation in the Air Force. Soviet Naval Aviation and the Strategic Missile Forces divisions had either colonels or major generals as commanding officers while the ship divisions were led by captains 1st rank or captains 2nd rank.

==== Russian Federation ====
After the dissolution of the Soviet Union, Russian tank and motor rifle divisions were reduced to near-cadre state, many being designated &quot;bases for storage of weapons and equipment&quot; (Russian acronym BKhVT). These bases, or &quot;cadre&quot; divisions, were equipped with all the heavy armaments of a full-strength motor-rifle or tank division, while having only skeleton personnel strength, as low as 500 personnel. The officers and men of a cadre division focus primarily on maintaining the equipment in working condition. During wartime mobilization, such a division would be reinforced up to full manpower strength; however, in peacetime, a cadre division is unfit for any combat.

From 1989 the Soviet and Russian Ground Forces organized a total of eight Machine-Gun Artillery Divisions: the 18th Machine Gun Artillery Division; 122nd Guards Machine-Gun Artillery Division; 126th; 127th; 128th; 129th Guards; 130th; and 131st Guards Machine-Gun Artillery Divisions. A 1997 report said they were generally composed of four brigades with a total of 12 battalions, including a mechanized regiment in each brigade, though later data suggests this was inaccurate. Later data indicates that fortified areas were disestablished and converted to Machine-Gun Artillery Regiments which then joined the new MGADs.

After the 2008 Russian military reforms, most active divisions were disbanded or converted into brigades.

Since 2013, several divisions were reactivated. In 2020, the Russian Ground Forces have 10 divisions:
* 2nd Guards Motor Rifle Division in Moscow
* 3rd Motor Rifle Division in Valuyki
* 4th Guards Tank Division in Naro-Fominsk
* 18th Machine Gun Artillery Division in Goryachiye Klyuchi
* 19th Motor Rifle Division in Vladikavkaz
* 42nd Guards Motor Rifle Division in Khankala
* 90th Guards Tank Division in Chebarkul
* 127th Motor Rifle Division in Sergeyevka, Primorsky Krai
* 144th Motor Rifle Division in Yelnya
* 150th Motor Rifle Division in Novocherkassk

The Coastal Troops of the Russian Navy has:

* 18th Guards Motor Rifle Division in Kaliningrad

The Russian Airborne Forces have 5 divisions:
* 7th Guards Mountain Air Assault Division in Novorossiysk
* 76th Guards Air Assault Division in Pskov
* 98th Guards Airborne Division in Ivanovo
* 104th Guards Airborne Division in Ulyanovsk
* 106th Guards Airborne Division in Tula

The Strategic Missile Forces have 12 divisions:
* 7th Guards Rocket Division at Vypolzovo
* 8th Rocket Division at Pervomaysky, Kirov Oblast
* 13th Red Banner Rocket Division at Dombarovskiy
* 14th Rocket Division at Yoshkar-Ola
* 28th Guards Rocket Division at Kozelsk
* 29th Guards Rocket Division at Irkutsk
* 35th Rocket Division at Barnaul
* 39th Guards Rocket Division at Novosibirsk
* 42nd Rocket Division at Nizhniy Tagil
* 54th Guards Rocket Division at Teykovo
* 60th Rocket Division at Tatischevo
* 62nd Rocket Division at Uzhur

In addition to the Army divisions, a division is currently on active duty within the ranks of the National Guard of Russia:
* Operational Purpose Division in Moscow.

Also, a number of Aviation Divisions and Air Defense Divisions have been reactivated within the Russian Air Force.

=== South Africa ===
South Africa has fielded several infantry and armoured divisions in its military history:
* 1 Infantry Division for battles waged in the North African theatre from 1940 to 1943.
* 2 Infantry Division also for the engagements of North Africa from 1940 to 1942.
* 6 Armoured Division for the Italian Campaign of 1943 to 1945.
* 7 Infantry Division for the Border War fought in Southern Africa. It existed from 1965 to 1990 and consisted of three brigades.
* 8 Armoured Division also for the Border War and existed from 1974 to 1997 and consisted of three brigades.
* 9 Infantry Division was formed for geographical purposes but only existed for a short period from 1992 to 1997.

=== United Kingdom ===

In the British Army, a division is commanded by a major general with a WO1 as the Command Sergeant Major and may consist of three infantry, mechanised and/or armoured brigades and supporting units.

Currently, the British Army has two active divisions:
* 1st (United Kingdom) Division
* 3rd (United Kingdom) Division

The British Army previously had four other divisions.
* 2nd Division – Scotland and Northern England, headquartered at Edinburgh
* 4th Division – Southern England, headquartered at Aldershot
* 5th Division – Wales, English Midlands and Eastern England, headquartered at Shrewsbury
* 6th (United Kingdom) Division, headquartered at Upavon
Additionally, most of the infantry regiments of the British Army are organised for administrative purposes into a number of organisations called &quot;divisions&quot;:

* Guards and Parachute Division – 2022–present
* Scottish, Welsh and Irish Division – 2017–present
* King&#x27;s Division – 1968–present
* Queen&#x27;s Division – 1968–present
* Scottish Division – 1968–2017
* Prince of Wales&#x27; Division – 1968–2017
* Light Division – 1968–present

=== United States ===

A divisional unit in the United States Army typically consists of 17,000 to 21,000 soldiers, but can grow up to 35,000 to 40,000 with attached support units during operations, and are commanded by a major general. Two divisions usually form a corps and each division consists of three maneuver brigades, an aviation brigade, an engineer brigade, and division artillery (latter two excluded from divisional structure as of 2007), along with a number of smaller specialized units. In 2014, divisional artillery (DIVARTY) organizations began to re-appear, with some fires brigades reorganizing to fill this role.

The United States Army currently has eleven active divisions and one deployable division headquarters (7th Infantry Division):
* 1st Infantry Division at Fort Riley, Kansas
* 1st Armored Division at Fort Bliss, Texas
* 1st Cavalry Division at Fort Cavazos, Texas
* 2nd Infantry Division at Camp Humphreys, South Korea and in Joint Base Lewis-McChord, Washington
* 3rd Infantry Division at Fort Stewart, Georgia and in Fort Moore, Georgia
* 4th Infantry Division at Fort Carson, Colorado
* 7th Infantry Division (Division Headquarters only) at Joint Base Lewis-McChord, Washington
* 10th Mountain Division (Light) at Fort Drum, New York and in Fort Johnson, Louisiana
* 11th Airborne Division at Joint Base Elmendorf–Richardson, Alaska
* 25th Infantry Division at Schofield Barracks, Hawaii
* 82nd Airborne Division at Fort Bragg, North Carolina
* 101st Airborne Division (Air Assault) at Fort Campbell, Kentucky

The Army National Guard has a further eight divisions:
* 28th Infantry Division, Fort Indiantown Gap, Pennsylvania
* 29th Infantry Division, Fort Belvoir, Virginia
* 34th Infantry Division, Rosemount, Minnesota
* 35th Infantry Division, Fort Leavenworth, Kansas
* 36th Infantry Division, Camp Mabry, Texas
* 38th Infantry Division, Indianapolis, Indiana
* 40th Infantry Division, Los Alamitos JFTB, California
* 42nd Infantry Division, Troy, New York

There are further nine divisions within the Army Reserve that are responsible for training and support operations:
* 78th Division (Operations), Joint Base McGuire–Dix–Lakehurst, New Jersey
* 86th Division (Decisive Action), Fort McCoy, Wisconsin
* 91st Division (Operations), Fort Hunter Liggett, California
* 94th Division (Force Sustainment), Fort Gregg-Adams, Virginia
* 95th Division (Entry Training), Fort Sill, Oklahoma
* 98th Division (Entry Training), Fort Moore, Georgia
* 100th Division (Operational Support), Fort Knox, Kentucky
* 102nd Division (Maneuver Support), Fort Leonard Wood, Missouri
* 104th Division (Leader Training), Fort Lewis, Washington

The United States Marine Corps has a further three active divisions and one reserve division. They consist of a headquarters battalion, two or three infantry regiments, an artillery regiment, and a reconnaissance battalion. Additionally, all Marine divisions (MARDIV), except 3rd MARDIV, have an assault amphibian (AA) battalion, a tank battalion, a light armored reconnaissance (LAR) battalion (two in 1st MARDIV), and a combat engineer (CE) battalion (two in 1st MARDIV). (3rd MARDIV has a combat assault battalion including one company each of AA, LAR, and CE. Tank support for 3rd MARDIV can be provided by tanks deployed with the 31st MEU or directly from one of the three divisional tank battalions under the Unit Deployment Program.)
* 1st Marine Division at Camp Pendleton, California
* 2nd Marine Division at Camp Lejeune, North Carolina
* 3rd Marine Division at Camp Smedley D. Butler, Okinawa, Japan
* 4th Marine Division (&quot;Reserve&quot;) with units located throughout the United States and headquartered in New Orleans, Louisiana

=== South Korea ===
Republic of Korea Army divisions are major tactical formations led by general officers. There are currently 39 Army and two Marine divisions. Of the 41 Army divisions, six are mechanized infantry divisions (combined arms formations centered around tanks, IFVs, APCs, and SPGs), 16 are infantry divisions (motorized divisions with various levels of mechanization), 12 are &quot;Homeland Infantry Divisions&quot; (향토보병사단, infantry divisions kept at a 40–50% manpower level, to be reinforced during national emergencies) and seven &quot;Reserve Infantry Divisions&quot; (동원보병사단, infantry divisions kept at 10–20% manpower level, to be reinforced during national emergencies). There are two Marine divisions organized similarly to their American counterparts. Though similarly formed, the 1st ROK Marine Division is specialized to perform amphibious landing operations while the 2nd ROK Marine Division performs more security operations and mans a sector of the DMZ facing the North Korean border.

Republic of Korea Army divisions are typically smaller than their foreign counterparts. Mechanized infantry divisions are fully formed at around 9,900, infantry divisions are fully formed at about 11,500 men, and other types of divisions are smaller in size during normal operations according to their reserve manpower levels. There are very few articles discussing ROK Marine Corps tactical organization, but an active duty force of 29,000 is divided into two divisions, two brigades, and its supporting units.

Mechanized infantry, infantry, Homeland Infantry, and Marine divisions are led by major generals, while Reserve Infantry Divisions are led by brigadier generals. As a general rule no major ROKAF formation contains the number four in its name.

=== Venezuela ===
The Venezuelan Army is organized into 6 divisions, four of them infantry, one armored and one being armoured cavalry. All are organized into brigades or regiments, which in turn are organized into infantry battalions, cavalry squadrons, field artillery battalions, air defense artillery battalions and combat engineer battalions. They also contain any divisional service support elements. Usually there are two to five regiments or brigades per division.

The divisions are:

* 1st Infantry Division – with HQ in Maracaibo
* 2nd Infantry Division – HQ San Cristobal
* 3rd Infantry Division – HQ Caracas
* 4th Armored Division – HQ Maracay
* 5th Infantry Division (Jungle) – HQ Ciudad Bolívar
* 9th Cavalry Division – HQ San Fernando de Apure

== See also ==
* Air Division (United States)
* Tumen
* List of military divisions
* Military organization

== Notes ==
== References ==
* 
* 
* 
== External links ==

* Infantry Divisions (British Army and British Indian Army) 1930–1956</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q169534" start="2" end="10" title="Division (military)" label="division"/>
<link wikidata="Q15627509" start="22" end="35" title="military unit" label="military unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q15627509" start="39" end="48" title="Formation (military)" label="formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q52371" start="158" end="166" title="regiment" label="regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q102356" start="171" end="178" title="brigade" label="brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q188497" start="228" end="233" title="corps" label="corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418029" start="284" end="297" title="combined arms" label="combined arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q207645" start="326" end="336" title="Military tactics" label="operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7308406" start="388" end="410" title="regimental combat team" label="regimental combat team"/>
<link wikidata="Q915341" start="553" end="572" title="brigade combat team" label="brigade combat team"/>
<link wikidata="Q3625329" start="714" end="741" title="Divizion" label="divizion/divizijun/dywizjon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382533" start="828" end="837" title="battalion" label="battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4161250" start="891" end="899" title="division (naval)" label="division"/>
<link wikidata="Q549276" start="1509" end="1517" title="flotilla" label="flotilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q955920" start="1521" end="1529" title="Squadron (naval)" label="squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q76723" start="1747" end="1762" title="Maurice de Saxe" label="Maurice de Saxe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324307" start="1774" end="1799" title="Marshal General of France" label="Marshal General of France"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1819" end="1831" title="Mes Rêveries" label="Mes Rêveries"/>
<link wikidata="Q695929" start="1902" end="1928" title="Victor-François, 2nd duc de Broglie" label="Victor-François de Broglie"/>
<link wikidata="Q33143" start="2036" end="2057" title="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q207318" start="2161" end="2185" title="French Revolutionary War" label="French Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q310767" start="2187" end="2200" title="Lazare Carnot" label="Lazare Carnot"/>
<link wikidata="Q724922" start="2208" end="2234" title="Committee of Public Safety" label="Committee of Public Safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192988" start="2472" end="2497" title="French Revolutionary Army" label="French Revolutionary Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="2516" end="2524" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q188497" start="2567" end="2572" title="corps" label="corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="2715" end="2730" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3704" end="3720" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="3923" end="3931" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q189266" start="4056" end="4075" title="Great Patriotic War" label="Great Patriotic War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="4112" end="4124" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q7582064" start="4314" end="4329" title="square division" label="square division"/>
<link wikidata="Q7840136" start="4385" end="4404" title="triangular division" label="triangular division"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="4505" end="4516" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7308406" start="5080" end="5102" title="regimental combat team" label="regimental combat team"/>
<link wikidata="Q102356" start="6364" end="6371" title="brigade" label="brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2050638" start="6376" end="6389" title="Battlegroup (army)" label="battle groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="6477" end="6486" title="artillery" label="artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382533" start="6521" end="6530" title="battalion" label="battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4168000" start="6581" end="6593" title="military intelligence" label="intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q177777" start="6595" end="6604" title="logistics" label="logistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q251741" start="6606" end="6620" title="reconnaissance" label="reconnaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q151197" start="6626" end="6642" title="combat engineers" label="combat engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q358648" start="6745" end="6780" title="Table of Organization and Equipment" label="Table of Organization and Equipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q102356" start="7021" end="7028" title="brigade" label="brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="7089" end="7097" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="7171" end="7183" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418029" start="7546" end="7559" title="combined arms" label="combined arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q188619" start="7571" end="7582" title="subordinate" label="subordinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="7886" end="7894" title="infantry" label="infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q15627509" start="7895" end="7900" title="military unit" label="units"/>
<link wikidata="Q690109" start="7937" end="7948" title="combat arms" label="combat arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="7957" end="7969" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q692886" start="8065" end="8083" title="motorised infantry" label="motorised infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7553816" start="8165" end="8191" title="soft-skinned motor vehicle" label="soft-skinned motor vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053481" start="8202" end="8221" title="mechanized infantry" label="mechanized infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4407246" start="8303" end="8328" title="armored personnel carrier" label="armored personnel carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q202825" start="8340" end="8365" title="infantry fighting vehicle" label="infantry fighting vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q130368" start="8411" end="8435" title="armored fighting vehicle" label="armored fighting vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q389280" start="8818" end="8850" title="List of United States divisions during World War II" label="US divisions during World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q708084" start="9156" end="9170" title="Volksgrenadier" label="Volksgrenadier"/>
<link wikidata="Q151701" start="9437" end="9449" title="Kriegsmarine" label="Kriegsmarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="9670" end="9679" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q88556" start="9750" end="9758" title="garrison" label="garrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q47315" start="10241" end="10248" title="cavalry" label="cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="10374" end="10388" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q71084" start="10405" end="10424" title="First French Empire" label="First French Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="10434" end="10447" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="10449" end="10461" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="10463" end="10477" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="10479" end="10494" title="Empire of Japan" label="Empire of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q207272" start="10496" end="10518" title="Second Polish Republic" label="Second Polish Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="10523" end="10535" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="10921" end="10933" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q939087" start="11196" end="11207" title="air assault" label="air cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793808" start="11258" end="11273" title="armored cavalry" label="armored cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q169980" start="11349" end="11381" title="11th Airborne Division (United States)" label="11th Air Assault Division (Test)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438462" start="11412" end="11424" title="Fort Benning" label="Fort Benning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338" start="11481" end="11513" title="1st Cavalry Division (United States)" label="1st Cavalry Division (Airmobile)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="11544" end="11555" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338" start="11596" end="11616" title="1st Cavalry Division (United States)" label="1st Cavalry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q12876" start="12132" end="12136" title="tank" label="tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="12144" end="12155" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q130368" start="12327" end="12331" title="armoured fighting vehicles" label="AFVs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779157" start="12713" end="12728" title="Panzer division" label="Panzer division"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="12773" end="12782" title="Wehrmacht" label="Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q153626" start="12803" end="12812" title="Waffen-SS" label="Waffen-SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="12837" end="12849" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210930" start="13290" end="13335" title="Mountain warfare" label="operate in hilly, mountainous or arctic areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q164669" start="13383" end="13408" title="10th Mountain Division" label="US 10th Mountain Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q163605" start="13421" end="13437" title="1st Ski Division (Wehrmacht)" label="1st Ski Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2815588" start="13452" end="13481" title="27th Mountain Infantry Brigade (France)" label="27th Alpine Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550449" start="13633" end="13639" title="Alpini" label="Alpini"/>
<link wikidata="Q127424" start="14226" end="14248" title="1st Parachute Division (Germany)" label="1st Parachute Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="14272" end="14281" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q701923" start="14294" end="14298" title="German Army (Wehrmacht)" label="Heer"/>
<link wikidata="Q153316" start="14329" end="14344" title="Battle of Crete" label="Battle of Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q217981" start="14412" end="14430" title="Allied invasion of Sicily" label="invasion of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641370" start="14473" end="14493" title="Invasion of Normandy" label="Invasion of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q189930" start="14584" end="14607" title="Operation Market Garden" label="Operation Market Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360624" start="14621" end="14638" title="Operation Varsity" label="Operation Varsity"/>
<link wikidata="Q939087" start="14771" end="14782" title="air assault" label="air assault"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="14908" end="14920" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q189266" start="15004" end="15017" title="Eastern Front (World War II)" label="Eastern Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="15025" end="15041" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q79911" start="15110" end="15127" title="Russian Civil War" label="Russian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q212948" start="15712" end="15721" title="Partisan (military)" label="partisans"/>
<link wikidata="Q182449" start="16075" end="16079" title="NKVD" label="NKVD"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16115" end="16162" title=":Category:Divisions of the NKVD in World War II" label=":Category:Divisions of the NKVD in World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q923933" start="16321" end="16335" title="Ordinal number (linguistics)" label="ordinal number"/>
<link wikidata="Q796411" start="16537" end="16549" title="Italian Army" label="Italian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338" start="17392" end="17408" title="1st Cavalry Division (United States)" label="cavalry division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358" start="18027" end="18031" title="82nd Airborne Division" label="82nd"/>
<link wikidata="Q169980" start="18036" end="18040" title="11th Airborne Division" label="11th"/>
<link wikidata="Q164669" start="18099" end="18121" title="10th Mountain Division" label="10th Mountain Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q781360" start="18218" end="18233" title="Australian Army" label="Australian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631278" start="18364" end="18389" title="First Australian Imperial Force" label="Australian Imperial Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q4596302" start="18391" end="18394" title="1st Division (Australia)" label="1st"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633649" start="18396" end="18399" title="2nd Division (Australia)" label="2nd"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636738" start="18401" end="18404" title="3rd Division (Australia)" label="3rd"/>
<link wikidata="Q4639255" start="18406" end="18409" title="4th Division (Australia)" label="4th"/>
<link wikidata="Q4641281" start="18411" end="18414" title="5th Division (Australia)" label="5th"/>
<link wikidata="Q1879274" start="18419" end="18422" title="6th Division (Australia)" label="6th"/>
<link wikidata="Q164983" start="18484" end="18502" title="Gallipoli Campaign" label="Gallipoli Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q152989" start="18559" end="18572" title="Western Front (World War I)" label="Western Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015837" start="18813" end="18848" title="New Zealand and Australian Division" label="New Zealand and Australian Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q770775" start="18952" end="18974" title="Australian Light Horse" label="Australian Light Horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q4056093" start="18995" end="19022" title="Australian Mounted Division" label="Australian Mounted Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q257973" start="19083" end="19105" title="ANZAC Mounted Division" label="ANZAC Mounted Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q727536" start="19133" end="19161" title="Sinai and Palestine Campaign" label="Sinai and Palestine Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644009" start="19499" end="19502" title="7th Division (Australia)" label="7th"/>
<link wikidata="Q4645338" start="19504" end="19507" title="8th Division (Australia)" label="8th"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021969" start="19509" end="19512" title="9th Division (Australia)" label="9th"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547027" start="19514" end="19518" title="10th Division (Australia)" label="10th"/>
<link wikidata="Q10823485" start="19520" end="19524" title="11th Division (Australia)" label="11th"/>
<link wikidata="Q17012802" start="19529" end="19533" title="12th Division (Australia)" label="12th"/>
<link wikidata="Q4742845" start="19615" end="19647" title="Second Australian Imperial Force" label="Second Australian Imperial Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2862909" start="19685" end="19692" title="Australian Army Reserve" label="Militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2554670" start="19750" end="19760" title="Conscription in Australia" label="conscripts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4596142" start="19839" end="19842" title="1st Armoured Division (Australia)" label="1st"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633541" start="19844" end="19847" title="2nd Armoured Division (Australia)" label="2nd"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636649" start="19852" end="19855" title="3rd Armoured Division (Australia)" label="3rd"/>
<link wikidata="Q218678" start="19927" end="19939" title="North African campaign" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888837" start="19941" end="19947" title="Battle of Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q770698" start="19949" end="19966" title="Syria–Lebanon Campaign" label="Syria and Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q581261" start="19975" end="19993" title="South West Pacific Area" label="South West Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q30599668" start="20198" end="20219" title="9th Infantry Division (Bangladesh)" label="9th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354" start="20254" end="20259" title="Dhaka" label="Dhaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855270" start="20289" end="20304" title="Bangladesh Army" label="Bangladesh Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q6621085" start="20337" end="20359" title="List of formations of the Bangladesh Army" label="ten infantry divisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q48734785" start="20568" end="20589" title="7th Infantry Division (Bangladesh)" label="7th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q48730095" start="20608" end="20632" title="Sheikh Hasina cantonment" label="Sheikh Hasina cantonment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429761" start="20634" end="20644" title="Patuakhali District" label="Patuakhali"/>
<link wikidata="Q30599668" start="20647" end="20668" title="9th Infantry Division (Bangladesh)" label="9th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q7427917" start="20687" end="20703" title="Savar Cantonment" label="Savar Cantonment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354" start="20705" end="20710" title="Dhaka" label="Dhaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q28225481" start="20713" end="20735" title="10th Infantry Division (Bangladesh)" label="10th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q20718345" start="20754" end="20769" title="Ramu Cantonment" label="Ramu Cantonment"/>
<link wikidata="Q949746" start="20771" end="20787" title="Cox&amp;#x27;s Bazar" label="Cox&amp;#x27;s Bazar"/>
<link wikidata="Q111796267" start="20790" end="20812" title="11th Infantry Division (Bangladesh)" label="11th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4937772" start="20831" end="20847" title="Bogra Cantonment" label="Bogra Cantonment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1918837" start="20849" end="20854" title="Bogra" label="Bogra"/>
<link wikidata="Q28225463" start="20857" end="20879" title="17th Infantry Division (Bangladesh)" label="17th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q23019157" start="20898" end="20918" title="Jalalabad Cantonment" label="Jalalabad Cantonment"/>
<link wikidata="Q466221" start="20920" end="20926" title="Sylhet" label="Sylhet"/>
<link wikidata="Q111796269" start="20929" end="20951" title="19th Infantry Division (Bangladesh)" label="19th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q29378894" start="20970" end="20998" title="Shahid Salahuddin Cantonment" label="Shahid Salahuddin Cantonment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306321" start="21000" end="21007" title="Tangail" label="Tangail"/>
<link wikidata="Q30668051" start="21010" end="21032" title="24th Infantry Division (Bangladesh)" label="24th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q24882892" start="21051" end="21072" title="Chittagong Cantonment" label="Chittagong Cantonment"/>
<link wikidata="Q376749" start="21074" end="21084" title="Chittagong" label="Chittagong"/>
<link wikidata="Q111796270" start="21087" end="21109" title="33rd Infantry Division (Bangladesh)" label="33rd Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q18750203" start="21128" end="21146" title="Comilla Cantonment" label="Comilla Cantonment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006296" start="21148" end="21155" title="Comilla" label="Comilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q111796271" start="21158" end="21180" title="55th Infantry Division (Bangladesh)" label="55th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q29026078" start="21199" end="21217" title="Jessore Cantonment" label="Jessore Cantonment"/>
<link wikidata="Q29026078" start="21219" end="21226" title="Jessore Cantonment" label="Jessore"/>
<link wikidata="Q111796272" start="21229" end="21251" title="66th Infantry Division (Bangladesh)" label="66th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q29378911" start="21270" end="21288" title="Rangpur Cantonment" label="Rangpur Cantonment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344570" start="21290" end="21297" title="Rangpur District" label="Rangpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292358" start="21318" end="21332" title="Brazilian Army" label="Brazilian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q8678" start="21399" end="21413" title="Rio de Janeiro" label="Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330314" start="21438" end="21462" title="Eastern Military Command (Brazil)" label="Eastern Military Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q174" start="21496" end="21505" title="São Paulo" label="São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6125502" start="21530" end="21559" title="Southeastern Military Command (Brazil)" label="Southeastern Military Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q740833" start="21592" end="21603" title="Santa Maria, Rio Grande do Sul" label="Santa Maria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4361" start="21638" end="21646" title="Curitiba" label="Curitiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q40269" start="21681" end="21693" title="Porto Alegre" label="Porto Alegre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6125482" start="21734" end="21759" title="Southern Military Command (Brazil)" label="Southern Military Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q48344" start="21795" end="21801" title="Recife" label="Recife"/>
<link wikidata="Q6125446" start="21824" end="21853" title="Northeastern Military Command (Brazil)" label="Northeastern Military Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q644943" start="22189" end="22206" title="Canadian Forces" label="Canadian military"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915952" start="22239" end="22267" title="Canadian Expeditionary Force" label="Canadian Expeditionary Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813665" start="22378" end="22399" title="1st Canadian Division" label="1st Canadian Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2815839" start="22407" end="22428" title="2nd Canadian Division" label="2nd Canadian Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2816553" start="22466" end="22487" title="3rd Canadian Division" label="3rd Canadian Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477391" start="22492" end="22513" title="4th Canadian Division" label="4th Canadian Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q234" start="22540" end="22548" title="Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665617" start="22708" end="22722" title="Canadian Corps" label="Canadian Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q696817" start="23264" end="23277" title="Mediterranean theatre of World War II" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q216184" start="23348" end="23364" title="Western Front (World War II)" label="Northwest Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033079" start="23486" end="23491" title="Battle of Kiska" label="Kiska"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415901" start="23677" end="23703" title="Allied Occupation Zones in Germany" label="occupation duty in Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q300879" start="23863" end="23880" title="Operation Downfall" label="invasion of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540361" start="23905" end="23916" title="Surrender of Japan" label="surrendered"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096" start="24521" end="24529" title="Edmonton" label="Edmonton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023457" start="24541" end="24551" title="CFB Valcartier" label="Valcartier"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24739" end="24773" title="Canadian Forces Joint Headquarters" label="Canadian Forces Joint Headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q788577" start="24810" end="24846" title="Canadian Expeditionary Force Command" label="Canadian Expeditionary Force Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985745" start="24959" end="24992" title="Canadian Joint Operations Command" label="Canadian Joint Operations Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032129" start="25015" end="25023" title="CFB Kingston" label="Kingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q25436" start="25106" end="25119" title="Canadian Forces Land Force Command" label="Canadian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813665" start="25123" end="25144" title="1st Canadian Division" label="1st Canadian Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2815839" start="25185" end="25206" title="2nd Canadian Division" label="2nd Canadian Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2816553" start="25247" end="25268" title="3rd Canadian Division" label="3rd Canadian Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477391" start="25309" end="25330" title="4th Canadian Division" label="4th Canadian Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477376" start="25370" end="25391" title="5th Canadian Division" label="5th Canadian Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2815839" start="25515" end="25536" title="2nd Canadian Division" label="2nd Canadian Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2816553" start="25538" end="25559" title="3rd Canadian Division" label="3rd Canadian Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477391" start="25561" end="25582" title="4th Canadian Division" label="4th Canadian Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477376" start="25588" end="25609" title="5th Canadian Division" label="5th Canadian Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187401" start="25701" end="25743" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Ground Force" label="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Ground Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663913" start="25773" end="25789" title="Theater commands of the People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army" label="Theater Commands"/>
<link wikidata="Q4550926" start="26189" end="26208" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Air Force Airborne Corps" label="15th Airborne Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426199" start="26463" end="26480" title="Republic of China (1912–1949)" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q7582064" start="26569" end="26584" title="square division" label="square division"/>
<link wikidata="Q127785855" start="26966" end="26981" title="Sino-German cooperation (1911–1941)" label="German advisors"/>
<link wikidata="Q5551020" start="27043" end="27064" title="German-trained divisions in the National Revolutionary Army" label="Reorganized Divisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7840136" start="27251" end="27270" title="triangular division" label="triangular division"/>
<link wikidata="Q188497" start="27352" end="27357" title="Corps" label="Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2814448" start="27704" end="27718" title="200th Division" label="200th Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115107" start="27746" end="27760" title="Colombian Army" label="Colombian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q606138" start="27908" end="27920" title="1st Division of the Colombian National Army" label="1st Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q209016" start="27922" end="27933" title="Santa Marta" label="Santa Marta"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633667" start="28093" end="28105" title="2nd Division of the Colombian National Army" label="2nd Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q243766" start="28107" end="28118" title="Bucaramanga" label="Bucaramanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636753" start="28255" end="28267" title="3rd Division of the Colombian National Army" label="3rd Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q335135" start="28269" end="28276" title="Popayán" label="Popayán"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28476" end="28488" title="4th Division of the Colombian National Army" label="4th Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q749224" start="28490" end="28503" title="Villavicencio" label="Villavicencio"/>
<link wikidata="Q16824012" start="28638" end="28650" title="5th Division of the Colombian National Army" label="5th Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2841" start="28652" end="28658" title="Bogotá" label="Bogotá"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28797" end="28809" title="6th Division of the Colombian National Army" label="6th Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q849859" start="28811" end="28820" title="Florencia, Caquetá" label="Florencia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28969" end="28981" title="7th Division of the Colombian National Army" label="7th Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q48278" start="28983" end="28991" title="Medellin" label="Medellin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29133" end="29145" title="8th Division of the Colombian National Army" label="8th Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q13591" start="29147" end="29152" title="Yopal" label="Yopal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6479134" start="29398" end="29411" title="Egyptian Army" label="Egyptian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q6479134" start="29561" end="29574" title="Egyptian Army" label="Egyptian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633728" start="29810" end="29839" title="2nd Infantry Division (Egypt)" label="2nd Infantry Division (Egypt)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16119685" start="29926" end="29957" title="Central Military Region (Egypt)" label="Central Military Region (Egypt)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30048" end="30088" title="3rd Mechanized Infantry Division (Egypt)" label="3rd Mechanized Infantry Division (Egypt)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16119668" start="30176" end="30208" title="Northern Military Region (Egypt)" label="Northern Military Region (Egypt)"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="30349" end="30372" title="Operation Desert Shield" label="Operation Desert Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q49077" start="30466" end="30477" title="Six-Day War" label="Six-Day War"/>
<link wikidata="Q12185867" start="30504" end="30523" title="Second Army (Egypt)" label="Second Army (Egypt)"/>
<link wikidata="Q49100" start="30595" end="30611" title="Yom Kippur War" label="October 1973 War"/>
<link wikidata="Q12185867" start="30638" end="30657" title="Second Army (Egypt)" label="Second Army (Egypt)"/>
<link wikidata="Q49100" start="30739" end="30755" title="Yom Kippur War" label="October 1973 War"/>
<link wikidata="Q763742" start="30835" end="30847" title="Bar Lev Line" label="Bar Lev Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q12185867" start="31020" end="31039" title="Second Army (Egypt)" label="Second Army (Egypt)"/>
<link wikidata="Q49100" start="31099" end="31115" title="Yom Kippur War" label="October 1973 War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6479134" start="31168" end="31181" title="Egyptian Army" label="Egyptian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q49100" start="31215" end="31231" title="Yom Kippur War" label="October 1973 War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896722" start="31317" end="31331" title="Battle of Suez" label="Battle of Suez"/>
<link wikidata="Q12185866" start="31355" end="31373" title="Third Army (Egypt)" label="Third Army (Egypt)"/>
<link wikidata="Q49101" start="31415" end="31426" title="Suez Crisis" label="Suez Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q49100" start="31502" end="31518" title="Yom Kippur War" label="October 1973 War"/>
<link wikidata="Q12185866" start="31542" end="31560" title="Third Army (Egypt)" label="Third Army (Egypt)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16119675" start="31648" end="31679" title="Western Military Region (Egypt)" label="Western Military Region (Egypt)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16126476" start="31683" end="31712" title="4th Armoured Division (Egypt)" label="4th Armoured Division (Egypt)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6479134" start="31806" end="31819" title="Egyptian Army" label="Egyptian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q49100" start="32033" end="32049" title="Yom Kippur War" label="October 1973 War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32514" end="32533" title="Mechanized Division" label="Mechanized Division"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32581" end="32597" title="Armored Division" label="Armored Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q12185867" start="32621" end="32640" title="Second Army (Egypt)" label="Second Army (Egypt)"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="32726" end="32731" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16119685" start="32768" end="32799" title="Central Military Region (Egypt)" label="Central Military Region (Egypt)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32803" end="32824" title="21st Armoured Division (Egypt)" label="21st Armored Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q49077" start="32872" end="32883" title="Six-Day War" label="Six-Day War"/>
<link wikidata="Q49100" start="32888" end="32904" title="Yom Kippur War" label="October 1973 War"/>
<link wikidata="Q16119675" start="32931" end="32962" title="Western Military Region (Egypt)" label="Western Military Region (Egypt)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637368" start="33065" end="33075" title="Task force" label="Task force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="33156" end="33160" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076619" start="33296" end="33307" title="French Army" label="French Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q162515" start="33350" end="33360" title="1st Armored Division (France)" label="1 division"/>
<link wikidata="Q37776" start="33368" end="33376" title="Besançon" label="Besançon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636645" start="33380" end="33390" title="3rd Armored Division (France)" label="3 division"/>
<link wikidata="Q23482" start="33398" end="33407" title="Marseille" label="Marseille"/>
<link wikidata="Q540390" start="33584" end="33605" title="Franco-German Brigade" label="Franco-German Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602" start="33796" end="33806" title="Strasbourg" label="Strasbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q227795" start="33881" end="33895" title="Cesson-Sévigné" label="Cesson-Sévigné"/>
<link wikidata="Q648" start="33972" end="33977" title="Lille" label="Lille"/>
<link wikidata="Q114098" start="33981" end="34033" title="French Army Special Forces Command" label="&amp;quot;Commandement des actions spéciales Terre&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q132671" start="34035" end="34038" title="Pau, Pyrénées-Atlantiques" label="Pau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225058" start="34112" end="34130" title="Mourmelon-le-Grand" label="Mourmelon-le-Grand"/>
<link wikidata="Q11322507" start="34153" end="34164" title="German Army" label="German Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q163389" start="34188" end="34206" title="1st Armoured Division (Germany)" label="1st Panzerdivision"/>
<link wikidata="Q1715" start="34221" end="34229" title="Hannover" label="Hannover"/>
<link wikidata="Q164544" start="34233" end="34252" title="10th Armoured Division (Germany)" label="10th Panzerdivision"/>
<link wikidata="Q82858" start="34267" end="34278" title="Sigmaringen" label="Sigmaringen"/>
<link wikidata="Q883125" start="34282" end="34303" title="Special Operations Division (Germany)" label="Rapid Forces Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q573628" start="34318" end="34331" title="Veitshöchheim" label="Veitshöchheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496240" start="34448" end="34474" title="General Officer Commanding" label="General Officer Commanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q157148" start="34501" end="34514" title="major general" label="major general"/>
<link wikidata="Q2862927" start="34833" end="34848" title="Indonesian Army" label="Indonesian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q9240" start="34875" end="34885" title="Indonesian language" label="Indonesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q129154" start="34928" end="34935" title="Kostrad" label="Kostrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7365182" start="35152" end="35158" title="Regional Military Command" label="Kodams"/>
<link wikidata="Q129154" start="35283" end="35290" title="Kostrad" label="Kostrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q6029105" start="35298" end="35327" title="1st Kostrad Infantry Division" label="1st Kostrad Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q10396" start="35331" end="35336" title="Depok" label="Depok"/>
<link wikidata="Q3724" start="35338" end="35347" title="West Java" label="West Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q12481699" start="35350" end="35379" title="2nd Kostrad Infantry Division" label="2nd Kostrad Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q11445" start="35383" end="35389" title="Malang" label="Malang"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586" start="35391" end="35400" title="East Java" label="East Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q55741551" start="35403" end="35432" title="3rd Kostrad Infantry Division" label="3rd Kostrad Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q14601" start="35436" end="35440" title="Gowa" label="Gowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5078" start="35442" end="35456" title="South Sulawesi" label="South Sulawesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q12492032" start="35496" end="35537" title="Kodam I/Bukit Barisan" label="I Military Regional Command/Bukit Barisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5972" start="35541" end="35546" title="Medan" label="Medan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140" start="35548" end="35561" title="North Sumatra" label="North Sumatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6425174" start="35564" end="35602" title="Kodam II/Sriwijaya" label="II Military Regional Command/Sriwijaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q8131" start="35606" end="35615" title="Palembang" label="Palembang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271" start="35617" end="35630" title="South Sumatra" label="South Sumatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469443" start="35633" end="35672" title="Kodam III/Siliwangi" label="III Military Regional Command/Siliwangi"/>
<link wikidata="Q10389" start="35676" end="35683" title="Bandung" label="Bandung"/>
<link wikidata="Q3724" start="35685" end="35694" title="West Java" label="West Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q6425176" start="35697" end="35736" title="Kodam IV/Diponegoro" label="IV Military Regional Command/Diponegoro"/>
<link wikidata="Q11025" start="35740" end="35748" title="Semarang" label="Semarang"/>
<link wikidata="Q3557" start="35750" end="35762" title="Central Java" label="Central Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q6425179" start="35765" end="35802" title="Kodam V/Brawijaya" label="V Military Regional Command/Brawijaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q11462" start="35806" end="35814" title="Surabaya" label="Surabaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586" start="35816" end="35825" title="East Java" label="East Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q6425180" start="35828" end="35867" title="Kodam VI/Mulawarman" label="VI Military Regional Command/Mulawarman"/>
<link wikidata="Q14492" start="35871" end="35881" title="Balikpapan" label="Balikpapan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3899" start="35883" end="35898" title="East Kalimantan" label="East Kalimantan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12492036" start="35901" end="35937" title="Kodam IX/Udayana" label="IX Military Regional Command/Udayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q11506" start="35941" end="35949" title="Denpasar" label="Denpasar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125978" start="35951" end="35955" title="Bali" label="Bali"/>
<link wikidata="Q12492034" start="35958" end="35999" title="Kodam XII/Tanjungpura" label="XII Military Regional Command/Tanjungpura"/>
<link wikidata="Q14160" start="36003" end="36020" title="Kubu Raya Regency" label="Kubu Raya Regency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3916" start="36022" end="36037" title="West Kalimantan" label="West Kalimantan"/>
<link wikidata="Q25467763" start="36040" end="36078" title="Kodam XIII/Merdeka" label="XIII Military Regional Command/Merdeka"/>
<link wikidata="Q15847" start="36082" end="36088" title="Manado" label="Manado"/>
<link wikidata="Q5068" start="36090" end="36104" title="North Sulawesi" label="North Sulawesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q12492033" start="36107" end="36147" title="Kodam XIV/Hasanuddin" label="XIV Military Regional Command/Hasanuddin"/>
<link wikidata="Q14634" start="36151" end="36159" title="Makassar" label="Makassar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5078" start="36161" end="36175" title="South Sulawesi" label="South Sulawesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q12492037" start="36178" end="36216" title="Kodam XV/Pattimura" label="XV Military Regional Command/Pattimura"/>
<link wikidata="Q18970" start="36220" end="36225" title="Ambon, Maluku" label="Ambon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5093" start="36227" end="36233" title="Maluku (province)" label="Maluku"/>
<link wikidata="Q6624432" start="36236" end="36279" title="Kodam XVII/Cenderawasih" label="XVII Military Regional Command/Cenderawasih"/>
<link wikidata="Q27860" start="36283" end="36291" title="Jayapura" label="Jayapura"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095" start="36293" end="36298" title="Papua (province)" label="Papua"/>
<link wikidata="Q85774772" start="36301" end="36340" title="Kodam XVIII/Kasuari" label="XVIII Military Regional Command/Kasuari"/>
<link wikidata="Q848672" start="36344" end="36353" title="Manokwari" label="Manokwari"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096" start="36355" end="36365" title="West Papua (province)" label="West Papua"/>
<link wikidata="Q136765" start="36368" end="36403" title="Kodam Jayakarta" label="Military Regional Command Jayakarta"/>
<link wikidata="Q10111" start="36407" end="36419" title="East Jakarta" label="East Jakarta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630" start="36421" end="36428" title="Jakarta" label="Jakarta"/>
<link wikidata="Q12492035" start="36431" end="36470" title="Kodam Iskandar Muda" label="Military Regional Command Iskandar Muda"/>
<link wikidata="Q5779" start="36474" end="36484" title="Banda Aceh" label="Banda Aceh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823" start="36486" end="36490" title="Aceh" label="Aceh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669350" start="36496" end="36519" title="Indonesian Marine Corps" label="Indonesian Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36559" end="36587" title="Indonesian Marine Corps#Marine Force" label="1st Marine Forces (Pasmar-1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11129" start="36591" end="36599" title="Sidoarjo" label="Sidoarjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586" start="36601" end="36610" title="East Java" label="East Java"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36613" end="36641" title="Indonesian Marine Corps#Marine Force" label="2nd Marine Forces (Pasmar-2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q192987" start="36645" end="36653" title="Cilandak" label="Cilandak"/>
<link wikidata="Q10114" start="36655" end="36668" title="South Jakarta" label="South Jakarta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36671" end="36699" title="Indonesian Marine Corps#Marine Force" label="3rd Marine Forces (Pasmar-3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q26837" start="36703" end="36709" title="Sorong" label="Sorong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096" start="36711" end="36721" title="West Papua (province)" label="West Papua"/>
<link wikidata="Q136765" start="37490" end="37505" title="Kodam Jayakarta" label="Kodam Jayakarta"/>
<link wikidata="Q58967" start="37974" end="37996" title="Israeli Defense Forces" label="Israeli Defense Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628208" start="38192" end="38213" title="36th Division (IDF)" label="36th Armored Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619015" start="38216" end="38241" title="98th Paratroopers Division (IDF)" label="98th Paratrooper Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q577202" start="38244" end="38266" title="162nd Division (IDF)" label="162nd Armored Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337749" start="38292" end="38317" title="80th Division (IDF)" label="80th Territorial Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336170" start="38340" end="38365" title="91st Division (IDF)" label="91st Territorial Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2615509" start="38390" end="38416" title="Gaza Division" label="143rd Territorial Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q30684122" start="38438" end="38464" title="210th Division (Israel)" label="210th Territorial Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351303" start="38488" end="38514" title="Judea and Samaria Division" label="877th Territorial Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q97207474" start="38571" end="38593" title="99th Infantry Division (Israel)" label="99th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896099" start="38618" end="38640" title="319th Division (IDF)" label="146th Armored Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4420001" start="38665" end="38687" title="Sinai Division" label="252nd Armored Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q889751" start="38725" end="38756" title="Japan Ground Self-Defense Force" label="Japan Ground Self-Defense Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418029" start="38771" end="38784" title="combined arms" label="combined arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q152951" start="39032" end="39050" title="lieutenant general" label="lieutenant general"/>
<link wikidata="Q4596307" start="39133" end="39145" title="1st Division (Japan)" label="1st Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q232655" start="39150" end="39156" title="Nerima" label="Nerima"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633662" start="39159" end="39171" title="2nd Division (Japan)" label="2nd Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q200740" start="39176" end="39185" title="Asahikawa, Hokkaidō" label="Asahikawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636751" start="39188" end="39200" title="3rd Division (Japan)" label="3rd Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q335444" start="39205" end="39210" title="Itami" label="Itami"/>
<link wikidata="Q5355366" start="39213" end="39225" title="4th Division (Japan)" label="4th Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q47084" start="39230" end="39236" title="Kasuga, Fukuoka" label="Kasuga"/>
<link wikidata="Q4642656" start="39239" end="39251" title="6th Division (Japan)" label="6th Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q823927" start="39256" end="39265" title="Higashine, Yamagata" label="Higashine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644017" start="39268" end="39280" title="7th Division (Japan)" label="7th Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q693237" start="39295" end="39302" title="Chitose, Hokkaidō" label="Chitose"/>
<link wikidata="Q4645345" start="39305" end="39317" title="8th Division (Japan)" label="8th Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q130308" start="39322" end="39330" title="Kumamoto Prefecture" label="Kumamoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q4646543" start="39333" end="39345" title="9th Division (Japan)" label="9th Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q146790" start="39350" end="39356" title="Aomori, Aomori" label="Aomori"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547036" start="39359" end="39372" title="10th Division (Japan)" label="10th Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q11751" start="39377" end="39383" title="Nagoya" label="Nagoya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078095" start="39426" end="39439" title="Pakistan Army" label="Pakistan Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799545" start="39915" end="39930" title="Philippine Army" label="Philippine Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q157148" start="40071" end="40084" title="major general" label="major general"/>
<link wikidata="Q102356" start="40103" end="40110" title="Brigade" label="Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q4596387" start="40137" end="40176" title="1st Infantry Division (Philippines)" label="1st Infantry &amp;quot;Tabak&amp;quot; Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633725" start="40179" end="40227" title="2nd Infantry Division (Philippines)" label="2nd Infantry &amp;quot;Jungle Fighter&amp;quot; Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636798" start="40230" end="40282" title="3rd Infantry Division (Philippines)" label="3rd Infantry &amp;quot;Spearhead Troopers&amp;quot; Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4639310" start="40285" end="40326" title="4th Infantry Division (Philippines)" label="4th Infantry &amp;quot;Diamond&amp;quot; Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4641329" start="40329" end="40367" title="5th Infantry Division (Philippines)" label="5th Infantry &amp;quot;Star&amp;quot; Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4642690" start="40370" end="40412" title="6th Infantry Division (Philippines)" label="6th Infantry &amp;quot;Kampilan&amp;quot; Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644071" start="40415" end="40456" title="7th Infantry Division (Philippines)" label="7th Infantry &amp;quot;Kaugnay&amp;quot; Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4645376" start="40459" end="40506" title="8th Infantry Division (Philippines)" label="8th Infantry &amp;quot;Storm Trooper&amp;quot; Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4646575" start="40509" end="40548" title="9th Infantry Division (Philippines)" label="9th Infantry &amp;quot;Spear&amp;quot; Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547069" start="40551" end="40591" title="10th Infantry Division (Philippines)" label="10th Infantry &amp;quot;Agila&amp;quot; Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q60787108" start="40594" end="40636" title="11th Infantry Division (Philippines)" label="11th Infantry &amp;quot;Alakdan&amp;quot; Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q97354354" start="40639" end="40673" title="Armor &amp;quot;Pambato&amp;quot; Division" label="Armor &amp;quot;Pambato&amp;quot; Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q7915590" start="40712" end="40731" title="Soviet Armed Forces" label="Soviet Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="41522" end="41530" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q860413" start="41851" end="41859" title="Streltsy" label="Streltsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q55647610" start="42921" end="42953" title="Anti-Aircraft Artillery Division (Soviet Union)" label="Anti-Aircraft Artillery Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781069" start="43025" end="43041" title="Mechanised corps (Soviet Union)" label="mechanised corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q4407246" start="43968" end="43994" title="armoured personnel carrier" label="armoured personnel carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q977436" start="44725" end="44748" title="Russian Airborne Forces" label="Russian Airborne Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q4029275" start="46312" end="46347" title="18th Machine Gun Artillery Division" label="18th Machine Gun Artillery Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q23132425" start="46394" end="46399" title="126th Machine Gun Artillery Division" label="126th"/>
<link wikidata="Q104842553" start="46408" end="46413" title="128th Machine Gun Artillery Division" label="128th"/>
<link wikidata="Q4029149" start="46415" end="46427" title="129th Guards Machine Gun Artillery Division" label="129th Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q23198498" start="46429" end="46434" title="130th Machine Gun Artillery Division" label="130th"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894529" start="46834" end="46862" title="2008 Russian military reform" label="2008 Russian military reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031386" start="46992" end="47013" title="Russian Ground Forces" label="Russian Ground Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q4029875" start="47035" end="47066" title="2nd Guards Tamanskaya Motor Rifle Division" label="2nd Guards Motor Rifle Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="47070" end="47076" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q28650707" start="47079" end="47103" title="3rd Motor Rifle Division" label="3rd Motor Rifle Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q132957" start="47107" end="47114" title="Valuyki, Belgorod Oblast" label="Valuyki"/>
<link wikidata="Q4031232" start="47117" end="47141" title="4th Guards Kantemirovskaya Tank Division" label="4th Guards Tank Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q164001" start="47145" end="47157" title="Naro-Fominsk" label="Naro-Fominsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4029275" start="47160" end="47195" title="18th Machine Gun Artillery Division" label="18th Machine Gun Artillery Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4146315" start="47199" end="47217" title="Goryachiye Klyuchi, Kurilsky District, Sakhalin Oblast" label="Goryachiye Klyuchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q96694250" start="47220" end="47245" title="19th Motor Rifle Division" label="19th Motor Rifle Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q5239" start="47249" end="47260" title="Vladikavkaz" label="Vladikavkaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4031354" start="47263" end="47295" title="42nd Guards Motor Rifle Division" label="42nd Guards Motor Rifle Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4495489" start="47299" end="47307" title="Khankala" label="Khankala"/>
<link wikidata="Q28650683" start="47310" end="47335" title="90th Guards Tank Division (2016–present)" label="90th Guards Tank Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q197860" start="47339" end="47348" title="Chebarkul" label="Chebarkul"/>
<link wikidata="Q4548556" start="47351" end="47377" title="127th Motor Rifle Division (Russia)" label="127th Motor Rifle Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4341" start="47393" end="47407" title="Primorsky Krai" label="Primorsky Krai"/>
<link wikidata="Q28650772" start="47410" end="47436" title="144th Guards Motor Rifle Division" label="144th Motor Rifle Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q102364" start="47440" end="47446" title="Yelnya, Yelninsky District, Smolensk Oblast" label="Yelnya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986734" start="47449" end="47475" title="150th Rifle Division (Soviet Union)" label="150th Motor Rifle Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q175452" start="47479" end="47492" title="Novocherkassk" label="Novocherkassk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4084274" start="47498" end="47532" title="Coastal Troops of the Russian Navy" label="Coastal Troops of the Russian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17462382" start="47541" end="47573" title="18th Guards Motor Rifle Division" label="18th Guards Motor Rifle Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1829" start="47577" end="47588" title="Kaliningrad" label="Kaliningrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q977436" start="47594" end="47617" title="Russian Airborne Forces" label="Russian Airborne Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2470360" start="47638" end="47678" title="7th Guards Mountain Air Assault Division" label="7th Guards Mountain Air Assault Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q15760" start="47682" end="47694" title="Novorossiysk" label="Novorossiysk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357" start="47697" end="47729" title="76th Guards Air Assault Division" label="76th Guards Air Assault Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2214" start="47733" end="47738" title="Pskov" label="Pskov"/>
<link wikidata="Q4646248" start="47741" end="47770" title="98th Guards Airborne Division" label="98th Guards Airborne Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630" start="47774" end="47781" title="Ivanovo" label="Ivanovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4028267" start="47784" end="47814" title="104th Guards Airborne Division" label="104th Guards Airborne Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q5627" start="47818" end="47827" title="Ulyanovsk" label="Ulyanovsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982881" start="47830" end="47860" title="106th Guards Airborne Division" label="106th Guards Airborne Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2770" start="47864" end="47868" title="Tula, Russia" label="Tula"/>
<link wikidata="Q63113668" start="47874" end="47898" title="Strategic Missile Forces" label="Strategic Missile Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q4032226" start="47920" end="47946" title="7th Guards Rocket Division" label="7th Guards Rocket Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4129075" start="47950" end="47959" title="Vypolzovo" label="Vypolzovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q282116" start="47985" end="48010" title="Pervomaysky (urban-type settlement), Kirov Oblast" label="Pervomaysky, Kirov Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q4028690" start="48013" end="48044" title="13th Red Banner Rocket Division" label="13th Red Banner Rocket Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q627080" start="48048" end="48060" title="Dombarovsky (air base)" label="Dombarovskiy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449" start="48087" end="48098" title="Yoshkar-Ola" label="Yoshkar-Ola"/>
<link wikidata="Q4030512" start="48101" end="48128" title="28th Guards Rocket Division" label="28th Guards Rocket Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q154661" start="48132" end="48139" title="Kozelsk" label="Kozelsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4030553" start="48142" end="48169" title="29th Guards Rocket Division" label="29th Guards Rocket Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q6576" start="48173" end="48180" title="Irkutsk" label="Irkutsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4030989" start="48183" end="48203" title="35th Rocket Division" label="35th Rocket Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q6014" start="48207" end="48214" title="Barnaul" label="Barnaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q883" start="48248" end="48259" title="Novosibirsk" label="Novosibirsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3895962" start="48262" end="48282" title="42nd Rocket Division" label="42nd Rocket Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q98967" start="48286" end="48299" title="Nizhniy Tagil" label="Nizhniy Tagil"/>
<link wikidata="Q4031786" start="48302" end="48329" title="54th Guards Rocket Division" label="54th Guards Rocket Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q196643" start="48333" end="48340" title="Teykovo" label="Teykovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3540884" start="48367" end="48377" title="Tatischevo (airbase)" label="Tatischevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4032032" start="48380" end="48400" title="62nd Rocket Division" label="62nd Rocket Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q196803" start="48404" end="48409" title="Uzhur" label="Uzhur"/>
<link wikidata="Q23764150" start="48509" end="48533" title="National Guard of Russia" label="National Guard of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030274" start="48537" end="48565" title="Separate Operational Purpose Division" label="Operational Purpose Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4431759" start="48596" end="48613" title="Aviation Division" label="Aviation Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q209833" start="48674" end="48691" title="Russian Air Force" label="Russian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813699" start="48807" end="48826" title="1st Infantry Division (South Africa)" label="1 Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633729" start="48895" end="48914" title="2nd Infantry Division (South Africa)" label="2 Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q8179618" start="48977" end="48996" title="6th Armoured Division (South Africa)" label="6 Armoured Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q20981343" start="49041" end="49060" title="7 South African Infantry Division" label="7 Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q20981344" start="49171" end="49190" title="8th Armoured Division (South Africa)" label="8 Armoured Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q25303333" start="49280" end="49299" title="9th Division (South Africa)" label="9 Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="49424" end="49436" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q157148" start="49467" end="49480" title="major general" label="major general"/>
<link wikidata="Q161896" start="49672" end="49701" title="1st (United Kingdom) Division" label="1st (United Kingdom) Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q223165" start="49704" end="49733" title="3rd (United Kingdom) Division" label="3rd (United Kingdom) Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471075" start="49791" end="49835" title="2nd Infantry Division (United Kingdom)" label="2nd Division – Scotland and Northern England"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="49854" end="49863" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2709225" start="49866" end="49897" title="4th Infantry Division (United Kingdom)" label="4th Division – Southern England"/>
<link wikidata="Q646980" start="49916" end="49925" title="Aldershot" label="Aldershot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185093" start="49928" end="49986" title="5th Infantry Division (United Kingdom)" label="5th Division – Wales, English Midlands and Eastern England"/>
<link wikidata="Q201970" start="50005" end="50015" title="Shrewsbury" label="Shrewsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775326" start="50018" end="50047" title="6th (United Kingdom) Division" label="6th (United Kingdom) Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229979" start="50066" end="50072" title="Upavon" label="Upavon"/>
<link wikidata="Q119805798" start="50244" end="50273" title="Guards and Parachute Division" label="Guards and Parachute Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q28225253" start="50291" end="50325" title="Scottish, Welsh and Irish Division" label="Scottish, Welsh and Irish Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410927" start="50343" end="50363" title="King&amp;#x27;s Division" label="King&amp;#x27;s Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269979" start="50381" end="50402" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Division" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437706" start="50420" end="50437" title="Scottish Division" label="Scottish Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244366" start="50452" end="50482" title="Prince of Wales&amp;#x27; Division" label="Prince of Wales&amp;#x27; Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q3032404" start="50497" end="50511" title="Light Division (United Kingdom)" label="Light Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q3280545" start="50750" end="50763" title="Major general (United States)" label="major general"/>
<link wikidata="Q188497" start="50794" end="50799" title="corps" label="corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451931" start="51114" end="51127" title="fires brigade" label="fires brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q163659" start="51291" end="51312" title="1st Infantry Division (United States)" label="1st Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438701" start="51316" end="51326" title="Fort Riley" label="Fort Riley"/>
<link wikidata="Q163673" start="51337" end="51357" title="1st Armored Division (United States)" label="1st Armored Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q707110" start="51361" end="51371" title="Fort Bliss" label="Fort Bliss"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338" start="51381" end="51401" title="1st Cavalry Division (United States)" label="1st Cavalry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q783854" start="51405" end="51417" title="Fort Cavazos" label="Fort Cavazos"/>
<link wikidata="Q210607" start="51427" end="51448" title="2nd Infantry Division (United States)" label="2nd Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q626752" start="51452" end="51466" title="Camp Humphreys" label="Camp Humphreys"/>
<link wikidata="Q999280" start="51487" end="51511" title="Joint Base Lewis-McChord" label="Joint Base Lewis-McChord"/>
<link wikidata="Q223551" start="51526" end="51547" title="3rd Infantry Division (United States)" label="3rd Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438754" start="51551" end="51563" title="Fort Stewart" label="Fort Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438462" start="51580" end="51590" title="Fort Moore" label="Fort Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q231293" start="51602" end="51623" title="4th Infantry Division (United States)" label="4th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q602739" start="51627" end="51638" title="Fort Carson" label="Fort Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q261179" start="51651" end="51672" title="7th Infantry Division (United States)" label="7th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q999280" start="51705" end="51729" title="Joint Base Lewis-McChord" label="Joint Base Lewis-McChord"/>
<link wikidata="Q164669" start="51744" end="51774" title="10th Mountain Division (United States)" label="10th Mountain Division (Light)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150555" start="51778" end="51787" title="Fort Drum" label="Fort Drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438661" start="51805" end="51817" title="Fort Johnson" label="Fort Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q169980" start="51831" end="51853" title="11th Airborne Division (United States)" label="11th Airborne Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148639" start="51857" end="51888" title="Joint Base Elmendorf–Richardson" label="Joint Base Elmendorf–Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q217777" start="51899" end="51921" title="25th Infantry Division (United States)" label="25th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430708" start="51925" end="51943" title="Schofield Barracks" label="Schofield Barracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358" start="51954" end="51976" title="82nd Airborne Division" label="82nd Airborne Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q991369" start="51980" end="51990" title="Fort Bragg" label="Fort Bragg"/>
<link wikidata="Q165256" start="52009" end="52046" title="101st Airborne Division" label="101st Airborne Division (Air Assault)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385040" start="52050" end="52063" title="Fort Campbell" label="Fort Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q689764" start="52079" end="52098" title="Army National Guard" label="Army National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640018" start="52132" end="52154" title="28th Infantry Division (United States)" label="28th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132721" start="52156" end="52175" title="Fort Indiantown Gap" label="Fort Indiantown Gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715528" start="52192" end="52214" title="29th Infantry Division (United States)" label="29th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375761" start="52216" end="52228" title="Fort Belvoir" label="Fort Belvoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q226238" start="52241" end="52263" title="34th Infantry Division (United States)" label="34th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986505" start="52265" end="52285" title="Rosemount, Minnesota" label="Rosemount, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q2612812" start="52288" end="52310" title="35th Infantry Division (United States)" label="35th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q590879" start="52312" end="52328" title="Fort Leavenworth" label="Fort Leavenworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2612933" start="52339" end="52361" title="36th Infantry Division (United States)" label="36th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027374" start="52363" end="52373" title="Camp Mabry" label="Camp Mabry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636022" start="52383" end="52405" title="38th Infantry Division (United States)" label="38th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q6346" start="52407" end="52419" title="Indianapolis" label="Indianapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4637475" start="52431" end="52453" title="40th Infantry Division (United States)" label="40th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298050" start="52455" end="52472" title="Los Alamitos JFTB" label="Los Alamitos JFTB"/>
<link wikidata="Q4637801" start="52487" end="52509" title="42nd Infantry Division (United States)" label="42nd Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q600301" start="52511" end="52525" title="Troy, New York" label="Troy, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036662" start="52571" end="52583" title="United States Army Reserve" label="Army Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q2818310" start="52644" end="52670" title="78th Infantry Division (United States)" label="78th Division (Operations)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087465" start="52672" end="52704" title="Joint Base McGuire–Dix–Lakehurst" label="Joint Base McGuire–Dix–Lakehurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644938" start="52719" end="52750" title="86th Infantry Division (United States)" label="86th Division (Decisive Action)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471614" start="52752" end="52762" title="Fort McCoy (Wisconsin)" label="Fort McCoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2818687" start="52776" end="52802" title="91st Division (United States)" label="91st Division (Operations)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471380" start="52804" end="52823" title="Fort Hunter Liggett" label="Fort Hunter Liggett"/>
<link wikidata="Q4032754" start="52838" end="52871" title="94th Infantry Division (United States)" label="94th Division (Force Sustainment)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376750" start="52873" end="52889" title="Fort Gregg-Adams" label="Fort Gregg-Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q4032758" start="52902" end="52932" title="95th Infantry Division (United States)" label="95th Division (Entry Training)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018681" start="52934" end="52943" title="Fort Sill" label="Fort Sill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4646234" start="52956" end="52986" title="98th Infantry Division (United States)" label="98th Division (Entry Training)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438462" start="52988" end="52998" title="Fort Moore" label="Fort Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q4028187" start="53010" end="53046" title="100th Infantry Division (United States)" label="100th Division (Operational Support)"/>
<link wikidata="Q983650" start="53048" end="53057" title="Fort Knox" label="Fort Knox"/>
<link wikidata="Q4028240" start="53070" end="53103" title="102nd Infantry Division (United States)" label="102nd Division (Maneuver Support)"/>
<link wikidata="Q964399" start="53105" end="53122" title="Fort Leonard Wood" label="Fort Leonard Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q4546544" start="53135" end="53167" title="104th Infantry Division (United States)" label="104th Division (Leader Training)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505731" start="53169" end="53179" title="Fort Lewis (Washington)" label="Fort Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="53197" end="53223" title="United States Marine Corps" label="United States Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q4634859" start="53828" end="53836" title="31st MEU" label="31st MEU"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887091" start="53908" end="53931" title="Unit Deployment Program" label="Unit Deployment Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q163669" start="53936" end="53955" title="1st Marine Division (United States)" label="1st Marine Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q195334" start="53959" end="53973" title="Camp Pendleton" label="Camp Pendleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q210606" start="53988" end="54007" title="2nd Marine Division (United States)" label="2nd Marine Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479693" start="54011" end="54023" title="Marine Corps Base Camp Lejeune" label="Camp Lejeune"/>
<link wikidata="Q223547" start="54042" end="54061" title="3rd Marine Division (United States)" label="3rd Marine Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q6764078" start="54065" end="54087" title="Marine Corps Base Camp Smedley D. Butler" label="Camp Smedley D. Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q231284" start="54106" end="54147" title="4th Marine Division (United States)" label="4th Marine Division (&amp;quot;Reserve&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="54217" end="54228" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q483268" start="54261" end="54283" title="Republic of Korea Army" label="Republic of Korea Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q487238" start="55622" end="55638" title="Republic of Korea Marine Corps" label="ROK Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q102356" start="55732" end="55739" title="brigade" label="brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q152956" start="55911" end="55928" title="brigadier general" label="brigadier general"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505986" start="56035" end="56050" title="Venezuelan Army" label="Venezuelan Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q868698" start="56791" end="56819" title="Air Division (United States)" label="Air Division (United States)"/>
<link wikidata="Q946868" start="56822" end="56827" title="Tumen (unit)" label="Tumen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3740101" start="56830" end="56856" title="List of military divisions" label="List of military divisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q15627509" start="56859" end="56880" title="Military organization" label="Military organization"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="145416" wikidata="Q6382533" url="?curid=145416" title="Battalion">
<text>A battalion is a military unit, typically consisting of up to one thousand soldiers. Commanded by a lieutenant colonel and subdivided into several companies, each typically commanded by a major or a captain. The typical battalion is built from three operational companies, one weapons company and one headquarters company. In some countries, battalions are exclusively infantry, while in others battalions are unit-level organizations. The word &quot;battalion&quot; has its origins in the Late Latin word &quot;battalion&quot;, which is derived from &quot;battalia&quot;, meaning &quot;battle&quot; or &quot;combat.&quot; The term was used to describe a large group of soldiers ready for battle. Over time, its meaning evolved in military terminology.

The word &quot;battalion&quot; came into the English language in the 16th century from the French , meaning &quot;battle squadron&quot; (similar to the Italian meaning the same thing) and the Spanish , derived from the Vulgar Latin noun (&quot;battle&quot;) and ultimately from the Classical Latin verb (&quot;to beat&quot; or &quot;to strike&quot;). The first use of the word in English is attested in the 1580s.

==Description==
A battalion is composed of two or more primary mission companies, which are often of a common type (e.g., infantry, tank, or maintenance), although there are exceptions, such as combined arms battalions in the U.S. Army. In addition to the primary mission companies, a battalion typically includes a headquarters staff and combat service support, which may be combined into a headquarters and service company. A battalion may contain a combat support company. With all these components, a battalion is the smallest military unit capable of &quot;limited independent operations&quot;.

The battalion must have a source of resupply to enable it to sustain operations for more than a few days. This is because a battalion&#x27;s complement of ammunition, expendable weapons (e.g., hand grenades and disposable rocket launchers), water, rations, fuel, lubricants, replacement parts, batteries, and medical supplies normally consists of only what the battalion&#x27;s soldiers and the battalion&#x27;s vehicles can carry.

The commander&#x27;s staff coordinates and plans operations. A battalion&#x27;s subordinate companies and their platoons are dependent upon the battalion headquarters for command, control, communications and intelligence, and the battalion&#x27;s service and support structure. The battalion is usually part of a regiment, group, or brigade, depending on the branch of service.

==NATO==
NATO defines a battalion as being &quot;larger than a company, but smaller than a regiment&quot; while &quot;consisting of two or more company-, battery-, or troop-sized units along with a headquarters.&quot; The standard NATO symbol for a battalion represented by a pair of vertical lines above a framed unit icon. Member nations have specified the various names they will use for organisations of this size.

== British Army ==

The term &quot;battalion&quot; is used in the British Army Infantry and some corps including the Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers and Intelligence Corps. It was formerly used in the Royal Engineers (before they switched to regiments), and was also used in the now defunct Royal Army Ordnance Corps and Royal Pioneer Corps. Other corps usually use the term &quot;regiment&quot; instead.

An infantry battalion is numbered ordinarily within its regiment (e.g., 1st Battalion, The Rifles, usually referred to as 1 Rifles). It normally has a headquarters company, support company and three rifle companies (usually, but not always, A, B and C companies). Each company is commanded by a major, the officer commanding (OC), with a captain or senior lieutenant as second-in-command (2IC). The HQ company contains signals, quartermaster, catering, intelligence, administration, pay, training, operations and medical elements. The support company usually contains anti-tank, machine gun, mortar, pioneer and reconnaissance platoons. Mechanised units usually have an attached light aid detachment (LAD) of the Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers (REME) to perform field repairs on vehicles and equipment. A British battalion in theatre during World War II had around 845 men; as of 2012, a British battalion had around 650 soldiers. With successive rounds of cutbacks after the war, many infantry regiments were reduced to a single battalion (others were amalgamated to form large regiments that maintained multiple battalions, e.g., the Royal Anglian Regiment).

Important figures in a battalion headquarters include:
* Commanding officer (CO) (invariably a lieutenant colonel)
* Second-in-command (2i/c) (major)
* Adjutant (captain)
* Quartermaster (QM) (LE captain)
* Quartermaster (technical) (QM(T))
* Medical officer (MO) (Royal Army Medical Service captain or major)
* Administrative officer (Adjutant General&#x27;s Corps captain or major)
* Padre (Royal Army Chaplains Department chaplain 4th or 3rd class)
* Operations officer (Ops) (lieutenant)
* Intelligence officer (IO) (lieutenant or captain)
* Regimental Signals officer (RSO) (Royal Corps of Signals captain)
* Regimental sergeant major (RSM) (warrant officer class 1)
* Regimental quartermaster sergeant (RQMS) (warrant officer class 2)
* Regimental quartermaster sergeant (technical) (RQMS(T)) (warrant officer class 2)
Battalions of other corps are given separate cardinal numbers within their corps (e.g., 101 Battalion REME).

=== Battle group ===
A battle group consists of an infantry battalion or armoured regiment with sub-units detached from other military units acting under the command of the battalion commander.

== Canadian Army ==
In the Canadian Army, the battalion is the standard unit organisation for infantry and combat service support and each battalion is divided into one or more sub-units referred to as companies.
In the Canadian Forces, most battalions are reserve units of between 100 and 200 soldiers that include an operationally ready, field-deployable component of approximately a half-company apiece. The nine regular force infantry battalions each contain three or four rifle companies and one or two support companies. Canadian battalions are generally commanded by lieutenant-colonels, though smaller reserve battalions may be commanded by majors.

Those regiments consisting of more than one battalion are:
* The Royal Canadian Regiment (three regular and one reserve battalions)
* Princess Patricia&#x27;s Canadian Light Infantry (three regular battalions)
* Royal 22e Régiment (three regular and two reserve battalions)
* The Royal Newfoundland Regiment (two reserve battalions)
Tactically, the Canadian battalion forms the core of the infantry battle group, which also includes various supporting elements such as armour, artillery, combat engineers and combat service support. An infantry battle group will typically be commanded by the commander of the core infantry battalion around which it is formed and can range in size from 300 to 1,500 or more soldiers, depending on the nature of the mission assigned.

== Indian Army ==
A battalion in the Indian Army consists of four rifle companies. In turn, each rifle company consists three platoons. A battalion in the Indian Army is commanded by a colonel. Normally a battalion is attached to a regiment of infantry, which is organised, as a general rule, of a number of battalions and the regimental centre battalion.

== Royal Netherlands Army ==
In the Royal Netherlands Army, a mechanised infantry battalion usually consists of one command- and medical company, three mechanised infantry companies and one support company, which has three platoons with heavy mortars and three platoons with anti-tank missiles (TOW). With the Dutch artillery units, the equivalent of a battalion is called an (which translates to &quot;section&quot;).

Combat companies consist of (usually mechanised) infantry, combat engineers, or tanks. In the latter case, the unit is called an , which translates roughly to &quot;squadron&quot;. There are also support battalions in the Dutch Army, which specialise on a specific task: for example, supplies and transport or communications.

The Netherlands have four battalions that are permanently reserved for the United Nations, for the purpose of peacekeeping duties.

An infantry battalion, logistical battalion, combat battalion and the Netherlands Marine Corps all have a battalion structure. Each battalion usually consists of the following:
* Battalion command
** Commander
** Second in command
* General service
** Personnel section
** Intelligence section
** Operations section
** Materiel section
** Communication section
* Command company
** Command group
** Administration group
** Medical group
** Communication group
** Supply platoon
* Three infantry companies
* Support company
** Command group
** Recon platoon
** Mortar platoon
** Anti-tank platoon

== Soviet Armed Forces ==

=== Motorised rifle battalion ===

In the Soviet Armed Forces, a motorised rifle battalion could be mounted in either BTR armoured personnel carriers or BMP infantry fighting vehicles, with the former being more numerous into the late 1980s. Both consisted of a battalion headquarters of 12 personnel and three motorised rifle companies of 110 personnel each, along with a number of combat support units: a mortar battery consisting of eight 120 mm 120-PM-43 mortars or automatic 82 mm 2B9 Vasileks, an air defence platoon with nine MANPADs, either the SA-7 Grail, SA-14 Gremlin or SA-16 Gimlet and an automatic grenade launcher platoon with six 30 mm AGS-17 launchers. The BTR battalion also featured an anti-tank platoon with four AT-3 Sagger or AT-4 Spigot launchers and two 73 mm SPG-9 recoilless guns; BTR units on high-readiness status sometimes had six missile launchers and three recoilless guns. Both featured the same support units as well, with a signal platoon, supply platoon, repair workshop and medical aid station. The addition of the antitank platoon meant that a BTR battalion at full strength was 525 personnel and 60 BTRs, including three command variants, while a BMP battalion consisted of 497 personnel and 45 BMPs, including three command variants.

=== Tank battalion ===

Prior to the late 1980s, Soviet tank battalions consisted of three tank companies of 13 T-64, T-72 or T-80 tanks each, along with a battalion headquarters mounted in a command tank and a headquarters and service platoon, for a total of 165 personnel and 40 tanks; battalions using the older T-54, T-55 or T-62s tanks had 31 or 40 additional enlisted personnel. However, forces in Eastern Europe began to standardise to a smaller formation with 135 personnel and 31 tanks total, with each tank company consisting of 10 tanks total.

=== Artillery battalion ===

A Soviet artillery battalion in the late 1980s consisted of a battalion headquarters, a headquarters platoon, a maintenance and supply platoon and three firing batteries, each with six artillery pieces, whether the self-propelled 2S1 Gvozdikas or the towed D-30 howitzers, and numbering 260 personnel or 240 personnel respectively. Rocket launcher artillery battalions consisted of a headquarters and headquarters platoon, a service battery and three firing batteries equipped with BM-21 Grads for a total of 255 personnel.

== Sweden ==

A Swedish battalion during the mid-17th century up to the mid-18th century was the smallest tactical unit in combat. The 600-man unit was formed, temporarily, at the inception of a battle by joining four-foot companies from a foot regiment of eight companies. The commander of the regiment, an (colonel), led the first battalion and his deputy, an (lieutenant colonel), the second battalion. Battalion commanders and all other officers marched in front of the formation. Non-commissioned officers (&quot;underofficers&quot;) marched beside and behind to prevent desertion, and to replace officers who were killed. In addition to his principal duties, senior officers, such as , the and , also commanded a company. So that the could focus on the operations of his regiment and first battalion, command of his company was delegated to a . During battle, each officer, except the , was in charge of a portion of his company. &quot;Underofficer&quot; (NCO) ranks consisted of , , , and .

== Swiss Army ==
With the major reform of its armed forces in 2004, the Swiss Army abandoned the old regimental system and adopted a combat team approach centred on battalions as the building blocks of mission-oriented task forces. Battalion sizes vary between branches.

== United States Armed Forces ==

=== United States Army ===

In the United States Army, a battalion is a unit composed of a headquarters and two to six batteries, companies, or troops. They are normally identified by ordinal numbers (1st Battalion, 2nd Squadron, etc.) and normally have subordinate units that are identified by single letters (Battery A, Company A, Troop A, etc.). Battalions are tactical and administrative organizations with a limited capability to plan and conduct independent operations and are normally organic components of brigades, groups, or regiments.

A U.S. Army battalion includes the battalion commander (lieutenant colonel), executive officer (major), command sergeant major (CSM), headquarters staff and usually three to five companies, with a total of 300 to 1,000 (but typically 500 to 600) soldiers.

During the American Civil War, an infantry or cavalry battalion was an ad hoc grouping of companies from the parent regiment (which had ten companies, A through K, minus J as described below), except for certain regular infantry regiments, which were formally organized into three battalions of six companies each (numbered 1–6 per battalion vice sequential letter designations). After 1882, cavalry battalions were renamed squadrons and cavalry companies were renamed troops. Artillery battalions typically comprised four or more batteries, although this number fluctuated considerably.

During World War II, most infantry regiments consisted of three battalions (1st, 2nd and 3rd) with each battalion consisting of three rifle companies and a heavy weapons company. That is, rifle companies A, B, C along with heavy weapons Company D were part of the 1st battalion, rifle companies E, F, G and heavy weapons Company H constituted the 2nd battalion, and rifle companies I, K, L and heavy weapons Company M were in the 3rd. There was no J Company: the letter &quot;J&quot; was traditionally not used because in 18th- and 19th-century old-style type, the capital letters &quot;I&quot; and &quot;J&quot; looked alike and were therefore easily confused with one another. It was common for a battalion to become temporarily attached to a different regiment. For example, during the confusion and high casualty rates of both the Normandy Landings and the Battle of the Bulge, in order to bolster the strength of a depleted infantry regiment, companies and even battalions were moved around as necessary.

The U.S. Army also created independent tank battalions to attach to infantry divisions during World War II in order to give them fire support.

From the 1960s through the early 1980s, a typical maneuver (infantry or tank) battalion had five companies: headquarters and headquarters company (HHC) and A, B and C Companies, plus a combat support company (CSC), with a scout platoon, 107 mm (4.2 inch) heavy mortar platoon, along with other elements that varied between organisations. These included heavy anti-tank TOW missile platoons, ground surveillance radar sections and man-portable air-defense system sections. Beginning in the early 1980s, some elements of the combat support companies (the mortar and scout platoons) were merged into the headquarters company with the staff and support elements, others were moved to their parent type organisation (ground surveillance radar and air defence), and in infantry battalions the heavy anti-tank missile platoon was organized as a separate company (E Company). In the late 1980s, there was a fourth &quot;line&quot; company added (D Company) in most infantry and tank battalions.

In this older structure, U.S. Army mechanised infantry battalions and tank battalions, for tactical purposes, task-organised companies to each other, forming a battalion-sized task force (TF).

Starting in 2005–2006, the U.S. Army&#x27;s mechanised and tank battalions were reorganised into combined arms battalions (CABs). Tank battalions and mechanised infantry battalions no longer exist. These new combined arms battalions are modular units, each consisting of a headquarters company, two mechanized infantry companies, two tank companies and a forward support company attached from the battalion&#x27;s parent brigade support battalion. This new structure eliminated the need to task-organize companies between battalions; each combined arms battalion was organically composed of the requisite companies. At a higher level, each armored brigade (formerly designated &#x27;heavy brigade&#x27;) is now composed of three CABs (versus the two CABs of a former heavy brigade), one reconnaissance squadron, one artillery battalion, one brigade engineer battalion (BEB) and one brigade support battalion (BSB).

=== United States Marine Corps ===

A United States Marine Corps battalion includes the battalion headquarters, consisting of the commanding officer (usually a lieutenant colonel, sometimes a colonel), an executive officer (the second-in-command, usually a major), the sergeant major and the executive staff (S-1 through S-4 and S-6). The battalion headquarters is supported by a headquarters and service company (battery). A battalion usually contains two to five organic companies (batteries in the artillery), with a total of 500 to 1,200 Marines in the battalion. A regiment consists of a regimental headquarters, a headquarters company (or battery) and two to five organic battalions (Marine infantry regiments – three battalions of infantry; Marine artillery regiments – three to five battalions of artillery; Marine combat logistics regiments – one to three combat logistics battalions). In the U.S. Marine Corps, the brigade designation is used only in &quot;Marine Expeditionary Brigade&quot; (MEB). An MEB is one of the standard Marine Air-Ground Task Forces (MAGTF), is commanded by a brigadier general or major general, and consists of command element, a ground combat element (usually one reinforced Marine infantry regiment), an aviation combat element (a reinforced Marine aircraft group including rotary wing, fixed wing and tiltrotor aircraft) and a combat logistics element (a Marine combat logistics regiment, which includes naval construction forces [Seabees] and naval medical elements).

In the U.S. Marine Corps, an infantry or &quot;rifle&quot; battalion typically consists of a headquarters and service company, three rifle or &quot;line&quot; companies (designated alphabetically A through M depending upon which battalion of the parent regiment to which they are attached) and a weapons company. Weapons companies do not receive a letter designation. Marine infantry regiments use battalion and company designations as described above under World War II, with company letters D, H and M not normally used but rather held in reserve for use in augmenting a fourth rifle company into each battalion as needed.

United States Marine Corps infantry battalions are task organised into Battalion Landing Teams (BLTs) as the ground combat element (GCE) of a Marine Expeditionary Unit (MEU). A standard U.S. Marine infantry battalion is typically supported by an artillery battery and a platoon each of tanks, amphibious assault vehicles, light armoured reconnaissance vehicles, reconnaissance Marines and combat engineers. The battalion structure is designed to readily expand to include a fourth rifle company, if required, as described above under battalion organisation. Often Air Naval Gunfire Liaison Company (ANGLICO) officers are assigned to the battalion, to coordinate naval gunfire support.

=== United States Navy ===
The United States Navy has construction battalions and navy cargo handling battalions. They are structured roughly analogous to an Army or Marine Corps battalion with staff and commanding officers of similar grade and experience.

== Myanmar ==

In Myanmar (Army, People&#x27;s Defence Force and various EAOs), battalions (or Regiments), called Tat Yinn (တပ်ရင်း), are the main maneuver units.

As for structure, an Infantry Battalion was structured with 27 Officers and 750 other ranks back in 1966 under a structure organisation named of . This was revised in 1988 to 814 men and then revised again in 2001 as 31 Officers and 826 other ranks under a structure organisation named .

Even though authorised strength of the structure changed, the core of the battalion structure remains roughly the same with Battalion/Regimental HQ housing command elements (OC, 2IC, Adjutant, Quartermaster, RSM, RQMS, R.P Sergeant etc.), HQ Company (Support Platoons like Engineer, Signal, Medical etc.) and 4 Rifle Companies. 4 Rifle Companies (No. (1) Rifle Company, No. (2) Rifle Company, No. (3) Rifle Company and No. (4) Rifle Company) and HQ Company are combat troops whereas Battalion/Regimental HQ is for command elements.

According to some observers, the average manpower of the battalions has substantially declined: from 670 plus in 1988, 350 plus in 1998, and 250 plus in 2008. A leaked document reported in the international media revealed that in late 2006, the Tatmadaw had 284 battalions with fewer than 200 personnel, and 220 battalions with between 200 and 300 personnel.

, most battalions/regiments of the army are reported to have less than 150 men. Within these battalions only around 80 men are fit for actual combat. Due to such manpower shortages, the army has been reportedly drawing out 30,000 men from combat support service battalions as of late 2023 (signal, supply and transport battalions for example).

== See also ==
* Battalion (Sweden)
* Indonesian Army infantry battalions
* March battalion
* Military organization

== References ==
== External links ==
* French Infantry of the Napoleonic Wars
* &quot;The Battalion Commander&#x27;s Handbook&quot;, 1996, by Major General Richard A. Chilcoat, US Army War College, Carlisle Barracks, Pennsylvania</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6382533" start="2" end="11" title="Battalion" label="battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q15627509" start="17" end="30" title="military unit" label="military unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q493898" start="100" end="118" title="lieutenant colonel" label="lieutenant colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q102538" start="147" end="156" title="Company (military unit)" label="companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q983927" start="188" end="193" title="Major (rank)" label="major"/>
<link wikidata="Q19100" start="199" end="206" title="Captain (armed forces)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7978085" start="277" end="292" title="weapons company" label="weapons company"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="369" end="377" title="infantry" label="infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="845" end="851" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="906" end="913" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="946" end="953" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q37560" start="973" end="985" title="Vulgar Latin" label="Vulgar Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q253854" start="1036" end="1051" title="Classical Latin" label="Classical Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418029" start="1363" end="1376" title="combined arms" label="combined arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q27627681" start="1508" end="1530" title="combat service support" label="combat service support"/>
<link wikidata="Q17147214" start="1561" end="1593" title="headquarters and service company" label="headquarters and service company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5150678" start="1621" end="1643" title="Combat Support Company" label="combat support company"/>
<link wikidata="Q15627509" start="1700" end="1713" title="Military organisation" label="military unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q173517" start="1963" end="1975" title="hand grenade" label="hand grenade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3216918" start="1992" end="2007" title="rocket launcher" label="rocket launcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q52371" start="2516" end="2524" title="regiment" label="regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040374" start="2526" end="2531" title="group (military unit)" label="group"/>
<link wikidata="Q102356" start="2536" end="2543" title="brigade" label="brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="2813" end="2817" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025514" start="3068" end="3089" title="British Army Infantry" label="British Army Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374138" start="3119" end="3160" title="Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers" label="Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2697847" start="3165" end="3183" title="Intelligence Corps (United Kingdom)" label="Intelligence Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098650" start="3213" end="3228" title="Royal Engineers" label="Royal Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373697" start="3303" end="3328" title="Royal Army Ordnance Corps" label="Royal Army Ordnance Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606162" start="3333" end="3352" title="Royal Pioneer Corps" label="Royal Pioneer Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q188497" start="3360" end="3365" title="corps" label="corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920229" start="3505" end="3515" title="The Rifles" label="The Rifles"/>
<link wikidata="Q983927" start="3713" end="3718" title="Major (rank)" label="major"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036510" start="3756" end="3763" title="Captain (British Army and Royal Marines)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q186024" start="3774" end="3784" title="lieutenant" label="lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7442967" start="3788" end="3805" title="second-in-command" label="second-in-command"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736535" start="3837" end="3844" title="signals (military)" label="signals"/>
<link wikidata="Q975834" start="3846" end="3859" title="quartermaster" label="quartermaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q4168000" start="3871" end="3883" title="Military espionage" label="intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q316936" start="3986" end="3995" title="anti-tank" label="anti-tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q12800" start="3997" end="4008" title="machine gun" label="machine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q7905205" start="4010" end="4016" title="mortar (weapon)" label="mortar"/>
<link wikidata="Q13393921" start="4018" end="4025" title="pioneer (military)" label="pioneer"/>
<link wikidata="Q251741" start="4030" end="4044" title="reconnaissance" label="reconnaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6545977" start="4097" end="4117" title="light aid detachment" label="light aid detachment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5080459" start="4565" end="4587" title="Royal Anglian Regiment" label="Royal Anglian Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q11247470" start="4648" end="4666" title="Commanding officer" label="Commanding officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q493898" start="4686" end="4704" title="lieutenant colonel" label="lieutenant colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7442967" start="4708" end="4725" title="Second-in-command" label="Second-in-command"/>
<link wikidata="Q852661" start="4743" end="4751" title="Adjutant" label="Adjutant"/>
<link wikidata="Q975834" start="4764" end="4777" title="Quartermaster" label="Quartermaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q130552946" start="4856" end="4882" title="Royal Army Medical Service" label="Royal Army Medical Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683223" start="4927" end="4956" title="Adjutant General&amp;#x27;s Corps" label="Adjutant General&amp;#x27;s Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q918824" start="4977" end="4982" title="Military Chaplain" label="Padre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373691" start="4984" end="5015" title="Royal Army Chaplains Department" label="Royal Army Chaplains Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322747" start="5171" end="5193" title="Royal Corps of Signals" label="Royal Corps of Signals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3479611" start="5205" end="5230" title="Regimental sergeant major" label="Regimental sergeant major"/>
<link wikidata="Q837643" start="5238" end="5253" title="warrant officer" label="warrant officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7308400" start="5265" end="5298" title="Regimental quartermaster sergeant" label="Regimental quartermaster sergeant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793813" start="5599" end="5616" title="Armoured regiment (United Kingdom)" label="armoured regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q25436" start="5748" end="5761" title="Canadian Army" label="Canadian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q27627681" start="5828" end="5850" title="combat service support" label="combat service support"/>
<link wikidata="Q644943" start="5941" end="5956" title="Canadian Forces" label="Canadian Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144991" start="5978" end="5985" title="military reserve force" label="reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q4991371" start="6015" end="6023" title="soldiers" label="soldiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932763" start="6295" end="6313" title="Lieutenant-Colonel (Canada)" label="lieutenant-colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738003" start="6370" end="6375" title="Major (Canada)" label="major"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016772" start="6440" end="6467" title="The Royal Canadian Regiment" label="The Royal Canadian Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076915" start="6475" end="6482" title="Regular Force" label="regular"/>
<link wikidata="Q3402243" start="6491" end="6508" title="Primary Reserve" label="reserve battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3061319" start="6513" end="6561" title="Princess Patricia&amp;#x27;s Canadian Light Infantry" label="Princess Patricia&amp;#x27;s Canadian Light Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2159553" start="6591" end="6609" title="Royal 22e Régiment" label="Royal 22e Régiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3375560" start="6655" end="6686" title="The Royal Newfoundland Regiment" label="The Royal Newfoundland Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="6856" end="6865" title="artillery" label="artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q27627681" start="6888" end="6910" title="combat service support" label="combat service support"/>
<link wikidata="Q355771" start="7184" end="7195" title="Indian Army" label="Indian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q304673" start="7273" end="7281" title="platoons" label="platoons"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148078" start="7332" end="7339" title="Colonel (India)" label="colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q52371" start="7379" end="7387" title="regiment" label="regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123768" start="7540" end="7562" title="Royal Netherlands Army" label="Royal Netherlands Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q747313" start="7799" end="7802" title="BGM-71 TOW" label="TOW"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="7814" end="7819" title="Netherlands" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q151197" start="7983" end="7999" title="combat engineering" label="combat engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q12876" start="8004" end="8008" title="tank" label="tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="8326" end="8340" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354958" start="8361" end="8373" title="peacekeeping" label="peacekeeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311437" start="8453" end="8477" title="Netherlands Marine Corps" label="Netherlands Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q7915590" start="9049" end="9068" title="Soviet Armed Forces" label="Soviet Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q16954263" start="9125" end="9128" title="BTR (vehicle)" label="BTR"/>
<link wikidata="Q4407246" start="9129" end="9155" title="armoured personnel carrier" label="armoured personnel carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q155494" start="9160" end="9163" title="Boyevaya Mashina Pekhoty" label="BMP"/>
<link wikidata="Q202825" start="9164" end="9189" title="infantry fighting vehicle" label="infantry fighting vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q172102" start="9456" end="9472" title="120-PM-43 mortar" label="120-PM-43 mortar"/>
<link wikidata="Q222003" start="9493" end="9504" title="2B9 Vasilek" label="2B9 Vasilek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465101" start="9540" end="9546" title="MANPAD" label="MANPAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q160810" start="9560" end="9570" title="SA-7 Grail" label="SA-7 Grail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051186" start="9572" end="9585" title="SA-14 Gremlin" label="SA-14 Gremlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q147847" start="9589" end="9601" title="SA-16 Gimlet" label="SA-16 Gimlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q292668" start="9659" end="9665" title="AGS-17" label="AGS-17"/>
<link wikidata="Q277443" start="9740" end="9751" title="AT-3 Sagger" label="AT-3 Sagger"/>
<link wikidata="Q298656" start="9755" end="9766" title="AT-4 Spigot" label="AT-4 Spigot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781096" start="9791" end="9796" title="SPG-9" label="SPG-9"/>
<link wikidata="Q641196" start="9797" end="9811" title="recoilless gun" label="recoilless gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q270697" start="10393" end="10397" title="T-64" label="T-64"/>
<link wikidata="Q155658" start="10399" end="10403" title="T-72" label="T-72"/>
<link wikidata="Q237135" start="10407" end="10411" title="T-80" label="T-80"/>
<link wikidata="Q328272" start="10596" end="10600" title="T-54" label="T-54"/>
<link wikidata="Q328272" start="10602" end="10606" title="T-55" label="T-55"/>
<link wikidata="Q207618" start="10610" end="10614" title="T-62" label="T-62"/>
<link wikidata="Q222786" start="11096" end="11108" title="2S1 Gvozdika" label="2S1 Gvozdika"/>
<link wikidata="Q172739" start="11123" end="11127" title="122 mm howitzer 2A18 (D-30)" label="D-30"/>
<link wikidata="Q180126" start="11128" end="11136" title="howitzer" label="howitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q270289" start="11348" end="11358" title="BM-21 Grad" label="BM-21 Grad"/>
<link wikidata="Q104680" start="11700" end="11707" title="colonel" label="colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q493898" start="11754" end="11772" title="lieutenant colonel" label="lieutenant colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q158950" start="11876" end="11901" title="Non-commissioned officers" label="Non-commissioned officers"/>
<link wikidata="Q633339" start="11967" end="11976" title="desertion" label="desertion"/>
<link wikidata="Q332844" start="12462" end="12472" title="Swiss Army" label="Swiss Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="12731" end="12749" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544459" start="13299" end="13317" title="Lieutenant colonel (United States)" label="lieutenant colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383594" start="13320" end="13337" title="executive officer" label="executive officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11707054" start="13339" end="13344" title="Major (United States)" label="major"/>
<link wikidata="Q16171848" start="13347" end="13369" title="command sergeant major" label="command sergeant major"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="13511" end="13529" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="14096" end="14108" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="14924" end="14941" title="Normandy Landings" label="Normandy Landings"/>
<link wikidata="Q151018" start="14950" end="14969" title="Battle of the Bulge" label="Battle of the Bulge"/>
<link wikidata="Q28456493" start="15127" end="15153" title="independent tank battalion" label="independent tank battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689909" start="15352" end="15389" title="headquarters and headquarters company" label="headquarters and headquarters company"/>
<link wikidata="Q747313" start="15613" end="15624" title="TOW missile" label="TOW missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q7279971" start="15635" end="15660" title="ground surveillance radar" label="ground surveillance radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465101" start="15674" end="15705" title="man-portable air-defense system" label="man-portable air-defense system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637368" start="16408" end="16418" title="task force" label="task force"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16523" end="16547" title="Brigade combat team#Combined Arms Battalion (×3)" label="combined arms battalions"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17066" end="17081" title="Brigade combat team#Armored brigade combat team" label="armored brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="17380" end="17406" title="United States Marine Corps" label="United States Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383594" start="17547" end="17564" title="executive officer" label="executive officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503675" start="17611" end="17625" title="sergeant major" label="sergeant major"/>
<link wikidata="Q17147214" start="17722" end="17754" title="headquarters and service company" label="headquarters and service company"/>
<link wikidata="Q6764141" start="18309" end="18337" title="Marine Expeditionary Brigade" label="Marine Expeditionary Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q6763988" start="18381" end="18409" title="Marine Air-Ground Task Force" label="Marine Air-Ground Task Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q152956" start="18438" end="18455" title="brigadier general" label="brigadier general"/>
<link wikidata="Q157148" start="18459" end="18472" title="major general" label="major general"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777144" start="18509" end="18530" title="ground combat element" label="ground combat element"/>
<link wikidata="Q3631069" start="18585" end="18608" title="aviation combat element" label="aviation combat element"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151628" start="19620" end="19645" title="Marine Expeditionary Unit" label="Marine Expeditionary Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q240313" start="19724" end="19741" title="artillery battery" label="artillery battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698110" start="20042" end="20075" title="Air Naval Gunfire Liaison Company" label="Air Naval Gunfire Liaison Company"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20140" end="20161" title="naval gunfire support#United States" label="naval gunfire support"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="20195" end="20213" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757145" start="20218" end="20241" title="Seabee (US Navy)" label="construction battalions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6982630" start="20246" end="20276" title="Navy Expeditionary Logistics Support Group (United States)" label="navy cargo handling battalions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382533" start="22130" end="22148" title="Battalion (Sweden)" label="Battalion (Sweden)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12475031" start="22151" end="22186" title="Indonesian Army infantry battalions" label="Indonesian Army infantry battalions"/>
<link wikidata="Q446565" start="22189" end="22204" title="March battalion" label="March battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q15627509" start="22207" end="22228" title="Military organization" label="Military organization"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="145418" wikidata="Q102538" url="?curid=145418" title="Company (military unit)">
<text>A company is a military unit, typically consisting of 100–250 soldiers and usually commanded by a major or a captain. Most companies are made up of three to seven platoons, although the exact number may vary by country, unit type, and structure.

Usually several companies are grouped as a battalion or regiment, the latter of which is sometimes formed by several battalions. Occasionally, &quot;independent&quot; or &quot;separate&quot; companies are organized for special purposes, such as the 1st Air Naval Gunfire Liaison Company or the 3rd Force Reconnaissance Company. These companies are not organic to a battalion or regiment, but rather report directly to a higher level organization such as a Marine Expeditionary Force headquarters (i.e., a corps-level command).

==Historical background==
The modern military company became popularized during the reorganization of the Swedish Army in 1631 under King Gustav II Adolph. For administrative purposes, the infantry was divided into companies consisting of 150 men, grouped into regiments of eight companies. Tactically, the infantry companies were organized into battalions and grouped with cavalry troops and artillery batteries to form brigades.

From ancient times, some armies have commonly used a base administrative and tactical unit of around 100 men. (Perhaps the best known is the Roman century, originally intended as a 100-man unit, but later ranging from about 60 to 80 men, depending on the time period.) An organization based on the decimal number system (i.e., by tens, hundreds, thousands, and ten-thousands) might seem intuitive. To the Romans, for example, a unit of 100 men seemed sufficiently large to efficiently facilitate organizing a large body of men numbering into the several thousands, yet small enough that one man could reasonably expect to command it as a cohesive unit by using his voice and physical presence, supplemented by musical notes (e.g., drum beats, bugle or trumpet blasts, etc.) and visual cues (e.g., colors, standards, guidons, etc.).

Furthermore, recent studies have indicated that humans are best able to maintain stable relationships in a cohesive group numbering between 100 and 250 members, with 150 members being the common number (see Dunbar&#x27;s number). Again, a military unit on the order of no more than 100 members, and perhaps ideally fewer, would perhaps present the greatest efficiency as well as effectiveness of control, on a battlefield where the stress, danger, fear, noise, confusion, and the general condition known as the &quot;fog of war&quot; would present the greatest challenge to an officer to command a group of men engaged in mortal combat. Until the latter half of the 19th century, when infantry troops still routinely fought in close order, marching and firing shoulder-to-shoulder in lines facing the enemy, the company remained at around 100, or fewer, men.

The advent of accurate, long-range rifle fire, repeating rifles, and machine guns necessitated highly dispersed combat formations. This, coupled with radio communication, permitted relatively small numbers of men to have much greater firepower and combat effectiveness than previously possible. Companies, however, continue to remain within the general range of 100–250 members, perhaps validating the premise that humans fight best (as well as live, work, socialize, play, etc.) in organizations of around 150 members, more or less.

While historically companies were usually grouped into battalions or regiments, there were certain sub-units raised as &quot;independent companies&quot; that did not belong to a specific battalion or regiment, such as Confederate States of America state local militia companies. However, upon activation and assimilation into the army, several of these &quot;independent&quot; companies would be grouped together to form either a battalion or a regiment, depending upon the number of companies involved. (Usually two to five would form a battalion, while six to twelve would form a regiment.)

More recent examples of &quot;separate&quot; companies would be the divisional support companies (i.e., signal, military police, ordinance maintenance, quartermaster, reconnaissance, and replacement companies) of a U.S. Army, Korean War-era infantry division and the divisional aviation company of a U.S. Army &quot;Pentomic&quot; infantry division. These companies were not organic to any intermediate headquarters (viz., battalion/group/regiment/brigade), but rather reported directly to the division headquarters.

==NATO==
NATO defines a company as &quot;larger than a platoon, but smaller than a battalion&quot; while being a &quot;unit consisting of two or more platoons, usually of the same type, with a headquarters and a limited capacity for self-support.&quot; The standard NATO symbol for a company consists of a single vertical line placed above a framed unit icon. Member nations have stipulated the different names they will use for organizations of this size.

==British Army==

Rifle companies consist of three platoons and a company headquarters.

Company-sized organisations in units with a horse-mounted heritage, such as the Household Cavalry, Royal Armoured Corps, Royal Engineers, Royal Corps of Signals, Army Air Corps, Special Air Service, Honourable Artillery Company and Royal Logistic Corps, use the term squadron instead of company, and in the Royal Artillery they are called &quot;batteries&quot;. Until after the Second World War, the Royal Engineers and Royal Signals had both squadrons and companies depending on whether the units were supporting mounted or foot formations.

The British Army infantry normally identifies its rifle companies by letter (usually, but not always, A, B and C) within a battalion, usually with the addition of a headquarters company and a support/heavy weapons company. Some units name their companies after regimental battle honours; this is commonly the case for composite units, for example the London Regiment with its Somme, Messines and Cambrai companies. The foot guards regiments use traditional names for some of their companies, for example Queen&#x27;s Company, Left Flank, Prince of Wales&#x27;s Company etc.

Royal Marines companies are designated by a letter that is unique across the corps, not just within their command. The Intelligence Corps, Royal Military Police and Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers all have companies uniquely numbered across their corps.

The defunct Royal Army Service Corps, Royal Pioneer Corps and Royal Army Ordnance Corps had companies; the Royal Corps of Transport had squadrons.

British companies are usually commanded by a major, the officer commanding (OC), with a captain or senior lieutenant as second-in-command (2i/c). The company headquarters also includes a company sergeant major (CSM) normally holding the rank of WO2 and a company quartermaster sergeant (CQMS) of colour sergeant rank, the two most senior soldiers in the company.

The Honourable Artillery Company is in fact a regiment, not a company, in terms of organisation and size.

==Canadian Army==
In the Canadian Army, the company is the standard sub-unit organization for infantry and combat service support, as modelled after the British. A Canadian infantry battalion consists of three or four rifle companies identified by letter (A Company, B Company, etc.), a Combat Support Company, and an Administration Support Company. A notable exception is The Royal Canadian Regiment, which names its companies sequentially throughout the regiment from the Duke of Edinburgh&#x27;s Company (instead of A Company) in the 1st Battalion to T Company in the 4th Battalion. Many regiments name their companies after battle honours or former units that make up the current regiment, for example:

* 75th Company—The Toronto Scottish Regiment (Queen Elizabeth the Queen Mother&#x27;s Own)
* Victoria Company—The Queen&#x27;s Own Rifles of Canada
* Grenadier Company—The Royal Regiment of Canada
* No.2 (Prince of Wales) Company-Canadian Grenadier Guards

The combat support company administratively contains the specialized platoons, such as reconnaissance, pioneer, headquarters and signals, anti-armour, and mortar. The administration support company contains the support tradesmen that a battalion requires, such as cooks, vehicle technicians, supply, medics, etc.

As in the British Army, company sized units with a mounted heritage use the term squadron, and in the artillery they are called batteries.

==Soviet/Russian armed forces==

===Motorised rifle company===

A Soviet motorised rifle company could be mounted in either BTR armoured personnel carriers or BMP infantry fighting vehicles, with the former being more numerous into the late 1980s. A BTR rifle company consisted of a company headquarters, three motorised rifle platoons and a machine gun/antitank platoon equipped with three PK machine guns and three AT-7 Saxhorn launchers for a total of 110 personnel and 12 BTRs. A BMP rifle company had the same number of personnel and carriers and consisted of a company headquarters, three motorised rifle platoons and a machine gun platoon equipped with six RPK-74s. While seemingly containing less firepower, US commanders were advised to include the BMP&#x27;s heavier weaponry in their calculations.

===Tank company===
Prior to the late 1980s, a Soviet tank company within a Motorised Rifle Regiment consisted of a company headquarters and three tank platoons with T-64, T-72 or T-80 tanks for a total of 39 personnel and 13 tanks; companies using the older T-54, T-55 or T-62s tanks had 13 additional enlisted personnel. Companies within Tank Regiments or independent Tank Battalions had a slightly smaller establishment, having 10 tanks and 30 personnel (40 with older tanks).

===Research company===
Research companies (single. nauchnaya rota, научная рота) were established in 2013 to allow conscripts with higher education to serve doing scientific and research tasks. There are seven research companies:
* 2nd and 3rd research company (Aerospace Forces)
* 5th research company (Army)
* 6th research company (General Headquarters)
* 7th research company (Communication)
* 8th research company (Medical)
* 9th research company (Radiation, Chemical, and Biological Defense)

==United States==

===Army===

====Historical background====
In the 1700s, British Army, American Colonial Militia, and Provincial Regulars (e.g., the Virginia Regiment), and later American Army infantry, regiments were organized into companies of somewhat less than 100 officers and enlisted men, although the actual totals widely varied. For example, in 1775, a typical British Army infantry company contained only 47 personnel (comprising 3 officers, 5 noncommissioned officers, a drummer, and 38 privates). However, by 1792, an American infantry company contained 98 personnel (comprising 3 officers, 9 noncommissioned officers, a drummer, a fifer, and 84 privates).

Beginning in 1775, American forces began to develop their own organizational doctrine somewhat based on the Franco-Prussian model (with much influence beginning in 1777 from Continental European expatriates and future American generals the Marquis de Lafayette of France, Count Casimir Pulaski of Poland, and Baron von Steuben of Prussia). As a result, in 1776, a Continental Army Infantry company was authorized one captain, one first lieutenant, one second lieutenant (both lieutenants serving as platoon commanders – not designated as platoon &quot;leaders&quot; until 1943 under the &quot;Triangular Division&quot; reorganization begun in 1939), an ensign (an obsolete subaltern officer rank charged with carrying the regimental colors in rotation with the other ensigns of the battalion/regiment), four sergeants (section leaders/squad leaders with two to a platoon), four corporals (assistant section leaders/squad leaders with two to a platoon), two musicians (a drummer and a fifer), and 76 privates. The company was organized into two platoons, each consisting of two sections/squads (the terms were sometimes used interchangeably) consisting of one sergeant, one corporal, and 19 privates. (Wright, 1983)

From the late 1700s up until the late 1800s, a US infantry company was commanded by a captain and assisted by a first sergeant (first authorized in 1781), and consisted of a small company headquarters and two identical platoons commanded by lieutenants. Even though from 1808 until 1821 companies were authorized two first lieutenants and two second lieutenants (and again from 1861 to 1866 for two second lieutenants), the positions of company executive officer (second-in-command) and a third platoon commander were not authorized until 1898 when the army expanded under mobilization for the war with Spain. During the 1800s the authorized strength of infantry companies fell to a low of 54 officers and men during periods of relative peace from 1821 to 1838 and again from 1842 to 1846. In contrast, from 1812 to 1815 (second war with Great Britain), 1846 to 1848 (war with Mexico), 1861 to 1890 (American civil war and wars with the plains Indians), and 1898–1899 (war with Spain) authorized company strength ranged from over 100 officers and men up to a high of 119. Also, in 1861 a company quartermaster sergeant was added to the authorized manning of an infantry company and a wagoner was reinstituted (previously authorized from 1796 to 1808) to drive the company supply wagon.

During the 1700s and up until the late 1800s, the company was an administrative and tactical unit seldom employed in other than as a massed formation. The standard procedure, once the company had marched into its position in the line of battle, was for the company to form facing the enemy as two ranks, by platoon, one behind the other. The commanding officer (a captain), and the one to four lieutenants (depending upon the time period) serving as platoon commanders/assistant platoon commanders (1808 to 1821) and the executive officer would direct the fighting, leading from the front in the attack and on the flanks in the defense. The executive officer, or more usually the junior lieutenant, and the first sergeant were normally positioned behind the battle line so as to assist the company commander in overseeing the company and managing the rear (company trains with the quartermaster sergeant and wagoner, casualties, enemy prisoners, non-combatants, deserters, etc.). The sergeants, acted as &quot;file closers&quot;, working the line by putting men forward to replace casualties in the front rank, encouraging men to fire, reload, move forward, etc. and if need be, physically assisting or restraining men who refused to move forward or attempted to flee. The corporals physically led by example (much like modern fire team leaders) by taking their place in the line with their privates and fighting alongside them.

The ensign, the junior officer in the company from 1775 until 1808 and nominally the &quot;color bearer&quot;, usually either personally carried the regimental battle flag or supervised the detailed party of NCOs and privates drawn from the companies tasked with bearing and protecting the flag. The rank and position of ensign (as well as cornet in mounted units) was eliminated in the early 1800s when incumbents were converted to second lieutenants. It had already become the custom to assign a veteran sergeant to carry the national colors as only regiments and separate battalions were authorized to carry a &quot;battle flag&quot;. A special group of NCOs, led by the &quot;color sergeant&quot;, chosen for their experience and fighting skills, were detailed from the companies to the regimental headquarters to carry and defend the national colors (the United States flag) and the regimental colors (the regiment&#x27;s unique standard bearing its branch and regiment designation as well as its battle honors and unit decorations).

The musicians remained with the commanding officer to relay orders by sound (i.e., musical notes and drumbeats). Sometimes, the regimental commander would group the musicians as a regimental band positioned behind the left center company in the line of battle, with the drummers forming a regimental drum-line for use by the regimental commander in giving orders to the several companies by drumbeats. As needed, the musicians also served as orderlies and guards at either the company or battalion/regimental headquarters and in combat served as messengers, water carriers, stretcher bearers, and temporarily guarded enemy prisoners of war until they were passed to the rear for processing and internment.

In 1898, with the expansion of the rifle company to three platoons under mobilization for the Spanish–American War, the company gained two officers (an additional first lieutenant as executive officer and an additional second lieutenant to command the third platoon). Additionally, there was an increase in the number of noncommissioned officers (NCOs) to serve as section leaders (sergeants) and squad leaders (corporals) to the point that in 1901 with the increase in privates to 127 (from 84 in 1898) that there were then authorized 18 corporals and six sergeants, along with two buglers (the bugle having replaced both the drum and the fife in infantry companies), the wagoner, two senior NCOs (first sergeant and quartermaster sergeant), and five officers for a total of 161 officers and men. In 1905, a mess sergeant was added to the company&#x27;s senior NCO staff and the company quartermaster sergeant was renamed supply sergeant.

Due to mobilization for World War I, the army adopted its &quot;square division&quot; organization structure, significantly increasing unit sizes from platoon up. In 1917, a fourth platoon was added to the company, increasing its size to 256 officers and men, including six officers (a captain as commanding officer, a first lieutenant as executive officer, and two first lieutenants and two second lieutenants as platoon commanders). Enlisted strength became: three senior NCOs (first sergeant, supply sergeant, and mess sergeant), 12 sergeants, 33 corporals (one company clerk and 32 squad leaders with eight per platoon), eight specialists (four cooks and four mechanics), two buglers, 64 privates first class, and 128 privates. Of the 12 sergeants, while eight of them continued to serve as section leaders (with two in each platoon), the four senior ranking sergeants were assigned to a new position in each platoon headquarters as &quot;assistant to platoon commander&quot;. This was the forerunner of the modern platoon sergeant slot created in 1943 (originally known in 1940 as the &quot;platoon leader&quot;, as the officer was styled as the &quot;platoon commander&quot; until 1943) to provide an experienced senior NCO as an advisor and second-in-command to the officer commanding the platoon.

Cavalry companies (not officially re-designated as &quot;troops&quot; until 1883) had a similar organization to the infantry, but with fewer men, companies rarely exceeding around 70 men. In the Field Artillery, the company-equivalent unit is designated as a &quot;battery&quot; and historically consisted of a battery headquarters and two or three gun platoons, each with two gun sections. At full authorized strength, a typical battery of six gun sections would consist of approximately 100 officers and enlisted men.

====Modern use====
In the United States Army, infantry companies are usually made up of three rifle platoons and a heavy weapons platoon; mechanized infantry companies are usually made up of three rifle platoons consisting of four infantry fighting vehicles (IFV) each and a command element containing two IFVs; tank companies are usually made up of three tank platoons consisting of four tanks each and a command element containing two tanks; support companies are typically divided into platoons of specialization that may contain additional special sections. A company is usually commanded by a captain, although in some cases they may be commanded by a first lieutenant or a major. Unlike its component platoons, a company typically has additional positions of supporting staff, such as an executive officer (XO), a first sergeant, a readiness/training NCO, and other positions (e.g., supply sergeant, armorer). The corresponding unit of artillery is always called a &quot;battery&quot;. Similarly, the term &quot;troop&quot; is used for cavalry units, including both the horse-mounted units of history as well as modern armored cavalry and air cavalry units.

Companies that are not separate from their parent battalion are identified by letter—for example, &quot;Company A, 1st Battalion, 15th Infantry Regiment&quot;. This would commonly be abbreviated as &quot;A/1-15 INF&quot; in writing, but not in speaking. The dash in &quot;1–15&quot; indicates that the unit&#x27;s history stems from the 15th Infantry Regiment of the Army, in its lineage. Companies normally do not have their own overhead, but share the overhead of the parent organization. When the regimental headquarters exists as a separate echelon of command (e.g., the 75th Ranger Regiment, the 11th Armored Cavalry Regiment, and the 1st Marine Regiment), as virtually all U.S. Army regiments did until after the Korean War, a slash separates the battalion/squadron number from the regimental number (i.e., B/2/75 Ranger, C/3/11 ACR, E/2/1 Marines).

Although not official designations, the letters are often pronounced in &quot;GI slang&quot; using the NATO phonetic alphabet or, before that, the Joint Army/Navy Phonetic Alphabet, resulting in names such as &quot;Bravo Company&quot; and &quot;Echo Company&quot; (formerly &quot;Baker&quot; and &quot;Easy&quot; companies, respectively). Companies with a separate table of organization and equipment (TO&amp;E) are identified by a number, and are able to operate completely independently from any other unit&#x27;s support. Company-sized units that are organized under a table of distribution and allowance (TDA) are identified with a name or number.

Company-sized units usually consist of four to six platoons each led by a lieutenant, although there are examples of combat service and combat service support companies that have seven or more platoons. For example, a transportation terminal service company normally has two ship platoons, two shore platoons, one documentation platoon, one maintenance platoon, and the headquarters platoon.

While companies are typically commanded by captains, some have a special operational capacity that requires them to be commanded by an officer with greater command authority and experience; such companies are commanded by majors, and have platoons commanded by captains. Examples of this arrangement include aviation platoons, military intelligence companies, military police companies, and special forces companies. A captain reports to his commander, usually the battalion commander (a lieutenant colonel). However, there are some administrative and other duties at battalion level and larger (brigade or division) that are also handled by captains, for example the S-1, S-2, &amp; S-4 officers of a battalion (S-3 is a major), or some assistant staff positions in the G shops at division.

The senior non-commissioned officer of a company is called a first sergeant. Any sergeant holding this position is referred to as &quot;first sergeant&quot; regardless of actual rank, though the non-commissioned officer assigned ordinarily has the rank of first sergeant. A master sergeant assigned to this position will be &quot;laterally promoted&quot; to the rank of first sergeant, unless the appointment is temporary. In some instances, a sergeant first class will be appointed to the job in lieu of a rank-qualified first sergeant or master sergeant. Again, in such situations, the NCO holds the duty position and title of &quot;First Sergeant&quot;, while retaining the rank of sergeant first class.

===Marine Corps===
;Rifle Company
*Company Headquarters
** Company Commander (Commanding Officer/CO) – Captain (O-3)
** Executive Officer (XO) – usually a First Lieutenant (O-2)
** First Sergeant (1stSgt, E-8)
** Gunnery Sergeant (GySgt, E-7)
** Property NCO (Sgt, E-5)
** Messenger/Driver (Pvt-LCpl, E-1/3)
* Rifle Platoon (3)
** Platoon Headquarters
*** Platoon Commander – Lieutenant (O-1/2)
*** Platoon Sergeant – Staff Sergeant (E-6)
*** Platoon Guide – Sergeant (E-5)
*** Messenger – (Pvt-LCpl, E-1/3)
** Rifle Squad (3)
*** Squad Leader – Sergeant (E-5)
*** Fire Team (3)
**** Team Leader/Grenadier – Corporal (E-4)
**** Automatic Rifleman – Lance Corporal (E-3)
**** Assistant Automatic Rifleman – (Pvt-LCpl, E-1/3)
**** Rifleman/Scout – (Pvt-LCpl, E-1/3)
* Weapons Platoon
** Platoon Headquarters
*** Platoon Commander – usually a First Lieutenant (O-2)
*** Platoon Sergeant – Gunnery Sergeant (E-7)
** Machine Gun Section (6 – M240G 7.62mm general-purpose machine guns)
*** Section Leader – Staff Sergeant (E-6)
*** Machine Gun Squad (3)
**** Squad Leader – Sergeant (E-5)
**** Machine Gun Team (2)
***** Team Leader – Corporal (E-4)
***** Gunner – Lance Corporal (E-3)
***** Ammunition Man – (Pvt-LCpl, E-1/3)
** LWCMS Mortar Section (3 – M224 60mm Light Weight Company Mortar Systems)
*** Section Leader – Staff Sergeant (E-6)
*** Mortar Squad (3)
**** Squad Leader/Gunner – Corporal (E-4)
**** Assistant Gunner – Lance Corporal (E-3)
**** Ammunition Man (2) – (Pvt-LCpl, E-1/3)
** Assault Section (6 – Mk153 SMAW Shoulder-launched Multipurpose Assault Weapon launchers)
*** Section Leader – Sergeant (E-5)
*** Assault Squad (3)
**** Squad Leader/Team Leader/Gunner – Corporal (E-4)
**** Team Leader/Gunner – Lance Corporal (E-3)
**** Assistant Gunner (2) – (Pvt-LCpl, E-1/3)
*Attachments (notional, dependent upon mission and availability)
** Company Medical Team from Medical Platoon, Headquarters and Service Company, Infantry Battalion
** Forward Observer from Fire Direction Center, 81mm Mortar Platoon, Weapons Company, Infantry battalion
** Forward Air Control Party from S-3 Section and Communications Platoon, Headquarters and Service Company, Infantry Battalion
** Forward Observer Team from the Battalion&#x27;s Direct Support 155mm Howitzer Battery, Artillery Battalion
** Dining Facility Team from Dining Facility Section, Service Platoon, Headquarters and Service Company, Infantry Battalion
** Heavy Machine Gun Squad/Section (M2HB .50 cal. BMG and/or Mk 19 40mm AGL) from Heavy Machine Gun Platoon, Weapons Company, Infantry Battalion
** Javelin Squad (4 – FGM-148 Javelin Anti-Tank Missile launchers) from Javelin Section, Antiarmor Platoon, Weapons Company, Infantry Battalion
** Antitank (TOW) Squad (2 – BGM-71 Tube launched, Optically tracked, Wire command link guided missile launchers) from Antitank (TOW) Section, Antiarmor Platoon, Weapons Company, Infantry Battalion
** Amphibious Assault Vehicle (AAV) Platoon (12 – AAV-7 Amphibious Assault Vehicles) from the Battalion&#x27;s Direct Support AAV Company/Battalion
** Tank Section/Platoon (2/4 M1A2 Main Battle Tanks) from the Battalion&#x27;s Direct Support Tank Company/Battalion
** Light Armored Reconnaissance (LAR) Platoon (4 LAV-25 Light Armored Reconnaissance Vehicles) from the Battalion&#x27;s Direct Support LAR Company/Battalion
** Other Ground Combat Element assets as required (e.g., Scout Sniper, Reconnaissance, Combat Engineer, etc.)

;Weapons company
A weapons company has in place of the three rifle platoons, an 81 mm mortar platoon, an anti-armor platoon, and a heavy machine gun platoon.

;Headquarters and Service Company
*Headquarters Platoon consists of Marines from S-1, S-2, S-3, the Nuclear, Biological, Chemical Defense section, and the Chaplain section (one Navy chaplain and an enlisted religious program specialist).
*Communications Platoon, consisting of Radiomen, Wiremen, Techs, Data Marines, and the associated staff.
*Service Platoon, consisting of S-4, Motor Transportation, Food Service, armorers, and Supply.
*Scout Sniper Platoon.
*Medical Platoon, which includes all of the Navy medical personnel for the rifle companies and the Battalion Aid Station (BAS). The allowance of 65 hospital corpsmen and two Medical Corps officers (doctors) is usually not completely staffed. As such, the BAS usually fields one doctor and 10–12 hospital corpsmen. The remaining personnel are assigned to the rifle companies, usually five hospital corpsmen per company.

;Tank and Light Armored Reconnaissance (LAR) companies
USMC tank and LAR companies are organized similarly to US Army tank and mechanized infantry companies, with the three line platoons consisting of four tanks or LAVs each, and the company command element containing two tanks or LAVs.

;Assault Amphibian Vehicle (AAV) companies
AAV companies have three platoons containing four sections of three AAVs each, for a total of 12 AAVs per platoon, and a headquarters section of three AAVs. The company also includes both command and recovery variants of the AAV, giving the company a grand total of approximately 42–45 AAVs.

==Notable examples==
Some companies were well enough known that they have been identified with their company letter. Examples include:
* Easy Company of the 506th Parachute Infantry Regiment, 101st Airborne Division, which became the focus of the BBC/HBO miniseries &quot;Band of Brothers&quot;.
* Able Company of the 116th Infantry Regiment, 29th Infantry Division, which landed at Dog Green Sector on Omaha Beach during the Normandy landings and suffered 96% casualties.

==See also==
* Military organization
* Infantry of the British Army

==References==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q102538" start="2" end="9" title="Company (military unit)" label="company"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15" end="28" title="Military organization#Commands, formations, and units" label="military unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4991371" start="62" end="69" title="soldier" label="soldier"/>
<link wikidata="Q983927" start="98" end="103" title="Major (rank)" label="major"/>
<link wikidata="Q19100" start="109" end="116" title="Captain (armed forces)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q304673" start="163" end="170" title="platoon" label="platoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382533" start="290" end="299" title="battalion" label="battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q52371" start="303" end="311" title="regiment" label="regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698110" start="496" end="533" title="Air Naval Gunfire Liaison Company" label="1st Air Naval Gunfire Liaison Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636771" start="541" end="573" title="3rd Force Reconnaissance Company" label="3rd Force Reconnaissance Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q6764145" start="703" end="729" title="Marine Expeditionary Force" label="Marine Expeditionary Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q188497" start="752" end="757" title="corps" label="corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q7655000" start="881" end="893" title="Swedish intervention in the Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Swedish Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q52938" start="913" end="929" title="Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden" label="Gustav II Adolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382533" start="1121" end="1130" title="battalion" label="battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q102356" start="1196" end="1203" title="brigade" label="brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q191306" start="1354" end="1361" title="centuria" label="century"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912707" start="2004" end="2030" title="Military colours, standards and guidons" label="colors, standards, guidons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137451" start="2247" end="2267" title="Dunbar&amp;#x27;s number" label="Dunbar&amp;#x27;s number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140228" start="2557" end="2567" title="fog of war" label="fog of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q751162" start="2947" end="2962" title="repeating rifle" label="repeating rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q12800" start="2969" end="2980" title="machine gun" label="machine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q6016500" start="3560" end="3581" title="Independent Company" label="independent companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="3653" end="3682" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederate States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q12718285" start="4339" end="4377" title="Pentomic" label="&amp;quot;Pentomic&amp;quot; infantry division"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="4556" end="4560" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q304673" start="5056" end="5063" title="platoon" label="platoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631440" start="5174" end="5191" title="Household Cavalry" label="Household Cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2388246" start="5193" end="5213" title="Royal Armoured Corps" label="Royal Armoured Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098650" start="5215" end="5230" title="Royal Engineers" label="Royal Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322747" start="5232" end="5254" title="Royal Corps of Signals" label="Royal Corps of Signals"/>
<link wikidata="Q555871" start="5256" end="5270" title="Army Air Corps (United Kingdom)" label="Army Air Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q222883" start="5272" end="5291" title="Special Air Service" label="Special Air Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q219514" start="5293" end="5321" title="Honourable Artillery Company" label="Honourable Artillery Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747823" start="5326" end="5346" title="Royal Logistic Corps" label="Royal Logistic Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q252280" start="5361" end="5369" title="Squadron (cavalry)" label="squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587335" start="5401" end="5416" title="Royal Artillery" label="Royal Artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="5472" end="5488" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="5641" end="5653" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382533" start="5760" end="5769" title="battalion" label="battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q48112295" start="5988" end="6003" title="London Regiment (1993)" label="London Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q132568" start="6013" end="6018" title="Battle of the Somme" label="Somme"/>
<link wikidata="Q389932" start="6020" end="6028" title="Battle of Messines (1914)" label="Messines"/>
<link wikidata="Q181285" start="6033" end="6040" title="Cambrai" label="Cambrai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046947" start="6212" end="6225" title="Royal Marines" label="Royal Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008856" start="6318" end="6325" title="Command (military formation)" label="command"/>
<link wikidata="Q2697847" start="6331" end="6349" title="Intelligence Corps (United Kingdom)" label="Intelligence Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666334" start="6351" end="6372" title="Royal Military Police" label="Royal Military Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374138" start="6377" end="6418" title="Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers" label="Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747823" start="6489" end="6513" title="Royal Logistic Corps" label="Royal Army Service Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606162" start="6515" end="6534" title="Royal Pioneer Corps" label="Royal Pioneer Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373697" start="6539" end="6564" title="Royal Army Ordnance Corps" label="Royal Army Ordnance Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374074" start="6584" end="6608" title="Royal Corps of Transport" label="Royal Corps of Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q983927" start="6670" end="6675" title="Major (rank)" label="major"/>
<link wikidata="Q11247470" start="6681" end="6699" title="officer commanding" label="officer commanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036510" start="6713" end="6720" title="Captain (British Army and Royal Marines)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q186024" start="6731" end="6741" title="lieutenant" label="lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7442967" start="6745" end="6762" title="second-in-command" label="second-in-command"/>
<link wikidata="Q694685" start="6812" end="6834" title="company sergeant major" label="company sergeant major"/>
<link wikidata="Q837643" start="6870" end="6873" title="WO2" label="WO2"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155571" start="6880" end="6910" title="company quartermaster sergeant" label="company quartermaster sergeant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149215" start="6921" end="6936" title="colour sergeant" label="colour sergeant"/>
<link wikidata="Q219514" start="6993" end="7021" title="Honourable Artillery Company" label="Honourable Artillery Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q52371" start="7035" end="7043" title="regiment" label="regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q25436" start="7121" end="7134" title="Canadian Army" label="Canadian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q27627681" start="7203" end="7225" title="combat service support" label="combat service support"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016772" start="7469" end="7496" title="The Royal Canadian Regiment" label="The Royal Canadian Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q262775" start="7724" end="7737" title="battle honour" label="battle honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7769631" start="7819" end="7894" title="The Toronto Scottish Regiment (Queen Elizabeth the Queen Mother&amp;#x27;s Own)" label="The Toronto Scottish Regiment (Queen Elizabeth the Queen Mother&amp;#x27;s Own)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522379" start="7914" end="7951" title="The Queen&amp;#x27;s Own Rifles of Canada" label="The Queen&amp;#x27;s Own Rifles of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522562" start="7972" end="8000" title="The Royal Regiment of Canada" label="The Royal Regiment of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520190" start="8034" end="8059" title="Canadian Grenadier Guards" label="Canadian Grenadier Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="8581" end="8587" title="Soviet" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q16954263" start="8639" end="8642" title="BTR (vehicle)" label="BTR"/>
<link wikidata="Q4407246" start="8643" end="8669" title="armoured personnel carrier" label="armoured personnel carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q155494" start="8674" end="8677" title="Boyevaya Mashina Pekhoty" label="BMP"/>
<link wikidata="Q202825" start="8678" end="8703" title="infantry fighting vehicle" label="infantry fighting vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q304673" start="8842" end="8849" title="platoon" label="platoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q159495" start="8906" end="8920" title="PK machine gun" label="PK machine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479603" start="8932" end="8944" title="AT-7 Saxhorn" label="AT-7 Saxhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q741087" start="9179" end="9185" title="RPK-74" label="RPK-74"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="9371" end="9377" title="Soviet" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q12876" start="9378" end="9382" title="tank" label="tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q270697" start="9490" end="9494" title="T-64" label="T-64"/>
<link wikidata="Q155658" start="9496" end="9500" title="T-72" label="T-72"/>
<link wikidata="Q237135" start="9504" end="9508" title="T-80" label="T-80"/>
<link wikidata="Q328272" start="9583" end="9587" title="T-54" label="T-54"/>
<link wikidata="Q328272" start="9589" end="9593" title="T-55" label="T-55"/>
<link wikidata="Q207618" start="9597" end="9601" title="T-62" label="T-62"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10392" end="10417" title="Militia (United States)#History" label="American Colonial Militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934476" start="10454" end="10471" title="Virginia Regiment" label="Virginia Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11215" end="11235" title="Gilbert du Motier, Marquis de Lafayette#American Revolution" label="Marquis de Lafayette"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11247" end="11268" title="Casimir Pulaski#In the United States" label="Count Casimir Pulaski"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11284" end="11301" title="Friedrich Wilhelm von Steuben#American Revolution" label="Baron von Steuben"/>
<link wikidata="Q16711404" start="12303" end="12317" title="first sergeant" label="first sergeant"/>
<link wikidata="Q12583" start="16749" end="16769" title="Spanish–American War" label="Spanish–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="19449" end="19467" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="19469" end="19477" title="infantry" label="infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q304673" start="19523" end="19530" title="platoon" label="platoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4832563" start="19538" end="19559" title="heavy weapons platoon" label="heavy weapons platoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053481" start="19561" end="19580" title="mechanized infantry" label="mechanized infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036511" start="20021" end="20028" title="Captain (U.S. Army)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20080" end="20096" title="First Lieutenant#United States" label="first lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q11707054" start="20102" end="20107" title="Major (United States)" label="major"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383594" start="20217" end="20234" title="executive officer" label="executive officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="20365" end="20374" title="artillery" label="artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q240313" start="20400" end="20407" title="artillery battery" label="battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q47315" start="20465" end="20472" title="cavalry" label="cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382533" start="20638" end="20647" title="battalion" label="battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q190194" start="21548" end="21570" title="NATO phonetic alphabet" label="NATO phonetic alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080869" start="21592" end="21625" title="Joint Army/Navy Phonetic Alphabet" label="Joint Army/Navy Phonetic Alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324145" start="21747" end="21751" title="Easy Company" label="Easy"/>
<link wikidata="Q358648" start="21810" end="21845" title="table of organization and equipment" label="table of organization and equipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q186024" start="22172" end="22182" title="lieutenant" label="lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22799" end="22815" title="aviation platoon" label="aviation platoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q234497" start="22882" end="22896" title="special forces" label="special forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q493898" start="22979" end="22997" title="lieutenant colonel" label="lieutenant colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q102356" start="23087" end="23094" title="brigade" label="brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q169534" start="23098" end="23106" title="division (military)" label="division"/>
<link wikidata="Q6813432" start="23159" end="23178" title="staff officer" label="S-1, S-2, &amp;amp; S-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q16711404" start="23345" end="23359" title="first sergeant" label="first sergeant"/>
<link wikidata="Q15215042" start="23558" end="23573" title="master sergeant" label="master sergeant"/>
<link wikidata="Q772765" start="24929" end="24970" title="M240 machine gun" label="M240G 7.62mm general-purpose machine guns"/>
<link wikidata="Q225032" start="25242" end="25287" title="M224 mortar" label="M224 60mm Light Weight Company Mortar Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302752" start="25507" end="25573" title="Mk 153 Shoulder-Launched Multipurpose Assault Weapon" label="Mk153 SMAW Shoulder-launched Multipurpose Assault Weapon launchers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644535" start="25992" end="26003" title="81 mm mortar" label="81mm Mortar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5635103" start="26242" end="26264" title="HOWITZER 155 mm HM 41" label="155mm Howitzer Battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q218932" start="26446" end="26463" title="M2 Browning" label="M2HB .50 cal. BMG"/>
<link wikidata="Q482529" start="26471" end="26485" title="Mk 19 grenade launcher" label="Mk 19 40mm AGL"/>
<link wikidata="Q634188" start="26577" end="26620" title="FGM-148 Javelin" label="FGM-148 Javelin Anti-Tank Missile launchers"/>
<link wikidata="Q747313" start="26728" end="26811" title="BGM-71 TOW" label="BGM-71 Tube launched, Optically tracked, Wire command link guided missile launchers"/>
<link wikidata="Q700689" start="26947" end="26980" title="Assault Amphibious Vehicle" label="AAV-7 Amphibious Assault Vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q173684" start="27074" end="27096" title="M1 Abrams" label="M1A2 Main Battle Tanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q906668" start="27211" end="27255" title="LAV-25" label="LAV-25 Light Armored Reconnaissance Vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27432" end="27447" title="Weapons company#United States Marine Corps" label="Weapons company"/>
<link wikidata="Q17147214" start="27591" end="27623" title="Headquarters and Service Company" label="Headquarters and Service Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1697506" start="28029" end="28049" title="Scout Sniper Platoon" label="Scout Sniper Platoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970186" start="28481" end="28509" title="Light Armored Reconnaissance" label="Light Armored Reconnaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q700689" start="28761" end="28786" title="Amphibious Assault Vehicle" label="Assault Amphibian Vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324145" start="29233" end="29245" title="E Company, 506th Infantry Regiment (United States)" label="Easy Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q385575" start="29253" end="29286" title="506th Parachute Infantry Regiment" label="506th Parachute Infantry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q165256" start="29288" end="29311" title="101st Airborne Division" label="101st Airborne Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="29343" end="29346" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="29347" end="29350" title="Home Box Office" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q208048" start="29368" end="29384" title="Band of Brothers (TV miniseries)" label="Band of Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29394" end="29406" title="A Company, 116th Infantry Regiment (United States)" label="Able Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547572" start="29414" end="29437" title="116th Infantry Regiment (United States)" label="116th Infantry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715528" start="29439" end="29461" title="29th Infantry Division (United States)" label="29th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q15627509" start="29585" end="29606" title="Military organization" label="Military organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025514" start="29609" end="29637" title="Infantry of the British Army" label="Infantry of the British Army"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="145421" wikidata="Q4904957" url="?curid=145421" title="Big August Quarterly">
<text>Big August Quarterly is an annual religious festival held in Wilmington, Delaware (sometimes called &quot;Big Quarterly&quot; or &quot;August Quarterly&quot;). Begun in 1814 by Peter Spencer in connection with the &quot;quarterly&quot; meeting (or &quot;conference&quot;) of the African Union Church—of the four meetings during the year, the one in August became the &quot;annual conference&quot; of the Church when ministers&#x27; assignments for the next year were announced, among other business—it was a time for free blacks and slaves alike to come together (from the multi-state area) and celebrate their faith with singing, dancing, testifying, and feasting. It is the oldest such celebration in the country.

The August Quarterly became a kind of Independence Day for Black people on the Delmarva Peninsula. In the early years of the festival “abolitionists and Underground Railroad conductors of the stature of Thomas Garrett and Harriet Tubman were often in the Wilmington area to assist slaves who chose to escape”. The Big Quarterly has remained a time of reunion, religious revival and celebration of freedom for the people in and around Wilmington, Delaware.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4904957" start="0" end="20" title="Big August Quarterly" label="Big August Quarterly"/>
<link wikidata="Q174224" start="61" end="81" title="Wilmington, Delaware" label="Wilmington, Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q7177049" start="177" end="190" title="Peter Spencer (religious leader)" label="Peter Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7576017" start="279" end="299" title="Spencer Churches" label="African Union Church"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="145422" wikidata="Q6279" url="?curid=145422" title="Joe Biden">
<text>Joseph Robinette Biden Jr. (born November 20, 1942) is an American politician who was the 46th president of the United States from 2021 to 2025. A member of the Democratic Party, he served as the 47th vice president from 2009 to 2017 under President Barack Obama, and represented Delaware in the U.S. Senate from 1973 to 2009.

Born in Scranton, Pennsylvania, Biden moved with his family to Delaware in 1953. He graduated from the University of Delaware in 1965 and the Syracuse University College of Law in 1968. He was elected to the New Castle County Council in 1970 and the U.S. Senate in 1972. As a senator, Biden drafted and led the effort to pass the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act and the Violence Against Women Act. He also oversaw six U.S. Supreme Court confirmation hearings, including the contentious hearings for Robert Bork and Clarence Thomas. Biden ran unsuccessfully for the 1988 and 2008 Democratic presidential nominations. In 2008, Obama chose Biden as his running mate, and he was a close counselor to Obama as vice president. In the 2020 presidential election, Biden won the Democratic nomination for president. He selected Kamala Harris as his running mate, and they defeated Republican incumbents Donald Trump and Mike Pence. He became the first president to serve with a female vice president.

As president, Biden signed the American Rescue Plan Act in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and subsequent recession. He signed bipartisan bills on infrastructure and manufacturing. He proposed the Build Back Better Act, which failed in Congress. Aspects of the bill were subsequently incorporated into the Inflation Reduction Act, which he signed into law in 2022. He appointed Ketanji Brown Jackson to the Supreme Court. In his foreign policy, the U.S. reentered the Paris Agreement. Biden oversaw the complete withdrawal of U.S. troops that ended the war in Afghanistan, leading to the collapse of the Afghan government and the Taliban seizing control. He responded to the Russian invasion of Ukraine by imposing sanctions on Russia and authorizing civilian and military aid to Ukraine. During the Gaza war, Biden condemned the actions of Hamas as terrorism, strongly supported Israel&#x27;s military efforts, and sent limited humanitarian aid to the Gaza Strip. A ceasefire proposal was adopted shortly before he left office.

Concerns about Biden&#x27;s age and health persisted throughout his term. Biden began his presidency with majority support, but saw his approval ratings decline throughout his presidency, in part due to public frustration over supply chain shortages and inflation, which peaked at 9.1% in June 2022 but dropped to 2.9% by the end of his presidency. He initially ran for reelection and, after the Democratic primaries, became the party&#x27;s presumptive nominee in the 2024 presidential election. After his performance in the first presidential debate, renewed scrutiny from across the political spectrum about his cognitive ability led him to withdraw his candidacy. He was replaced as the nominee by Vice President Harris, who lost to Trump in the general election. During his term, historians and political scientists ranked Biden in the second quartile of U.S. presidents, diverging from public assessments of his tenure.

== Early life (1942–1965) ==
Joseph Robinette Biden Jr. was born on November 20, 1942, at St. Mary&#x27;s Hospital in Scranton, Pennsylvania, to Catherine Eugenia &quot;Jean&quot; Biden () and Joseph Robinette Biden Sr. He was the oldest child in a Catholic family of mostly Irish descent. He has a sister, Valerie, and two brothers, Francis and James.

Biden&#x27;s father had been wealthy, and the family purchased a home in the affluent Long Island suburb of Garden City in 1946, but he suffered business setbacks around the time Biden was seven years old, and for several years the family lived with Biden&#x27;s maternal grandparents in Scranton. Scranton fell into economic decline during the 1950s, and Biden&#x27;s father could not find steady work. Beginning in 1953 when Biden was ten, the family lived in an apartment in Claymont, Delaware, before moving to a house in nearby Mayfield, Delaware. Biden Sr. later became a successful used-car salesman, maintaining the family in a middle-class lifestyle.

At Archmere Academy in Claymont, Biden played baseball and was a standout halfback and wide receiver on the high school football team. Though a poor student, he was class president in his junior and senior years. He graduated in 1961. At the University of Delaware in Newark, Biden briefly played freshman football, and, as an unexceptional student, received a Bachelor of Arts degree with a double major in history and political science in 1965.

Biden had a stutter and has mitigated it since his early twenties.

== Marriages, law school, and early career (1966–1973) ==

Biden married Neilia Hunter, a student at Syracuse University, on August 27, 1966, after overcoming her parents&#x27; disinclination for her to wed a Catholic. Their wedding was held in a Catholic church in Skaneateles, New York. They had three children: Joseph R. &quot;Beau&quot; Biden III, Robert Hunter Biden, and Naomi Christina &quot;Amy&quot; Biden.

Biden earned a Juris Doctor from Syracuse University College of Law in 1968. In his first year of law school, he failed a course because he plagiarized a law review article, but the failing grade was later stricken. His grades were relatively poor, and he graduated 76th in a class of 85. He was admitted to the Delaware bar in 1969.

Biden clerked at a Wilmington law firm headed by prominent local Republican William Prickett in 1968 and, he later said, &quot;thought of myself as a Republican&quot;. He disliked incumbent Democratic Delaware governor Charles L. Terry&#x27;s conservative racial politics and supported a more liberal Republican, Russell W. Peterson, who defeated Terry in 1968. Local Republicans attempted to recruit Biden, but he registered as an Independent because of his distaste for Republican presidential candidate Richard Nixon.

In 1969, Biden practiced law, first as a public defender and then at a law firm headed by a locally active Democrat, who named him to the Democratic Forum, a group trying to reform and revitalize the state party; Biden subsequently reregistered as a Democrat. He and another attorney also formed a law firm. Corporate law did not appeal to him, and criminal law did not pay well. He supplemented his income by managing properties.

Biden ran for the fourth district seat on the New Castle County Council in 1970 on a liberal platform that included support for public housing in the suburbs. Biden won the general election, defeating Republican Lawrence T. Messick, and took office on January 5, 1971. He served until January 1, 1973. During his time on the county council, Biden opposed large highway projects, which he argued might disrupt Wilmington neighborhoods.

Biden had not openly supported or opposed the Vietnam War until he ran for Senate and opposed Richard Nixon&#x27;s conduct of the war. While studying at the University of Delaware and Syracuse University, Biden obtained five student draft deferments. Based on a physical examination, he was given a conditional medical deferment in 1968; in 2008, a spokesperson for Biden said his having had &quot;asthma as a teenager&quot; was the reason.

=== 1972 U.S. Senate campaign in Delaware ===

Biden defeated Republican incumbent J. Caleb Boggs to become the junior U.S. senator from Delaware in 1972. He was the only Democrat willing to challenge Boggs and, with minimal campaign funds, he was thought to have no chance of winning. Family members managed and staffed the campaign, which relied on meeting voters face-to-face and hand-distributing position papers, an approach made feasible by Delaware&#x27;s small size. He received help from the AFL-CIO and Democratic pollster Patrick Caddell. His platform focused on the environment, withdrawal from Vietnam, civil rights, mass transit, equitable taxation, health care and public dissatisfaction with &quot;politics as usual&quot;. A few months before the election, Biden trailed Boggs by almost thirty percentage points, but his energy, attractive young family, and ability to connect with voters&#x27; emotions worked to his advantage, and he won with 50.5% of the vote.

=== Death of wife and daughter ===
A few weeks after Biden was elected senator, his wife Neilia and one-year-old daughter Naomi were killed in an automobile accident in Hockessin, Delaware, on December 18, 1972. Their sons Beau (aged 3) and Hunter (aged 2) were in the car and were taken to hospital with non-life-threatening injuries. Biden considered resigning to care for them, but Senate Majority Leader Mike Mansfield persuaded him not to. Biden contemplated suicide and was filled with anger and religious doubt. He wrote that he &quot;felt God had played a horrible trick&quot; on him and had trouble focusing on work.

=== Second marriage ===

Biden met teacher Jill Tracy Jacobs in 1975 on a blind date. They married at the United Nations chapel in New York on June 17, 1977, and spent their honeymoon at Lake Balaton in the Hungarian People&#x27;s Republic. Biden credits her with the renewal of his interest in politics and life.

In 1981, the couple had a daughter, Ashley Biden. She is a social worker. Jill helped raise her stepsons, Hunter and Beau, who were seven and eight respectively at the time of her marriage. Hunter has worked as a Washington lobbyist and investment adviser; his business dealings, personal life, and legal troubles have come under significant scrutiny during his father&#x27;s presidency. In December 2024, Biden pardoned Hunter following his conviction on gun and tax charges despite repeated promises that he would not do so. Beau became an Army judge-advocate in Iraq and later Delaware attorney general; he died of brain cancer in 2015.

=== Teaching ===
From 1991 to 2008, as an adjunct professor, Biden co-taught a seminar on constitutional law at Widener University School of Law.

== U.S. Senate (1973–2009) ==
=== Senate activities ===

Elected to the U.S. Senate in 1972, Biden was re-elected in 1978, 1984, 1990, 1996, 2002, and 2008, regularly receiving about 60% of the vote. Aged 30 when first elected, he was the seventh-youngest senator in U.S. history. He was junior senator to William Roth until Roth was defeated in 2000. , he was the 19th-longest-serving senator in U.S. history.

During his early years in the Senate, Biden focused on consumer protection and environmental issues and called for greater government accountability. In a 1974 interview, he described himself as liberal on civil rights and liberties, senior citizens&#x27; concerns and healthcare, but conservative on other issues, including abortion and military conscription. Biden was the first U.S. senator to endorse Jimmy Carter for president in the 1976 Democratic primary. Carter won the Democratic nomination and the 1976 election. Biden also worked on arms control. After Congress failed to ratify the SALT II Treaty signed in 1979 by Soviet general secretary Leonid Brezhnev and President Jimmy Carter, Biden met with Soviet foreign minister Andrei Gromyko and secured changes that addressed the Senate Foreign Relations Committee&#x27;s objections. He received considerable attention when he excoriated Secretary of State George Shultz at a Senate hearing for the Reagan administration&#x27;s support of South Africa despite its policy of apartheid. In a congressional hearing in 1984, he objected to the Strategic Defense Initiative plan to construct autonomous systems of ICBM defense.

In the mid-1970s, Biden was one of the Senate&#x27;s strongest opponents of race-integration busing. His Delaware constituents strongly opposed it, and such opposition nationwide later led his party to mostly abandon school integration policies. In his first Senate campaign, Biden had expressed support for busing to remedy &quot;de jure&quot; segregation, as in the South, but opposed its use to remedy &quot;de facto&quot; segregation arising from racial patterns of neighborhood residency, as in Delaware; he opposed a proposed constitutional amendment banning busing entirely. Biden supported a 1976 measure forbidding the use of federal funds for transporting students beyond the school closest to them. He co-sponsored a 1977 amendment closing loopholes in that measure, which President Carter signed into law in 1978.

Biden became ranking minority member of the Senate Judiciary Committee in 1981. He was a Democratic floor manager for the successful passage of the Comprehensive Crime Control Act in 1984. His supporters praised him for modifying some of the law&#x27;s worst provisions, and it was his most important legislative accomplishment to that time. In 1994, Biden helped pass the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act, which included a ban on assault weapons, and the Violence Against Women Act, which he has called his most significant legislation. The 1994 crime law was unpopular among progressives and criticized for resulting in mass incarceration; in 2019, Biden called his role in passing the bill a &quot;big mistake&quot;, saying it &quot;trapped an entire generation&quot;.

Biden voted for a 1993 provision that deemed homosexuality incompatible with military life, thereby banning gay people from serving in the armed forces. In 1996, he voted for the Defense of Marriage Act, which prohibited the federal government from recognizing same-sex marriages, thereby barring people in such marriages from equal protection under federal law and allowing states to do the same. In 2015, the act was ruled unconstitutional in &quot;Obergefell v. Hodges&quot;.

Biden was critical of Independent Counsel Ken Starr during the 1990s Whitewater controversy and Lewinsky scandal investigations, saying &quot;it&#x27;s going to be a cold day in hell&quot; before another independent counsel would be granted similar powers. He voted to acquit during the impeachment of Bill Clinton. During the 2000s, Biden sponsored bankruptcy legislation sought by credit card issuers. Bill Clinton vetoed the bill in 2000, but it passed in 2005 as the Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act, with Biden being one of only 18 Democrats to vote for it, while leading Democrats and consumer rights organizations opposed it. As a senator, Biden strongly supported increased Amtrak funding and rail security.

=== Brain surgeries ===
In February 1988, after several episodes of severe neck pain, Biden underwent surgery to correct a leaking intracranial berry aneurysm. While recuperating, he suffered a pulmonary embolism. A second aneurysm was surgically repaired in May. His recuperation kept him away from the Senate for seven months.

=== Senate Judiciary Committee ===
Biden was a longtime member of the Senate Committee on the Judiciary. He chaired it from 1987 to 1995 and was a ranking minority member from 1981 to 1987 and again from 1995 to 1997.

As chair, Biden presided over two highly contentious U.S. Supreme Court confirmation hearings. When Robert Bork was nominated in 1988, Biden reversed his approvalgiven in an interview the previous yearof a hypothetical Bork nomination. Conservatives were angered, but at the hearings&#x27; close Biden was praised for his fairness, humor, and courage. Rejecting the arguments of some Bork opponents, Biden framed his objections to Bork in terms of the conflict between Bork&#x27;s strong originalism and the view that the U.S. Constitution provides rights to liberty and privacy beyond those explicitly enumerated in its text. Bork&#x27;s nomination was rejected in the committee by a 5–9 vote and then in the full Senate, 42–58.

During Clarence Thomas&#x27;s nomination hearings in 1991, Biden&#x27;s questions on constitutional issues were often convoluted to the point that Thomas sometimes lost track of them, and Thomas later wrote that Biden&#x27;s questions were akin to &quot;beanballs&quot;. After the committee hearing closed, the public learned that Anita Hill had accused Thomas of making unwelcome sexual comments when they had worked together. Biden had known of some of these charges, but initially shared them only with the committee because Hill was then unwilling to testify. The committee hearing was reopened and Hill testified, but Biden did not permit testimony from other witnesses, such as a woman who had made similar charges and experts on harassment. The full Senate confirmed Thomas by a 52–48 vote, with Biden opposed. Liberal legal advocates and women&#x27;s groups felt strongly that Biden had mishandled the hearings and not done enough to support Hill. In 2019, he told Hill he regretted his treatment of her, but Hill said afterward she remained unsatisfied.

=== Senate Foreign Relations Committee ===
Biden was a longtime member of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. He became its ranking minority member in 1997 and chaired it from June 2001 to 2003 and 2007 to 2009. His positions were generally liberal internationalist. He collaborated effectively with Republicans and sometimes went against elements of his own party. During this time he met with at least 150 leaders from 60 countries and international organizations, becoming a well-known Democratic voice on foreign policy.

Biden voted against authorization for the Gulf War in 1991. He became interested in the Yugoslav Wars after hearing about Serbian abuses during the Croatian War of Independence in 1991. Once the Bosnian War broke out, Biden was among the first to call for the &quot;lift and strike&quot; policy. The George H. W. Bush administration and Clinton administration were both reluctant to implement the policy, fearing Balkan entanglement. In April 1993, Biden had a tense three-hour meeting with Serbian leader Slobodan Milošević. Biden worked on several versions of legislative language urging the U.S. toward greater involvement. He has called his role in affecting Balkan policy in the mid-1990s his &quot;proudest moment in public life&quot; related to foreign policy. In 1999, during the Kosovo War, Biden supported the 1999 NATO bombing of FR Yugoslavia. He and Senator John McCain co-sponsored the McCain-Biden Kosovo Resolution, which called on Clinton to use all necessary force, including ground troops, to confront Milošević over Yugoslav actions toward Kosovo Albanians.

==== Wars in Afghanistan and Iraq ====

Biden was a strong supporter of the War in Afghanistan, saying, &quot;Whatever it takes, we should do it.&quot; As head of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, he said in 2002 that Iraqi president Saddam Hussein was a threat to national security and there was no other option than to &quot;eliminate&quot; that threat. In October 2002, he voted in favor of the Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Iraq, approving the U.S. invasion of Iraq. As chair of the committee, he assembled witnesses to testify in favor of the authorization. They gave testimony grossly misrepresenting the intent, history, and status of Saddam and his government, and touted Iraq&#x27;s fictional possession of weapons of mass destruction. Biden eventually became a critic of the war and called his role a &quot;mistake&quot;, but did not push for withdrawal. He supported the appropriations for the occupation, but argued that the war should be internationalized, that more soldiers were needed, and that the Bush administration should &quot;level with the American people&quot; about its cost and length.

By late 2006, Biden&#x27;s stance had shifted considerably. He opposed the troop surge of 2007, saying General David Petraeus was &quot;dead, flat wrong&quot; in believing the surge could work. Biden instead advocated dividing Iraq into a loose federation of three ethnic states. In September 2007, a non-binding resolution endorsing the plan passed the Senate, but the idea failed to gain traction.

== 1988 and 2008 presidential campaigns ==

=== 1988 campaign ===

Biden declared his candidacy for the 1988 Democratic presidential nomination on June 9, 1987. He was considered a strong candidate because of his moderate image, his speaking ability, his high profile as chair of the Senate Judiciary Committee at the upcoming Robert Bork Supreme Court nomination hearings, and his appeal to Baby Boomers. He raised more in the first quarter of 1987 than any other candidate.

By August, Biden&#x27;s campaign messaging had become confused due to staff rivalries, and in September, he was accused of plagiarizing a speech by British Labour Party leader Neil Kinnock. Biden had credited Kinnock on previous occasions, but did not on two occasions in August. Earlier that year, Biden had also used passages from a speech by Robert F. Kennedy (for which his aides took blame) and John F. Kennedy&#x27;s inaugural address; two years earlier he had used a 1976 passage by Hubert Humphrey. Biden responded that politicians often borrow from one another without giving credit, and that one of his rivals for the nomination, Jesse Jackson, had called him to point out that he (Jackson) had used the same material by Humphrey that Biden had used. A few days later, it was publicized that, while in law school, Biden had taken text from a &quot;Fordham Law Review&quot; article with inadequate citations. At Biden&#x27;s request the Delaware Supreme Court&#x27;s Board of Professional Responsibility reviewed the incident and concluded that he had violated no rules.

Biden has made several false or exaggerated claims about his early life: that he had earned three degrees in college, that he attended law school on a full scholarship, that he had graduated in the top half of his class, and that he had marched in the civil rights movement. The limited amount of other news about the presidential race amplified these disclosures, and on September 23, 1987, Biden withdrew his candidacy.

=== 2008 campaign ===

After exploring running in several previous cycles, in January 2007, Biden declared his candidacy in the 2008 elections. Biden focused on the Iraq War, his record as chairman of major Senate committees, and his foreign-policy experience. Biden was noted for his one-liners during the campaign; in one debate he said of Republican candidate Rudy Giuliani, &quot;There&#x27;s only three things he mentions in a sentence: a noun, and a verb and 9/11.&quot;

Biden had difficulty raising funds, struggled to draw people to his rallies, and failed to gain traction against the high-profile candidacies of Obama and Hillary Clinton. He never rose above single digits in national polls of the Democratic candidates. In the first contest on January 3, 2008, Biden placed fifth in the Iowa caucuses, garnering slightly less than one percent of the state delegates. He withdrew from the race that evening.

Despite its lack of success, Biden&#x27;s 2008 campaign raised his stature in the political world. In particular, it changed the relationship between Biden and Obama. Although they had served together on the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, they had not been close: Biden resented Obama&#x27;s quick rise to political stardom, while Obama viewed Biden as garrulous and patronizing. Having gotten to know each other during 2007, Obama appreciated Biden&#x27;s campaign style and appeal to working-class voters, and Biden said he became convinced Obama was &quot;the real deal&quot;.

== 2008 and 2012 vice presidential campaigns ==

=== 2008 campaign ===

In August 2008, Obama and Biden met in secret to discuss the possibility of a place for Biden in the Obama administration, and developed a strong personal rapport. On August 22, 2008, Obama announced that Biden would be his running mate. &quot;The New York Times&quot; reported that the choice reflected a desire for someone with foreign policy and national security experience. Others pointed out Biden&#x27;s appeal to middle-class and blue-collar voters. Biden was officially nominated for vice president on August 27 at the 2008 Democratic National Convention in Denver.

Biden&#x27;s vice-presidential campaigning gained little media attention, as the press devoted far more coverage to the Republican nominee, Alaska governor Sarah Palin. Under instructions from the campaign, Biden kept his speeches succinct and tried to avoid offhand remarks. Privately, Biden&#x27;s remarks frustrated Obama. &quot;How many times is Biden gonna say something stupid?&quot;, he asked. Obama campaign staffers called Biden&#x27;s blunders &quot;Joe bombs&quot; and kept Biden uninformed about strategy discussions, which irked Biden. Relations between the two campaigns became strained for a month, until Biden apologized to Obama and the two built a stronger partnership.

As the 2007–2008 financial crisis reached a peak in September 2008, and the proposed Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008 became a major factor in the campaign, Biden voted for the $700 billion Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008, which passed in the Senate. On October 2, he participated in the vice-presidential debate with Palin at Washington University in St. Louis. Post-debate polls found that while Palin exceeded many voters&#x27; expectations, Biden had still won the debate overall. On November 4, Obama and Biden were elected.

As Biden was running for vice president, he was also running for reelection to the Senate, as permitted by Delaware law. Having been re-elected to the Senate as well as the vice presidency, Biden made a point of not resigning from the Senate before he was sworn in for his seventh term in January 2009. He resigned from the Senate on January 15.

=== 2012 campaign ===
In October 2010, Biden said Obama had asked him to remain as his running mate for the 2012 presidential election, but with Obama&#x27;s popularity on the decline, White House Chief of Staff William M. Daley conducted some secret polling and focus group research in late 2011 on the idea of replacing Biden with Hillary Clinton. The notion was dropped when the results showed no appreciable improvement, and White House officials later said Obama himself never entertained the idea.

Biden&#x27;s May 2012 statement that he was &quot;absolutely comfortable&quot; with same-sex marriage gained considerable public attention in comparison to Obama&#x27;s position, which had been described as &quot;evolving&quot;. Biden made his statement without administration consent, and Obama and his aides were irked, since Obama had planned to shift position in the build-up to the party convention. Gay rights advocates seized upon Biden&#x27;s statement, and within days, Obama announced that he too supported same-sex marriage, an action in part forced by Biden&#x27;s remarks.

Biden had a heavy schedule of appearances in swing states as the reelection campaign began in earnest in spring 2012. An August 2012 remark before a mixed-race audience that Republican proposals to relax Wall Street regulations would &quot;put y&#x27;all back in chains&quot; again drew attention to Biden&#x27;s propensity for colorful remarks.
Following the first presidential debate of the general election, in which President Obama&#x27;s performance was considered surprisingly lackluster, his lead over Romney collapsed, putting pressure on Biden to stop the bleeding with a strong showing against the Republican vice-presidential nominee, Paul Ryan. Some political analysts considered Biden&#x27;s performance in the October 11 vice-presidential debate one of the best of his career and a key factor in Obama&#x27;s rebound in the polls and eventual victory. The debate also became memorable for the popularization of Biden&#x27;s use of the phrase &quot;a bunch of malarkey&quot; in response to an attack by Ryan on the administration&#x27;s response to the September 11, 2012, attacks on the U.S. embassy in Benghazi. Biden reused the phrase during his 2020 presidential campaign. On November 6, Obama and Biden were re-elected.

== Vice presidency (2009–2017) ==
=== First term (2009–2013) ===
Biden said he intended to eliminate some explicit roles assumed by George W. Bush&#x27;s vice president, Dick Cheney, and did not intend to emulate any previous vice presidency. He was sworn in on January 20, 2009. He was the first vice president from Delaware and the first Roman Catholic vice president.

Biden visited Kosovo in May and affirmed the U.S. position that its &quot;independence is irreversible&quot;. Biden lost an internal debate to Secretary of State Hillary Clinton about sending 21,000 new troops to Afghanistan, but his skepticism was valued, and in 2009, Biden&#x27;s views gained more influence as Obama reconsidered his Afghanistan strategy. Biden visited Iraq about every two months, becoming the administration&#x27;s point man in delivering messages to Iraqi leadership about expected progress there. More generally, overseeing Iraq policy became Biden&#x27;s responsibility. By 2012, Biden had made eight trips there, but his oversight of U.S. policy in Iraq receded with the exit of U.S. troops in 2011.

Biden oversaw infrastructure spending from the Obama stimulus package intended to help counteract the ongoing recession. When he completed that role in February 2011, he said the number of fraud incidents with stimulus monies had been less than one percent.

Biden&#x27;s off-message response to a question in April 2009, during the beginning of the swine flu outbreak, led to a swift retraction by the White House. The remark revived Biden&#x27;s reputation for gaffes. Confronted with rising unemployment through July 2009, Biden acknowledged that the administration had &quot;misread how bad the economy was&quot;, but maintained confidence the stimulus package would create many more jobs once the pace of expenditures picked up. A hot mic picked up Biden telling Obama that his signing the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act was &quot;a big fucking deal&quot; on March 23, 2010. Despite their different personalities, Obama and Biden formed a friendship, partly based around Obama&#x27;s daughter Sasha and Biden&#x27;s granddaughter Maisy, who attended Sidwell Friends School together.

Members of the Obama administration said Biden&#x27;s role in the White House was to be a contrarian and force others to defend their positions. Rahm Emanuel, White House chief of staff, said that Biden helped counter groupthink. The Bidens maintained a relaxed atmosphere at their official residence in Washington, often entertaining their grandchildren, and regularly returned to their home in Delaware.

Biden campaigned heavily for Democrats in the 2010 midterm elections, maintaining an attitude of optimism in the face of predictions of large-scale losses for the party. Following big Republican gains in the elections and the departure of Emanuel, Biden&#x27;s past relationships with Republicans in Congress became more important. He led the successful administration effort to gain Senate approval for the New START treaty. In December 2010, Biden&#x27;s advocacy for a middle ground, followed by his negotiations with Senate minority leader Mitch McConnell, were instrumental in producing the administration&#x27;s compromise tax package that included a temporary extension of the Bush tax cuts. The package passed as the Tax Relief, Unemployment Insurance Reauthorization, and Job Creation Act of 2010.

Obama delegated Biden to lead negotiations with Congress in March 2011 to resolve federal spending levels and avoid a government shutdown. The U.S. debt ceiling crisis developed over the next few months, but Biden&#x27;s relationship with McConnell again proved key in bringing about a deal to resolve it, in the form of the Budget Control Act of 2011. Some reports suggest that Biden opposed proceeding with the May 2011 U.S. mission to kill Osama bin Laden, lest failure adversely affect Obama&#x27;s reelection prospects.

Obama named Biden to head the Gun Violence Task Force, created to address the causes of school shootings and consider possible gun control measures in the aftermath of the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting, in December 2012. Later that month, during the final days before the United States fell off the &quot;fiscal cliff&quot;, Biden&#x27;s relationship with McConnell again proved important as the two negotiated a deal that led to the American Taxpayer Relief Act of 2012 being passed at the start of 2013.

=== Second term (2013–2017) ===

Biden was inaugurated to a second term on January 20, 2013, at a small ceremony at Number One Observatory Circle, his official residence, with Justice Sonia Sotomayor presiding (a public ceremony took place on January 21). He played little part in discussions that led to the October 2013 passage of the Continuing Appropriations Act, 2014, which resolved the federal government shutdown of 2013 and the debt-ceiling crisis of 2013. Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid and other Democratic leaders cut him out of direct talks with Congress, feeling Biden had given too much away during previous negotiations.
Biden&#x27;s Violence Against Women Act was reauthorized again in 2013. The act led to related developments, such as the White House Council on Women and Girls, begun in the first term, as well as the White House Task Force to Protect Students from Sexual Assault, begun in January 2014 with Biden and Valerie Jarrett as co-chairs. He talked about sexual violence while introducing Lady Gaga at the 88th Academy Awards in 2016, receiving a standing ovation from the audience.

Biden favored arming Syria&#x27;s rebel fighters. As the ISIL insurgency in Iraq intensified in 2014, renewed attention was paid to the Biden-Gelb Iraqi federalization plan of 2006, with some observers suggesting Biden had been right all along. He had close relationships with several Latin American leaders and visited the region 16 times during his vice presidency, the most of any president or vice president. In August 2016, Biden visited Serbia, where he met with the Serbian Prime Minister Aleksandar Vučić and expressed condolences for civilian victims of the bombing campaign during the Kosovo War. Biden never cast a tie-breaking vote in the Senate, making him the longest-serving vice president with this distinction.

==== Role in the 2016 presidential campaign ====
During his second term, Biden was often said to be preparing for a bid for the 2016 Democratic presidential nomination. With his family, friends, and donors encouraging him in mid-2015 to enter the race, and with Hillary Clinton&#x27;s favorability ratings in decline at that time, Biden was reported to be seriously considering the prospect and a &quot;Draft Biden 2016&quot; PAC was established.

By late 2015, Biden was still uncertain about running. He felt his son Beau&#x27;s recent death had largely drained his emotional energy, and said, &quot;nobody has a right ... to seek that office unless they&#x27;re willing to give it 110% of who they are.&quot; On October 21, Biden announced his decision not to run for president in 2016.

== Post-vice presidency (2017–2021) ==
After leaving the vice presidency, Biden became an honorary professor at the University of Pennsylvania, developing the Penn Biden Center for Diplomacy and Global Engagement. Biden remained in that position into 2019.

In 2017, Biden wrote a memoir, &quot;Promise Me, Dad&quot;, and went on a book tour. By 2019, he and his wife reported that they had earned over $15 million since the end of his vice presidency from speaking engagements and book sales.

Biden remained in the public eye, endorsing candidates while continuing to comment on politics, climate change, and the presidency of Donald Trump. He also continued to speak out in favor of LGBT rights, continuing advocacy on an issue he had become more closely associated with during his vice presidency. In 2018, he gave a eulogy for Senator John McCain. Biden continued to support cancer research.

==2020 presidential campaign==
=== Speculation and announcement ===
Between 2016 and 2019, media outlets often mentioned Biden as a likely candidate for president in 2020. When asked if he would run, he gave varied and ambivalent answers, saying &quot;never say never&quot;. A political action committee known as Time for Biden was formed in January 2018. Biden launched his campaign on April 25, 2019, saying he was worried by the Trump administration and felt a &quot;sense of duty&quot;.

=== Campaign ===
As the 2020 campaign season heated up, public polling showed Biden as one of the best-performing Democratic candidates head-to-head against Trump. With Democrats keenly focused on &quot;electability&quot; for defeating Trump, this boosted his popularity among Democratic voters. It also made Biden a frequent target of Trump. In September 2019, it was reported that Trump had pressured Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskyy to investigate alleged wrongdoing by Biden and his son Hunter Biden. No evidence was produced of any wrongdoing by the Bidens. Trump was perceived by many as attempting to hurt Biden&#x27;s chances of winning the presidency, resulting in a political scandal and Trump&#x27;s impeachment.

In March 2019 and April 2019, eight women accused Biden of inappropriate physical contact, such as embracing, touching or kissing. Biden had previously called himself a &quot;tactile politician&quot; and admitted this behavior had caused trouble for him. Journalist Mark Bowden described Biden&#x27;s lifelong habit of talking close, writing that he &quot;doesn&#x27;t just meet you, he engulfs you... scooting closer&quot; and leaning forward to talk. In April 2019, Biden pledged to be more &quot;respectful of people&#x27;s personal space&quot;.

Throughout 2019, Biden stayed generally ahead of other Democrats in national polls. Despite this, he finished fourth in the Iowa caucuses and fifth in the New Hampshire primary. He performed better in the Nevada caucuses, reaching the 15% required for delegates, but still finished 21.6 percentage points behind Bernie Sanders. Making strong appeals to Black voters on the campaign trail and in the South Carolina debate, Biden won the South Carolina primary by more than 28 points. After the withdrawals and subsequent endorsements of candidates Pete Buttigieg and Amy Klobuchar, he made large gains in the Super Tuesday primaries. Biden won 18 of the next 26 contests, putting him in the lead. Elizabeth Warren and Mike Bloomberg soon dropped out, and Biden expanded his lead with victories over Sanders in four states on March 10.

In late March 2020, Tara Reade, one of the eight women who in 2019 had accused Biden of inappropriate physical contact, accused Biden of having sexually assaulted her in 1993. There were inconsistencies between Reade&#x27;s 2019 and 2020 allegations. Biden and his campaign denied the sexual assault allegation.

When Sanders suspended his campaign on April 8, 2020, Biden became the Democratic Party&#x27;s presumptive nominee. On April 13, Sanders endorsed Biden. Barack Obama endorsed Biden the next day. On August 11, Biden announced U.S. senator Kamala Harris as his running mate, making her the first African American and first South Asian American vice-presidential nominee on a major-party ticket. On August 18, 2020, at the 2020 Democratic National Convention, Biden officially became the Democratic Party nominee for president in the 2020 election.

=== Presidential transition ===
Biden was elected the 46th president in November 2020, defeating the incumbent, Donald Trump. Trump refused to concede, insisting the election had been &quot;stolen&quot; through &quot;voter fraud&quot;, challenging the results in court and promoting numerous conspiracy theories about the voting and vote-counting processes, in an attempt to overturn the election results. Biden&#x27;s transition was delayed by several weeks as the White House ordered federal agencies not to cooperate. On November 23, General Services Administrator Emily W. Murphy formally recognized Biden as the apparent winner of the 2020 election and authorized the start of a transition process to the Biden administration.

On January 6, 2021, during Congress&#x27;s electoral vote count, Trump told supporters gathered in front of the White House to march to the Capitol and refused to concede. Soon after, some of his supporters attacked the Capitol. During the attack, Biden addressed the nation, calling the events &quot;an unprecedented assault unlike anything we&#x27;ve seen in modern times&quot;. After the Capitol was cleared, Congress officially certified the election results with Vice President Mike Pence, in his capacity as President of the Senate, declaring Biden and Harris the winners.

== Presidency (2021–2025) ==

=== Inauguration ===

Biden was inaugurated as the 46th president of the United States on January 20, 2021. At 78, he was the oldest person to have assumed the office. He is the second Catholic president (after John F. Kennedy) and the first president whose home state is Delaware. He is also the first man since George H. W. Bush to have been both vice president and president, and the second non-incumbent vice president (after Richard Nixon in 1968) to be elected president. He is also the first and only president to date from the Silent Generation.

Biden&#x27;s inauguration was &quot;a muted affair unlike any previous inauguration&quot; due to COVID-19 precautions as well as massively increased security measures because of the January 6 United States Capitol attack. Trump did not attend, becoming the first outgoing president since 1869 to not attend his successor&#x27;s inauguration.

=== First 100 days ===
In his first two days as president, Biden signed 17 executive orders. By his third day, orders had included rejoining the Paris Climate Agreement, ending the state of national emergency at the border with Mexico, directing the government to rejoin the World Health Organization, face mask requirements on federal property, measures to combat hunger in the United States, and revoking permits for the construction of the Keystone XL pipeline.
On March 11, Biden signed into law the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021, a $1.9 trillion economic stimulus and relief package that he had proposed to support the United States&#x27; recovery from the economic and health effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. The package included direct payments to most Americans, an extension of increased unemployment benefits, funds for vaccine distribution and school reopenings, and expansions of health insurance subsidies and the child tax credit. Biden&#x27;s initial proposal included an increase of the federal minimum wage to $15 per hour, but after the Senate parliamentarian determined that including the increase in a budget reconciliation bill would violate Senate rules, Democrats removed it.

Also in March, amid a rise in migrants entering the U.S. from Mexico, Biden said migrant adults were &quot;being sent back&quot;, in reference to the continuation of the Trump administration&#x27;s Title 42 policy for quick deportations. He earlier announced that his administration would not deport unaccompanied migrant children; the rise in arrivals of such children exceeded the capacity of facilities meant to shelter them, leading the Biden administration in March to direct the Federal Emergency Management Agency to help.

On April 14, Biden announced that the United States would delay the withdrawal of all troops from the war in Afghanistan until September 11, signaling an end to the country&#x27;s direct military involvement in Afghanistan after nearly 20 years. In February 2020, the Trump administration had made a deal with the Taliban to completely withdraw U.S. forces by May 1, 2021. Biden&#x27;s decision met with a range of reactions, from support and relief to trepidation at the possible collapse of the Afghan government without American support. On April 22–23, Biden held an international climate summit at which he announced that the U.S. would cut its greenhouse gas emissions by 50%–52% by 2030 compared to 2005 levels. On April 28, the eve of his 100th day in office, Biden delivered his first address to a joint session of Congress.

=== Domestic policy ===
On June 17, Biden signed the Juneteenth National Independence Day Act, which officially declared Juneteenth a federal holiday. In July 2021, amid a slowing of the COVID-19 vaccination rate in the country and the spread of the SARS-CoV-2 Delta variant, Biden said that it was &quot;gigantically important&quot; for Americans to be vaccinated.

In 2022, Biden endorsed a change to the Senate filibuster to allow for the passing of the Freedom to Vote Act and John Lewis Voting Rights Act. The rules change failed when two Democratic senators joined Senate Republicans in opposing it. In April 2022, Biden signed into law the bipartisan Postal Service Reform Act of 2022 to revamp the finances and operations of the United States Postal Service agency. Biden supported the Bipartisan Safer Communities Act aimed to address gun reform issues following the Robb Elementary School shooting in Uvalde, Texas; he signed the bill on June 25, 2022.

The Honoring our PACT Act of 2022 was introduced in 2021 and signed into law by Biden on August 10, 2022. The act intends to significantly improve healthcare access and funding for veterans who were exposed to toxic substances, including burn pits, during military service.

In 2022, Biden signed the Respect for Marriage Act, which repealed the Defense of Marriage Act and requires the federal government to recognize the validity of same-sex and interracial marriages.

In June 2024, Biden issued an executive action offering amnesty to unauthorized immigrants married to American citizens. The program included a pathway to U.S. residency and citizenship and was expected to initially affect about 500,000 people. It was later struck down due to a lack of legislation empowering the president to enact the program.

In January 2025, Biden declared the lapsed Equal Rights Amendment ratified as the &quot;28th Amendment&quot; to the constitution. The declaration has no formal effect and the National Archives has said it does not intend to certify the amendment as part of the constitutiom due to &quot;established legal, judicial, and procedural decisions&quot;.

==== Economy ====

Biden entered office nine months into a recovery from the COVID-19 recession and his first year in office was characterized by robust growth in real GDP, employment, wages, and stock market returns, amid significantly elevated inflation. Real GDP grew 5.9%, the fastest rate in 37 years. Amid record job creation, the unemployment rate fell at the fastest pace on record during the year. By the end of 2021, inflation rates measured by the consumer price index (CPI) reached a nearly 40-year high of 7.1%, which was partially offset by the highest nominal wage and salary growth in at least 20 years. The inflation rate peaked at 9% in June 2022. The inflation rate reached 2.9% and core inflation rate reached 3.2% on an annual basis in December 2024, the last full month of Biden&#x27;s term. Between December 2020 and December 2024, CPI rose 21.3% overall, with an annualized inflation rate of 5.3% throughout Biden&#x27;s term in office. The inflation rate remained above the Federal Reserve&#x27;s 2% target every month since March 2021, resulting in elevated interest rates to combat inflation. Average wages increased 19% throughout Biden&#x27;s presidency, falling behind inflation. The unemployment rate declined by over 2% and real GDP grew 11% during Biden&#x27;s term. Total household net worth increased by 28%, largely driven by stocks and real estate. The national debt grew to $36.2 trillion, with a debt to GDP ratio of 123% and a deficit to GDP ratio of 6% in FY 2024.
Amid a surge in inflation and high gas prices, Biden&#x27;s approval ratings declined, with his disapproval rating surpassing his approval rating in early 2022. After 5.9% growth in 2021, real GDP growth cooled in 2022 to 2.1%, after slightly negative growth in the first half spurred recession concerns. Job creation and consumer spending remained strong through the year, as the unemployment rate fell to match a 53-year low of 3.5% in December. Inflation peaked at 9.1% in June before easing to 3.2% by October 2023. Stocks had had their worst year since 2008 before recovering. Widespread predictions of an imminent recession did not materialize in 2022 or 2023, and by late 2023 indicators showed sharply lower inflation with economic acceleration. GDP growth hit 4.9% in the third quarter of 2023 and the year ended with stocks near record highs, with robust holiday spending.

Biden signed numerous major pieces of economic legislation in the 117th Congress, including the American Rescue Plan, Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, CHIPS and Science Act, and the Inflation Reduction Act. He signed the CHIPS and Science Act into law on August 9, 2022. It provided billions of dollars in new funding to boost domestic research on and manufacture of semiconductors, to compete economically with China. In his third month in office, Biden also signed an executive order to increase the minimum wage for federal contractors to $15 per hour. The order went into effect for 390,000 workers in January 2022. His administration rigorously enforced antitrust law.

In 2022, Biden blocked a national railroad strike planned by multiple labor unions. During the United Auto Workers strike, he expressed support for the workers in negotiations. Biden joined striking UAW workers&#x27; picket line in Michigan, becoming the first president to join a picket line. He refused to block a port strike from the International Longshoremen&#x27;s Association in October 2024.

Over the course of five days in March 2023, three small- to mid-size U.S. banks failed, triggering a sharp decline in global bank stock prices and swift response by regulators to prevent potential global contagion. After Silicon Valley Bank collapsed, the first to do so, Biden expressed opposition to a bailout by taxpayers. He claimed that the partial rollback of Dodd-Frank regulations contributed to the bank&#x27;s failure.

At the beginning of the 118th Congress, Biden and congressional Republicans engaged in a standoff after the U.S. hit its debt limit, which raised the risk that the U.S. would default on its debt. Biden and House speaker Kevin McCarthy struck a deal to raise the debt limit, the Fiscal Responsibility Act of 2023, which suspended the debt limit until January 2025. Biden signed it on June 3, averting a default. The deal was generally seen as favorable to Biden.

Biden extended the COVID-19 student loan pause through September 2023, with an &quot;on ramp&quot; period that extended some of the pause&#x27;s protections against credit reporting, collection efforts, and late payment fees through September 30, 2024. The Biden administration&#x27;s attempts to implement student loan forgiveness and relief programs have faced legal challenges from a coalition of Republican-led states. Biden&#x27;s plans to forgive student loan debt were estimated to cost over $519 billion, and some critics called them a &quot;disaster&quot;.

==== Judiciary ====

By the end of 2021, 40 of his nominees to the federal judiciary had been confirmed, more than any president in his first year in office since Ronald Reagan. Biden has prioritized diversity in his judicial appointments more than any president in U.S. history, with most of his appointees being women and people of color.

In January 2022, Supreme Court justice Stephen Breyer announced his intention to retire. During his 2020 campaign, Biden vowed to nominate the first Black woman to the Supreme Court if a vacancy occurred, a promise he reiterated after Breyer announced his retirement. On February 25, Biden nominated federal judge Ketanji Brown Jackson. She was sworn in on June 30. By the end of his presidency, Biden had appointed 235 judges, more appointments in a single term than any other president in at least 50 years. 63% of Biden&#x27;s judges were women and 60% were non-white. Biden expressed interest in judicial term limits and a binding ethics code for Supreme Court justices.

==== Infrastructure and climate ====

As part of Biden&#x27;s Build Back Better agenda, in late March 2021, he proposed the American Jobs Plan, a $2 trillion package addressing issues including transport infrastructure, utilities infrastructure, broadband infrastructure, housing, schools, manufacturing, research and workforce development. After months of negotiations among Biden and lawmakers, in August 2021 the Senate passed a $1 trillion bipartisan infrastructure bill called the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, while the House, also in a bipartisan manner, approved that bill in early November 2021, covering infrastructure related to transport, utilities, and broadband. Biden signed the bill into law in mid-November 2021.

The other core part of the Build Back Better agenda was the Build Back Better Act, a $3.5 trillion social spending bill that expands the social safety net and includes major provisions on climate change. Democrats attempted to pass it on a party-line vote through budget reconciliation, but struggled to win the support of Senator Joe Manchin, even as the price was lowered to $2.2 trillion. After Manchin rejected the bill, it was comprehensively reworked into the Inflation Reduction Act of 2022, covering deficit reduction, climate change, healthcare, and tax reform.

The Inflation Reduction Act of 2022 was introduced by Manchin and Senator Chuck Schumer. The package aimed to raise $739 billion and authorize $370 billion in spending on energy and climate change, $300 billion in deficit reduction, three years of Affordable Care Act subsidies, prescription drug reform to lower prices, and tax reform. According to an analysis by the Rhodium Group, the bill will lower U.S. greenhouse gas emissions between 31 percent and 44 percent below 2005 levels by 2030. On August 7, 2022, the Senate passed the bill (as amended) on a 51–50 vote, with all Democrats voting in favor, all Republicans opposed, and Vice President Kamala Harris breaking the tie. Biden signed the bill on August 16.

Before and during the 2021 United Nations Climate Change Conference (COP26), Biden promoted an agreement that the U.S. and the European Union cut methane emissions by a third by 2030 and tried to add dozens of other countries to the effort. Biden pledged to double climate funding to developing countries by 2024. Also at COP26, the U.S. and China reached a deal on greenhouse gas emission reduction. The two countries are responsible for 40 percent of global emissions. In July 2023, when heat waves hit the United STates, Biden announced measures to protect the population and said the heat waves were linked to climate change. In April 2024, he unveiled a plan to protect and restore natural water sources (3.2 million hectares of wetlands and 161,000 km of waterways).

Biden protected 674 million acres of land and ocean from natural resource exploitation, more than any other president. The vast majority of the conservation came from a ban on offshore drilling in 625 million acres of ocean.

==== Immigration ====
Illegal border crossings at the Mexico–United States border began to surge in 2021 when Biden assumed office, reaching an all-time monthly high in December 2023. Throughout 2024, crossings began to significantly decline from the December record, after Biden implemented restrictions on asylum claims from migrants who cross the border between ports of entry and urged Mexico to crack down on migrants. Deportations from October 2023 to September 2024 reached the highest level since 2014. Biden used humanitarian parole to an unprecedented degree to mitigate illegal border crossings, allowing migrants to fly into the U.S. or schedule their entries through official entry points in the U.S.-Mexico border. Over a million migrants had been admitted to the U.S. under humanitarian parole as of January 2024.

In January 2024, Biden expressed support for a proposed bipartisan immigration deal led by Senators Kyrsten Sinema and James Lankford. He had previously supported the U.S. Citizenship Act of 2021, which he proposed on his first day in office. The proposed bipartisan bill would have allowed DHS to close the border when encounters reach a seven-day average of 5,000 or exceed 8,500 in a single day. In addition, the bill would have mandated the detention of migrants seeking asylum and undergoing asylum interviews, with those failing the process repatriated to their home countries. While not addressing the status of &quot;Dreamers&quot;, it would have changed immigration law to allow the children of those with H-1B visas to get work authorizations and freeze their legal ages while waiting for green cards, rather than face deportation once they turn 21, and provide additional funding for immigration judges.

Former president Donald Trump announced his opposition to the legislation, calling on Congressional Republicans to oppose it; subsequently, leaders such as Speaker of the House Mike Johnson announced their opposition, halting further legislative action. As a result of continued high immigration levels throughout his tenure, some lawmakers and pundits have criticized Biden&#x27;s handling of the southern border. Criticism of the bill and broader immigration policy continued to be expressed by both sides, with some liberals considering his policies too harsh while some conservatives considered them too lax. On January 17, 2024, a Republican-led non-binding resolution denouncing the Biden-Harris administration&#x27;s handling of the U.S. southern border passed the House of Representatives by a vote of 225–187, with 211 Republicans and 14 Democrats supporting it. In the final year of his presidency, the Biden administration worked to extend at least 14 contracts with private prison companies to run immigrant detention centers, despite his 2020 campaign promise to end the practice. In June 2024, Biden issued an executive order allowing the president to restrict the Mexico–U.S. border.

==== Pardons and commutations ====
Biden issued more individual pardons and commutations than any other president. On October 6, 2022, he pardoned all Americans convicted of &quot;small&quot; amounts of cannabis possession under federal law. On December 22, 2023, he pardoned Americans for cannabis use or possession on federal lands regardless of whether they had been charged or prosecuted. On December 12, 2024, in the largest single-day clemency act in history, Biden granted clemency to about 1,500 nonviolent felons in home confinement who had previously been released from prison. The act generated controversy, as it included felons such as Michael Conahan, a judge involved in the kids for cash kickback scandal, and Rita Crundwell, a comptroller responsible for the single largest municipal fraud in U.S. history. The Biden administration said the offenders who received clemency &quot;deserve a second chance&quot; and were selected based on meeting certain criteria in a uniform decision. On December 23, 2024, Biden commuted the sentences of 37 out of 40 federal death row inmates. On his last day in office, Biden commuted the sentence of Leonard Peltier, convicted of murdering two FBI agents, to house arrest.

==== Pardons of family members and political figures====

Biden issued more pardons for members of his family than any other president. On December 1, 2024, he issued a &quot;full and unconditional&quot; pardon to Hunter Biden that covered all federal offenses between 2014 and December 1, 2024. The pardon&#x27;s sweeping extent was &quot;unprecedented&quot;. According to &quot;Reason&quot; magazine, Hunter Biden&#x27;s pardon was even more far-reaching than Richard Nixon&#x27;s or other &quot;controversial&quot; pardons:The Hunter pardon is far more comprehensive...in that it covered not just his convictions for drug-related activities and tax fraud, but &quot;any other criminal behavior&quot; since 2014—the year that Hunter joined the board of Ukrainian energy company Burisma. It has been alleged that Hunter&#x27;s job was essentially to trade on the family name and sell his access to dad. This may not have been illegal, but it does mean that the pardon is clearly designed to offer preemptive protection not just to Hunter, but to Joe Biden himself. These features make the pardon unprecedented, though perfectly in line with the president&#x27;s executive powers.Hunter had been convicted on charges related to tax and gun offenses, after which Joe made numerous promises not to pardon him. He and his staff continued to say that Hunter would not be pardoned as late as November, although internal staff discussions affirmed that the option remained on the table even as Biden said otherwise. Biden and his family finalized the decision to pardon Hunter without consulting senior staff. In a statement announcing the pardon, Biden said he believed his son was &quot;selectively, and unfairly, prosecuted&quot;, blaming &quot;political pressure&quot; for the collapse of a plea bargain. The plea bargain actually fell apart after the presiding judge asked about its unusual construction. Biden&#x27;s pardon came amid incoming December sentencing dates for Hunter for his convictions and concerns about the succeeding Trump administration potentially targeting political rivals for prosecution. Biden said, &quot;I hope Americans will understand why a father and a president would come to this decision.&quot;

On his last day in office, Biden issued pardons for more of his family members and other high-profile figures. The pardons covered Biden&#x27;s siblings and their spouses, including James Biden, who was interviewed as part of an impeachment probe into Biden. Others pardoned that day include former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Mark Milley, former National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases director Anthony Fauci, and members and participants in the House Select Committee on the January 6 Attack, despite many of those pardoned not having been under criminal investigation. Biden justified the pardons by citing his concern about &quot;baseless and politically motivated investigations&quot; during Trump&#x27;s second term. Biden added that the pardons were preemptive and should not be seen as implying their recipients&#x27; guilt. The pardons Biden granted to his family and other political figures had a sweeping scope similar to the one he granted Hunter, covering federal offenses the recipients committed or may have committed between 2014 and the day of the pardon.

Biden also pardoned two other Democratic officials on his last day in office: Ernest William Cromartie, convicted of tax evasion, and Gerald G. Lundergan, convicted of a scheme to funnel money to his daughter&#x27;s Senate campaign.

====2022 elections====

On September 2, 2022, in a nationally broadcast Philadelphia speech, Biden called for a &quot;battle for the soul of the nation&quot;. Off camera, he called Trump supporters &quot;semi-fascists&quot;, which Republican commentators denounced. A predicted Republican wave election did not materialize and the race for U.S. Congress control was much closer than expected, with Republicans securing a slim majority of 222 seats in the House of Representatives, and the Democratic caucus keeping control of the U.S. Senate.

It was the first midterm election since 1986 in which the party of the incumbent president achieved a net gain in governorships, and the first since 1934 in which the president&#x27;s party lost no state legislative chambers. Democrats credited Biden for their unexpectedly favorable performance.

=== Foreign policy ===
In June 2021, Biden took his first trip abroad as president. In eight days he visited Belgium, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom. He attended a G7 summit, a NATO summit, and an EU summit, and held one-on-one talks with Russian president Vladimir Putin.

In September 2021, Biden announced AUKUS, a security pact between Australia, the United Kingdom and the United States, to ensure &quot;peace and stability in the Indo-Pacific over the long term&quot;.

In February 2021, the Biden administration announced that the United States was ending its support for the Saudi-led bombing campaign in Yemen and revoked the designation of Yemen&#x27;s Houthis as terrorists. In early February 2022, Biden ordered the counterterrorism raid in northern Syria that resulted in the death of Abu Ibrahim al-Hashimi al-Qurashi, the second leader of the Islamic State. In late July, Biden approved the drone strike that killed Ayman al-Zawahiri, the second leader of Al-Qaeda, and an integral member in the planning of the September 11 attacks. The 2022 OPEC+ oil production cut caused a diplomatic spat with Saudi Arabia, widening the rift between the two countries, and threatening a longstanding alliance.

In August 2024, Biden negotiated and oversaw the 2024 Ankara prisoner exchange, the largest prisoner exchange since the end of the Cold War. It involved the release of 26 people, including American journalist Evan Gershkovich and former United States Marine Paul Whelan. In November 2024, the Biden administration announced that it had helped broker a ceasefire agreement in the Israel–Hezbollah conflict.

==== Withdrawal from Afghanistan ====

American forces began withdrawing from Afghanistan in 2020, under the provisions of a February 2020 US-Taliban agreement that set a May 1, 2021, deadline. The Taliban began an offensive on May 1. By early July, most American troops in Afghanistan had withdrawn. Biden addressed the withdrawal in July, saying, &quot;The likelihood there&#x27;s going to be the Taliban overrunning everything and owning the whole country is highly unlikely.&quot;

On August 15, the Afghan government collapsed under the Taliban offensive, and Afghan President Ashraf Ghani fled the country. Biden reacted by ordering 6,000 American troops to assist with evacuating American personnel and Afghan allies. He faced bipartisan criticism for the manner of the withdrawal, with the evacuations described as chaotic and botched. On August 16, Biden addressed the &quot;messy&quot; situation, taking responsibility for it, and admitting that the situation &quot;unfolded more quickly than we had anticipated&quot;. He defended his decision to withdraw, saying that Americans should not be &quot;dying in a war that Afghan forces are not willing to fight for themselves&quot;.

On August 26, a suicide bombing at the Kabul airport killed 13 U.S. service members and 169 Afghans. On August 27, an American drone strike killed two ISIS-K targets, who were &quot;planners and facilitators&quot;, according to a U.S. Army general. On August 29, another American drone strike killed ten civilians, including seven children. The Defense Department initially claimed the strike was conducted on an Islamic State suicide bomber threatening Kabul Airport, but admitted the suspect was harmless on September 17, calling its killing of civilians &quot;a tragic mistake&quot;.

The U.S. military completed withdrawal from Afghanistan on August 30. Biden called the extraction of over 120,000 Americans, Afghans and other allies &quot;an extraordinary success&quot;. He acknowledged that up to 200 Americans who wanted to leave did not, despite his August 18 pledge to keep troops in Afghanistan until all Americans who wanted to leave had left.

After the withdrawal, the U.S. continued to send aid to Afghanistan, remaining the country&#x27;s biggest aid donor as of August 2024 and spending at least $20.7 billion post-withdrawal. U.S. funding has helped support the Taliban government and stabilize Afghanistan&#x27;s economy. On September 25, 2024, the United States House of Representatives passed a resolution condemning the Biden-Harris Administration for the U.S. withdrawal from Afghanistan. The resolution passed 219 - 194, with ten Democrats and all Republicans voting in favor.

====Russian invasion of Ukraine====
In February 2022, the Russian Armed Forces under President Vladimir Putin launched a full-scale invasion of Ukraine. After warning for several weeks that an attack was imminent, Biden responded to the invasion by imposing severe sanctions on Russia and authorizing over $8 billion in weapons shipments to Ukraine. On April 29, he asked Congress for $33 billion for Ukraine, but lawmakers later increased it to about $40 billion. Biden blamed Putin for the emerging energy and food crises.

In 2022, Congress approved about $113 billion in aid to Ukraine. In October 2023, the Biden administration requested an additional $61.4 billion in aid for Ukraine for the year ahead, but delays in the passage of further aid by the House of Representatives inhibited progress, with the additional $61 billion in aid to Ukraine added in April 2024. Announced levels of aid frequently differed from actual deliveries of aid, with Ukraine receiving 30% of the vehicles the U.S. announced it would provide in 2024 by December 2024. Aid was also frequently delayed, and the Government Accountability Office and Pentagon Inspector General found that the Biden administration seemed unaware of the pace of weapons deliveries.

Throughout the conflict, Biden consistently refused Ukrainian requests to allow them to utilize weapons against Russian military targets inside Russia. An exception was granted in May 2024 for targets in the vicinity of Kharkiv for &quot;counter-fire&quot; purposes. Biden also blocked access for some weapons systems altogether, typically citing fears of escalation, only to permit deliveries for some weapons later on.

==== China affairs ====

The Solomon Islands-China security pact caused alarm in late 2022, as China could build military bases across the South Pacific. Biden sought to strengthen ties with Australia and New Zealand in the wake of the deal, as Anthony Albanese succeeded to the premiership of Australia and Jacinda Ardern&#x27;s government took a firmer line on Chinese influence. In a September 2022 interview with &quot;60 Minutes&quot;, Biden said that U.S. forces would defend Taiwan in the event of &quot;an unprecedented attack&quot; by the Chinese, which is in contrast to the long-standing U.S. policy of &quot;strategic ambiguity&quot; toward China and Taiwan. The September comments came after three previous comments by Biden that the U.S. would defend Taiwan in the event of a Chinese invasion. Amid increasing tension with China, Biden&#x27;s administration has repeatedly walked back his statements and asserted that U.S. policy toward Taiwan has not changed. In late 2022, Biden issued several executive orders and federal rules designed to slow Chinese technological growth, and maintain U.S. leadership over computing, biotech, and clean energy.

On February 4, 2023, Biden ordered the United States Air Force to shoot down a suspected Chinese surveillance balloon off the coast of Myrtle Beach, South Carolina. The State Department said the balloon carried antennas and other equipment capable of geolocating communications signals, and similar balloons from China have flown over more than 40 nations.&lt;ref name=&quot;washingtonpost/2023/02/09/chinese-balloon-program2&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; The Chinese government denied that the balloon was a surveillance device, instead claiming it was a civilian (mainly meteorological) airship that had blown off course. Secretary of State Antony Blinken postponed his planned visit to China as the incident further damaged U.S.-China relations. In May 2024, the Biden administration doubled tariffs on solar cells imported from China and more than tripled tariffs on lithium-ion electric vehicle batteries imported from China. It also raised tariffs on imports of Chinese steel, aluminum, and medical materials.

In April 2024, Biden signed the Protecting Americans from Foreign Adversary Controlled Applications Act, which would ban social networking services within 270 to 360 days if they are determined by the president and relevant provisions to be a &quot;foreign adversary controlled application&quot;. The act explicitly applies to ByteDance Ltd. and its subsidiaries, which are all based in China. It ceases to be applicable if the foreign adversary controlled application is divested and no longer considered to be controlled by a foreign adversary of the United States. Biden had signed the No TikTok on Government Devices Act in December 2022, prohibiting the use of TikTok on devices owned by the federal government.

====Gaza war====

In October 2023, Hamas launched a surprise attack on Israel that devolved into an intensified conflict, jeopardizing the administration&#x27;s push to normalize relations between Israel and Saudi Arabia. Biden stated his unequivocal support for Israel and condemned the attack by Hamas. He deployed aircraft carriers in the region to deter others from joining the war, and called for an additional $14 billion in military aid to Israel. He later began pressuring Israel to address the growing humanitarian crisis in the Gaza Strip. Biden rejected calls for a ceasefire but said he supported &quot;humanitarian pauses&quot; to deliver aid to the people of the Gaza Strip. He asked Israel to pause its invasion of Gaza for at least three days to allow for hostage negotiations; Israel agreed to daily four-hour pauses. He also directed the U.S. military to facilitate the delivery of humanitarian aid to Palestinians in Gaza. Biden has said he is a Zionist. He has faced criticism for his unwavering support for Israel. Officials have urged him to take a harder stance against Israel, criticizing his administration&#x27;s leniency and support despite the Israeli government&#x27;s contentious offensive, which has led to significant civilian casualties and humanitarian crises.

Following the killing of Palestinian civilians receiving food aid on February 29, 2024, Biden said the current level of aid flowing into Gaza was insufficient. On March 3, the U.S. military began airdropping food aid into Gaza. Several experts called the U.S. airdrops performative and said they would do little to alleviate the famine in Gaza.

As of May 2024, Biden has continued to support Israel during the course of the war despite significant domestic opposition to American involvement in it and subsequent widespread protests. A March 2024 Gallup poll found that a strong majority of Americans disapproved of Israeli conduct during the war. It found that 36% approved &quot;of the military action Israel has taken in Gaza&quot; and 55% disapproved. Young Americans have been significantly less supportive of Israel than older generations. Beginning in April 2024, widespread Gaza war protests emerged on university campuses, denouncing Biden.

On May 31, 2024, Biden announced his support for an Israeli ceasefire proposal, saying that Hamas was &quot;no longer capable&quot; of another large-scale attack. The proposal, which would establish a permanent ceasefire, release all hostages, and reconstruct the Gaza Strip, was supported by Hamas officials after mediation by Egypt and Qatar. The Netanyahu administration responded that Israel&#x27;s goals regarding &quot;the destruction of Hamas military and governing capabilities&quot; had not changed and that conditions would need to be met before it would agree to a ceasefire. In the first year of the war, it was estimated that the Biden administration had sent Israel at least $17.9 billion in military aid, a record. In about the same period, it sent Palestinians $1.2 billion in humanitarian aid. In the last week of Biden&#x27;s presidency, Qatari officials announced that Hamas had accepted the ceasefire deal, with 33 hostages to be released pending Israeli approval. Biden hailed the deal, saying &quot;it is long past time for the fighting to end and the work of building peace and security to begin&quot; in a press release the same day.

====NATO enlargement====
Following the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, Biden expressed support for expanding NATO to cover Sweden and Finland. On August 9, 2022, he signed the instruments of ratification stipulating U.S. support for the two countries&#x27; entry into NATO. Finnish ascension occurred on April 4, 2023, but opposition by Turkey and Hungary to Swedish entry led to a stalemate. Biden led diplomatic talks resulting in formal Swedish ascension into NATO on March 7, 2024. He has also expressed openness to Ukrainian entry into NATO following the end of the conflict, supporting an expedited timetable in its ascension and the removal of steps such as the Membership Action Plan typically required for NATO entry.

=== Investigations ===
====Retention of classified documents====
On November 2, 2022, while packing files at the Penn Biden Center, Biden&#x27;s attorneys found classified documents dating from his vice presidency in a &quot;locked closet&quot;. According to the White House, the documents were reported that day to the U.S. National Archives, which recovered them the next day. On November 14, Attorney General Merrick Garland appointed U.S. attorney John R. Lausch Jr. to conduct an investigation. On December 20, a second batch of classified documents was discovered in the garage of Biden&#x27;s Wilmington, Delaware residence.

The findings broke news on January 9, 2023, after CBS News published an article on the Lausch investigation. On January 12, Garland appointed Robert K. Hur as special counsel to investigate &quot;possible unauthorized removal and retention of classified documents or other records&quot;. On January 20, after a 13-hour consensual search by FBI investigators, six more items with classified markings were recovered from Biden&#x27;s Wilmington residence. FBI agents searched Biden&#x27;s home in Rehoboth Beach on February 1 and collected papers and notes from his time as vice president, but did not find any classified information. On February 8, 2024, Hur concluded the special counsel investigation and announced that no charges would be brought against Biden.

==== Business activities ====

On January 11, 2023, the House of Representatives launched an investigative committee into the foreign business activities of Biden&#x27;s son, Hunter, and brother, James. The committee&#x27;s chair, Representative James Comer, simultaneously investigated alleged corruption related to the Hunter Biden laptop controversy.

On September 12, House speaker Kevin McCarthy initiated a formal impeachment inquiry against Biden, saying that the recent House investigations &quot;paint a picture of corruption&quot; by Biden and his family. Congressional investigations, including by the House Oversight committee, have discovered no evidence of wrongdoing by Biden as of December 2023. On December 13, 2023, the House of Representatives voted 221–212 to formalize an impeachment inquiry into Biden.

In February 2024, Alexander Smirnov, a former intelligence informant who was prominent in the bribery allegations against Biden, was charged with making false statements to the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI). Smirnov admitted he had publicized a false story given to him by Russian intelligence officials with the goal of damaging Biden&#x27;s reelection campaign.

=== Age and health concerns ===

Biden was the oldest sitting president in U.S. history. His cognitive health was perceived to have declined by Republicans and some media figures, and privately by some Democrats. Members of Biden&#x27;s family and White House staffers, particularly Jill Biden, Hunter Biden, advisor Mike Donilon, counselor Steve Ricchetti, deputy chief of staff Annie Tomasini, and first lady advisor Anthony Bernal insulated Biden from scrutiny of his advanced aging and decline in acuity.

The media amplified and widely covered public concern about Biden&#x27;s mental acuity after a weak performance in a June 2024 presidential debate, but gave it limited coverage beforehand, in part due to harsh pushback from White House officials against questions about Biden&#x27;s health and cognitive ability. Biden repeatedly said he was fit to serve two terms as president, but later acknowledged that he may have been too old to serve a second term. Upon concluding the investigation into Biden&#x27;s handling of classified documents, special counsel Robert Hur suggested that Biden would be able to present himself to a jury as an &quot;elderly man with poor memory&quot; and wrote that his memory &quot;appeared to have significant limitations&quot;.

On July 21, 2022, Biden tested positive for COVID-19 with reportedly mild symptoms. According to the White House, he was treated with Paxlovid. He worked in isolation in the White House for five days and returned to isolation when he tested positive again on July 30, 2022. On July 17, 2024, Biden again tested positive for COVID-19.

=== 2024 presidential campaign ===

Ending months of speculation, on April 25, 2023, Biden confirmed he would run for reelection as president in the 2024 election, with Harris again as his running mate. The campaign launched four years to the day after the start of his 2020 presidential campaign. On the day of his announcement, a Gallup poll found that Biden&#x27;s approval rating was 37 percent, with most of those surveyed saying the economy was their biggest concern. During his campaign, Biden promoted higher economic growth and recovery following the COVID-19 pandemic. He frequently stated his intention to &quot;finish the job&quot; as a political rallying cry.

U.S. Representative Dean Phillips ran against Biden in the 2024 Democratic presidential primaries. Phillips campaigned as a younger alternative to Biden, who would be a stronger opponent to Trump. Biden was not on the ballot in the January 23 New Hampshire primary, but won it in a write-in campaign with 63.8% of the vote to Phillips&#x27;s 19.6%. He had wanted South Carolina to be the first primary, and won that state on February 3 with 96.2% of the vote. Biden received 89.3% of the vote in Nevada and 81.1% of the vote in Michigan, with &quot;none of these candidates&quot; and &quot;uncommitted&quot; coming in second in each state, respectively. On March 5 (&quot;Super Tuesday&quot;), he won 15 of 16 primaries, netting 80% or more of the vote in 13 of them. Biden lost the American Samoa contest to venture capitalist Jason Palmer, becoming the first incumbent president to lose a contest while appearing on the ballot since Jimmy Carter in 1980. On March 6, Phillips suspended his campaign and endorsed Biden. On March 12, Biden reached more than the 1,968 delegates needed to win the Democratic nomination, becoming the presumptive nominee.

The first presidential debate was held on June 27, 2024, between Biden and Trump. Biden&#x27;s performance was widely criticized, with commentators saying he frequently lost his train of thought and gave meandering answers. Several newspaper columnists declared Trump the winner, and polling indicated the majority of debate watchers believed Trump won. After the debate raised questions about his health and age, Biden faced calls to withdraw from the race, including from fellow Democrats and the editorial boards of several major news outlets.

Biden initially insisted that he would remain a candidate, but on July 21, he withdrew his candidacy, writing that this was &quot;in the best interest of my party and the country&quot;. He endorsed Harris as his successor. His announcement came 29 days before the beginning of the 2024 Democratic National Convention. On August 6, 2024, Harris was confirmed as the Democratic presidential nominee after securing 99% of the delegates in a virtual roll call vote. This was the first time an eligible incumbent had declined to run for reelection since Lyndon B. Johnson in 1968.

In the general election, Trump defeated Harris, flipping six states Biden had won in 2020. The Senate went Republican for the first time since 2018. In a nationally televised speech after the election, Biden congratulated Trump and promised a &quot;peaceful and orderly&quot; transition of power.

In a January 2025 interview, Biden claimed he could have defeated Trump had he not been persuaded to withdraw from the election, despite lagging behind Trump in polling. A YouGov poll conducted on November 6–7, 2024, found that if Biden had been the Democratic nominee, Trump would have won the popular vote by 49% to 42%. Trump won the popular vote over Harris by 49.8% to 48.3%.

===Assessments===

A February 2024 American Political Science Association poll of historians and scholars ranked Biden as the 14th-greatest president, diverging from public assessments. The pollsters noted that Biden&#x27;s ranking was unusually high for a presidency without military victories or institutional expansion, and with personal scandals such as Hunter Biden&#x27;s. The experts polled generally regarded Biden&#x27;s signature accomplishment as his victory over Trump in the 2020 election, which was perceived as helping to protect and restore political and institutional norms in American government.

Journalist Ronald Brownstein of &quot;The Atlantic&quot; compared Biden to Jimmy Carter, who died on December 29, 2024, and whom Biden eulogized on January 9, 2025. Biden&#x27;s presidency was overshadowed by the 2021–2023 inflation surge, much as the 1970s energy crisis and stagflation overshadowed Carter&#x27;s presidency. Both men were Democrats and served a single term as president, with Carter losing reelection in 1980 to Ronald Reagan and Biden&#x27;s party losing in 2024 to Donald Trump. Biden&#x27;s withdrawal from the 2024 presidential election was also compared to Lyndon B. Johnson&#x27;s withdrawal from the 1968 presidential election, with Johnson&#x27;s vice president Hubert Humphrey losing in 1968 to Richard Nixon and Biden&#x27;s vice president Kamala Harris losing in 2024 to Trump. Johnson and Biden were both initially popular but saw their approval ratings decline throughout their presidencies. Johnson and Biden also previously served as vice president, under John F. Kennedy and Barack Obama, respectively.

Journalist Amy Walter, editor of the nonpartisan &quot;The Cook Political Report&quot;, argued that Biden&#x27;s presidency was deemed a failure by the public particularly due to frustration over inflation. Walter said that voters considered inflation the most important factor with respect to the economy, more important than the stock market, low unemployment, or household income. The extent to which Biden&#x27;s policies were responsible for inflation is debated by economists, but according to Gallup, public perception of the economy in 2024 was worse only in 2008 and 1992, helping Trump win the 2024 presidential election.

== Post-presidency (2025–present) ==
His term ended on January 20, 2025, upon Trump&#x27;s second inauguration. Biden moved back to Wilmington, Delaware, afterwards. He later signed with talent agency Creative Artists Agency (CAA) to represent him in public engagements. CAA previously represented him from 2017 to 2020.

At the end of his presidency, Biden designated former senior advisors Anthony Bernal and Annie Tomasini to raise funds for the Joseph R. Biden Jr. Presidential Library.

On February 7, 2025, President Trump revoked Biden&#x27;s security clearance, ending his access to classified information. The White House said the decision was part of a broader review of security clearances for former officials. Former presidents have traditionally been granted access to intelligence briefings, though such access is at the sitting president&#x27;s discretion. In 2021, Biden revoked Trump&#x27;s security clearance after the January 6 Capitol attack.

== Political positions ==


As a senator, Biden was regarded as a moderate Democrat. As a presidential nominee, Biden&#x27;s platform had been called the most progressive of any major party platform in history, although not within his party&#x27;s ideological vanguard. Biden says his positions are deeply influenced by Catholic social teaching.

According to political scientist Carlo Invernizzi Accetti, &quot;it has become second nature to describe his politics with such ready-made labels as centrist or moderate.&quot; Accetti says that Biden represents an Americanized form of Christian democracy, taking positions characteristic of both the center-right and center-left. Biden has cited the Catholic philosopher Jacques Maritain, credited with starting the Christian democratic movement, as immensely influential in his thinking. Other analysts have likened his ideology to traditional liberalism, &quot;a doctrine of liberty, equality, justice and individual rights that relies, in the modern age, on a strong federal government for enforcement&quot;. Such analysts distinguish liberals, who believe in a regulated market economy, from the left, who believe in greater economic intervention or a planned economy. In 2022, journalist Sasha Issenberg wrote that Biden&#x27;s &quot;most valuable political skill&quot; was &quot;an innate compass for the ever-shifting mainstream of the Democratic Party&quot;.

Biden has proposed partially reversing the corporate tax cuts of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017, saying that doing so would not hurt businesses&#x27; ability to hire. He supported raising the corporate tax only up to 28% from the 21% established in the 2017 bill, not back to 35%, the corporate tax rate until 2017. He voted for the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA). as well as the Trans-Pacific Partnership. Biden is a staunch supporter of the Affordable Care Act (ACA). He has promoted a plan to expand and build upon it, paid for by revenue gained from reversing some Trump administration tax cuts. Biden&#x27;s plan aims to expand health insurance coverage to 97% of Americans, including by creating a public health insurance option.

Biden did not support national same-sex marriage rights while in the Senate and voted for the Defense of Marriage Act, but opposed proposals for constitutional amendments that would have banned same-sex marriage nationwide. Biden has supported same-sex marriage since 2012. As a senator, Biden forged deep relationships with police groups and was a chief proponent of a Police Officer&#x27;s Bill of Rights measure that police unions supported but police chiefs opposed. In 2020, Biden also ran on decriminalizing cannabis, after advocating harsher penalties for drug use as a U.S. senator.

Biden believes action must be taken on climate change. As a senator, he co-sponsored the Boxer–Sanders Global Warming Pollution Reduction Act, the most stringent climate bill in the United States Senate. Biden supports nature conservation. According to a report from the Center for American Progress, he broke several records in this domain. He took steps to protect old-growth forests. Biden opposes drilling for oil in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge. He wants to achieve a carbon-free power sector in the U.S. by 2035 and stop emissions completely by 2050. His program includes reentering the Paris Agreement, green building and more. Biden supports environmental justice, including climate justice and ocean justice. A major step is increasing energy efficiency, water efficiency and resilience to climate disasters in low-income houses for mitigate climate change, reduce costs, improve health and safety. Biden has called global temperature rise above the 1.5 degree limit the &quot;only existential threat humanity faces even more frightening than a nuclear war&quot;. Despite his clean energy policies and congressional Republicans characterizing them as a &quot;War on American Energy&quot;, domestic oil production reached a record high in October 2023.

Biden has said the U.S. needs to &quot;get tough&quot; on China, calling it the &quot;most serious competitor&quot; that poses challenges to the United States&#x27; &quot;prosperity, security, and democratic values&quot;. Biden has spoken about human rights abuses in the Xinjiang region to the Chinese Communist Party leader Xi Jinping, pledging to sanction and commercially restrict Chinese government officials and entities who carry out repression. Biden has said he is against regime change but is for providing non-military support to opposition movements. He opposed direct U.S. intervention in Libya, voted against U.S. participation in the Gulf War, voted in favor of the Iraq War, and supports a two-state solution in the Israeli–Palestinian conflict. Biden has pledged to end U.S. support for the Saudi Arabian-led intervention in Yemen and to reevaluate the United States&#x27; relationship with Saudi Arabia. Biden supports extending the New START arms control treaty with Russia to limit the number of nuclear weapons deployed by both sides. In 2021, Biden officially recognized the Armenian genocide, becoming the first U.S. president to do so.

Biden has supported abortion rights throughout his presidency, though he personally opposes abortion because of his Catholic faith. In 2019, he said he supported &quot;Roe v. Wade&quot; and repealing the Hyde Amendment. After &quot;Dobbs v. Jackson Women&#x27;s Health Organization&quot;, he criticized near-total bans on abortion access passed in a majority of Republican-controlled states, and took measures to protect abortion rights in the United States. He has vowed to sign a bill codifying the protections of &quot;Roe&quot; into federal law; such a bill passed the House in 2022, but was unable to clear the Senate filibuster.

== Public image ==
Biden was consistently ranked one of the least wealthy members of the Senate, which he attributed to having been elected young. Feeling that less-wealthy public officials may be tempted to accept contributions in exchange for political favors, he proposed campaign finance reform measures during his first term. , Biden&#x27;s net worth was $27,012. , the Bidens were worth $9 million, largely due to sales of Biden&#x27;s books and speaking fees after his vice presidency.

Political columnist David S. Broder wrote that Biden has grown over time: &quot;He responds to real people—that&#x27;s been consistent throughout. And his ability to understand himself and deal with other politicians has gotten much, much better.&quot; Journalist James Traub has written that &quot;Biden is the kind of fundamentally happy person who can be as generous toward others as he is to himself&quot;. In recent years, especially after the 2015 death of his elder son Beau, Biden has been noted for his empathetic nature and ability to communicate about grief. In 2020, CNN wrote that his presidential campaign aimed to make him &quot;healer-in-chief&quot;, while &quot;The New York Times&quot; described his extensive history of being called upon to give eulogies.

Journalist and TV anchor Wolf Blitzer has called Biden loquacious; journalist Mark Bowden has said that he is famous for &quot;talking too much&quot;, leaning in close &quot;like an old pal with something urgent to tell you&quot;. He often deviates from prepared remarks, and sometimes &quot;puts his foot in his mouth&quot;. Biden has a reputation for being prone to gaffes, and in 2018 called himself &quot;a gaffe machine&quot;. &quot;The New York Times&quot; wrote that Biden&#x27;s &quot;weak filters make him capable of blurting out pretty much anything&quot;.

According to &quot;The New York Times&quot;, Biden often embellishes elements of his life or exaggerates, a trait also noted by &quot;The New Yorker&quot; in 2014. For instance, he has claimed to have been more active in the civil rights movement than he actually was, and has falsely recalled being an excellent student who earned three college degrees. The &quot;Times&quot; wrote, &quot;Mr. Biden&#x27;s folksiness can veer into folklore, with dates that don&#x27;t quite add up and details that are exaggerated or wrong, the factual edges shaved off to make them more powerful for audiences.&quot;

=== Job approval ===
According to Morning Consult polling, Biden maintained an approval rating above 50% during his presidency&#x27;s first eight months. In August 2021, it began to decline, reaching the low forties by December. This was attributed to the Afghanistan withdrawal, increasing hospitalizations from the Delta variant, high inflation and gas prices, disarray within the Democratic Party, and a general decline in popularity customary in politics. In 2023, Biden&#x27;s approval rating was the lowest of any modern U.S. president after three years in office.

Gallup, Inc. found Biden&#x27;s approval ratings to be consistently above 50% during his first few months in office, but by August, his ratings began to decline. He had a 98% approval rating from Democrats in February 2021, but by December only 78% approved of his presidency. By October 2023, his rating among Democrats had reached a record low of 75%. His approval rating among Republicans has been consistently in the single digits, aside from his first few months in office. Additionally, Gallup noted that Biden&#x27;s public support eroded each year he was in office: he averaged 49% approval in his first year, 41% in his second, and 40% in his third. In July 2024, just before he withdrew from the 2024 presidential election, Gallup found his approval rating had fallen to an all-time low of 36%.

A December 2024 Gallup poll found that 54% of Americans thought Biden&#x27;s presidency was below average or poor, 26% average, and 19% above average or outstanding. Gallup found that Americans largely offered negative assessments of Biden&#x27;s presidency on economic, national, and international issues. Of 18 issue areas Gallup tracked, a majority of Americans said the U.S. lost ground in six, including the economy in general, immigration, and the country&#x27;s position in the world. A plurality found that the U.S. declined in six other areas, including national infrastructure and energy, education, and trade relations with other countries. Americans perceived standstills in climate change and black people&#x27;s situation, and were divided between standstills and declines in their perception of healthcare, national defense, and taxes. A plurality felt the U.S. made progress in only one indicator under Biden: the conditions of gay, lesbian, and transgender people.

In January 2025, an AP-NORC poll found that Americans viewed Biden&#x27;s presidency less favorably than they did Obama&#x27;s at the end of his second term or Trump&#x27;s at the end of his first. Gallup&#x27;s averaged polls of Biden&#x27;s presidency found that he was the second least popular president in its polling history, ahead of Trump. Many members of Biden&#x27;s party called on him to withdraw from the 2024 presidential election, and criticized him for initially running for a second term given his age and unpopularity after Harris lost. &quot;NBC News&quot; and &quot;The Guardian&quot; called the conclusion of Biden&#x27;s presidency a &quot;tragedy&quot;, particularly because Biden was succeeded by Trump after previously defeating him.

Gallup found that Biden had an average approval rating of 42.2% throughout his presidency, which was lower than all other presidents&#x27; except Trump&#x27;s first term, at 41.1%. Biden&#x27;s average approval rating in his fourth year in office was 39%. His final approval rating in January 2025 was 40%, which was low but still higher than the final approval ratings for several other presidents. CNN and CBS News found Biden&#x27;s final approval rating to be even lower, at 37% and 36%, respectively. Polling aggregator FiveThirtyEight found that Biden had a final average approval rating of 37%.

=== Media depictions ===

Nine men have portrayed Biden on &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot;, starting with Kevin Nealon in 1991. Jason Sudeikis portrayed Biden during the 2008 election season and reprised the role many times. During the 2020 election season, Biden was played by John Mulaney, Alex Moffat, Mikey Day, Woody Harrelson, and Jim Carrey. In 2024, Dana Carvey played the role. In 2016, Greg Kinnear portrayed Biden in the HBO television film &quot;Confirmation&quot;, about the Clarence Thomas Supreme Court nomination hearings.

=== Scholarly rankings ===
The Siena College Research Institute&#x27;s 2022 survey ranked Biden 19th out of 45 presidents. The 2024 &quot;Presidential Greatness Project Expert&quot; survey ranked Biden the 14th best president.

== See also ==
*Bibliography of Joe Biden
*Electoral history of Joe Biden
*List of presidents of the United States
*List of presidents of the United States by previous experience
*List of things named after Joe Biden

== Notes ==
&lt;templatestyles src=&quot;Reflist/styles.css&quot; /&gt;

== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Works cited ===
* 
* 
* 
== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* 
== External links ==

=== Official ===
* President Joe Biden official website (archived)
* Obama White House biography (archived)
* Senator Joseph R. Biden (1973–2009)

=== Other ===
* 
* Joe Biden at On the Issues
* Joe Biden at PolitiFact</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="0" end="26" title="Joe Biden" label="Joseph Robinette Biden Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="95" end="125" title="president of the United States" label="president of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="161" end="177" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699" start="201" end="215" title="vice president of the United States" label="vice president"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="250" end="262" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393" start="280" end="288" title="Delaware" label="Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="296" end="307" title="U.S. Senate" label="U.S. Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q271395" start="336" end="358" title="Scranton, Pennsylvania" label="Scranton, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068072" start="431" end="453" title="University of Delaware" label="University of Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q7663080" start="470" end="504" title="Syracuse University College of Law" label="Syracuse University College of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q156156" start="536" end="561" title="New Castle County Council" label="New Castle County Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891450" start="578" end="597" title="1972 United States Senate election in Delaware" label="U.S. Senate in 1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q96412672" start="599" end="611" title="US Senate career of Joe Biden" label="As a senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7933159" start="658" end="703" title="Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act" label="Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7933122" start="712" end="738" title="Violence Against Women Act" label="Violence Against Women Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="760" end="778" title="U.S. Supreme Court" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342219" start="828" end="852" title="Robert Bork Supreme Court nomination" label="hearings for Robert Bork"/>
<link wikidata="Q5126773" start="857" end="872" title="Clarence Thomas Supreme Court nomination" label="Clarence Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255749" start="907" end="911" title="1988 Democratic Party presidential primaries" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q9062647" start="916" end="956" title="2008 Democratic Party presidential primaries" label="2008 Democratic presidential nominations"/>
<link wikidata="Q22923830" start="1070" end="1096" title="2020 United States presidential election" label="2020 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q10853588" start="1161" end="1174" title="Kamala Harris" label="Kamala Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="1214" end="1224" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="1236" end="1248" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q24313" start="1253" end="1263" title="Mike Pence" label="Mike Pence"/>
<link wikidata="Q105246837" start="1366" end="1390" title="American Rescue Plan Act" label="American Rescue Plan Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q83873577" start="1410" end="1427" title="COVID-19 pandemic in the United States" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q88599208" start="1432" end="1452" title="COVID-19 recession" label="subsequent recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q107563916" start="1475" end="1498" title="Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act" label="bills on infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q113449362" start="1503" end="1516" title="CHIPS and Science Act" label="manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q109236245" start="1534" end="1555" title="Build Back Better Act" label="Build Back Better Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q113468254" start="1643" end="1666" title="Inflation Reduction Act" label="Inflation Reduction Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q111345400" start="1705" end="1757" title="Ketanji Brown Jackson Supreme Court nomination" label="appointed Ketanji Brown Jackson to the Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q104969585" start="1762" end="1780" title="Foreign policy of the Joe Biden administration" label="his foreign policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q21707860" start="1805" end="1820" title="Paris Agreement" label="Paris Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q105694892" start="1840" end="1874" title="2020–2021 U.S. troop withdrawal from Afghanistan" label="complete withdrawal of U.S. troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q182865" start="1890" end="1908" title="War in Afghanistan (2001–2021)" label="war in Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q107461898" start="1925" end="1990" title="2021 Taliban offensive" label="collapse of the Afghan government and the Taliban seizing control"/>
<link wikidata="Q111338146" start="1995" end="2039" title="United States and the Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="responded to the Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q111022187" start="2052" end="2071" title="International sanctions during the Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="sanctions on Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q116820785" start="2088" end="2124" title="United States military aid to Ukraine during the Russo-Ukrainian War" label="civilian and military aid to Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q122962941" start="2137" end="2145" title="Gaza war" label="Gaza war"/>
<link wikidata="Q38799" start="2178" end="2183" title="Hamas" label="Hamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q123238356" start="2217" end="2247" title="United States support for Israel in the Gaza war" label="Israel&amp;#x27;s military efforts"/>
<link wikidata="Q39760" start="2290" end="2300" title="Gaza Strip" label="Gaza Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q131760224" start="2302" end="2322" title="2025 Gaza war ceasefire" label="A ceasefire proposal"/>
<link wikidata="Q123080564" start="2367" end="2409" title="Age and health concerns about Joe Biden" label="Concerns about Biden&amp;#x27;s age and health"/>
<link wikidata="Q108913847" start="2594" end="2616" title="2021–2023 global supply chain crisis" label="supply chain shortages"/>
<link wikidata="Q110281455" start="2621" end="2630" title="2021-2023 inflation surge" label="inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q117842677" start="2729" end="2747" title="Joe Biden 2024 presidential campaign" label="ran for reelection"/>
<link wikidata="Q113954454" start="2763" end="2783" title="2024 Democratic Party presidential primaries" label="Democratic primaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q101110072" start="2836" end="2862" title="2024 United States presidential election" label="2024 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q126919562" start="2893" end="2918" title="2024 Joe Biden–Donald Trump presidential debate" label="first presidential debate"/>
<link wikidata="Q127688165" start="3011" end="3033" title="Withdrawal of Joe Biden from the 2024 United States presidential election" label="withdraw his candidacy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3152" end="3200" title="Historical rankings of presidents of the United States#Scholar survey summary" label="historians and political scientists ranked Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q220924" start="3259" end="3277" title="United States presidential approval rating" label="public assessments"/>
<link wikidata="Q271395" start="3412" end="3434" title="Scranton, Pennsylvania" label="Scranton, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="3543" end="3551" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q98854090" start="3601" end="3608" title="Valerie Biden Owens" label="Valerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q100741820" start="3640" end="3645" title="James Biden" label="James"/>
<link wikidata="Q739452" start="3756" end="3767" title="Garden City, New York" label="Garden City"/>
<link wikidata="Q755958" start="4126" end="4144" title="Claymont, Delaware" label="Claymont, Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q14685634" start="4181" end="4199" title="Mayfield, Delaware" label="Mayfield, Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q787836" start="4237" end="4254" title="used-car salesman" label="used-car salesman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860580" start="4312" end="4328" title="Archmere Academy" label="Archmere Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q589410" start="4383" end="4391" title="Halfback (American football)" label="halfback"/>
<link wikidata="Q918224" start="4396" end="4409" title="wide receiver" label="wide receiver"/>
<link wikidata="Q5757701" start="4417" end="4437" title="high school football" label="high school football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744598" start="4474" end="4489" title="class president" label="class president"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068072" start="4551" end="4573" title="University of Delaware" label="University of Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q506586" start="4577" end="4583" title="Newark, Delaware" label="Newark"/>
<link wikidata="Q716855" start="4701" end="4713" title="double major" label="double major"/>
<link wikidata="Q36442" start="4729" end="4746" title="political science" label="political science"/>
<link wikidata="Q186676" start="4769" end="4776" title="stutter" label="stutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q19285477" start="4898" end="4911" title="Neilia Hunter Biden" label="Neilia Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q617433" start="4926" end="4945" title="Syracuse University" label="Syracuse University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7533924" start="5091" end="5112" title="Skaneateles, New York (village)" label="Skaneateles, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q813332" start="5139" end="5175" title="Beau Biden" label="Joseph R. &amp;quot;Beau&amp;quot; Biden III"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944264" start="5177" end="5196" title="Hunter Biden" label="Robert Hunter Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540185" start="5257" end="5269" title="Juris Doctor" label="Juris Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7663080" start="5275" end="5309" title="Syracuse University College of Law" label="Syracuse University College of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q164666" start="5382" end="5393" title="Plagiarism" label="plagiarized"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683819" start="5538" end="5546" title="Admission to the bar in the United States" label="admitted"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253357" start="5554" end="5566" title="Delaware bar" label="Delaware bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q174224" start="5596" end="5606" title="Wilmington, Delaware" label="Wilmington"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="5642" end="5652" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q435014" start="5796" end="5812" title="Charles L. Terry" label="Charles L. Terry"/>
<link wikidata="Q881892" start="5890" end="5909" title="Russell W. Peterson" label="Russell W. Peterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q327591" start="6009" end="6020" title="Independent politician" label="Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="6083" end="6096" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6528049" start="6140" end="6155" title="public defender" label="public defender"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609670" start="6407" end="6420" title="Corporate law" label="Corporate law"/>
<link wikidata="Q146491" start="6448" end="6460" title="criminal law" label="criminal law"/>
<link wikidata="Q156156" start="6577" end="6602" title="New Castle County Council" label="New Castle County Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="7013" end="7024" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q580750" start="7200" end="7205" title="conscription" label="draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q35869" start="7365" end="7371" title="asthma" label="asthma"/>
<link wikidata="Q887153" start="7492" end="7506" title="J. Caleb Boggs" label="J. Caleb Boggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q464271" start="7910" end="7917" title="AFL-CIO" label="AFL-CIO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7146191" start="7942" end="7957" title="Patrick Caddell" label="Patrick Caddell"/>
<link wikidata="Q254769" start="8559" end="8578" title="Hockessin, Delaware" label="Hockessin, Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813203" start="8775" end="8797" title="Senate Majority Leader" label="Senate Majority Leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889152" start="8798" end="8812" title="Mike Mansfield" label="Mike Mansfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q235349" start="9060" end="9077" title="Jill Tracy Jacobs" label="Jill Tracy Jacobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q884125" start="9091" end="9101" title="blind date" label="blind date"/>
<link wikidata="Q104867977" start="9123" end="9144" title="Church Center for the United Nations" label="United Nations chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6383" start="9204" end="9216" title="Lake Balaton" label="Lake Balaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q16410" start="9224" end="9256" title="Hungarian People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="Hungarian People&amp;#x27;s Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q97588420" start="9368" end="9380" title="Ashley Biden" label="Ashley Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q111805661" start="9612" end="9625" title="Hunter Biden laptop controversy" label="personal life"/>
<link wikidata="Q121335702" start="9631" end="9645" title="Weiss special counsel investigation" label="legal troubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q116449513" start="9662" end="9682" title="United States House Oversight Committee investigation into the Biden family" label="significant scrutiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q121335702" start="9774" end="9784" title="Weiss special counsel investigation" label="conviction"/>
<link wikidata="Q4114562" start="9879" end="9893" title="judge-advocate" label="judge-advocate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253226" start="9912" end="9937" title="Delaware attorney general" label="Delaware attorney general"/>
<link wikidata="Q357813" start="10015" end="10032" title="adjunct professor" label="adjunct professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q504703" start="10052" end="10059" title="seminar" label="seminar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11206" start="10063" end="10081" title="constitutional law" label="constitutional law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7998682" start="10085" end="10117" title="Widener University School of Law" label="Widener University School of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891450" start="10207" end="10211" title="1972 United States Senate election in Delaware" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891452" start="10237" end="10241" title="1978 United States Senate election in Delaware" label="1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891455" start="10243" end="10247" title="1984 United States Senate election in Delaware" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891457" start="10249" end="10253" title="1990 United States Senate election in Delaware" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891458" start="10255" end="10259" title="1996 United States Senate election in Delaware" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891460" start="10261" end="10265" title="2002 United States Senate election in Delaware" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891462" start="10271" end="10275" title="2008 United States Senate election in Delaware" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10359" end="10399" title="List of youngest members of the United States Congress#List of youngest U.S. senators" label="seventh-youngest senator in U.S. history"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400609" start="10426" end="10438" title="William Roth" label="William Roth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628264" start="10485" end="10513" title="List of members of the United States Congress by longevity of service" label="19th-longest-serving senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q580750" start="10870" end="10891" title="military conscription" label="military conscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="10937" end="10949" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255745" start="10971" end="10994" title="1976 Democratic Party presidential primaries" label="1976 Democratic primary"/>
<link wikidata="Q699693" start="11041" end="11054" title="1976 United States presidential election" label="1976 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q364056" start="11077" end="11089" title="arms control" label="arms control"/>
<link wikidata="Q623994" start="11127" end="11134" title="SALT II" label="SALT II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048744" start="11160" end="11184" title="Soviet general secretary" label="Soviet general secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q765165" start="11185" end="11200" title="Leonid Brezhnev" label="Leonid Brezhnev"/>
<link wikidata="Q184267" start="11268" end="11282" title="Andrei Gromyko" label="Andrei Gromyko"/>
<link wikidata="Q313411" start="11449" end="11462" title="George Shultz" label="George Shultz"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="11566" end="11575" title="apartheid" label="apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q211031" start="11632" end="11660" title="Strategic Defense Initiative" label="Strategic Defense Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q2382217" start="11792" end="11815" title="race-integration busing" label="race-integration busing"/>
<link wikidata="Q132555" start="12047" end="12054" title="de jure" label="de jure"/>
<link wikidata="Q59816" start="12061" end="12072" title="Racial segregation" label="segregation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12121" end="12153" title="De facto#Segregation" label="&amp;quot;de facto&amp;quot; segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7293294" start="12556" end="12579" title="ranking minority member" label="ranking minority member"/>
<link wikidata="Q452532" start="12587" end="12613" title="Senate Judiciary Committee" label="Senate Judiciary Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156963" start="12691" end="12722" title="Comprehensive Crime Control Act" label="Comprehensive Crime Control Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7933159" start="12916" end="12961" title="Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act" label="Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440014" start="12978" end="13002" title="Federal Assault Weapons Ban" label="a ban on assault weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7933122" start="13012" end="13038" title="Violence Against Women Act" label="Violence Against Women Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182626" start="13508" end="13531" title="Defense of Marriage Act" label="Defense of Marriage Act"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13780" end="13800" title="Obergefell v. Hodges" label="Obergefell v. Hodges"/>
<link wikidata="Q7863164" start="13831" end="13850" title="United States Office of the Independent Counsel" label="Independent Counsel"/>
<link wikidata="Q708241" start="13851" end="13860" title="Ken Starr" label="Ken Starr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074621" start="13878" end="13900" title="Whitewater controversy" label="Whitewater controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q154234" start="13905" end="13921" title="Lewinsky scandal" label="Lewinsky scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4200400" start="14096" end="14123" title="impeachment of Bill Clinton" label="impeachment of Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="14213" end="14225" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4856444" start="14280" end="14335" title="Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act" label="Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="14514" end="14520" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198391" start="14680" end="14707" title="intracranial berry aneurysm" label="intracranial berry aneurysm"/>
<link wikidata="Q220570" start="14743" end="14761" title="pulmonary embolism" label="pulmonary embolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q452532" start="14949" end="14982" title="United States Senate Committee on the Judiciary" label="Senate Committee on the Judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7293294" start="15026" end="15049" title="ranking member" label="ranking minority member"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="15151" end="15169" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342219" start="15198" end="15223" title="Robert Bork Supreme Court nomination" label="Robert Bork was nominated"/>
<link wikidata="Q453503" start="15586" end="15597" title="originalism" label="originalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="15620" end="15637" title="Constitution of the United States" label="U.S. Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5126773" start="15836" end="15878" title="Clarence Thomas Supreme Court nomination" label="Clarence Thomas&amp;#x27;s nomination hearings"/>
<link wikidata="Q4876271" start="16083" end="16091" title="beanball" label="beanball"/>
<link wikidata="Q2850177" start="16160" end="16170" title="Anita Hill" label="Anita Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q751722" start="16193" end="16225" title="Sexual harassment" label="making unwelcome sexual comments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806257" start="16971" end="17005" title="United States Senate Committee on Foreign Relations" label="Senate Foreign Relations Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540846" start="17138" end="17162" title="Liberal internationalism" label="liberal internationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="17465" end="17473" title="Gulf War" label="Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q242352" start="17511" end="17524" title="Yugoslav Wars" label="Yugoslav Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q127885" start="17545" end="17552" title="Serbs" label="Serbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q68969" start="17571" end="17599" title="Croatian War of Independence" label="Croatian War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q181533" start="17618" end="17629" title="Bosnian War" label="Bosnian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6545644" start="17689" end="17704" title="Lift and strike (Bosnian War)" label="lift and strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719914" start="17723" end="17755" title="Presidency of George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824550" start="17760" end="17782" title="Presidency of Bill Clinton" label="Clinton administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="17836" end="17842" title="Balkans" label="Balkan"/>
<link wikidata="Q47139" start="17929" end="17947" title="Slobodan Milošević" label="Slobodan Milošević"/>
<link wikidata="Q190029" start="18211" end="18221" title="Kosovo War" label="Kosovo War"/>
<link wikidata="Q155723" start="18243" end="18277" title="NATO bombing of Yugoslavia" label="1999 NATO bombing of FR Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10390" start="18294" end="18305" title="John McCain" label="John McCain"/>
<link wikidata="Q37024" start="18459" end="18467" title="FR Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslav"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242155" start="18483" end="18499" title="Kosovo Albanians" label="Kosovo Albanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q182865" start="18578" end="18596" title="War in Afghanistan (2001–2021)" label="War in Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316" start="18742" end="18756" title="Saddam Hussein" label="Saddam Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q6067763" start="18906" end="18958" title="Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Iraq" label="Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q107802" start="18974" end="18995" title="U.S. invasion of Iraq" label="U.S. invasion of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q49394" start="19242" end="19269" title="weapons of mass destruction" label="weapons of mass destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q6067814" start="19714" end="19733" title="troop surge of 2007" label="troop surge of 2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q28591" start="19750" end="19764" title="David Petraeus" label="David Petraeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q204886" start="19884" end="19894" title="federalism" label="federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255749" start="20144" end="20183" title="1988 Democratic Party presidential primaries" label="1988 Democratic presidential nomination"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342219" start="20367" end="20403" title="Robert Bork Supreme Court nomination" label="Robert Bork Supreme Court nomination"/>
<link wikidata="Q797819" start="20432" end="20443" title="Baby Boomer" label="Baby Boomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q164666" start="20640" end="20652" title="plagiarism" label="plagiarizing"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="20665" end="20685" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="British Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q317258" start="20693" end="20705" title="Neil Kinnock" label="Neil Kinnock"/>
<link wikidata="Q25310" start="20862" end="20879" title="Robert F. Kennedy" label="Robert F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6013770" start="20917" end="20957" title="inaugural address of John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy&amp;#x27;s inaugural address"/>
<link wikidata="Q209989" start="21007" end="21022" title="Hubert Humphrey" label="Hubert Humphrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q310586" start="21157" end="21170" title="Jesse Jackson" label="Jesse Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468067" start="21375" end="21393" title="Fordham Law Review" label="Fordham Law Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="21850" end="21871" title="civil rights movement" label="civil rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q9062647" start="22128" end="22163" title="2008 Democratic Party presidential primaries" label="his candidacy in the 2008 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="22186" end="22194" title="Iraq War" label="Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q834492" start="22306" end="22316" title="one-line joke" label="one-liners"/>
<link wikidata="Q212648" start="22384" end="22397" title="Rudy Giuliani" label="Rudy Giuliani"/>
<link wikidata="Q5986681" start="22486" end="22490" title="Cultural influence of the September 11 attacks" label="9/11"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="22654" end="22669" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Hillary Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979901" start="22708" end="22751" title="Nationwide opinion polling for the Democratic Party 2008 presidential candidates" label="national polls of the Democratic candidates"/>
<link wikidata="Q8206185" start="22820" end="22833" title="Iowa Democratic caucuses, 2008" label="Iowa caucuses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806257" start="23149" end="23183" title="Senate Foreign Relations Committee" label="Senate Foreign Relations Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339406" start="23823" end="23835" title="running mate" label="running mate"/>
<link wikidata="Q181648" start="23929" end="23943" title="foreign policy" label="foreign policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q258307" start="23948" end="23965" title="national security" label="national security"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191714" start="24037" end="24048" title="blue-collar" label="blue-collar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034682" start="24127" end="24162" title="2008 Democratic National Convention" label="2008 Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="24166" end="24172" title="Denver" label="Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q575942" start="24315" end="24330" title="List of Governors of Alaska" label="Alaska governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q43144" start="24331" end="24342" title="Sarah Palin" label="Sarah Palin"/>
<link wikidata="Q896666" start="24871" end="24897" title="2007–2008 financial crisis" label="2007–2008 financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q391478" start="24949" end="24993" title="Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008" label="Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q391478" start="25066" end="25110" title="Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008" label="Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892643" start="25177" end="25201" title="2008 United States presidential debates" label="vice-presidential debate"/>
<link wikidata="Q777403" start="25216" end="25250" title="Washington University in St. Louis" label="Washington University in St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q45578" start="25405" end="25417" title="2008 United States presidential election" label="were elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891462" start="25553" end="25563" title="2008 United States Senate election in Delaware" label="re-elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q22908281" start="25726" end="25750" title="resignation from the United States Senate" label="resigned from the Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4226" start="25875" end="25901" title="2012 United States presidential election" label="2012 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q786242" start="25952" end="25978" title="White House Chief of Staff" label="White House Chief of Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370400" start="25979" end="25995" title="William M. Daley" label="William M. Daley"/>
<link wikidata="Q17422" start="26356" end="26373" title="same-sex marriage" label="same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858123" start="26924" end="26943" title="Barack Obama presidential campaign, 2012" label="reelection campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q203966" start="27505" end="27514" title="Paul Ryan" label="Paul Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q40816" start="27976" end="27984" title="Benghazi" label="Benghazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="28230" end="28244" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q48259" start="28268" end="28279" title="Dick Cheney" label="Dick Cheney"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="28438" end="28452" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246" start="28484" end="28490" title="Kosovo" label="Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="28632" end="28647" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Hillary Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q182865" start="28654" end="28694" title="War in Afghanistan (2001–2021)" label="sending 21,000 new troops to Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29211" end="29266" title="American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009#Infrastructure investment" label="infrastructure spending from the Obama stimulus package"/>
<link wikidata="Q154510" start="29299" end="29316" title="Late-2000s recession" label="ongoing recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q101452" start="29547" end="29565" title="2009 flu pandemic" label="swine flu outbreak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210313" start="29660" end="29666" title="Political gaffe" label="gaffes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6839886" start="29933" end="29940" title="hot mic" label="hot mic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414593" start="29992" end="30034" title="Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act" label="Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q3439758" start="30264" end="30286" title="Sidwell Friends School" label="Sidwell Friends School"/>
<link wikidata="Q298443" start="30443" end="30455" title="Rahm Emanuel" label="Rahm Emanuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q751414" start="30516" end="30526" title="groupthink" label="groupthink"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783821" start="30580" end="30598" title="Number One Observatory Circle" label="official residence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351781" start="30751" end="30773" title="United States elections, 2010" label="2010 midterm elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002064" start="31113" end="31129" title="New START treaty" label="New START treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q355522" start="31249" end="31264" title="Mitch McConnell" label="Mitch McConnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001455" start="31372" end="31402" title="extension of the Bush tax cuts" label="extension of the Bush tax cuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3616718" start="31430" end="31510" title="Tax Relief, Unemployment Insurance Reauthorization, and Job Creation Act of 2010" label="Tax Relief, Unemployment Insurance Reauthorization, and Job Creation Act of 2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591212" start="31656" end="31680" title="United States debt-ceiling crisis of 2011" label="U.S. debt ceiling crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4985020" start="31838" end="31864" title="Budget Control Act of 2011" label="Budget Control Act of 2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q19085" start="31935" end="31971" title="U.S. mission to kill Osama bin Laden" label="U.S. mission to kill Osama bin Laden"/>
<link wikidata="Q906933" start="32069" end="32092" title="Gun Violence Task Force" label="Gun Violence Task Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q473853" start="32127" end="32142" title="school shooting" label="school shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328508" start="32166" end="32177" title="gun control" label="gun control"/>
<link wikidata="Q906933" start="32211" end="32248" title="Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting" label="Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q41361" start="32352" end="32364" title="United States fiscal cliff" label="fiscal cliff"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745218" start="32481" end="32517" title="American Taxpayer Relief Act of 2012" label="American Taxpayer Relief Act of 2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783821" start="32670" end="32699" title="Number One Observatory Circle" label="Number One Observatory Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11107" start="32738" end="32753" title="Sonia Sotomayor" label="Sonia Sotomayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q15076618" start="32891" end="32926" title="Continuing Appropriations Act, 2014" label="Continuing Appropriations Act, 2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q15015307" start="32947" end="32982" title="2013 United States federal government shutdown" label="federal government shutdown of 2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892403" start="32991" end="33018" title="United States debt-ceiling crisis of 2013" label="debt-ceiling crisis of 2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q314459" start="33043" end="33053" title="Harry Reid" label="Harry Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994870" start="33315" end="33353" title="White House Council on Women and Girls" label="White House Council on Women and Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q17184204" start="33395" end="33457" title="White House Task Force to Protect Students from Sexual Assault" label="White House Task Force to Protect Students from Sexual Assault"/>
<link wikidata="Q259514" start="33496" end="33511" title="Valerie Jarrett" label="Valerie Jarrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q19848" start="33576" end="33585" title="Lady Gaga" label="Lady Gaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q20022969" start="33593" end="33612" title="88th Academy Awards" label="88th Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610932" start="33634" end="33650" title="standing ovation" label="standing ovation"/>
<link wikidata="Q27135026" start="33692" end="33719" title="Timber Sycamore" label="Syria&amp;#x27;s rebel fighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429253" start="33728" end="33732" title="ISIL" label="ISIL"/>
<link wikidata="Q17984356" start="33733" end="33751" title="War in Iraq (2013–2017)" label="insurgency in Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="34114" end="34120" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q222031" start="34167" end="34183" title="Aleksandar Vučić" label="Aleksandar Vučić"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643351" start="34290" end="34328" title="List of tie-breaking votes cast by vice presidents of the United States" label="cast a tie-breaking vote in the Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q17004294" start="34528" end="34567" title="2016 Democratic Party presidential primaries" label="2016 Democratic presidential nomination"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="34662" end="34677" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Hillary Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3038574" start="34803" end="34808" title="Draft (politics)" label="Draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101438" start="34826" end="34829" title="Political action committee" label="PAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q49117" start="35307" end="35333" title="University of Pennsylvania" label="University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q105410012" start="35350" end="35403" title="Penn Biden Center for Diplomacy and Global Engagement" label="Penn Biden Center for Diplomacy and Global Engagement"/>
<link wikidata="Q100221747" start="35486" end="35501" title="Promise Me, Dad" label="Promise Me, Dad"/>
<link wikidata="Q27809653" start="35806" end="35832" title="First presidency of Donald Trump" label="presidency of Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q10390" start="36031" end="36042" title="John McCain" label="John McCain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3421914" start="36071" end="36086" title="cancer research" label="cancer research"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101438" start="36366" end="36392" title="political action committee" label="political action committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q63241885" start="36402" end="36416" title="Time for Biden" label="Time for Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q27809653" start="36521" end="36541" title="First presidency of Donald Trump" label="Trump administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3874799" start="37004" end="37023" title="Volodymyr Zelenskyy" label="Volodymyr Zelenskyy"/>
<link wikidata="Q100804812" start="37039" end="37057" title="Biden–Ukraine conspiracy theory" label="alleged wrongdoing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944264" start="37079" end="37091" title="Hunter Biden" label="Hunter Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q68451938" start="37262" end="37281" title="Trump–Ukraine scandal" label="a political scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q79063280" start="37286" end="37310" title="First impeachment of Donald Trump" label="Trump&amp;#x27;s impeachment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273582" start="37579" end="37590" title="Mark Bowden" label="Mark Bowden"/>
<link wikidata="Q60519449" start="37987" end="38000" title="2020 Iowa caucuses" label="Iowa caucuses"/>
<link wikidata="Q2899221" start="38018" end="38039" title="New Hampshire presidential primary" label="New Hampshire primary"/>
<link wikidata="Q17091490" start="38068" end="38083" title="Nevada presidential caucuses" label="Nevada caucuses"/>
<link wikidata="Q61764221" start="38175" end="38189" title="Bernie Sanders 2020 presidential campaign" label="Bernie Sanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q65056449" start="38299" end="38321" title="2020 South Carolina Democratic primary" label="South Carolina primary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7173106" start="38410" end="38424" title="Pete Buttigieg" label="Pete Buttigieg"/>
<link wikidata="Q22237" start="38429" end="38442" title="Amy Klobuchar" label="Amy Klobuchar"/>
<link wikidata="Q846330" start="38471" end="38484" title="Super Tuesday" label="Super Tuesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q85847055" start="38506" end="38532" title="Results of the 2020 Democratic Party presidential primaries" label="18 of the next 26 contests"/>
<link wikidata="Q92231659" start="38818" end="38825" title="Joe Biden sexual assault allegation" label="accused"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240907" start="39106" end="39125" title="presumptive nominee" label="presumptive nominee"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="39164" end="39176" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q10853588" start="39249" end="39262" title="Kamala Harris" label="Kamala Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q39086965" start="39332" end="39352" title="South Asian American" label="South Asian American"/>
<link wikidata="Q65090703" start="39431" end="39466" title="2020 Democratic National Convention" label="2020 Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q22923830" start="39542" end="39555" title="2020 United States presidential election" label="2020 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q22923830" start="39600" end="39607" title="2020 United States presidential election" label="elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="39670" end="39682" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q159535" start="39850" end="39869" title="conspiracy theories" label="conspiracy theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q102422710" start="39933" end="39962" title="Attempts to overturn the 2020 United States presidential election" label="overturn the election results"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501657" start="40095" end="40125" title="General Services Administration" label="General Services Administrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q42282721" start="40126" end="40141" title="Emily W. Murphy" label="Emily W. Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q104706517" start="40334" end="40354" title="2021 United States Electoral College vote count" label="electoral vote count"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="40403" end="40414" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q104705419" start="40498" end="40518" title="January 6 United States Capitol attack" label="attacked the Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q24313" start="40774" end="40784" title="Mike Pence" label="Mike Pence"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="41086" end="41094" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="41112" end="41127" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393" start="41173" end="41181" title="Delaware" label="Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="41214" end="41231" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="41331" end="41344" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q693742" start="41348" end="41352" title="1968 United States presidential election" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044693" start="41436" end="41453" title="Silent Generation" label="Silent Generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q104705419" start="41638" end="41676" title="January 6 United States Capitol attack" label="January 6 United States Capitol attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454199" start="41744" end="41748" title="First inauguration of Ulysses S. Grant" label="1869"/>
<link wikidata="Q21707860" start="41944" end="41967" title="Paris Climate Agreement" label="Paris Climate Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057263" start="42015" end="42033" title="Mexico–United States border" label="border with Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="42074" end="42099" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q108783676" start="42101" end="42123" title="100 Days Masking Challenge" label="face mask requirements"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440540" start="42127" end="42143" title="Federal lands" label="federal property"/>
<link wikidata="Q16845622" start="42164" end="42191" title="hunger in the United States" label="hunger in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631056" start="42242" end="42262" title="Keystone XL pipeline" label="Keystone XL pipeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q105246837" start="42303" end="42335" title="American Rescue Plan Act of 2021" label="American Rescue Plan Act of 2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559147" start="42353" end="42370" title="Stimulus (economics)" label="economic stimulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q96354864" start="42464" end="42472" title="Economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in the United States" label="economic"/>
<link wikidata="Q83873577" start="42499" end="42516" title="COVID-19 pandemic in the United States" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q109743477" start="42730" end="42746" title="Child tax credit (United States)" label="child tax credit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865497" start="42806" end="42826" title="Minimum wage in the United States" label="federal minimum wage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7138958" start="42858" end="42880" title="Parliamentarian of the United States Senate" label="Senate parliamentarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q177997" start="42925" end="42946" title="budget reconciliation" label="budget reconciliation"/>
<link wikidata="Q85811428" start="43023" end="43071" title="Mexico–United States border crisis" label="a rise in migrants entering the U.S. from Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q503010" start="43488" end="43523" title="Federal Emergency Management Agency" label="Federal Emergency Management Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q105694892" start="43586" end="43626" title="2020–2021 U.S. troop withdrawal from Afghanistan" label="would delay the withdrawal of all troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q182865" start="43636" end="43654" title="War in Afghanistan (2001–2021)" label="war in Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q107354956" start="43827" end="43838" title="United States–Taliban deal" label="made a deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q106634662" start="44105" end="44133" title="2021 Leaders&amp;#x27; Climate Summit" label="international climate summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q106358009" start="44184" end="44208" title="greenhouse gas emissions" label="greenhouse gas emissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q106632834" start="44322" end="44366" title="2021 Joe Biden speech to a joint session of Congress" label="first address to a joint session of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q6312521" start="44422" end="44462" title="Juneteenth National Independence Day Act" label="Juneteenth National Independence Day Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q6312521" start="44490" end="44500" title="Juneteenth" label="Juneteenth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440532" start="44503" end="44518" title="Federal holidays in the United States" label="federal holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q105938904" start="44552" end="44596" title="COVID-19 vaccination in the United States" label="the COVID-19 vaccination rate in the country"/>
<link wikidata="Q107055182" start="44619" end="44643" title="SARS-CoV-2 Delta variant" label="SARS-CoV-2 Delta variant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5448434" start="44776" end="44793" title="Filibuster in the United States Senate" label="Senate filibuster"/>
<link wikidata="Q60768961" start="44826" end="44845" title="Freedom to Vote Act" label="Freedom to Vote Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q105083659" start="44850" end="44878" title="John Lewis Voting Rights Act" label="John Lewis Voting Rights Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q105972764" start="45027" end="45060" title="Postal Service Reform Act of 2022" label="Postal Service Reform Act of 2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="45106" end="45134" title="United States Postal Service" label="United States Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q112728299" start="45163" end="45195" title="Bipartisan Safer Communities Act" label="Bipartisan Safer Communities Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q112123052" start="45245" end="45276" title="Robb Elementary School shooting" label="Robb Elementary School shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q868860" start="45280" end="45293" title="Uvalde, Texas" label="Uvalde, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q111941879" start="45337" end="45366" title="Honoring our PACT Act of 2022" label="Honoring our PACT Act of 2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999562" start="45571" end="45580" title="burn pits" label="burn pits"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315878" start="45634" end="45658" title="Respect for Marriage Act" label="Respect for Marriage Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182626" start="45679" end="45702" title="Defense of Marriage Act" label="Defense of Marriage Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q17476" start="45768" end="45776" title="Same-sex marriage in the United States" label="same-sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q16848246" start="45781" end="45792" title="Interracial marriage in the United States" label="interracial"/>
<link wikidata="Q429923" start="46195" end="46217" title="Equal Rights Amendment" label="Equal Rights Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="46268" end="46280" title="Constitution of the United States" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q518155" start="46327" end="46344" title="National Archives of the United States" label="National Archives"/>
<link wikidata="Q88599208" start="46578" end="46596" title="COVID-19 recession" label="COVID-19 recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q110281455" start="46724" end="46756" title="2021–2022 inflation surge" label="significantly elevated inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q110281455" start="48023" end="48032" title="2021–2023 inflation surge" label="inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q108904013" start="48037" end="48052" title="2021–present global energy crisis" label="high gas prices"/>
<link wikidata="Q65089999" start="48957" end="48971" title="117th United States Congress" label="117th Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q105246837" start="48987" end="49007" title="American Rescue Plan Act of 2021" label="American Rescue Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q107563916" start="49009" end="49047" title="Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act" label="Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q113449362" start="49049" end="49070" title="CHIPS and Science Act" label="CHIPS and Science Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q113468254" start="49080" end="49103" title="Inflation Reduction Act" label="Inflation Reduction Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q11456" start="49265" end="49279" title="semiconductors" label="semiconductors"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49284" end="49315" title="China–United States relations#Economic relations" label="compete economically with China"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277149" start="49557" end="49570" title="United States antitrust law" label="antitrust law"/>
<link wikidata="Q113992356" start="49598" end="49622" title="2022 United States railroad labor dispute" label="national railroad strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q122599696" start="49668" end="49694" title="2023 United Auto Workers strike" label="United Auto Workers strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480879" start="49790" end="49801" title="picketing" label="picket line"/>
<link wikidata="Q130394260" start="49889" end="49900" title="2024 United States port strike" label="port strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q6051803" start="49910" end="49955" title="International Longshoremen&amp;#x27;s Association" label="International Longshoremen&amp;#x27;s Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q117084939" start="50018" end="50060" title="2023 banking crisis" label="three small- to mid-size U.S. banks failed"/>
<link wikidata="Q499041" start="50178" end="50187" title="Financial contagion" label="contagion"/>
<link wikidata="Q117053334" start="50195" end="50224" title="Collapse of Silicon Valley Bank" label="Silicon Valley Bank collapsed"/>
<link wikidata="Q55388419" start="50320" end="50336" title="Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act" label="partial rollback"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234044" start="50340" end="50362" title="Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act" label="Dodd-Frank regulations"/>
<link wikidata="Q104842452" start="50428" end="50442" title="118th United States Congress" label="118th Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q116259568" start="50480" end="50501" title="2023 United States debt-ceiling crisis" label="engaged in a standoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892404" start="50525" end="50535" title="United States debt ceiling" label="debt limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q702362" start="50579" end="50586" title="Default (finance)" label="default"/>
<link wikidata="Q766866" start="50624" end="50638" title="Kevin McCarthy" label="Kevin McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q116259568" start="50682" end="50715" title="Fiscal Responsibility Act of 2023" label="Fiscal Responsibility Act of 2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="51597" end="51610" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11124" start="51815" end="51829" title="Stephen Breyer" label="Stephen Breyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q111345400" start="52060" end="52075" title="Ketanji Brown Jackson Supreme Court nomination" label="Biden nominated"/>
<link wikidata="Q6395324" start="52090" end="52111" title="Ketanji Brown Jackson" label="Ketanji Brown Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="52385" end="52396" title="Term limits in the United States#Federal term limits" label="term limits"/>
<link wikidata="Q105549782" start="52576" end="52594" title="American Jobs Plan" label="American Jobs Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q107563916" start="52938" end="52976" title="Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act" label="Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q109236245" start="53253" end="53274" title="Build Back Better Act" label="Build Back Better Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7551358" start="53330" end="53347" title="social safety net" label="social safety net"/>
<link wikidata="Q7140875" start="53433" end="53448" title="party-line vote" label="party-line vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q177997" start="53457" end="53478" title="Reconciliation (United States Congress)" label="budget reconciliation"/>
<link wikidata="Q538868" start="53524" end="53535" title="Joe Manchin" label="Joe Manchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q113468254" start="53659" end="53690" title="Inflation Reduction Act of 2022" label="Inflation Reduction Act of 2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q113468254" start="53769" end="53800" title="Inflation Reduction Act of 2022" label="Inflation Reduction Act of 2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q380900" start="53839" end="53852" title="Chuck Schumer" label="Chuck Schumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="53947" end="53961" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414593" start="54013" end="54032" title="Affordable Care Act" label="Affordable Care Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346630" start="54090" end="54100" title="tax reform" label="tax reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133502" start="54169" end="54198" title="Climate change in the United States" label="U.S. greenhouse gas emissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q10853588" start="54416" end="54429" title="Kamala Harris" label="Kamala Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643351" start="54430" end="54446" title="List of tie-breaking votes cast by the vice president of the United States" label="breaking the tie"/>
<link wikidata="Q68580968" start="54507" end="54552" title="2021 United Nations Climate Change Conference" label="2021 United Nations Climate Change Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="54612" end="54626" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q118546758" start="54975" end="55007" title="2023 Western North America heat wave" label="heat waves hit the United STates"/>
<link wikidata="Q170321" start="55219" end="55226" title="wetland" label="wetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057263" start="55539" end="55566" title="Mexico–United States border" label="Mexico–United States border"/>
<link wikidata="Q6533003" start="55793" end="55799" title="Asylum in the United States" label="asylum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7139400" start="56007" end="56026" title="humanitarian parole" label="humanitarian parole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1556541" start="56415" end="56429" title="Kyrsten Sinema" label="Kyrsten Sinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q45940" start="56434" end="56448" title="James Lankford" label="James Lankford"/>
<link wikidata="Q105334669" start="56482" end="56510" title="U.S. Citizenship Act of 2021" label="U.S. Citizenship Act of 2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q11231" start="56606" end="56609" title="Department of Homeland Security" label="DHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251504" start="56940" end="56948" title="Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals" label="Dreamers"/>
<link wikidata="Q974595" start="57030" end="57040" title="H-1B visas" label="H-1B visas"/>
<link wikidata="Q912994" start="57387" end="57407" title="Speaker of the United States House of Representatives" label="Speaker of the House"/>
<link wikidata="Q19880665" start="57408" end="57420" title="Mike Johnson" label="Mike Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q126727047" start="58355" end="58370" title="A Proclamation on Securing the Border" label="executive order"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="58634" end="58642" title="Cannabis (drug)" label="cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q320994" start="58956" end="58972" title="home confinement" label="home confinement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6829405" start="59080" end="59095" title="Michael Conahan" label="Michael Conahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740880" start="59121" end="59151" title="kids for cash" label="kids for cash kickback scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7336504" start="59157" end="59171" title="Rita Crundwell" label="Rita Crundwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083686" start="59507" end="59516" title="death row" label="death row"/>
<link wikidata="Q439054" start="59584" end="59599" title="Leonard Peltier" label="Leonard Peltier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454090" start="60032" end="60050" title="Reason (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Reason&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="60120" end="60133" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763459" start="62184" end="62221" title="chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff" label="chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766465" start="62222" end="62233" title="Mark Milley" label="Mark Milley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519875" start="62242" end="62295" title="National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases" label="National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q573246" start="62305" end="62318" title="Anthony Fauci" label="Anthony Fauci"/>
<link wikidata="Q107473422" start="62356" end="62402" title="House Select Committee on the January 6 Attack" label="House Select Committee on the January 6 Attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q17280630" start="63117" end="63136" title="Gerald G. Lundergan" label="Gerald G. Lundergan"/>
<link wikidata="Q113951227" start="63289" end="63308" title="Battle for the Soul of the Nation speech" label="Philadelphia speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q18394643" start="63506" end="63519" title="Wave elections in the United States" label="wave election"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="63557" end="63570" title="U.S. Congress" label="U.S. Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q104315114" start="63655" end="63696" title="2022 United States House of Representatives elections" label="222 seats in the House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q28405034" start="63747" end="63758" title="2022 United States Senate elections" label="U.S. Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892512" start="63801" end="63805" title="1986 United States gubernatorial elections" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892423" start="63910" end="63914" title="1934 United States elections" label="1934"/>
<link wikidata="Q104843625" start="64226" end="64237" title="47th G7 summit" label="a G7 summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q106817677" start="64239" end="64252" title="2021 Brussels summit" label="a NATO summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q107101128" start="64281" end="64297" title="2021 Russia–United States summit" label="one-on-one talks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747" start="64321" end="64335" title="Vladimir Putin" label="Vladimir Putin"/>
<link wikidata="Q108556886" start="64373" end="64378" title="AUKUS" label="AUKUS"/>
<link wikidata="Q6944158" start="64382" end="64395" title="Defense pact" label="security pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547309" start="64500" end="64512" title="Indo-Pacific" label="Indo-Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q111952587" start="64631" end="64673" title="U.S. support for Saudi-led operations in Yemen" label="support for the Saudi-led bombing campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042087" start="64727" end="64734" title="Houthis" label="Houthis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="64853" end="64895" title="Abu Ibrahim al-Hashimi al-Qurashi#Death" label="death of Abu Ibrahim al-Hashimi al-Qurashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429253" start="64922" end="64935" title="Islamic State" label="Islamic State"/>
<link wikidata="Q30588142" start="64970" end="64982" title="drone strike" label="drone strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q113379121" start="64988" end="65012" title="Killing of Ayman al-Zawahiri" label="killed Ayman al-Zawahiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q34490" start="65035" end="65043" title="Al-Qaeda" label="Al-Qaeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="65091" end="65111" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="65117" end="65146" title="OPEC#2022 oil production cut" label="2022 OPEC+ oil production cut"/>
<link wikidata="Q7424667" start="65267" end="65275" title="Saudi Arabia–United States relations" label="alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q128215399" start="65327" end="65356" title="2024 Ankara prisoner exchange" label="2024 Ankara prisoner exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001775" start="65370" end="65387" title="prisoner exchange" label="prisoner exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="65409" end="65417" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5774966" start="65467" end="65486" title="History of American journalism" label="American journalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q117337455" start="65487" end="65503" title="Evan Gershkovich" label="Evan Gershkovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="65515" end="65535" title="United States Marine Corps" label="United States Marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q60437778" start="65536" end="65547" title="Paul Whelan (security director)" label="Paul Whelan"/>
<link wikidata="Q131338691" start="65630" end="65639" title="2024 Israel–Lebanon ceasefire agreement" label="ceasefire"/>
<link wikidata="Q122974556" start="65657" end="65682" title="Israel–Hezbollah conflict (2023–2024)" label="Israel–Hezbollah conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q107354956" start="65810" end="65844" title="United States–Taliban deal" label="February 2020 US-Taliban agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q107461898" start="65897" end="65909" title="2021 Taliban offensive" label="an offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q108102583" start="66185" end="66216" title="Fall of Kabul (2021)" label="the Afghan government collapsed"/>
<link wikidata="Q172388" start="66267" end="66279" title="Ashraf Ghani" label="Ashraf Ghani"/>
<link wikidata="Q108285843" start="66892" end="66928" title="2021 Kabul airport attack" label="suicide bombing at the Kabul airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="68143" end="68181" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q193159" start="68435" end="68455" title="Russian Armed Forces" label="Russian Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747" start="68472" end="68486" title="Vladimir Putin" label="Vladimir Putin"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="68496" end="68528" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="a full-scale invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q111022187" start="68642" end="68661" title="International sanctions during the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="sanctions on Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q116820785" start="68697" end="68725" title="List of military aid to Ukraine during the Russo-Ukrainian War" label="weapons shipments to Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q108904013" start="68878" end="68884" title="2021–present global energy crisis" label="energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q111525590" start="68889" end="68900" title="2022 food crises" label="food crises"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="69135" end="69159" title="United States House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q749118" start="69472" end="69504" title="Government Accountability Office" label="Government Accountability Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q16986373" start="69509" end="69535" title="Department of Defense Office of Inspector General" label="Pentagon Inspector General"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="69767" end="69773" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42308" start="69843" end="69850" title="Kharkiv" label="Kharkiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q38885946" start="70074" end="70109" title="China–Solomon Islands relations" label="Solomon Islands-China security pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q335697" start="70290" end="70306" title="Anthony Albanese" label="Anthony Albanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q65091319" start="70307" end="70316" title="2022 Australian federal election" label="succeeded"/>
<link wikidata="Q3606816" start="70353" end="70367" title="Jacinda Ardern" label="Jacinda Ardern"/>
<link wikidata="Q247869" start="70468" end="70478" title="60 Minutes" label="60 Minutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209701" start="70665" end="70684" title="strategic ambiguity" label="strategic ambiguity"/>
<link wikidata="Q116652301" start="71289" end="71327" title="2023 Chinese balloon incident" label="suspected Chinese surveillance balloon"/>
<link wikidata="Q839805" start="71345" end="71373" title="Myrtle Beach, South Carolina" label="Myrtle Beach, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="71379" end="71395" title="United States Department of State" label="State Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q936190" start="71662" end="71680" title="Chinese government" label="Chinese government"/>
<link wikidata="Q133585" start="71791" end="71798" title="airship" label="airship"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821917" start="71845" end="71859" title="Antony Blinken" label="Antony Blinken"/>
<link wikidata="Q52389" start="71997" end="72003" title="tariff" label="tariff"/>
<link wikidata="Q58803" start="72008" end="72018" title="solar cell" label="solar cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822895" start="72073" end="72111" title="Lithium-ion battery" label="lithium-ion electric vehicle batteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q124840308" start="72251" end="72322" title="Protecting Americans from Foreign Adversary Controlled Applications Act" label="Protecting Americans from Foreign Adversary Controlled Applications Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q3220391" start="72340" end="72365" title="social networking service" label="social networking service"/>
<link wikidata="Q55606242" start="72546" end="72560" title="ByteDance" label="ByteDance Ltd."/>
<link wikidata="Q1200733" start="72691" end="72699" title="divestment" label="divested"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="72747" end="72785" title="United States foreign adversaries#Other meanings" label="foreign adversary of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q116205450" start="72808" end="72843" title="No TikTok on Government Devices Act" label="No TikTok on Government Devices Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q122976243" start="72978" end="73014" title="October 7 Hamas-led attack on Israel" label="launched a surprise attack on Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q122962941" start="73020" end="73057" title="Gaza war" label="devolved into an intensified conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891303" start="73126" end="73157" title="Israel–Saudi Arabia relations" label="between Israel and Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q123238356" start="73172" end="73206" title="United States support for Israel in the Gaza war" label="his unequivocal support for Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q122982851" start="73448" end="73485" title="2023 Israeli blockade of the Gaza Strip" label="humanitarian crisis in the Gaza Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q39760" start="73614" end="73624" title="Gaza Strip" label="Gaza Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="73902" end="73909" title="Zionist" label="Zionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q123392381" start="74211" end="74230" title="Gaza humanitarian crisis (2023–present)" label="humanitarian crises"/>
<link wikidata="Q124695144" start="74247" end="74298" title="flour massacre" label="killing of Palestinian civilians receiving food aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q124302798" start="74562" end="74576" title="Gaza Strip famine" label="famine in Gaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q123477755" start="74758" end="74766" title="Gaza war protests in the United States" label="protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q125957926" start="75116" end="75164" title="List of pro-Palestinian protests on university campuses in the United States in 2024" label="Gaza war protests emerged on university campuses"/>
<link wikidata="Q131760224" start="75245" end="75254" title="2025 Gaza war ceasefire" label="ceasefire"/>
<link wikidata="Q39760" start="75449" end="75459" title="Gaza Strip" label="Gaza Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="75513" end="75518" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q846" start="75523" end="75528" title="Qatar" label="Qatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="76383" end="76415" title="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="76455" end="76459" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="76469" end="76475" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="76480" end="76487" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q110653216" start="76620" end="76637" title="Finland–NATO relations" label="Finnish ascension"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="76683" end="76689" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="76694" end="76701" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q110653212" start="76705" end="76718" title="Sweden–NATO relations" label="Swedish entry"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="76866" end="76875" title="Ukraine" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="77015" end="77037" title="Enlargement of NATO#Membership Action Plan" label="Membership Action Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q105410012" start="77187" end="77204" title="Penn Biden Center" label="Penn Biden Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q518155" start="77394" end="77416" title="U.S. National Archives" label="U.S. National Archives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922011" start="77486" end="77501" title="Merrick Garland" label="Merrick Garland"/>
<link wikidata="Q44532195" start="77526" end="77544" title="John R. Lausch Jr." label="John R. Lausch Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q174224" start="77674" end="77694" title="Wilmington, Delaware" label="Wilmington, Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q861764" start="77757" end="77765" title="CBS News" label="CBS News"/>
<link wikidata="Q48675953" start="77849" end="77862" title="Robert K. Hur" label="Robert K. Hur"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162859" start="78026" end="78043" title="consent search" label="consensual search"/>
<link wikidata="Q755106" start="78202" end="78216" title="Rehoboth Beach, Delaware" label="Rehoboth Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="78528" end="78552" title="United States House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q116449513" start="78562" end="78588" title="United States House Oversight Committee investigation into the Biden family" label="an investigative committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944264" start="78647" end="78653" title="Hunter Biden" label="Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q100741820" start="78668" end="78673" title="James Biden" label="James"/>
<link wikidata="Q6131602" start="78718" end="78729" title="James Comer (politician)" label="James Comer"/>
<link wikidata="Q111805661" start="78793" end="78824" title="Hunter Biden laptop controversy" label="Hunter Biden laptop controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q766866" start="78858" end="78872" title="Kevin McCarthy" label="Kevin McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q116449513" start="79078" end="79110" title="United States House Oversight Committee investigation into the Biden family" label="by the House Oversight committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="79210" end="79234" title="United States House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q122442280" start="79265" end="79295" title="impeachment inquiry into Joe Biden" label="impeachment inquiry into Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q124713967" start="79316" end="79333" title="Alexander Smirnov (FBI informant)" label="Alexander Smirnov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364673" start="79357" end="79366" title="informant" label="informant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6739666" start="79444" end="79467" title="making false statements" label="making false statements"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="79475" end="79506" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="Federal Bureau of Investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6846591" start="79988" end="80000" title="Mike Donilon" label="Mike Donilon"/>
<link wikidata="Q732029" start="80002" end="80011" title="Counselor to the President" label="counselor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7613738" start="80012" end="80027" title="Steve Ricchetti" label="Steve Ricchetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q119550295" start="80051" end="80065" title="Annie Tomasini" label="Annie Tomasini"/>
<link wikidata="Q125523325" start="80090" end="80104" title="Anthony Bernal" label="Anthony Bernal"/>
<link wikidata="Q116187976" start="80657" end="80721" title="Joe Biden classified documents incident" label="investigation into Biden&amp;#x27;s handling of classified documents"/>
<link wikidata="Q48675953" start="80739" end="80749" title="Robert Hur" label="Robert Hur"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="80986" end="80994" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q110442458" start="81076" end="81084" title="Paxlovid" label="Paxlovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q101110072" start="81426" end="81439" title="2024 United States presidential election" label="2024 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q63241885" start="81547" end="81573" title="Joe Biden 2020 presidential campaign" label="2020 presidential campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q105027005" start="81787" end="81822" title="Economic policy of the Joe Biden administration" label="higher economic growth and recovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="81951" end="81970" title="U.S. Representative" label="U.S. Representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q58323131" start="81971" end="81984" title="Dean Phillips" label="Dean Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q123263367" start="82059" end="82069" title="Dean Phillips 2024 presidential campaign" label="campaigned"/>
<link wikidata="Q118105148" start="82194" end="82215" title="2024 New Hampshire Democratic presidential primary" label="New Hampshire primary"/>
<link wikidata="Q118105151" start="82358" end="82386" title="2024 South Carolina Democratic presidential primary" label="won that state on February 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q118105145" start="82447" end="82453" title="2024 Nevada Democratic presidential primary" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q118105515" start="82479" end="82487" title="2024 Michigan Democratic presidential primary" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q124818352" start="82734" end="82748" title="2024 American Samoa Democratic presidential caucuses" label="American Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q124748988" start="82779" end="82791" title="Jason Palmer (politician)" label="Jason Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="82886" end="82898" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255747" start="82902" end="82906" title="1980 Democratic Party presidential primaries" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q126919562" start="83109" end="83134" title="2024 Joe Biden–Donald Trump presidential debate" label="first presidential debate"/>
<link wikidata="Q123080564" start="83499" end="83517" title="Age and health concerns of Joe Biden" label="his health and age"/>
<link wikidata="Q127513055" start="83579" end="83595" title="List of Democrats who opposed the Joe Biden 2024 presidential campaign" label="fellow Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985386" start="83604" end="83620" title="editorial boards" label="editorial boards"/>
<link wikidata="Q104844259" start="83934" end="83969" title="2024 Democratic National Convention" label="2024 Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="84202" end="84219" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q693742" start="84223" end="84227" title="1968 United States presidential election" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q60519315" start="84332" end="84347" title="2024 United States Senate elections" label="went Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470929" start="84700" end="84706" title="YouGov" label="YouGov"/>
<link wikidata="Q433211" start="84945" end="84983" title="American Political Science Association" label="American Political Science Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q47544922" start="85537" end="85554" title="Ronald Brownstein" label="Ronald Brownstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542536" start="85564" end="85576" title="The Atlantic" label="The Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="85601" end="85613" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q131587665" start="85619" end="85689" title="Death and state funeral of Jimmy Carter" label="died on December 29, 2024, and whom Biden eulogized on January 9, 2025"/>
<link wikidata="Q110281455" start="85739" end="85764" title="2021–2023 inflation surge" label="2021–2023 inflation surge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4574284" start="85778" end="85797" title="1970s energy crisis" label="1970s energy crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q185245" start="85802" end="85813" title="stagflation" label="stagflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824547" start="85827" end="85851" title="Presidency of Jimmy Carter" label="Carter&amp;#x27;s presidency"/>
<link wikidata="Q699716" start="85949" end="85953" title="1980 United States presidential election" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="85957" end="85970" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q101110072" start="86004" end="86008" title="2024 United States presidential election" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="86012" end="86024" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q127688165" start="86026" end="86085" title="Withdrawal of Joe Biden from the 2024 United States presidential election" label="Biden&amp;#x27;s withdrawal from the 2024 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q127698512" start="86107" end="86178" title="Withdrawal of Lyndon B. Johnson from the 1968 United States presidential election" label="Lyndon B. Johnson&amp;#x27;s withdrawal from the 1968 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q209989" start="86215" end="86230" title="Hubert Humphrey" label="Hubert Humphrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q693742" start="86241" end="86245" title="1968 United States presidential election" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="86249" end="86262" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q10853588" start="86295" end="86308" title="Kamala Harris" label="Kamala Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="86516" end="86531" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="86536" end="86548" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q14957133" start="86576" end="86586" title="Amy Walter" label="Amy Walter"/>
<link wikidata="Q126616223" start="87276" end="87308" title="Second inauguration of Donald Trump" label="Trump&amp;#x27;s second inauguration"/>
<link wikidata="Q174224" start="87330" end="87350" title="Wilmington, Delaware" label="Wilmington, Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002407" start="87399" end="87422" title="Creative Artists Agency" label="Creative Artists Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q7450652" start="87574" end="87589" title="Senior Advisor to the President of the United States" label="senior advisors"/>
<link wikidata="Q125523325" start="87590" end="87604" title="Anthony Bernal" label="Anthony Bernal"/>
<link wikidata="Q119550295" start="87609" end="87623" title="Annie Tomasini" label="Annie Tomasini"/>
<link wikidata="Q131621907" start="87647" end="87687" title="Joseph R. Biden Jr. Presidential Library" label="Joseph R. Biden Jr. Presidential Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q104705419" start="88136" end="88160" title="January 6 Capitol attack" label="January 6 Capitol attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q3345101" start="88229" end="88246" title="moderate Democrat" label="moderate Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q16334344" start="88483" end="88507" title="Catholic social teaching" label="Catholic social teaching"/>
<link wikidata="Q209158" start="88746" end="88765" title="Christian democracy" label="Christian democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q844072" start="88811" end="88823" title="center-right" label="center-right"/>
<link wikidata="Q737014" start="88828" end="88839" title="center-left" label="center-left"/>
<link wikidata="Q45723" start="88882" end="88898" title="Jacques Maritain" label="Jacques Maritain"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152203" start="89056" end="89066" title="Modern liberalism in the United States" label="liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q179522" start="89286" end="89300" title="market economy" label="market economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="89307" end="89315" title="Left-wing politics" label="the left"/>
<link wikidata="Q11480083" start="89340" end="89361" title="economic intervention" label="economic intervention"/>
<link wikidata="Q189724" start="89367" end="89382" title="planned economy" label="planned economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7425087" start="89404" end="89419" title="Sasha Issenberg" label="Sasha Issenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q42955478" start="89648" end="89677" title="Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017" label="Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q181574" start="89915" end="89950" title="North American Free Trade Agreement" label="North American Free Trade Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366688" start="89975" end="90000" title="Trans-Pacific Partnership" label="Trans-Pacific Partnership"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414593" start="90038" end="90057" title="Affordable Care Act" label="Affordable Care Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5691094" start="90228" end="90253" title="Health insurance coverage in the United States" label="health insurance coverage"/>
<link wikidata="Q17076813" start="90299" end="90329" title="public health insurance option" label="public health insurance option"/>
<link wikidata="Q17422" start="90363" end="90380" title="same-sex marriage" label="same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182626" start="90426" end="90449" title="Defense of Marriage Act" label="Defense of Marriage Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503029" start="90702" end="90738" title="Law Enforcement Officers&amp;#x27; Bill of Rights" label="Police Officer&amp;#x27;s Bill of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q79817" start="90846" end="90854" title="cannabis" label="cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="90963" end="90977" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570777" start="91013" end="91065" title="Global Warming Pollution Reduction Act of 2007" label="Boxer–Sanders Global Warming Pollution Reduction Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="91106" end="91126" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q20113959" start="91143" end="91162" title="nature conservation" label="nature conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q368035" start="91195" end="91223" title="Center for American Progress" label="Center for American Progress"/>
<link wikidata="Q208478" start="91291" end="91308" title="old-growth forest" label="old-growth forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q638097" start="91349" end="91380" title="Arctic National Wildlife Refuge" label="Arctic National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q21707860" start="91524" end="91539" title="Paris Agreement" label="Paris Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q242606" start="91541" end="91555" title="green building" label="green building"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479527" start="91581" end="91602" title="environmental justice" label="environmental justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291678" start="91614" end="91629" title="climate justice" label="climate justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q97358090" start="91634" end="91647" title="Blue justice" label="ocean justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q380170" start="91676" end="91693" title="energy conservation" label="energy efficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q7973495" start="91695" end="91711" title="water efficiency" label="water efficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q17072637" start="91716" end="91747" title="Climate resilience" label="resilience to climate disasters"/>
<link wikidata="Q34800" start="92465" end="92473" title="Xinjiang" label="Xinjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="92488" end="92511" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q15031" start="92519" end="92529" title="Xi Jinping" label="Xi Jinping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673271" start="92675" end="92688" title="regime change" label="regime change"/>
<link wikidata="Q210714" start="92779" end="92800" title="2011 military intervention in Libya" label="intervention in Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="92842" end="92850" title="Gulf War" label="Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="92874" end="92882" title="Iraq War" label="Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q719543" start="92899" end="92917" title="two-state solution" label="two-state solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q151622" start="92925" end="92953" title="Israeli–Palestinian conflict" label="Israeli–Palestinian conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q19682450" start="93001" end="93040" title="Saudi Arabian-led intervention in Yemen" label="Saudi Arabian-led intervention in Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7424667" start="93063" end="93095" title="Saudi Arabia–United States relations" label="United States&amp;#x27; relationship"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="93101" end="93113" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002064" start="93144" end="93153" title="New START" label="New START"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="93209" end="93223" title="nuclear weapon" label="nuclear weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748640" start="93275" end="93285" title="Armenian genocide recognition" label="recognized"/>
<link wikidata="Q80034" start="93290" end="93307" title="Armenian genocide" label="Armenian genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331070" start="93374" end="93389" title="Abortion-rights movements" label="abortion rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q300950" start="93522" end="93533" title="Roe v. Wade" label="Roe v. Wade"/>
<link wikidata="Q16845908" start="93558" end="93572" title="Hyde Amendment" label="Hyde Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q107058269" start="93586" end="93635" title="Dobbs v. Jackson Women&amp;#x27;s Health Organization" label="Dobbs v. Jackson Women&amp;#x27;s Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668505" start="93657" end="93691" title="Abortion law in the United States by state" label="near-total bans on abortion access"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="93716" end="93726" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q283681" start="93775" end="93811" title="Abortion in the United States" label="abortion rights in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="94064" end="94085" title="United States Senate" label="members of the Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027776" start="94265" end="94288" title="Campaign finance reform in the United States" label="campaign finance reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q166604" start="94504" end="94519" title="David S. Broder" label="David S. Broder"/>
<link wikidata="Q6144399" start="94748" end="94759" title="James Traub" label="James Traub"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="95063" end="95066" title="CNN" label="CNN"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="95163" end="95181" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q49079" start="95285" end="95297" title="Wolf Blitzer" label="Wolf Blitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210313" start="95628" end="95634" title="political gaffe" label="gaffes"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="95962" end="95976" title="The New Yorker" label="The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="96053" end="96074" title="civil rights movement" label="civil rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q28401695" start="96465" end="96480" title="Morning Consult" label="Morning Consult"/>
<link wikidata="Q49958" start="96510" end="96525" title="Opinion poll" label="approval rating"/>
<link wikidata="Q107055182" start="96748" end="96761" title="SARS-CoV-2 Delta variant" label="Delta variant"/>
<link wikidata="Q110281455" start="96763" end="96792" title="2021–2023 inflation surge" label="high inflation and gas prices"/>
<link wikidata="Q65358" start="97003" end="97015" title="Gallup, Inc." label="Gallup, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q2877626" start="99352" end="99360" title="NBC News" label="NBC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="99377" end="99389" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q600669" start="100076" end="100091" title="FiveThirtyEight" label="FiveThirtyEight"/>
<link wikidata="Q13979" start="100219" end="100238" title="Saturday Night Live" label="Saturday Night Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q449531" start="100260" end="100272" title="Kevin Nealon" label="Kevin Nealon"/>
<link wikidata="Q14539" start="100282" end="100296" title="Jason Sudeikis" label="Jason Sudeikis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6249723" start="100432" end="100444" title="John Mulaney" label="John Mulaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q27837145" start="100446" end="100457" title="Alex Moffat" label="Alex Moffat"/>
<link wikidata="Q6849449" start="100459" end="100468" title="Mikey Day" label="Mikey Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q201279" start="100470" end="100485" title="Woody Harrelson" label="Woody Harrelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q40504" start="100491" end="100501" title="Jim Carrey" label="Jim Carrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q545924" start="100512" end="100523" title="Dana Carvey" label="Dana Carvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q269869" start="100550" end="100562" title="Greg Kinnear" label="Greg Kinnear"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="100586" end="100589" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q20649594" start="100612" end="100624" title="Confirmation (film)" label="Confirmation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5126773" start="100642" end="100691" title="Clarence Thomas Supreme Court nomination" label="Clarence Thomas Supreme Court nomination hearings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7511063" start="100725" end="100757" title="Siena College Research Institute" label="Siena College Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="100777" end="100789" title="Historical rankings of presidents of the United States#2022 Siena College" label="ranked Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q115816189" start="100938" end="100963" title="Bibliography of Joe Biden" label="Bibliography of Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q5356331" start="100965" end="100995" title="Electoral history of Joe Biden" label="Electoral history of Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q35073" start="100997" end="101036" title="List of presidents of the United States" label="List of presidents of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6594910" start="101038" end="101100" title="List of presidents of the United States by previous experience" label="List of presidents of the United States by previous experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q85780975" start="101102" end="101138" title="List of things named after Joe Biden" label="List of things named after Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7091389" start="101509" end="101522" title="On the Issues" label="On the Issues"/>
<link wikidata="Q3394318" start="101538" end="101548" title="PolitiFact" label="PolitiFact"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="145424" wikidata="Q191944" url="?curid=145424" title="Exoskeleton">
<text>An exoskeleton (from Greek &quot;éxō&quot; &quot;outer&quot; and &quot;skeletós&quot; &quot;skeleton&quot;) is a skeleton that is on the exterior of an animal in the form of hardened integument, which both supports the body&#x27;s shape and protects the internal organs, in contrast to an internal endoskeleton (e.g. that of a human) which is enclosed underneath other soft tissues. Some large, hard and non-flexible protective exoskeletons are known as [[mollusc shell|shell]] or [[armour (anatomy)|armour]].

Examples of exoskeletons in animals include the cuticle skeletons shared by arthropods (insects, chelicerates, myriapods and crustaceans) and tardigrades, as well as the skeletal cups formed by hardened secretion of stony corals, the test/tunic of sea squirts and sea urchins, and the prominent mollusc shell shared by snails, clams, tusk shells, chitons and nautilus. Some vertebrate animals, such as the turtle, have both an endoskeleton and a protective exoskeleton.

== Role ==
Exoskeletons contain rigid and resistant components that fulfil a set of functional roles in addition to structural support in many animals, including protection, respiration, excretion, sensation, feeding and courtship display, and as an osmotic barrier against desiccation in terrestrial organisms. Exoskeletons have roles in defence from parasites and predators and in providing attachment points for musculature.

Arthropod exoskeletons contain chitin; the addition of calcium carbonate makes them harder and stronger, at the price of increased weight. Ingrowths of the arthropod exoskeleton known as apodemes serve as attachment sites for muscles. These structures are composed of chitin and are approximately six times stronger and twice the stiffness of vertebrate tendons. Similar to tendons, apodemes can stretch to store elastic energy for jumping, notably in locusts. Calcium carbonates constitute the shells of molluscs, brachiopods, and some tube-building polychaete worms. Silica forms the exoskeleton in the microscopic diatoms and radiolaria. One mollusc species, the scaly-foot gastropod, even uses the iron sulfides greigite and pyrite.

Some organisms, such as some foraminifera, agglutinate exoskeletons by sticking grains of sand and shell to their exterior. Contrary to a common misconception, echinoderms do not possess an exoskeleton and their test is always contained within a layer of living tissue.

Exoskeletons have evolved independently many times; 18 lineages evolved calcified exoskeletons alone. Further, other lineages have produced tough outer coatings, such as some mammals, that are analogous to an exoskeleton. This coating is constructed from bone in the armadillo, and hair in the pangolin. The armour of reptiles like turtles and dinosaurs like Ankylosaurs is constructed of bone; crocodiles have bony scutes and horny scales.

== Growth ==

Since exoskeletons are rigid, they present some limits to growth. Organisms with open shells can grow by adding new material to the aperture of their shell, as is the case in gastropods, bivalves, and other molluscans. A true exoskeleton, like that found in panarthropods, must be shed via moulting (ecdysis) when the animal starts to outgrow it. A new exoskeleton is produced beneath the old one, and the new skeleton is soft and pliable before shedding the old one. The animal will typically stay in a den or burrow during moulting, as it is quite vulnerable to trauma during this period. Once at least partially set, the organism will plump itself up to try to expand the exoskeleton. The new exoskeleton is still capable of growing to some degree before it is eventually hardened. In contrast, moulting reptiles shed only the outer layer of skin and often exhibit indeterminate growth. These animals produce new skin and integuments throughout their life, replacing them according to growth. Arthropod growth, however, is limited by the space within its current exoskeleton. Failure to shed the exoskeleton once outgrown can result in the animal&#x27;s death or prevent subadults from reaching maturity, thus preventing them from reproducing. This is the mechanism behind some insect pesticides, such as Azadirachtin.

== Paleontological significance ==

Exoskeletons, as hard parts of organisms, are greatly useful in assisting the preservation of organisms, whose soft parts usually rot before they can be fossilized. Mineralized exoskeletons can be preserved as shell fragments. The possession of an exoskeleton permits a couple of other routes to fossilization. For instance, the strong layer can resist compaction, allowing a mould of the organism to be formed underneath the skeleton, which may later decay. Alternatively, exceptional preservation may result in chitin being mineralised, as in the Burgess Shale, or transformed to the resistant polymer keratin, which can resist decay and be recovered.

However, our dependence on fossilised skeletons also significantly limits our understanding of evolution. Only the parts of organisms that were already mineralised are usually preserved, such as the shells of molluscs. It helps that exoskeletons often contain &quot;muscle scars&quot;, marks where muscles have been attached to the exoskeleton, which may allow the reconstruction of much of an organism&#x27;s internal parts from its exoskeleton alone. The most significant limitation is that, although there are 30-plus phyla of living animals, two-thirds of these phyla have never been found as fossils, because most animal species are soft-bodied and decay before they can become fossilised.

Mineralized skeletons first appear in the fossil record shortly before the base of the Cambrian period, . The evolution of a mineralised exoskeleton is considered a possible driving force of the Cambrian explosion of animal life, resulting in a diversification of predatory and defensive tactics. However, some Precambrian (Ediacaran) organisms produced tough outer shells while others, such as &quot;Cloudina&quot;, had a calcified exoskeleton. Some &quot;Cloudina&quot; shells even show evidence of predation, in the form of borings.

== Evolution ==

The fossil record primarily contains mineralized exoskeletons, since these are by far the most durable. Since most lineages with exoskeletons are thought to have started with a non-mineralized exoskeleton which they later mineralized, it is difficult to comment on the very early evolution of each lineage&#x27;s exoskeleton. It is known, however, that in a very short course of time, just before the Cambrian period, exoskeletons made of various materials – silica, calcium phosphate, calcite, aragonite, and even glued-together mineral flakes – sprang up in a range of different environments. Most lineages adopted the form of calcium carbonate which was stable in the ocean at the time they first mineralized, and did not change from this mineral morph - even when it became less favourable.

Some Precambrian (Ediacaran) organisms produced tough but non-mineralized outer shells, while others, such as &quot;Cloudina&quot;, had a calcified exoskeleton, but mineralized skeletons did not become common until the beginning of the Cambrian period, with the rise of the &quot;small shelly fauna&quot;. Just after the base of the Cambrian, these miniature fossils become diverse and abundant – this abruptness may be an illusion since the chemical conditions which preserved the small shells appeared at the same time. Most other shell-forming organisms appeared during the Cambrian period, with the Bryozoans being the only calcifying phylum to appear later, in the Ordovician. The sudden appearance of shells has been linked to a change in ocean chemistry which made the calcium compounds of which the shells are constructed stable enough to be precipitated into a shell. However, this is unlikely to be a sufficient cause, as the main construction cost of shells is in creating the proteins and polysaccharides required for the shell&#x27;s composite structure, not in the precipitation of the mineral components. Skeletonization also appeared at almost the same time that animals started burrowing to avoid predation, and one of the earliest exoskeletons was made of glued-together mineral flakes, suggesting that skeletonization was likewise a response to increased pressure from predators.

Ocean chemistry may also control which mineral shells are constructed of. Calcium carbonate has two forms, the stable calcite and the metastable aragonite, which is stable within a reasonable range of chemical environments but rapidly becomes unstable outside this range. When the oceans contain a relatively high proportion of magnesium compared to calcium, aragonite is more stable, but as the magnesium concentration drops, it becomes less stable, hence harder to incorporate into an exoskeleton, as it will tend to dissolve.

Except for the molluscs, whose shells often comprise both forms, most lineages use just one form of the mineral. The form used appears to reflect the seawater chemistry – thus which form was more easily precipitated – at the time that the lineage first evolved a calcified skeleton, and does not change thereafter. However, the relative abundance of calcite- and aragonite-using lineages does not reflect subsequent seawater chemistry – the magnesium/calcium ratio of the oceans appears to have a negligible impact on organisms&#x27; success, which is instead controlled mainly by how well they recover from mass extinctions. A recently discovered modern gastropod &quot;Chrysomallon squamiferum&quot; that lives near deep-sea hydrothermal vents illustrates the influence of both ancient and modern local chemical environments: its shell is made of aragonite, which is found in some of the earliest fossil molluscs; but it also has armour plates on the sides of its foot, and these are mineralised with the iron sulfides pyrite and greigite, which had never previously been found in any metazoan but whose ingredients are emitted in large quantities by the vents.

== See also ==
* Endoskeleton
* Hydrostatic skeleton
* Osteoderm
* Powered exoskeleton
* known to incorporate iron into its exoskeleton
* Spiracle – small openings in the exoskeleton that allow insects to breathe
* Stolon

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q191944" start="3" end="14" title="Exoskeleton" label="exoskeleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7881" start="113" end="121" title="skeleton" label="skeleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q729" start="152" end="158" title="animal" label="animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214385" start="183" end="193" title="integument" label="integument"/>
<link wikidata="Q712378" start="254" end="268" title="internal organ" label="internal organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148064" start="298" end="310" title="endoskeleton" label="endoskeleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q9621" start="317" end="332" title="human skeleton" label="that of a human"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458306" start="369" end="380" title="soft tissue" label="soft tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q191944" start="454" end="477" title="Exoskeleton" label="[[mollusc shell|shell]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q191944" start="481" end="508" title="Exoskeleton" label="[[armour (anatomy)|armour]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q4797676" start="559" end="575" title="arthropod exoskeleton" label="cuticle skeleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360" start="587" end="596" title="arthropod" label="arthropod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390" start="599" end="605" title="insect" label="insect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359" start="608" end="619" title="chelicerate" label="chelicerate"/>
<link wikidata="Q25823" start="622" end="630" title="myriapod" label="myriapod"/>
<link wikidata="Q25364" start="636" end="646" title="crustacean" label="crustacean"/>
<link wikidata="Q5194" start="653" end="663" title="tardigrade" label="tardigrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q19903878" start="681" end="693" title="corallite" label="skeletal cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q195605" start="727" end="738" title="stony coral" label="stony coral"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519023" start="745" end="749" title="test (biology)" label="test"/>
<link wikidata="Q190090" start="759" end="769" title="sea squirt" label="sea squirt"/>
<link wikidata="Q83483" start="775" end="785" title="sea urchin" label="sea urchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6445670" start="806" end="819" title="mollusc shell" label="mollusc shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q308841" start="830" end="835" title="snail" label="snail"/>
<link wikidata="Q25368" start="838" end="842" title="bivalvia" label="clam"/>
<link wikidata="Q238314" start="845" end="855" title="tusk shell" label="tusk shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q188906" start="858" end="864" title="chiton" label="chiton"/>
<link wikidata="Q223939" start="870" end="878" title="nautilus" label="nautilus"/>
<link wikidata="Q25241" start="885" end="895" title="vertebrate" label="vertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q223044" start="917" end="923" title="turtle" label="turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q13486671" start="957" end="979" title="turtle shell" label="protective exoskeleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058733" start="1098" end="1116" title="structural support" label="structural support"/>
<link wikidata="Q10968643" start="1203" end="1220" title="courtship display" label="courtship display"/>
<link wikidata="Q903071" start="1256" end="1267" title="desiccation" label="desiccation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7365" start="1397" end="1408" title="muscle" label="musculature"/>
<link wikidata="Q4797676" start="1411" end="1432" title="Arthropod exoskeleton" label="Arthropod exoskeleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q161219" start="1442" end="1448" title="chitin" label="chitin"/>
<link wikidata="Q23767" start="1466" end="1483" title="calcium carbonate" label="calcium carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4797676" start="1567" end="1588" title="arthropod exoskeleton" label="arthropod exoskeleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q232358" start="1765" end="1771" title="tendon" label="tendon"/>
<link wikidata="Q891408" start="1824" end="1838" title="elastic energy" label="elastic energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q83931" start="1863" end="1869" title="locust" label="locust"/>
<link wikidata="Q178272" start="1926" end="1936" title="brachiopod" label="brachiopod"/>
<link wikidata="Q18952" start="1962" end="1972" title="polychaete" label="polychaete"/>
<link wikidata="Q116269" start="1980" end="1986" title="Silicon dioxide" label="Silica"/>
<link wikidata="Q162678" start="2028" end="2034" title="diatom" label="diatom"/>
<link wikidata="Q107920" start="2040" end="2050" title="Radiolarian" label="radiolaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5962358" start="2077" end="2097" title="scaly-foot gastropod" label="scaly-foot gastropod"/>
<link wikidata="Q426234" start="2127" end="2135" title="greigite" label="greigite"/>
<link wikidata="Q50769" start="2140" end="2146" title="pyrite" label="pyrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q107027" start="2178" end="2190" title="foraminifera" label="foraminifera"/>
<link wikidata="Q393294" start="2192" end="2203" title="agglutination (biology)" label="agglutinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q44631" start="2309" end="2319" title="echinoderm" label="echinoderm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519023" start="2361" end="2365" title="Test (biology)" label="test"/>
<link wikidata="Q933382" start="2492" end="2501" title="Calcification" label="calcified"/>
<link wikidata="Q104840543" start="2687" end="2696" title="armadillo" label="armadillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2191516" start="2714" end="2722" title="pangolin" label="pangolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q273617" start="2779" end="2789" title="Ankylosauria" label="Ankylosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q43169" start="2815" end="2824" title="crocodile" label="crocodile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365510" start="2836" end="2841" title="scute" label="scute"/>
<link wikidata="Q65284752" start="2847" end="2851" title="Horn (anatomy)" label="horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867740" start="3051" end="3060" title="gastropod" label="gastropod"/>
<link wikidata="Q25368" start="3063" end="3070" title="bivalve" label="bivalve"/>
<link wikidata="Q25326" start="3083" end="3091" title="mollusca" label="mollusca"/>
<link wikidata="Q381084" start="3166" end="3174" title="moulting" label="moulting"/>
<link wikidata="Q13389887" start="3176" end="3183" title="ecdysis" label="ecdysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q793471" start="4184" end="4196" title="Azadirachtin" label="Azadirachtin"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="4531" end="4537" title="fossil" label="fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122699" start="4709" end="4733" title="Lagerstätte" label="exceptional preservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q852085" start="4784" end="4797" title="Burgess Shale" label="Burgess Shale"/>
<link wikidata="Q189474" start="4839" end="4846" title="keratin" label="keratin"/>
<link wikidata="Q610457" start="5042" end="5053" title="Biomineralization" label="mineralised"/>
<link wikidata="Q38348" start="5411" end="5416" title="phylum" label="phyla"/>
<link wikidata="Q79064" start="5673" end="5688" title="Cambrian period" label="Cambrian period"/>
<link wikidata="Q32919" start="5781" end="5799" title="Cambrian explosion" label="Cambrian explosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q188654" start="5910" end="5919" title="Ediacaran" label="Ediacaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q723846" start="5921" end="5930" title="Ediacara biota" label="organisms"/>
<link wikidata="Q15104453" start="5987" end="5995" title="Cloudinid" label="Cloudina"/>
<link wikidata="Q426664" start="6607" end="6624" title="calcium phosphate" label="calcium phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q171917" start="6626" end="6633" title="calcite" label="calcite"/>
<link wikidata="Q23775" start="6635" end="6644" title="aragonite" label="aragonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058746" start="7216" end="7234" title="small shelly fauna" label="small shelly fauna"/>
<link wikidata="Q148134" start="7539" end="7546" title="Bryozoa" label="Bryozoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q62100" start="7606" end="7616" title="Ordovician" label="Ordovician"/>
<link wikidata="Q7076133" start="7681" end="7696" title="ocean chemistry" label="ocean chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="7924" end="7931" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q134219" start="7937" end="7951" title="polysaccharide" label="polysaccharide"/>
<link wikidata="Q181790" start="7983" end="8002" title="composite material" label="composite structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410542" start="8131" end="8137" title="burrow" label="burrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q849516" start="8470" end="8480" title="Metastability" label="metastable"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867740" start="9521" end="9530" title="gastropod" label="gastropod"/>
<link wikidata="Q5962358" start="9537" end="9561" title="Chrysomallon squamiferum" label="Chrysomallon squamiferum"/>
<link wikidata="Q867648" start="9593" end="9610" title="hydrothermal vent" label="hydrothermal vent"/>
<link wikidata="Q50769" start="9887" end="9893" title="pyrite" label="pyrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q426234" start="9898" end="9906" title="greigite" label="greigite"/>
<link wikidata="Q729" start="9953" end="9961" title="Animal" label="metazoan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148064" start="10048" end="10060" title="Endoskeleton" label="Endoskeleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640354" start="10063" end="10083" title="Hydrostatic skeleton" label="Hydrostatic skeleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513527" start="10086" end="10095" title="Osteoderm" label="Osteoderm"/>
<link wikidata="Q938523" start="10098" end="10117" title="Powered exoskeleton" label="Powered exoskeleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q31060267" start="10169" end="10177" title="Spiracle (arthropods)" label="Spiracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q633912" start="10246" end="10252" title="Stolon" label="Stolon"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="145426" wikidata="Q222738" url="?curid=145426" title="National Autonomous University of Mexico">
<text>The National Autonomous University of Mexico (, UNAM) is a public research university in Mexico. It has several campuses in Mexico City, and many others in various locations across Mexico, as well as a presence in nine countries. It also has 34 research institutes, 26 museums, and 18 historic sites.

A portion of (University City), UNAM&#x27;s main campus in Mexico City, is a UNESCO World Heritage site that was designed and decorated by some of Mexico&#x27;s best-known architects and painters. The campus hosted the main events of the 1968 Summer Olympics, and was the birthplace of the student movement of 1968. All Mexican Nobel laureates have been alumni of UNAM. In 2009, the university was awarded the Prince of Asturias Award for Communication and Humanities. More than 25% of the total scientific papers published by Mexican academics come from researchers at UNAM.

UNAM was founded in its modern form, on 22 September 1910 by Justo Sierra as a secular alternative to its predecessor, the Royal and Pontifical University of Mexico (the first Western-style university in North America, founded in 1551).
==History==
The university was founded on 22 September 1910 by Justo Sierra, then minister of education in the Porfirio Díaz regime, who sought to create a very different institution from its 19th-century precursor, the Royal and Pontifical University of Mexico, which had been founded on 21 September 1551 by a royal decree signed by Crown Prince Phillip II on behalf of Charles I of Spain and brought to a definitive closure in 1865 by Maximilian I of Mexico. Instead of reviving what he saw as an anachronistic institution with strong ties to the Roman Catholic Church, he aimed to merge and expand Mexico City&#x27;s decentralized colleges of higher education (including former faculties of the old university) and create a new university, secular in nature and national in scope, that could reorganize higher education within the country, serve as a model of positivism and encompass the ideas of the dominant Mexican liberalism.

The project initially unified the Fine Arts, Business, Political Science, Jurisprudence, Engineering, Medicine, Normal, and the National Preparatory schools; its first rector was Joaquin Eguía y Lis.The new university&#x27;s challenges were mostly political, due to the ongoing Mexican Revolution and the fact that the federal government had direct control over the university&#x27;s policies and curriculum; some resisted its establishment on philosophical grounds. This opposition led to disruptions in the function of the university when political instability forced resignations in the government, including that of President Díaz. Internally, the first student strike occurred in 1912 to protest examination methods introduced by the director of the School of Jurisprudence, Luis Cabrera Lobato. By July of that year, a majority of the law students decided to abandon the university and join the newly created Free School of Law.

In 1914 initial efforts to gain autonomy for the university failed. In 1920, José Vasconcelos became rector. In 1921, he created the school&#x27;s coat-of-arms: the image of an eagle and a condor surrounding a map of Latin America, from Mexico&#x27;s northern border to Tierra del Fuego, and the motto, &quot;The Spirit shall speak for my people&quot;. Efforts to gain autonomy for the university continued in the early 1920s. In the mid-1920s, the second wave of student strikes opposed a new grading system. The strikes included major classroom walkouts in the law school and confrontation with police at the medical school. The striking students were supported by many professors and subsequent negotiations eventually led to autonomy for the university. The institution was no longer a dependency of the Secretariat of Public Education; the university rector became the final authority, eliminating much of the confusing overlap in authority.

During the early 1930s, the rector of UNAM was Manuel Gómez Morín. The government attempted to implement socialist education at Mexican universities, which Gómez Morín, many professors, and Catholics opposed as an infringement on academic freedom. Gómez Morín with the support of the Jesuit-founded student group, the Unión Nacional de Estudiantes Católicos, successfully fought against socialist education. UNAM supported the recognition of the academic certificates by Catholic preparatory schools, which validated their educational function. UNAM played an important role in the founding of the Jesuit institution, the , in 1943. However, UNAM opposed initiatives at the in later years, opposing the establishment of majors in industrial relations and communications.

In 1943 initial decisions were made to move the university from the various buildings it occupied in the city center to a new and consolidated university campus; the new &quot; &quot; (lit. University City) would be in San Ángel, to the south of the city. The first stone laid was that of the faculty of Sciences, the first building of . President Miguel Alemán Valdés participated in the ceremony on 20 November 1952. The University Olympic Stadium was inaugurated on the same day. In 1957 the Doctorate Council was created to regulate and organize graduate studies.

Another major student strike, again over examination regulations, occurred in 1966. Students invaded the rectorate and forced the rector to resign. The Board of Regents did not accept this resignation, so the professors went on strike, paralyzing the university and forcing the Board&#x27;s acceptance. In the summer, violent outbreaks occurred on a number of the campuses of the university&#x27;s affiliated preparatory schools; police took over several high school campuses, with injuries.

Students at UNAM, along with other Mexico City universities, mobilized in what has come to be called Mexico 68, protests against the 1968 Mexico City Olympics, but also a whole array of political and social tensions. During August 1968, protests formed on the main campus against the police actions on the main campus and in the center of the city. The protests grew into a student movement that demanded the resignation of the police chief, among other things. More protests followed in September, gaining frequency and numbers. During a meeting of the student leaders, the army fired on the Chihuahua building in Tlatelolco, where the student organization supposedly was. In the Tlatelolco massacre, the police action resulted in many dead, wounded, and detained. Protests continued on after that. Only ten days later, the 1968 Olympic Games opened at the University Stadium. The university was shut down for the duration.

The 1970s and 1980s saw the opening of satellite campuses in other parts of Mexico and nearby areas, to decentralize the system. There were some minor student strikes, mostly concerning grading and tuition.

The last major student strike at the university occurred in 1999–2000 when students shut down the campus for almost a year to protest a proposal to charge students the equivalent of US$150 per semester for those who could afford it. Referendums were held by both the university and the strikers, but neither side accepted the others&#x27; results. Acting on a judge&#x27;s order, the police stormed the buildings held by strikers on 7 February 2000, putting an end to the strike.

In 2009 the university was awarded the Prince of Asturias Award for Communication and Humanities and began the celebration of its centennial anniversary with several activities that will last until 2011.

The UNAM has actively included minorities into different educational fields, as in technology. In 2016, the university adopted United Nations platforms throughout all of its campuses to support and empower women.

==Campuses==

===University City===
&quot;Ciudad Universitaria&quot; (University City) is UNAM&#x27;s main campus, located within the Coyoacán borough in the southern part of Mexico City. The construction of UNAM&#x27;s central campus was the original idea of two students from the National School of Architecture in 1928: Mauricio De Maria y Campos and Marcial Gutiérrez Camarena. It was designed by architects Mario Pani, Armando Franco Rovira, Enrique del Moral, Eugenio Peschard, Ernesto Gómez Gallardo Argüelles, Domingo García Ramos, and others such as Mauricio De Maria y Campos who always showed great interest in participating in the project. Architects De Maria y Campos, Del Moral, and Pani were given the responsibility as directors and coordinators to assign each architect to each selected building or constructions which enclose the Estadio Olímpico Universitario, about 40 schools and institutes, the Cultural Center, an ecological reserve, the Central Library, the National Library of Mexico and a few museums. It was built during the 1950s on an ancient solidified lava bed to replace the scattered buildings in downtown Mexico City, where classes were given. It was completed in 1954, and is almost a separate region within Mexico City, with its own regulations, councils, police, transportation and even a supermarket.

In June 2007, its main campus, Ciudad Universitaria, was declared a UNESCO World Heritage Site.

===Satellite campuses===

Apart from University City (Ciudad Universitaria), UNAM has several campuses in the Metropolitan Area of Mexico City (Acatlán, Aragón, Cuautitlán, Iztacala, and Zaragoza), as well as many others in several locations across Mexico (in Santiago de Querétaro, Morelia, Mérida, Sisal, Ensenada, Cuernavaca, Temixco and Leon), mainly aimed at research and graduate studies. Its School of Music, formerly the National School of Music, is located in Coyoacán. Its Center of Teaching for Foreigners has a campus in Taxco, in the southern Mexican state of Guerrero, focusing in Spanish language and Mexican culture for foreigners, as well as locations in the upscale neighborhood of Polanco in central Mexico City.

The university has extension schools in the United States, and Canada, focusing on the Spanish language, English language, Mexican culture, and, in the case of UNAM Canada, French language: UNAM San Antonio, Texas; UNAM Los Angeles, California; UNAM Chicago, Illinois; Gatineau, Quebec; and Seattle, Washington.

It operates Centers for Mexican Studies and/or Centers of Teaching for Foreigners in Beijing, China (jointly with the Beijing Foreign Studies University); Madrid, Spain (jointly with the Cervantes Institute); San Jose, Costa Rica (jointly with the University of Costa Rica); London, United Kingdom (with King&#x27;s College London); Paris, France (jointly with Paris-Sorbonne University); and Northridge, California, United States (jointly with California State University Northridge).

===Museums and buildings of interest===

====Palacio de Minería====
Under the care of the School of Engineering, UNAM, the Colonial Palace of Mining is located in the historical center of Mexico City. Formerly the School of Engineering, it has three floors, and hosts the International Book Expo (&quot;Feria Internacional del Libro&quot; or &quot;FIL&quot;) and the International Day of Computing Security Congress (&quot;DISC&quot;). It also has a permanent exhibition of historical books, mostly topographical and naturalist works of 19th-century Mexican scientists, in the former library of the School of Engineers. It also contains several exhibitions related to mining, the prime engineering occupation during the Spanish colonization. It is considered to be one of the most significant examples of Mexican architecture of its period, conceived by Manuel Tolsa during de Spanish colonial rule in a neoclassical style (18th century).

It hosts every year one of Mexico&#x27;s top book fairs, known in Spanish as Feria Internacional del Libro de Palacio de Mineria. Which is more than 40 years old and has each year more than 100,000 attendants. 

====Casa del Lago====

The House of the Lake, in Chapultepec Park, is a place devoted to cultural activities, including dancing, theater, and ballet. It also serves as a meeting place for university-related organizations and committees.

====National Biodiversity Pavilion====
Opened in 2021, with the sponsorship of Carlos Slim, the museum hosts a number of permanent exhibits which consist mostly on samples of local flora and fauna from Mexico.

====Museum of San Ildefonso====

This museum and cultural center is considered to be the birthplace of the Mexican muralism movement. San Ildefonso began as a prestigious Jesuit boarding school, and after the Reform War, it gained educational prestige again as National Preparatory School, which was closely linked to the founding of UNAM. This school, and the building, closed completely in 1978, then reopened as a museum and cultural center in 1994, administered jointly by UNAM, the National Council for Culture and Arts and the government of the Federal District of Mexico City. The museum has permanent and temporary art and archaeological exhibitions, in addition to the many murals painted on its walls by José Clemente Orozco, Diego Rivera and others. The complex is located between San Ildefonso Street and Justo Sierra Street in the historic center of Mexico City.

====Chopo University Museum====
The Chopo University Museum possesses an artistic architecture, large crystal panels and two iron towers designed by Gustave Eiffel. It opened with part of the collection of the now-defunct Public Museum of Natural History, Archeology and History, which eventually became the National Museum of Cultures. It served the National Museum of Natural History for almost 50 years, and is now devoted to the temporary exhibitions of visual arts.

====Museo Experimental El Eco====
The Museo Experimental El Eco is one of the two buildings by German modern artist Mathias Goeritz and an example of Emotional architecture. Goeritz was a close collaborator of architect Luis Barragán and author of several public sculptures including the Torres de Satélite. The building was acquired and renovated by the National University in 2004 and since 2005 it exhibits contemporary art and a yearly architecture competition Pabellón Eco.

====National Astronomical Observatory====
The National Astronomical Observatory is located in the Sierra San Pedro Mártir mountain range in Baja California, about 130 km south of United States-Mexican border. It has been in operation since 1970, and it currently has three large reflecting telescopes.
==Academics==
UNAM is organized in schools or colleges, rather than departments. Both undergraduate and graduate studies are available. UNAM is also responsible for the Escuela Nacional Preparatoria (ENP) (National Preparatory School), and the Colegio de Ciencias y Humanidades (CCH) (Science and Humanities College), which consist of several high schools, in Mexico City. Counting ENES, CCH, FES (Facultad de Estudios Superiores), higher-secondary, undergraduate and graduate students, UNAM has over 324,413 students, making it one of the world&#x27;s largest universities.

=== Schools and colleges ===

UNAM has a set of schools covering different academic fields such as &quot;engineering&quot; or &quot;law&quot;. All of UNAM&#x27;s schools offer undergraduate and graduate studies (master&#x27;s degrees and PhDs). However, the schools that UNAM calls &quot;national schools&quot; only offer undergraduate studies, as this type of school is mainly focused on practical experience. This is the case of the National School of Nursing and Obstetrics, and the National School of Social Work.

===List of schools, and institutes===

* Schools (all of these offer undergraduate and graduate degrees)
** School of Accounting and Administration
** School of Architecture
** School of Arts and Design
** School of Chemistry
** School of Economics
** School of Engineering
** School of High Studies (FES) Acatlán
** School of High Studies (FES) Aragón
** School of High Studies (FES) Cuautitlán
** School of High Studies (FES) Iztacala
** School of High Studies (FES) Zaragoza
** School of Law
** School of Medicine
** School of Music
** School of Odontology
** School of Philosophy and Letters
** School of Political and Social Sciences
** School of Psychology
** School of Sciences
** School of Veterinarian Medicine and Animal Science
* National Schools (only have undergraduate degrees)
** National School of Cinematographic Arts
** National School of Earth Sciences
** National School of Languages, Linguistics and Translation
** National School of Nursing and Obstetrics
** National School of Social Work
** National Preparatory School (with 9 high schools)
** National School of High Studies Morelia (in the state of Michoacan)
** National School of High Studies León (in the state of Guanajuato)
** National School of High Studies Mérida (in the state of Yucatán)
** National School of High Studies Juriquilla (in the state of Querétaro)
** National School &#x27;College of Sciences and Humanities&#x27; (with five high schools)

===Open University and Distance Education System===
The Open University and Distance Education System or &quot;Sistema de Universidad Abierta y Educación a Distancia&quot; (SUAyED) is an alternative to the university&#x27;s on-campus education. The open education programs require on-campus assistance at least one in every 15 days, usually on Saturdays (semi-presence). The distance education programs are entirely online using content provided through online platforms where students, teachers, and peers communicate online. About 32,000 of UNAM&#x27;s students are enrolled in open or distance programs.

SUAyED offers bachelor and postgraduate degrees.

=== Rankings ===
UNAM is consistently ranked as the best university in Mexico by most academic rankings, as well as one of the top 10 in Latin America. World rankings tend to position it within the 100 to 300 range.
==Research==
UNAM has excelled in many areas of research. For instance, it was recognized by UNESCO as producing globally some of the most impactful research on Artificial Intelligence. It has also consistently secured top positions in the international robotics competition RoboCup, often claiming first places. The university houses many of Mexico&#x27;s premiere research institutions. UNAM is currently recognized as one of the most international research universities in Latin America.

Despite the low percentage of funding invested in research and development in Mexico, the UNAM stands out as a research-oriented university with international competitiveness across all fields of knowledge. The UNAM is likely also the Mexican institution, whether public or private, with the greatest infrastructure and investment in basic research. For instance, some studies have attributed to it more than 50% of Mexico&#x27;s scientific production, followed by several prominent public universities (e.g., CINVESTAV/IPN, UAM, UdeG, UANL), public hospitals, and research centers directly affiliated with the National Council of Science and Technology.

In recent years, it has attracted students and hired professional scientists from all over the world, most notably from Europe, other countries in Latin America, India, and the United States, creating a unique and diverse scientific community.Scientific research at UNAM is divided between colleges, institutes, centers, and schools, and covers a range of disciplines in Latin America. Some notable UNAM institutes include the Institute of Astronomy, the Institute of Biotechnology, the Institute of Nuclear Sciences, the Institute of Ecology, the Institute of Physics, Institute of Renewable Energies, the Institute of Cell Physiology, the Institute of Geophysics, the Institute of Engineering, the Institute of Materials Research, the Institute of Chemistry, the Institute of Biomedical Sciences, and the Applied Mathematics and Systems Research Institute.

Research centers tend to focus on multidisciplinary problems particularly relevant to Mexico and the developing world, most notably, the Center for Applied Sciences and Technological Development, which focuses on connecting the sciences to real-world problems (e.g., optics, nanosciences), and Center for Energy Research, which conducts world-class research in alternative energies.

All research centers are open to students from around the world. The UNAM holds a number of programs for students within the country, using scientific internships to encourage research in the country.

UNAM currently installed its first supercomputer Sirio (Cray Y/MP) in 1991. Since 2013 it operates a supercomputer named Miztli (HP) for scientific research.

== Athletics ==

===Professional football club===
UNAM&#x27;s football club, Club Universidad Nacional, participates in Liga MX, the top division of Mexican football. The club became two-time consecutive champions of the Apertura, and the Clausura in 2004. Their home ground is the Estadio Olímpico Universitario.

===College football team===

The Pumas CU represents UNAM in college football since 1927. Is one of the most successful football programs in Mexico.

The team maintains an historic fierce rivalry with the National Polytechnic Institute (IPN) football program, the &quot;Águilas Blancas&quot; (White Eagles), due to both of them being the biggest public universities in the country.

===Pumas volleyball team===
UNAM&#x27;s volleyball team, Pumas, has had great success on a national and international level. The manager for Mexico&#x27;s representative volleyball team is from Pumas, and several players representing Mexico are also UNAM students and alumni. They played in the Olympics at Rio.

== Culture ==

=== Seal ===
The university logo was designed by José Vasconcelos in 1920, a prolific ideologue of pan-American identity and Mexican culture in particular. As rector of the university, he expressed the importance of ending the oppression and the bloody confrontations of yesteryear, with the new battlefields being those of culture and education, as means to achieve a new era of unification of Latin Americans. He imprinted this vision in the university seal, featuring a Mexican eagle and an Andean condor, forming a double-headed eagle supported by an allegory of volcanoes and cacti (a reference to the foundational myth of Tenochtitlan). In the central part of the shield is the map of Latin America, which goes from the northern border of Mexico to Cape Horn. Framing this map is the phrase &quot;For my people the spirit shall speak.&quot; In the upper part of the seal there is a ribbon that says &quot;National Autonomous University of Mexico&quot;.

=== Motto ===
The motto that animates the National University, &quot;For my people the spirit shall speak&quot;, reveals the humanistic vocation with which it was conceived. The author of this famous phrase, José Vasconcelos, assumed the rectory in 1920, within the framework of the Latin American University Reform, and at a time when the hopes of the Mexican Revolution were still alive; There was a great faith in the homeland, and the redemptive spirit extended into the environment. It &quot;means in this motto the conviction that our race will elaborate a culture of new tendencies, of spiritual and free essence&quot;, explained the &quot;Master of America&quot; when presenting the proposal. Later, he would specify: &quot;I imagined the university shield that I presented to the Council, roughly and with a legend: &#x27;For my people the spirit shall speak&#x27;, pretending to mean that we woke up from a long night of oppression&quot; 

=== Imagotype ===
On April 20, 1974, the then rector Guillermo Soberón Acevedo presented the new sport&#x27;s emblem of the UNAM in the Auditorium of the Faculty of Sciences. The university commissioned the design to Manuel Andrade Rodríguez, as part of the renovation of the General Directorate of Sports and Recreation Activities. The image was chosen among 16 works, and required more than 800 sketches.

The image type consists of the face of a puma in gold, made from the silhouette of a closed fist, on a blue triangle with rounded corners. In turn, this triangle expresses the three fundamental pillars of the university: Education, Research and the Diffusion of Culture.

The emblem of the puma serves as a seal for the sports teams of the university. In 2013, the British newspaper The Guardian included it in a list of one of the most remarkable club logos in football.
=== Cultural traditions ===
The university has an annual tradition to make a large display of Day of the Dead offerings (Spanish: &quot;ofrenda&quot;) all over the main square of Ciudad Universitaria. Each school builds an offering, and in the center, there is usually a large offering made according to a theme corresponding to the festivities of the university for that year.

===Political activism===

UNAM students and professors are regarded throughout Mexico as politically very active, generally speaking. Since 2000, a small building at the School of Humanities (near the central library) has been effectively under the control of an anarcho-communist student group, who renamed the place from &quot;Justo Sierra Auditorium&quot; to &quot;Che Guevara Auditorium&quot;. While most of its students usually adhere to left-wing political ideologies and movements, the university has also produced several prominent right-wing and neoliberal politicians and businessmen, such as President Carlos Salinas de Gortari, catholic rector Manuel Gómez Morín and magnate Carlos Slim.

UNAM&#x27;s history has made it a strong advocate of minorities, especially women in tech. The school of engineering has organized along with Google some of the largest all Latina Hackathons. UNAM along with Google has organized large scale Latina Hackathons.

===Student associations===
The UNAM contains several associations of current students and alumni that provide extra-curricular activities to the whole community, enriching the university&#x27;s activities with cultural, social, and scientific events.

* Fundación UNAM
* Nibiru Sociedad Astronomica
* SAFIR

== Notable people ==

===Nobel laureates===
All three of Mexico&#x27;s Nobel laureates are alumni of UNAM:

* Alfonso García Robles (alumnus) - Nobel Peace Prize, 1982
* Octavio Paz (alumnus) - Nobel Prize in Literature, 1990
* Mario Molina (alumnus) - Nobel Prize in Chemistry, 1995
In addition, eleven faculty of UNAM have taken part of the Nobel Peace Prize (Ana María Cetto twice), in 1995, 2005 and 2007; as members of the Pugwash Conference, the International Atomic Energy Agency and the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.

===Noted faculty===
:&quot;See also :Category:Academic staff of the National Autonomous University of Mexico&quot;
* Miguel Alcubierre, theoretical physicist
* Gabriel Careaga Medina, sociologist 
* Maria Leoba Castañeda Rivas, lawyer 
* Max Cetto, architect
* Mónica Clapp, mathematician
* Alejandro Corichi, astrophysicist
* Javier Corral Jurado, politician
* Jesús A. De Loera, mathematician
* Erich Fromm, philosopher and psychoanalyst
* Adolfo Gilly, historian
* Teodoro González de León, architect
* Jorge González Torres, politician
* José Gaos, philosopher
* Laura Hernández Guzmán, psychologist
* Isabel Hubard Escalera, mathematician
* José Miguel Insulza, a Chilean politician, secretary of the Organization of American States
* Paul Kirchhoff, anthropologist and ethnohistorian
* Larry Laudan, philosopher
* Juan Carlos Laguna, musician (guitar)
* Enrique Leff, political ecologist and economist
* Miguel León-Portilla, historian and Nahuatl language researcher
* Florian Luca, mathematician
* Rodrigo Medellín, ecologist
* Rodolfo Neri Vela, astronaut
* Edmundo O&#x27;Gorman, historian and writer
* Kiyoto Ota, sculptor
* Margarita Peña (1937-2018), writer, educator
* Arturo Rosenblueth, physiologist
* Graciela Salicrup (1935–1982), architect, archaeologist and mathematician
* Juan José Sánchez Sosa, psychologist
* Adolfo Sánchez Vázquez, a Spanish-born philosopher
* Manuel Sandoval Vallarta, physicist and cosmic ray researcher
* Sara Sefchovich, writer
* Jesus Savage, robotics researcher and founder of the Mexican Institute of Robotics
* Bernardo Sepúlveda Amor, lawyer
*Carlos Slim, businessman and one of the richest people in the world

===Noted alumni===

:See also :Category:National Autonomous University of Mexico alumni

====World heads of state====
* Abel Pacheco (President of Costa Rica 2002–2006)
* Adolfo López Mateos (President of Mexico 1958–1964)
* Alfonso Portillo (President of Guatemala 2000–2004)
* Carlos Salinas de Gortari (President of Mexico 1988–1994)
* José López Portillo y Pacheco (President of Mexico 1976–1982)
* Luis Echeverría (President of Mexico 1970–1976)
* Miguel Alemán Valdés (President of Mexico 1946–1952)
* Miguel de la Madrid Hurtado (President of Mexico 1982–1988)
* Andrés Manuel López Obrador (Mayor of Mexico City from 2000 to 2005, President of Mexico 2018–2024)
* Claudia Sheinbaum (scientist, Mayor of Mexico City, President of Mexico 2024-present)

====Politicians====
* Abel Pacheco (President of Costa Rica)
* Alan Cranston (U.S. Senator from California) - one summer
* Álvaro García Linera (vice-president of Bolivia, did not graduate)
*Alejandro Encinas (Mayor of Mexico City)
* Antonio Carrillo Flores (Cabinet Minister in several previous administrations, 1929, 1950)
* Carlos Mendoza Davis (Governor of Baja California Sur)
* Fernando Baeza Melendez (Senator and Governor of Chihuahua)
* Luis Félix López (Secretary of Government of Ecuador)
* Manlio Fabio Beltrones Rivera (Deputy, Senator and Governor of Sonora)
* Miguel Ángel Mancera (Mayor of Mexico City)
* Mark Kirk (U.S. Senator from Illinois, did not graduate)
*Rosario Robles (Mexican politician who served as the Secretary of Social Development)
*Santiago Creel (senator)
* Veton Surroi (Kosovo publicist and leader of the Kosovar Party ORA)
* Xóchitl Gálvez (Mexican Senator and Mexican presidential candidate)

====Diplomats====
* Antonio Carrillo Flores (Ministry of Mexican Foreign Affairs during the Díaz Ordaz administration)
* Jaime Torres Bodet (writer and politician, UNESCO Director-General (1948-1952))
* Narciso Bassols (former ambassador to Russia, France, and Great Britain; former director of UNAM&#x27;s School of Law)
* Norma Lucía Piña Hernández (President of Mexico&#x27;s Supreme Court of Justice of the Nation (Chief Justice))
* Marco Antonio Garcia Blanco (Ambassador of Mexico to Nigeria)
* Rosario Green (Ministry of Mexican Foreign Affairs during the Zedillo administration)

====Artists, writers, and humanists====

* Abraham Cruzvillegas (artist)
* Adolfo Sánchez Vázquez (philosopher and writer)
* Agustín Landa Verdugo (architect and urban planner)
* Alejandro Rossi (philosopher and writer)
* Alfonso Cuarón (film director)
* Alfonso García Robles (diplomat)
* Alfonso Reyes (writer, and diplomat)
* Ana Colchero (actress)
* Mercedes Durand (journalist and poet)
* Adelina Nicholls (activist)
* Audre Lorde (writer, poet and activist)
* Emiliano Monge
* Ayako Tsuru (mural artist)
* Bolívar Echeverría (philosopher)
* Carlos Fuentes (essayist)
* Carlos Monsiváis (editorialist and writer)
* Carmen Aristegui (journalist)
* Chespirito (screenwriter)
* Elena Poniatowska (journalist and writer)
* Fernando del Paso (writer)
* Francisco Laguna Correa (writer)
* Guillermo del Toro (filmmaker, author, and actor)
* Horst Matthai Quelle (philosopher)
* Jacobo Zabludovsky (lawyer and journalist)
* Jaime Maussan (television personality)
* Javier Solorzano (journalist)
* Jorge Volpi (novelist and essayist)
* José Emilio Pacheco (writer)
* Josefina Muriel (bibliophile)
* Juan García Esquivel (musician)
* Juan Rulfo (writer)
* Julio Estrada (UNAM scholar)
* Julio Scherer García (author and journalist)
* Ilse Gradwohl (painter)
* Marcela Del Río Reyes (writer and educator)
* Margarita Peña (writer and educator)
* Natalie Korneitsik (journalist, tv person)
* Maruxa Vilalta (dramatist)
* Octavio Paz (poet and essayist)
* Pola Weiss Álvarez (video artist)
* Ricardo Legorreta (laureated architect)
* Rosa Beltrán (writer, lecturer and academic)
* Rosario Castellanos (writer, philosopher, poet, feminist and diplomat) 
* Salvador Elizondo (writer)
* Subcomandante Marcos (sociologist)
* Tenoch Huerta (actor)
* Teodoro González de León (architect)
* Veronica Castro (movie star)
* Victoria Espinosa (theatre director, academic and activist)
* William F. Buckley (writer and political philosopher)
* Yael Bitrán (historian and translator)
* David Camorlinga Tagle (sculptor)
* Yan María Yaoyólotl Castro (lesbian feminist)

====Physicians and surgeons====
* Celia Mercedes Alpuche Aranda (deputy general director of the Center for Research on Infectious Diseases (CISEI))
*Carlos Fernández del Castillo (specialist in pancreatic diseases, pancreatobiliary surgery, gastrointestinal surgery at Massachusetts General Hospital, USA)
* Fernando Antonio Bermúdez Arias (prominent physician, cardiologist, scientist, writer, teacher, historian, artist, and social defender)
*Ignacio Chávez (prominent Mexican physician, founded the first cardiology area in the General Hospital of Mexico. He was the rector of the National Autonomous University of Mexico (1965–1966). Founded several Mexican institutions in Cardiology and he was appointed honorary doctor or rector of 95 universities around the world. He was a founding member of El Colegio Nacional (1943).)
*Jorge Calles-Escandón (endocrinologist, specializing in thyroid biopsy, type 1 diabetes, type 2 diabetes, and insulin pumps at Wake Forest Baptist Medical Center, USA)
*David Herzog, eating disorders expert and Endowed Professor in Psychiatry at Harvard Medical School
*Alberto P. León (physician, professor, and Secretary of Health of Mexico)
*Alethse de la Torre Rosas (infectious disease specialist, and Director General of the Centro Nacional para la Prevención y Control del VIH/SIDA)
*Gerardo Jiménez Sánchez (pediatrician, founding president of the Mexican Society of Genomic Medicine)
*Mauricio Tohen, Distinguished Professor, and Chairman of the Department of Psychiatry &amp; Behavioral Sciences at the University of New Mexico
*Nora Volkow (director of the National Institute of Drug Abuse)
*Leopoldo Salazar Viniegra (doctor, psychiatrist)

====Scientists====
* Ángela Alessio Robles (civil engineer and town planner)
* Alfonso Caso y Andrade (archaeologist)
* Antonio Lazcano (biologist and evolutionist, director of The Lynn Margulis Centre for Evolutionary Biology)
* Carlos Frenk (astronomer, a pioneer in simulations of large-scale structures)
* Constantino Reyes-Valerio (chemist and historian who coined the term &quot;arte indocristiano&quot; and contributed to the discovery of the production of Maya blue pigment)
* Eduardo Pareyón Moreno (archaeologist)
* Guido Münch (astronomer and director of the Max Planck Institute for Astronomy)
* Guillermo Haro (astronomer, co-discoverer of Herbig–Haro objects)
* Guillermo Oliver (biologist and professor at Northwestern University)
* Jerzy Rzedowski (plant scientist, pioneer in the field of neotropical floristics)
* Juan J. de Pablo (chemical engineer and vice president for national laboratories, science strategy, innovation, and global initiatives at the University of Chicago)
* Luis E. Miramontes (co-inventor of the contraceptive pill)
* Marcos Moshinsky (theoretical physicist, whose work in the field of elementary particles won him the Prince of Asturias Prize for Scientific and Technical Investigation and the UNESCO Science Prize)
* Mario Molina (co-discoverer of decomposition of ozone with CFC aerosols, Nobel laureate in Chemistry)
* Miguel Alcubierre (theoretical and computational physicist; see Alcubierre metric)
* Miguel de Icaza (free software programmer, co-founder of GNOME)
* Monica Olvera de la Cruz (soft matter theorist)
* Nabor Carrillo Flores (a soil mechanics expert, a nuclear energy advisor and former president of UNAM)
* Ricardo Miledi (neuroscientist, pioneer of the calcium hypothesis of neurotransmitter release)
* Rodolfo Neri Vela (the first Mexican in space)
* Salvador Zubirán (physician, founder of the National Institute of Nutrition)
* Shlomo Eckstein (economist and President of Bar-Ilan University)
* Susana López Charretón (virologist and researcher)
* Víctor Neumann-Lara (pioneer in graph theory)
* Yair Israel Piña López (physicist, NASA researcher)

====Business people====
* Carlos Slim (Studied at UNAM&#x27;s School of Engineering, and became a tech businessman, billionaire, and the current fourth richest person in the world)
* Alfredo Harp Helú (businessman, billionaire, and former owner of the biggest Latin American bank, Banamex).
* Enrique de la Madrid (Studied at UNAM&#x27;s Law School, and served as one of the directors for Latin America at the HSBC bank.)
* Manuel Gómez Morin (Studied at UNAM&#x27;s Law School, and was a co-founder and first president of the Bank of Mexico.)
* Arturo Elías Ayub (Business man who was chairman of UNAM Pumas Soccer team.)
* Riobóo Martín (Civil Engineering businessman, founder of &quot;Grupo Riobóo&quot;, which has constructed large scale infrastructure projects for Mexico City, including Subway lines 1,2,3, the indoor olympic arena: &quot;Gimnasio Olímpico Juan de la Barrera&quot;, the Olympic pool: &quot;Alberca Olímpica Francisco Márquez,&quot; and the palace of sports: &quot;Palacio de los Deportes&quot;).
* Pepe Carral (Studied at UNAM&#x27;s Law School, had his own company, and served as one of the directors for Bank of America in Mexico.)
* Delia González (Studied at UNAM&#x27;s Art School, her company focuses on designing and selling silver Mexican-style jewelry for Macys, Bloomingdales and Juan Gabriel&#x27;s Funeral). 

====Athletes====
* Hugo Sánchez (Mexican football player, Real Madrid C.F., former Mexico national team and UD Almería manager)
* Daniel Vargas (Volleyball player and engineer, played for Pumas UNAM, and was part of Mexico men&#x27;s national volleyball team, where he played at the Olympic Games Rio 2016)
* René Ahumada (born 1935), Mexican Olympic sprinter
==See also==

* List of universities in Mexico
* DGSCA (Dirección General de Servicios de Cómputo Académico, Hub of Computer Sciences/Engineering in UNAM)
* XHUNAM-TV (&quot;Teveunam&quot;, UNAM&#x27;s educational and cultural television channel)
* &quot;Mexican Law Review&quot;

==References==
===Bibliography===
*Jiménez Rueda, Julio. &quot;Historia Jurídica de la Universidad de México.&quot; Mexico City: Imprenta Universitaria 1955.
*Mabry, Donald J. &quot;The Mexican University and the State.&quot; College Station: Texas A&amp;M Press 1982.
*Mayo, Sebastián, &quot;La educación socialista en México: El Asalto a la Universidad Nacional.&quot; Mexico: El Caballito 1985.
*Wences Reza, Rosalío, &quot;La Universidad en la historia de México.&quot; Mexico: Editorial Línea 1984.

==External links==

* official website (Spanish)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q222738" start="4" end="44" title="National Autonomous University of Mexico" label="National Autonomous University of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q222738" start="48" end="52" title="National Autonomous University of Mexico" label="UNAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q875538" start="59" end="65" title="public university" label="public"/>
<link wikidata="Q15936437" start="66" end="85" title="research university" label="research university"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="89" end="95" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="361" end="372" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="379" end="400" title="UNESCO World Heritage" label="UNESCO World Heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q8429" start="540" end="560" title="1968 Summer Olympics" label="1968 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q17006981" start="592" end="616" title="Mexican Movement of 1968" label="student movement of 1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q339619" start="630" end="645" title="Nobel laureates" label="Nobel laureates"/>
<link wikidata="Q329157" start="712" end="730" title="Princess of Asturias Awards" label="Prince of Asturias"/>
<link wikidata="Q2511268" start="940" end="952" title="Justo Sierra" label="Justo Sierra"/>
<link wikidata="Q372529" start="1002" end="1043" title="Royal and Pontifical University of Mexico" label="Royal and Pontifical University of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737908" start="1055" end="1079" title="Calmecac" label="Western-style university"/>
<link wikidata="Q2511268" start="1179" end="1191" title="Justo Sierra" label="Justo Sierra"/>
<link wikidata="Q150688" start="1227" end="1240" title="Porfirio Díaz" label="Porfirio Díaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q372529" start="1336" end="1377" title="Royal and Pontifical University of Mexico" label="Royal and Pontifical University of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q207293" start="1451" end="1463" title="Crown Prince" label="Crown Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q34417" start="1464" end="1474" title="Philip II of Spain" label="Phillip II"/>
<link wikidata="Q84192" start="1554" end="1576" title="Maximilian I of Mexico" label="Maximilian I of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1666" end="1687" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q131015" start="1980" end="1990" title="positivism" label="positivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q219625" start="2086" end="2095" title="Fine Arts" label="Fine Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4830453" start="2097" end="2105" title="Business" label="Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q36442" start="2107" end="2124" title="Political Science" label="Political Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932206" start="2126" end="2139" title="Jurisprudence" label="Jurisprudence"/>
<link wikidata="Q11023" start="2141" end="2152" title="Engineering" label="Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q11190" start="2154" end="2162" title="Medicine" label="Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q627006" start="2164" end="2170" title="Normal School" label="Normal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367381" start="2180" end="2200" title="Escuela Nacional Preparatoria" label="National Preparatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q212071" start="2220" end="2226" title="Rector (academia)" label="rector"/>
<link wikidata="Q214426" start="2330" end="2348" title="Mexican Revolution" label="Mexican Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6700395" start="2832" end="2851" title="Luis Cabrera Lobato" label="Luis Cabrera Lobato"/>
<link wikidata="Q2456057" start="2967" end="2985" title="Escuela Libre de Derecho" label="Free School of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091141" start="3065" end="3081" title="José Vasconcelos" label="José Vasconcelos"/>
<link wikidata="Q82601" start="3258" end="3274" title="Tierra del Fuego" label="Tierra del Fuego"/>
<link wikidata="Q750196" start="3796" end="3827" title="Secretariat of Public Education" label="Secretariat of Public Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378948" start="3983" end="4001" title="Manuel Gómez Morín" label="Manuel Gómez Morín"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="4220" end="4226" title="Jesuit" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067789" start="4927" end="4936" title="San Ángel" label="San Ángel"/>
<link wikidata="Q180958" start="5001" end="5008" title="Faculty (division)" label="faculty"/>
<link wikidata="Q315615" start="5056" end="5076" title="Miguel Alemán Valdés" label="Miguel Alemán Valdés"/>
<link wikidata="Q767558" start="5131" end="5157" title="University Olympic Stadium" label="University Olympic Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q8429" start="5871" end="5880" title="Mexico 68" label="Mexico 68"/>
<link wikidata="Q14623011" start="6385" end="6395" title="Tlatelolco (Mexico City)" label="Tlatelolco"/>
<link wikidata="Q909737" start="6451" end="6470" title="Tlatelolco massacre" label="Tlatelolco massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4595208" start="6908" end="6933" title="1999 UNAM strike" label="last major student strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="7086" end="7089" title="USD" label="US$"/>
<link wikidata="Q329157" start="7424" end="7448" title="Prince of Asturias Award" label="Prince of Asturias Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q661315" start="7938" end="7946" title="Coyoacán" label="Coyoacán"/>
<link wikidata="Q671960" start="8216" end="8226" title="Mario Pani" label="Mario Pani"/>
<link wikidata="Q254662" start="8251" end="8268" title="Enrique del Moral" label="Enrique del Moral"/>
<link wikidata="Q81322712" start="8270" end="8286" title="Eugenio Peschard" label="Eugenio Peschard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290371" start="8322" end="8342" title="Domingo García Ramos" label="Domingo García Ramos"/>
<link wikidata="Q767558" start="8652" end="8682" title="Estadio Olímpico Universitario" label="Estadio Olímpico Universitario"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061367" start="8765" end="8780" title="Central Library (UNAM)" label="Central Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q5495070" start="8786" end="8812" title="National Library of Mexico" label="National Library of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="8943" end="8954" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q130025" start="9175" end="9195" title="University City of Mexico" label="Ciudad Universitaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="9212" end="9218" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="9219" end="9238" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q665894" start="9351" end="9383" title="Greater Mexico City" label="Metropolitan Area of Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q173121" start="9501" end="9522" title="Santiago de Querétaro" label="Santiago de Querétaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q200252" start="9524" end="9531" title="Morelia" label="Morelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q165204" start="9533" end="9539" title="Mérida, Yucatán" label="Mérida"/>
<link wikidata="Q517463" start="9541" end="9546" title="Sisal, Yucatán" label="Sisal"/>
<link wikidata="Q656189" start="9548" end="9556" title="Ensenada, Baja California" label="Ensenada"/>
<link wikidata="Q204245" start="9558" end="9568" title="Cuernavaca, Morelos" label="Cuernavaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q602729" start="9570" end="9577" title="Temixco, Morelos" label="Temixco"/>
<link wikidata="Q189128" start="9582" end="9586" title="Leon, Guanajuato" label="Leon"/>
<link wikidata="Q785318" start="9941" end="9948" title="Polanco, Mexico City" label="Polanco"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="10169" end="10187" title="San Antonio, Texas" label="San Antonio, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="10194" end="10217" title="Los Angeles, California" label="Los Angeles, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="10224" end="10241" title="Chicago, Illinois" label="Chicago, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q141844" start="10243" end="10251" title="Gatineau" label="Gatineau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144682" start="10405" end="10439" title="Beijing Foreign Studies University" label="Beijing Foreign Studies University"/>
<link wikidata="Q165715" start="10474" end="10493" title="Cervantes Institute" label="Cervantes Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305486" start="10535" end="10559" title="University of Costa Rica" label="University of Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q245247" start="10591" end="10617" title="King&amp;#x27;s College London" label="King&amp;#x27;s College London"/>
<link wikidata="Q546118" start="10648" end="10673" title="Paris-Sorbonne University" label="Paris-Sorbonne University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026939" start="10732" end="10770" title="California State University Northridge" label="California State University Northridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428960" start="10864" end="10891" title="School of Engineering, UNAM" label="School of Engineering, UNAM"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11791" end="11842" title=":es:Feria Internacional del Libro del Palacio de Miner%C3%ADa" label="Feria Internacional del Libro de Palacio de Mineria"/>
<link wikidata="Q523194" start="11975" end="11991" title="Chapultepec" label="Chapultepec Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q170419" start="12243" end="12254" title="Carlos Slim" label="Carlos Slim"/>
<link wikidata="Q938864" start="12482" end="12498" title="Mexican Muralism" label="Mexican muralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="12546" end="12552" title="Jesuit" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091916" start="12584" end="12594" title="Reform War" label="Reform War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367381" start="12636" end="12663" title="Escuela Nacional Preparatoria" label="National Preparatory School"/>
<link wikidata="Q332041" start="13089" end="13109" title="José Clemente Orozco" label="José Clemente Orozco"/>
<link wikidata="Q171128" start="13111" end="13123" title="Diego Rivera" label="Diego Rivera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2146288" start="13219" end="13234" title="Centro (Mexico City)" label="historic center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="13238" end="13249" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q20882" start="13401" end="13415" title="Gustave Eiffel" label="Gustave Eiffel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6940503" start="13560" end="13587" title="National Museum of Cultures" label="National Museum of Cultures"/>
<link wikidata="Q64487" start="13840" end="13855" title="Mathias Goeritz" label="Mathias Goeritz"/>
<link wikidata="Q243295" start="13944" end="13957" title="Luis Barragán" label="Luis Barragán"/>
<link wikidata="Q372185" start="14302" end="14325" title="Sierra San Pedro Mártir" label="Sierra San Pedro Mártir"/>
<link wikidata="Q58731" start="14344" end="14359" title="Baja California" label="Baja California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057263" start="14383" end="14411" title="United States-Mexican border" label="United States-Mexican border"/>
<link wikidata="Q180958" start="14541" end="14560" title="Faculty (division)" label="schools or colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467461" start="14574" end="14585" title="Academic department" label="departments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430192" start="14592" end="14605" title="undergraduate" label="undergraduate"/>
<link wikidata="Q141212" start="14610" end="14618" title="Postgraduate education" label="graduate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367381" start="14675" end="14704" title="Escuela Nacional Preparatoria" label="Escuela Nacional Preparatoria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14750" end="14783" title="Colegio de Ciencias y Humanidades" label="Colegio de Ciencias y Humanidades"/>
<link wikidata="Q121116229" start="14849" end="14860" title="High school (upper secondary)" label="high school"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="14866" end="14877" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14938" end="14954" title="Secondary education#Mexico" label="higher-secondary"/>
<link wikidata="Q17098461" start="15046" end="15079" title="world&amp;#x27;s largest universities" label="world&amp;#x27;s largest universities"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15517" end="15558" title="National School of Nursing and Obstetrics" label="National School of Nursing and Obstetrics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15568" end="15598" title="National School of Social Work" label="National School of Social Work"/>
<link wikidata="Q5854807" start="15709" end="15748" title="School of Accounting and Administration, UNAM" label="School of Accounting and Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428908" start="15752" end="15774" title="School of Architecture, UNAM" label="School of Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15778" end="15803" title="School of Arts and Design, UNAM" label="School of Arts and Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q8960741" start="15807" end="15826" title="School of Chemistry, UNAM" label="School of Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428940" start="15830" end="15849" title="School of Economics, UNAM" label="School of Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428960" start="15853" end="15874" title="School of Engineering, UNAM" label="School of Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15878" end="15914" title="School of High Studies (FES) Acatlán" label="School of High Studies (FES) Acatlán"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15918" end="15953" title="School of High Studies (FES) Aragón" label="School of High Studies (FES) Aragón"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15957" end="15996" title="School of High Studies (FES) Cuautitlán" label="School of High Studies (FES) Cuautitlán"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16000" end="16037" title="School of High Studies (FES) Iztacala" label="School of High Studies (FES) Iztacala"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16041" end="16078" title="School of High Studies (FES) Zaragoza" label="School of High Studies (FES) Zaragoza"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16082" end="16095" title="School of Law, UNAM" label="School of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918474" start="16099" end="16117" title="School of Medicine, UNAM" label="School of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16121" end="16136" title="School of Music, UNAM" label="School of Music"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16140" end="16160" title="School of Odontology, UNAM" label="School of Odontology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367388" start="16164" end="16196" title="School of Philosophy and Letters, UNAM" label="School of Philosophy and Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064315" start="16200" end="16239" title="School of Political and Social Sciences, UNAM" label="School of Political and Social Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16243" end="16263" title="School of Psychology, UNAM" label="School of Psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5429070" start="16267" end="16285" title="School of Sciences, UNAM" label="School of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16289" end="16339" title="School of Veterinarian Medicine, UNAM" label="School of Veterinarian Medicine and Animal Science"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16396" end="16435" title="National School of Cinematographic Arts" label="National School of Cinematographic Arts"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16439" end="16472" title="National School of Earth Sciences" label="National School of Earth Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16476" end="16533" title="National School of Languages, Linguistics and Translation" label="National School of Languages, Linguistics and Translation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16537" end="16578" title="National School of Nursing and Obstetrics" label="National School of Nursing and Obstetrics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16582" end="16612" title="National School of Social Work" label="National School of Social Work"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367381" start="16616" end="16643" title="National Preparatory School" label="National Preparatory School"/>
<link wikidata="Q200252" start="16701" end="16708" title="Morelia" label="Morelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q79861" start="16726" end="16735" title="Michoacan" label="Michoacan"/>
<link wikidata="Q46475" start="16794" end="16804" title="Guanajuato" label="Guanajuato"/>
<link wikidata="Q17073865" start="19869" end="19919" title="IIMAS" label="Applied Mathematics and Systems Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q11468" start="20197" end="20208" title="nanoscience" label="nanoscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q12705" start="20283" end="20303" title="Alternative energy" label="alternative energies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="20729" end="20737" title="Association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143000" start="20744" end="20769" title="Club Universidad Nacional" label="Club Universidad Nacional"/>
<link wikidata="Q764690" start="20787" end="20794" title="Liga MX" label="Liga MX"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20888" end="20896" title="Torneo de Apertura" label="Apertura"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20906" end="20914" title="Torneo de Clausura" label="Clausura"/>
<link wikidata="Q767558" start="20949" end="20979" title="Estadio Olímpico Universitario" label="Estadio Olímpico Universitario"/>
<link wikidata="Q7259780" start="21015" end="21023" title="Pumas CU" label="Pumas CU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109032" start="21043" end="21059" title="college football" label="college football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539696" start="21187" end="21217" title="National Polytechnic Institute" label="National Polytechnic Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q8076596" start="21252" end="21267" title="Águilas Blancas" label="Águilas Blancas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091141" start="21742" end="21758" title="José Vasconcelos" label="José Vasconcelos"/>
<link wikidata="Q41181" start="22166" end="22179" title="American golden eagle" label="Mexican eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q170598" start="22187" end="22200" title="Andean condor" label="Andean condor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22300" end="22333" title="Tenochtitlan#History" label="foundational myth of Tenochtitlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="22384" end="22397" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091141" start="22861" end="22877" title="José Vasconcelos" label="José Vasconcelos"/>
<link wikidata="Q214426" start="23006" end="23024" title="Mexican Revolution" label="Mexican Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="24394" end="24406" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="24473" end="24481" title="Association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q309256" start="24577" end="24592" title="Day of the Dead" label="Day of the Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q130025" start="24662" end="24682" title="University City of Mexico" label="Ciudad Universitaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q188670" start="25125" end="25142" title="Anarcho-communism" label="anarcho-communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2511268" start="25191" end="25203" title="Justo Sierra" label="Justo Sierra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5809" start="25230" end="25241" title="Che Guevara" label="Che Guevara"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="25305" end="25314" title="left-wing" label="left-wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q76074" start="25402" end="25412" title="right-wing" label="right-wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q162719" start="25417" end="25427" title="neoliberal" label="neoliberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q315633" start="25475" end="25500" title="Carlos Salinas de Gortari" label="Carlos Salinas de Gortari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378948" start="25518" end="25536" title="Manuel Gómez Morín" label="Manuel Gómez Morín"/>
<link wikidata="Q170419" start="25549" end="25560" title="Carlos Slim" label="Carlos Slim"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26078" end="26092" title="Fundación UNAM" label="Fundación UNAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7024218" start="26095" end="26122" title="Nibiru Sociedad Astronomica" label="Nibiru Sociedad Astronomica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26125" end="26130" title="Faculty of Engineering (UNAM)#Student organizations" label="SAFIR"/>
<link wikidata="Q203843" start="26242" end="26263" title="Alfonso García Robles" label="Alfonso García Robles"/>
<link wikidata="Q35637" start="26276" end="26293" title="Nobel Peace Prize" label="Nobel Peace Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q46739" start="26302" end="26313" title="Octavio Paz" label="Octavio Paz"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="26326" end="26351" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel Prize in Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q19045" start="26360" end="26372" title="Mario Molina" label="Mario Molina"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="26385" end="26409" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q35637" start="26475" end="26492" title="Nobel Peace Prize" label="Nobel Peace Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q4750428" start="26494" end="26509" title="Ana María Cetto" label="Ana María Cetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q381282" start="26560" end="26578" title="Pugwash Conferences on Science and World Affairs" label="Pugwash Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q41984" start="26584" end="26618" title="International Atomic Energy Agency" label="International Atomic Energy Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q171183" start="26627" end="26668" title="Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change" label="Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change"/>
<link wikidata="" start="26707" end="26779" title=":Category:Academic staff of the National Autonomous University of Mexico" label=":Category:Academic staff of the National Autonomous University of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056796" start="26788" end="26805" title="Miguel Alcubierre" label="Miguel Alcubierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5515565" start="26831" end="26853" title="Gabriel Careaga Medina" label="Gabriel Careaga Medina"/>
<link wikidata="Q16979775" start="26870" end="26897" title="María Leoba Castañeda Rivas" label="Maria Leoba Castañeda Rivas"/>
<link wikidata="Q87075" start="26909" end="26918" title="Max Cetto" label="Max Cetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q18977855" start="26932" end="26944" title="Mónica Clapp" label="Mónica Clapp"/>
<link wikidata="Q4714507" start="26962" end="26979" title="Alejandro Corichi" label="Alejandro Corichi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5927621" start="26998" end="27018" title="Javier Corral Jurado" label="Javier Corral Jurado"/>
<link wikidata="Q18685657" start="27033" end="27050" title="Jesús A. De Loera" label="Jesús A. De Loera"/>
<link wikidata="Q57085" start="27068" end="27079" title="Erich Fromm" label="Erich Fromm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2163832" start="27113" end="27125" title="Adolfo Gilly" label="Adolfo Gilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q723981" start="27139" end="27163" title="Teodoro González de León" label="Teodoro González de León"/>
<link wikidata="Q1909814" start="27177" end="27198" title="Jorge González Torres" label="Jorge González Torres"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774796" start="27213" end="27222" title="José Gaos" label="José Gaos"/>
<link wikidata="Q30900482" start="27238" end="27260" title="Laura Hernández Guzmán" label="Laura Hernández Guzmán"/>
<link wikidata="Q20995118" start="27277" end="27299" title="Isabel Hubard Escalera" label="Isabel Hubard Escalera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357872" start="27317" end="27336" title="José Miguel Insulza" label="José Miguel Insulza"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="27340" end="27345" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q123759" start="27377" end="27408" title="Organization of American States" label="Organization of American States"/>
<link wikidata="Q64274" start="27411" end="27425" title="Paul Kirchhoff" label="Paul Kirchhoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370686" start="27463" end="27475" title="Larry Laudan" label="Larry Laudan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27491" end="27509" title="Juan Carlos Laguna" label="Juan Carlos Laguna"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242500" start="27531" end="27543" title="Enrique Leff" label="Enrique Leff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449906" start="27581" end="27601" title="Miguel León-Portilla" label="Miguel León-Portilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q20885652" start="27647" end="27659" title="Florian Luca" label="Florian Luca"/>
<link wikidata="Q17285575" start="27677" end="27693" title="Rodrigo Medellín" label="Rodrigo Medellín"/>
<link wikidata="Q704639" start="27707" end="27724" title="Rodolfo Neri Vela" label="Rodolfo Neri Vela"/>
<link wikidata="Q2109245" start="27738" end="27759" title="Edmundo O&amp;#x27;Gorman" label="Edmundo O&amp;#x27;Gorman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6419162" start="27784" end="27794" title="Kiyoto Ota" label="Kiyoto Ota"/>
<link wikidata="Q16599489" start="27807" end="27821" title="Margarita Peña" label="Margarita Peña"/>
<link wikidata="Q121729" start="27854" end="27872" title="Arturo Rosenblueth" label="Arturo Rosenblueth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5883996" start="27889" end="27906" title="Graciela Salicrup" label="Graciela Salicrup"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27965" end="27987" title="Juan José Sánchez Sosa" label="Juan José Sánchez Sosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q365193" start="28004" end="28026" title="Adolfo Sánchez Vázquez" label="Adolfo Sánchez Vázquez"/>
<link wikidata="Q6752867" start="28057" end="28081" title="Manuel Sandoval Vallarta" label="Manuel Sandoval Vallarta"/>
<link wikidata="Q11547" start="28097" end="28107" title="cosmic ray" label="cosmic ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q7421766" start="28121" end="28136" title="Sara Sefchovich" label="Sara Sefchovich"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28147" end="28159" title="Jesus Savage" label="Jesus Savage"/>
<link wikidata="Q823046" start="28232" end="28255" title="Bernardo Sepúlveda Amor" label="Bernardo Sepúlveda Amor"/>
<link wikidata="Q170419" start="28265" end="28276" title="Carlos Slim" label="Carlos Slim"/>
<link wikidata="Q493078" start="28305" end="28332" title="Forbes list of billionaires" label="richest people in the world"/>
<link wikidata="" start="28364" end="28421" title=":Category:National Autonomous University of Mexico alumni" label=":Category:National Autonomous University of Mexico alumni"/>
<link wikidata="Q217794" start="28454" end="28466" title="Abel Pacheco" label="Abel Pacheco"/>
<link wikidata="Q800" start="28481" end="28491" title="Costa Rica" label="Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q335533" start="28505" end="28524" title="Adolfo López Mateos" label="Adolfo López Mateos"/>
<link wikidata="Q182441" start="28559" end="28575" title="Alfonso Portillo" label="Alfonso Portillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q774" start="28590" end="28599" title="Guatemala" label="Guatemala"/>
<link wikidata="Q315633" start="28613" end="28638" title="Carlos Salinas de Gortari" label="Carlos Salinas de Gortari"/>
<link wikidata="Q315613" start="28673" end="28702" title="José López Portillo y Pacheco" label="José López Portillo y Pacheco"/>
<link wikidata="Q317681" start="28737" end="28752" title="Luis Echeverría" label="Luis Echeverría"/>
<link wikidata="Q315615" start="28787" end="28807" title="Miguel Alemán Valdés" label="Miguel Alemán Valdés"/>
<link wikidata="Q296691" start="28842" end="28869" title="Miguel de la Madrid Hurtado" label="Miguel de la Madrid Hurtado"/>
<link wikidata="Q318508" start="28904" end="28931" title="Andrés Manuel López Obrador" label="Andrés Manuel López Obrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q5771800" start="29006" end="29023" title="Claudia Sheinbaum" label="Claudia Sheinbaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q901" start="29025" end="29034" title="scientist" label="scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q628004" start="29058" end="29077" title="President of Mexico" label="President of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q217794" start="29115" end="29127" title="Abel Pacheco" label="Abel Pacheco"/>
<link wikidata="Q800" start="29142" end="29152" title="Costa Rica" label="Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994957" start="29156" end="29169" title="Alan Cranston" label="Alan Cranston"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="29171" end="29199" title="United States Senate" label="U.S. Senator from California"/>
<link wikidata="Q250993" start="29216" end="29236" title="Álvaro García Linera" label="Álvaro García Linera"/>
<link wikidata="Q750" start="29256" end="29263" title="Bolivia" label="Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q592222" start="29284" end="29301" title="Alejandro Encinas" label="Alejandro Encinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2073431" start="29327" end="29350" title="Antonio Carrillo Flores" label="Antonio Carrillo Flores"/>
<link wikidata="Q5042373" start="29420" end="29440" title="Carlos Mendoza Davis" label="Carlos Mendoza Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5444604" start="29477" end="29500" title="Fernando Baeza Melendez" label="Fernando Baeza Melendez"/>
<link wikidata="Q6700604" start="29539" end="29555" title="Luis Félix López" label="Luis Félix López"/>
<link wikidata="Q736" start="29584" end="29591" title="Ecuador" label="Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355497" start="29595" end="29624" title="Manlio Fabio Beltrones Rivera" label="Manlio Fabio Beltrones Rivera"/>
<link wikidata="Q195398" start="29668" end="29688" title="Miguel Ángel Mancera" label="Miguel Ángel Mancera"/>
<link wikidata="Q339046" start="29714" end="29723" title="Mark Kirk" label="Mark Kirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="29725" end="29751" title="United States Senate" label="U.S. Senator from Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737753" start="29772" end="29786" title="Rosario Robles" label="Rosario Robles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2241589" start="29859" end="29873" title="Santiago Creel" label="Santiago Creel"/>
<link wikidata="Q681897" start="29886" end="29898" title="Veton Surroi" label="Veton Surroi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246" start="29900" end="29906" title="Kosovo" label="Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264634" start="29949" end="29952" title="Reformist Party ORA" label="ORA"/>
<link wikidata="Q65430971" start="29956" end="29970" title="Xóchitl Gálvez" label="Xóchitl Gálvez"/>
<link wikidata="Q2073431" start="30045" end="30068" title="Antonio Carrillo Flores" label="Antonio Carrillo Flores"/>
<link wikidata="Q7444306" start="30070" end="30105" title="Secretary of Foreign Affairs (Mexico)" label="Ministry of Mexican Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q315637" start="30117" end="30127" title="Gustavo Díaz Ordaz" label="Díaz Ordaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q553110" start="30146" end="30164" title="Jaime Torres Bodet" label="Jaime Torres Bodet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="30189" end="30195" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q973929" start="30228" end="30243" title="Narciso Bassols" label="Narciso Bassols"/>
<link wikidata="Q30068236" start="30349" end="30375" title="Norma Lucía Piña Hernández" label="Norma Lucía Piña Hernández"/>
<link wikidata="Q130925" start="30404" end="30442" title="Supreme Court of Justice of the Nation" label="Supreme Court of Justice of the Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q24668917" start="30462" end="30489" title="Marco Antonio Garcia Blanco" label="Marco Antonio Garcia Blanco"/>
<link wikidata="Q162130" start="30526" end="30539" title="Rosario Green" label="Rosario Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q7444306" start="30541" end="30576" title="Secretary of Foreign Affairs (Mexico)" label="Ministry of Mexican Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q298149" start="30588" end="30595" title="Ernesto Zedillo" label="Zedillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668821" start="30656" end="30676" title="Abraham Cruzvillegas" label="Abraham Cruzvillegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q365193" start="30688" end="30710" title="Adolfo Sánchez Vázquez" label="Adolfo Sánchez Vázquez"/>
<link wikidata="Q399294" start="30738" end="30759" title="Agustín Landa Verdugo" label="Agustín Landa Verdugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4714658" start="30792" end="30807" title="Alejandro Rossi" label="Alejandro Rossi"/>
<link wikidata="Q28028" start="30835" end="30849" title="Alfonso Cuarón" label="Alfonso Cuarón"/>
<link wikidata="Q203843" start="30868" end="30889" title="Alfonso García Robles" label="Alfonso García Robles"/>
<link wikidata="Q462721" start="30903" end="30916" title="Alfonso Reyes" label="Alfonso Reyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290547" start="30942" end="30954" title="Ana Colchero" label="Ana Colchero"/>
<link wikidata="Q2884663" start="30967" end="30982" title="Mercedes Durand" label="Mercedes Durand"/>
<link wikidata="Q65547525" start="31007" end="31023" title="Adelina Nicholls" label="Adelina Nicholls"/>
<link wikidata="Q463319" start="31037" end="31048" title="Audre Lorde" label="Audre Lorde"/>
<link wikidata="Q68635218" start="31079" end="31093" title="Emiliano Monge" label="Emiliano Monge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4830857" start="31096" end="31107" title="Ayako Tsuru" label="Ayako Tsuru"/>
<link wikidata="Q891708" start="31125" end="31143" title="Bolívar Echeverría" label="Bolívar Echeverría"/>
<link wikidata="Q154691" start="31160" end="31174" title="Carlos Fuentes" label="Carlos Fuentes"/>
<link wikidata="Q522579" start="31188" end="31204" title="Carlos Monsiváis" label="Carlos Monsiváis"/>
<link wikidata="Q526297" start="31233" end="31249" title="Carmen Aristegui" label="Carmen Aristegui"/>
<link wikidata="Q555578" start="31265" end="31275" title="Chespirito" label="Chespirito"/>
<link wikidata="Q261397" start="31293" end="31310" title="Elena Poniatowska" label="Elena Poniatowska"/>
<link wikidata="Q557774" start="31337" end="31354" title="Fernando del Paso" label="Fernando del Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q5483562" start="31366" end="31389" title="Francisco Laguna Correa" label="Francisco Laguna Correa"/>
<link wikidata="Q219124" start="31401" end="31419" title="Guillermo del Toro" label="Guillermo del Toro"/>
<link wikidata="Q77595" start="31453" end="31473" title="Horst Matthai Quelle" label="Horst Matthai Quelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677736" start="31490" end="31508" title="Jacobo Zabludovsky" label="Jacobo Zabludovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636607" start="31535" end="31548" title="Jaime Maussan" label="Jaime Maussan"/>
<link wikidata="Q972553" start="31576" end="31592" title="Javier Solorzano" label="Javier Solorzano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376498" start="31608" end="31619" title="Jorge Volpi" label="Jorge Volpi"/>
<link wikidata="Q561833" start="31646" end="31665" title="José Emilio Pacheco" label="José Emilio Pacheco"/>
<link wikidata="Q5936655" start="31677" end="31692" title="Josefina Muriel" label="Josefina Muriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q722627" start="31709" end="31729" title="Juan García Esquivel" label="Juan García Esquivel"/>
<link wikidata="Q200661" start="31743" end="31753" title="Juan Rulfo" label="Juan Rulfo"/>
<link wikidata="Q346908" start="31765" end="31778" title="Julio Estrada (musicologist)" label="Julio Estrada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1791061" start="31796" end="31816" title="Julio Scherer García" label="Julio Scherer García"/>
<link wikidata="Q6001168" start="31843" end="31856" title="Ilse Gradwohl" label="Ilse Gradwohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q17198321" start="31869" end="31890" title="Marcela Del Río Reyes" label="Marcela Del Río Reyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q16599489" start="31915" end="31929" title="Margarita Peña" label="Margarita Peña"/>
<link wikidata="Q6968191" start="31954" end="31972" title="Natalie Korneitsik" label="Natalie Korneitsik"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296029" start="31999" end="32013" title="Maruxa Vilalta" label="Maruxa Vilalta"/>
<link wikidata="Q46739" start="32028" end="32039" title="Octavio Paz" label="Octavio Paz"/>
<link wikidata="Q19559939" start="32062" end="32080" title="Pola Weiss Álvarez" label="Pola Weiss Álvarez"/>
<link wikidata="Q732502" start="32098" end="32115" title="Ricardo Legorreta" label="Ricardo Legorreta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3442073" start="32140" end="32152" title="Rosa Beltrán" label="Rosa Beltrán"/>
<link wikidata="Q260862" start="32187" end="32206" title="Rosario Castellanos" label="Rosario Castellanos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060957" start="32261" end="32278" title="Salvador Elizondo" label="Salvador Elizondo"/>
<link wikidata="Q491635" start="32290" end="32310" title="Subcomandante Marcos" label="Subcomandante Marcos"/>
<link wikidata="Q6141629" start="32327" end="32340" title="Tenoch Huerta" label="Tenoch Huerta"/>
<link wikidata="Q723981" start="32351" end="32375" title="Teodoro González de León" label="Teodoro González de León"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256457" start="32390" end="32405" title="Veronica Castro" label="Veronica Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q17632634" start="32421" end="32438" title="Victoria Espinosa" label="Victoria Espinosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q378098" start="32483" end="32501" title="William F. Buckley" label="William F. Buckley"/>
<link wikidata="Q50377043" start="32539" end="32550" title="Yael Bitrán" label="Yael Bitrán"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867273" start="32580" end="32602" title="David Camorlinga Tagle" label="David Camorlinga Tagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q23907152" start="32616" end="32642" title="Yan María Yaoyólotl Castro" label="Yan María Yaoyólotl Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q94440576" start="32697" end="32726" title="Celia Mercedes Alpuche Aranda" label="Celia Mercedes Alpuche Aranda"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32812" end="32841" title="Carlos Fernández del Castillo" label="Carlos Fernández del Castillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130407" start="32857" end="32875" title="pancreatic disease" label="pancreatic disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275614" start="32904" end="32928" title="gastrointestinal surgery" label="gastrointestinal surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q126412" start="32932" end="32962" title="Massachusetts General Hospital" label="Massachusetts General Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5444595" start="32971" end="33002" title="Fernando Antonio Bermúdez Arias" label="Fernando Antonio Bermúdez Arias"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647071" start="33108" end="33122" title="Ignacio Chávez Sánchez" label="Ignacio Chávez"/>
<link wikidata="Q10379" start="33171" end="33181" title="cardiology" label="cardiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6277787" start="33494" end="33515" title="Jorge Calles-Escandón" label="Jorge Calles-Escandón"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33550" end="33564" title="thyroid biopsy" label="thyroid biopsy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33566" end="33581" title="type 1 diabetes" label="type 1 diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33583" end="33598" title="type 2 diabetes" label="type 2 diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q941674" start="33604" end="33616" title="insulin pump" label="insulin pump"/>
<link wikidata="Q7960909" start="33621" end="33655" title="Wake Forest Baptist Medical Center" label="Wake Forest Baptist Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5234957" start="33663" end="33675" title="David Herzog" label="David Herzog"/>
<link wikidata="Q49121" start="33740" end="33762" title="Harvard Medical School" label="Harvard Medical School"/>
<link wikidata="Q23806352" start="33764" end="33779" title="Alberto P. León" label="Alberto P. León"/>
<link wikidata="Q90909483" start="33839" end="33864" title="Alethse de la Torre Rosas" label="Alethse de la Torre Rosas"/>
<link wikidata="Q21011179" start="33985" end="34008" title="Gerardo Jiménez Sánchez" label="Gerardo Jiménez Sánchez"/>
<link wikidata="Q88971056" start="34088" end="34102" title="Mauricio Tohen" label="Mauricio Tohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q457967" start="34233" end="34244" title="Nora Volkow" label="Nora Volkow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973751" start="34262" end="34294" title="National Institute of Drug Abuse" label="National Institute of Drug Abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q117470157" start="34297" end="34322" title="Leopoldo Salazar Viniegra" label="Leopoldo Salazar Viniegra"/>
<link wikidata="Q105825961" start="34368" end="34389" title="Ángela Alessio Robles" label="Ángela Alessio Robles"/>
<link wikidata="Q13582652" start="34391" end="34405" title="civil engineer" label="civil engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q596792" start="34426" end="34448" title="Alfonso Caso y Andrade" label="Alfonso Caso y Andrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q602805" start="34467" end="34482" title="Antonio Lazcano" label="Antonio Lazcano"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34524" end="34573" title="The Lynn Margulis Centre for Evolutionary Biology" label="The Lynn Margulis Centre for Evolutionary Biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042912" start="34577" end="34589" title="Carlos Frenk" label="Carlos Frenk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163877" start="34657" end="34682" title="Constantino Reyes-Valerio" label="Constantino Reyes-Valerio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6025696" start="34737" end="34750" title="indocristiano" label="indocristiano"/>
<link wikidata="Q901499" start="34811" end="34820" title="Maya blue" label="Maya blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5340723" start="34832" end="34854" title="Eduardo Pareyón Moreno" label="Eduardo Pareyón Moreno"/>
<link wikidata="Q517271" start="34873" end="34884" title="Guido Münch" label="Guido Münch"/>
<link wikidata="Q209610" start="34917" end="34951" title="Max Planck Institute for Astronomy" label="Max Planck Institute for Astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q710627" start="34955" end="34969" title="Guillermo Haro" label="Guillermo Haro"/>
<link wikidata="Q50048" start="35000" end="35019" title="Herbig–Haro object" label="Herbig–Haro objects"/>
<link wikidata="Q88144183" start="35023" end="35039" title="Guillermo Oliver" label="Guillermo Oliver"/>
<link wikidata="Q309350" start="35068" end="35091" title="Northwestern University" label="Northwestern University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4178628" start="35095" end="35110" title="Jerzy Rzedowski" label="Jerzy Rzedowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372905" start="35165" end="35175" title="floristics" label="floristics"/>
<link wikidata="Q42056171" start="35179" end="35195" title="Juan J. de Pablo" label="Juan J. de Pablo"/>
<link wikidata="Q535388" start="35346" end="35364" title="Luis E. Miramontes" label="Luis E. Miramontes"/>
<link wikidata="Q571605" start="35407" end="35423" title="Marcos Moshinsky" label="Marcos Moshinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q329157" start="35508" end="35532" title="Princess of Asturias Awards" label="Prince of Asturias Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q19045" start="35608" end="35620" title="Mario Molina" label="Mario Molina"/>
<link wikidata="Q183140" start="35639" end="35661" title="Ozone depletion" label="decomposition of ozone"/>
<link wikidata="Q960800" start="35667" end="35670" title="Chlorofluorocarbon" label="CFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q104541" start="35671" end="35678" title="aerosol" label="aerosol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35681" end="35708" title="List of Nobel laureates in Chemistry#Laureates" label="Nobel laureate in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056796" start="35712" end="35729" title="Miguel Alcubierre" label="Miguel Alcubierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q169890" start="35776" end="35793" title="Alcubierre metric" label="Alcubierre metric"/>
<link wikidata="Q62849" start="35797" end="35812" title="Miguel de Icaza" label="Miguel de Icaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q44316" start="35854" end="35859" title="GNOME" label="GNOME"/>
<link wikidata="Q15995378" start="35863" end="35887" title="Monica Olvera de la Cruz" label="Monica Olvera de la Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1962056" start="35913" end="35934" title="Nabor Carrillo Flores" label="Nabor Carrillo Flores"/>
<link wikidata="Q975033" start="36018" end="36032" title="Ricardo Miledi" label="Ricardo Miledi"/>
<link wikidata="Q704639" start="36115" end="36132" title="Rodolfo Neri Vela" label="Rodolfo Neri Vela"/>
<link wikidata="Q279209" start="36164" end="36180" title="Salvador Zubirán" label="Salvador Zubirán"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973680" start="36208" end="36239" title="National Institute of Nutrition" label="National Institute of Nutrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q28543624" start="36243" end="36258" title="Shlomo Eckstein" label="Shlomo Eckstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124657" start="36287" end="36306" title="Bar-Ilan University" label="Bar-Ilan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4795076" start="36310" end="36332" title="Susana López Charretón" label="Susana López Charretón"/>
<link wikidata="Q7944699" start="36363" end="36382" title="Víctor Neumann-Lara" label="Víctor Neumann-Lara"/>
<link wikidata="Q131476" start="36395" end="36407" title="graph theory" label="graph theory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36411" end="36433" title="Yair Israel Piña López" label="Yair Israel Piña López"/>
<link wikidata="Q170419" start="36490" end="36501" title="Carlos Slim" label="Carlos Slim"/>
<link wikidata="Q493078" start="36609" end="36643" title="Forbes list of billionaires" label="fourth richest person in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q555810" start="36647" end="36664" title="Alfredo Harp Helú" label="Alfredo Harp Helú"/>
<link wikidata="Q16799549" start="36724" end="36738" title="Latin American" label="Latin American"/>
<link wikidata="Q22687" start="36739" end="36743" title="bank" label="bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q749474" start="36745" end="36752" title="Banamex" label="Banamex"/>
<link wikidata="Q5379858" start="36757" end="36777" title="Enrique de la Madrid Cordero" label="Enrique de la Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q190464" start="36874" end="36878" title="HSBC" label="HSBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378948" start="36888" end="36906" title="Manuel Gómez Morín" label="Manuel Gómez Morin"/>
<link wikidata="Q806208" start="36991" end="37005" title="Bank of Mexico" label="Bank of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q4801727" start="37010" end="37027" title="Arturo Elías Ayub" label="Arturo Elías Ayub"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143000" start="37062" end="37072" title="Club Universidad Nacional" label="UNAM Pumas"/>
<link wikidata="" start="37089" end="37102" title=":es:Grupo_Riobóo" label="Riobóo Martín"/>
<link wikidata="" start="37152" end="37170" title=":es:Grupo_Riobóo" label="Grupo Riobóo&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="37234" end="37245" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524795" start="37309" end="37345" title="Gimnasio Olímpico Juan de la Barrera" label="Gimnasio Olímpico Juan de la Barrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484285" start="37377" end="37411" title="Alberca Olímpica Francisco Márquez" label="Alberca Olímpica Francisco Márquez"/>
<link wikidata="Q301937" start="37451" end="37474" title="Palacio de los Deportes" label="Palacio de los Deportes"/>
<link wikidata="Q487907" start="37593" end="37608" title="Bank of America" label="Bank of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253869" start="37623" end="37637" title="Delia Gonzalez" label="Delia González"/>
<link wikidata="Q629269" start="37752" end="37757" title="Macy&amp;#x27;s" label="Macys"/>
<link wikidata="Q283383" start="37759" end="37772" title="Bloomingdale&amp;#x27;s" label="Bloomingdales"/>
<link wikidata="Q738404" start="37777" end="37789" title="Juan Gabriel" label="Juan Gabriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q487155" start="37828" end="37840" title="Hugo Sánchez" label="Hugo Sánchez"/>
<link wikidata="Q8682" start="37867" end="37883" title="Real Madrid C.F." label="Real Madrid C.F."/>
<link wikidata="Q164089" start="37892" end="37912" title="Mexico national football team" label="Mexico national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q10407" start="37917" end="37927" title="UD Almería" label="UD Almería"/>
<link wikidata="Q21285636" start="37939" end="37952" title="Daniel Vargas (volleyball)" label="Daniel Vargas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143000" start="37997" end="38007" title="Pumas UNAM" label="Pumas UNAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q772078" start="38025" end="38067" title="Mexico men&amp;#x27;s national volleyball team" label="Mexico men&amp;#x27;s national volleyball team"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="38092" end="38105" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q8613" start="38106" end="38114" title="2016 Summer Olympics" label="Rio 2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q30253181" start="38118" end="38130" title="René Ahumada" label="René Ahumada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853351" start="38185" end="38215" title="List of universities in Mexico" label="List of universities in Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q5204973" start="38218" end="38223" title="DGSCA" label="DGSCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5846104" start="38326" end="38335" title="XHUNAM-TV" label="XHUNAM-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q15733705" start="38424" end="38442" title="Mexican Law Review" label="Mexican Law Review"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="145427" wikidata="Q2361509" url="?curid=145427" title="Phantasy Star (video game)">
<text>is a role-playing video game (RPG) developed by Sega and released for the Master System in 1987. One of the earliest Japanese RPGs for consoles, &quot;Phantasy Star&quot; tells the story of Alis on her journey to defeat the evil ruler of her star system, King Lassic, after her brother dies at his hands. She traverses between planets, gathering a party of fighters and collecting the items she needs to avenge her brother&#x27;s death and return peace to the star system. The gameplay features traditional Japanese RPG elements including random encounters and experience points. All the characters have predefined personalities and abilities, a unique element compared to the customizable characters of other RPGs of the era.

Sega launched the development of &quot;Phantasy Star&quot; so their Master System could compete with the burgeoning popularity of console RPGs, particularly &quot;Dragon Quest&quot; (1986) on the Famicom. Designer Kotaro Hayashida and programmer Yuji Naka formed a team, staffed by a large number of women for the time, including graphic designer Rieko Kodama. The team wanted &quot;Phantasy Star&quot; to be a unique RPG experience, so they added elements like 3D dungeon crawling, a female protagonist, and ample animation. The game&#x27;s setting was a fusion between medieval fantasy and science fiction, an idea inspired by &quot;Star Wars&quot;. The team had to use several techniques to fit all their content on a four megabit cartridge, a large game size for the time.

The game was released for the Master System two days after &quot;Final Fantasy&quot; arrived for the competing Famicom. It was praised for its grand sense of adventure due to its advanced visual effects and deep gameplay. The battery backup system drew praise but also contributed to the game&#x27;s notably high retail price which made it difficult for some critics to recommend. The game was re-released on several platforms in the following years, including a series of &quot;Phantasy Star&quot; compilations. In 2003, a remake titled was released for the PlayStation 2.

&quot;Phantasy Star&quot; is considered a landmark RPG for its use of predetermined characters and a science fantasy setting. Sega launched a series of sequels, some of which were developed by staff who worked on the original. Kodama directed &quot;Phantasy Star IV: The End of the Millennium&quot; (1993) and Naka produced &quot;Phantasy Star Online&quot; (2000).

==Gameplay==
&quot;Phantasy Star&quot; is a traditional Japanese role-playing game. It alters between a top-down perspective when the player is exploring the overworld, and changes to a first-person view when engaged in battle or exploring dungeons. The dungeons are long and twisted, and require the player to map most of them on paper. When exploring the overworld, the player can venture into a town to buy items and weapons. Outside the towns, monsters may randomly engage the player in battle. The player controls the main character Alis, and as the game progresses, other characters are recruited to her party: a wizard named Noah, a warrior Odin, and a talking cat-like creature named Myau. Each character has different strengths, weaknesses, and abilities. The party has a shared inventory of items and equipment.

When encountering enemies, all party members enter into battle. Battles are handled using a menu system which allows the player to fight or attempt to talk and negotiate with an enemy. When an enemy is defeated, party members gain experience points and are rewarded with a treasure chest that may contain money or a booby trap. As the characters gain experience points, they increase in level, gaining access to new magic spells and raising their offensive and defensive statistics.

==Plot==
&quot;Phantasy Star&quot; is set in the Algol star system which consists of three planets: the lush and green Palma, the arid and barren Motavia, and the icy and desolate Dezoris. Algol is ruled by King Lassic, who while originally benevolent, becomes a cruel, sociopathic tyrant. After a string of harsh political changes, small pockets of rebellion emerge but are mostly ineffective against Lassic&#x27;s iron rule. One such rebel named Nero is killed by Lassic&#x27;s forces, and his sister Alis swears revenge. Alis builds a party of adventurers including a warrior named Odin, a wizard named Noah, and a catlike creature named Myau. Together, they embark on an adventure spanning the three planets, meeting with townspeople, battling enemies, and finding special items that will help in the fight against Lassic. Eventually, the party engages and defeats Lassic, after which an ethereal voice tells them to return to Motavia. There, they encounter a more evil force, Dark Falz, and after destroying him, finally return peace to the Algol system.

==Development==

=== Background ===

Role-playing games (RPG) were beginning to gain popularity with console players in Japan in the late 1980s. Many Japanese game designers were inspired by Western RPGs such as &quot;Ultima&quot; and &quot;Wizardry.&quot; Enix&#x27;s &quot;Dragon Quest&quot; series was proving to be very popular on the Famicom, inspiring other developers to design similar games. Falcom began development on &quot;Ys I: Ancient Ys Vanished&quot;, as Square was doing the same with &quot;Final Fantasy&quot;. Around the release of &quot;Dragon Quest II&quot; in January 1987, Sega felt they needed an RPG for their Master System to compete in this emerging market. They believed they could not rely on third-party support because Sega&#x27;s hardware market share was only one-tenth that of Nintendo&#x27;s. They looked internally and found designer Kotaro Hayashida and programmer Yuji Naka were interested in creating an RPG. They had previously been recognized for their work within Sega — Hayashida for &quot;Alex Kidd in Miracle World&quot; (1986), and Naka for his 8-bit home console conversions of arcade games like &quot;Out Run&quot; and &quot;Space Harrier&quot;. With Sega&#x27;s approval, Hayashida and Naka began forming a team to develop an RPG.

The team consisted of around ten people. Hayashida was lead designer and Naka was lead programmer. Other staff members from &quot;Miracle World&quot; joined the project including lead graphic designer Rieko Kodama, and composer Tokuhiko Uwabo. There were more women on the development team than was typical at the time. Among them were Kodama, who drew most of the artwork, designer Miki Morimoto, who did much of the playtesting and enemy statistics configuration, and Chieko Aoki, who wrote the game&#x27;s original story and script. Aoki had already been working on an original story with most of the dialogue already completed, and this became the first draft for the RPG project. The game would be character designer Naoto Ohshima&#x27;s first project at Sega. Although there was no team director, Hayashida believes he had the largest role in shaping the game as lead designer and scenario writer, although Ohshima recalls Naka leading the project. The name &quot;Phantasy Star&quot; was formed after Naka took the word &quot;Fantasy&quot; from a song he enjoyed titled &quot;Nagisa no Fantasy&quot; by Noriko Sakai. The team shared the same room, so they could see each other&#x27;s work. They were given the freedom to build the game how they wanted without restrictions, which Hayashida believes led to them enjoying themselves more and producing a higher quality game in the end.

===Production===
The team wanted &quot;Phantasy Star&quot; to be different from other RPGs. They took many new approaches to the design of the game and its art to provide a unique experience. One approach was with the setting. The team was strongly influenced by &quot;Star Wars&quot; and how it combined Western culture with Japanese touches, such as how clothing resembled judo uniforms, and lightsabers were used like samurai swords. Kodama took this approach and designed the world of &quot;Phantasy Star&quot; using a science fiction motif mixed with medieval fantasy elements. Rather than use an airship to navigate over mountainous landscape, something common in other games, they added in a vehicle that could mow down impassable terrain. The team also added detailed event scenes, and animated monsters to help set the game apart. Their philosophy was to use extensive animation, so the ocean and walkways on the world map are always moving. Because the Master System could not draw large sprites, some parts of large characters were drawn to the background and only the animated portions were drawn as sprites.
Another unique addition to &quot;Phantasy Star&quot; was the 3D dungeons. They became a central concept in the game&#x27;s early planning stages, in part because the Famicom was incapable of handling them. The team drew inspiration from Western dungeon crawling RPGs like &quot;Wizardry&quot; and wanted to add animated navigation to help the player know their location and orientation more easily. Naka had experimented with creating dungeons inspired by these RPGs. Typically these scenes were rendered in small boxes, so Naka was motivated to engineer a full-screen dungeon that could be used for an action game or an RPG. Originally the artists were drawing full 2D backgrounds using a 3D perspective, but the number of frames necessary to achieve the animated effect used too much space on the cartridge. Naka solved this by programming true wireframe 3D dungeons. The artists then used a program by Naka to superimpose their art on top of the wireframes. They also saved three-quarters of the memory they would normally need by making each quadrant of the screen identical. The new dungeons scrolled faster than expected and needed to be slowed down.

The female heroine, Alis, was a sharp contrast compared with the typical male protagonists of other RPGs. Kodama had designed female characters before but never one in a strong and prominent role. This was an uncommon portrayal when games at the time usually had a damsel in distress. Kodama went through about a dozen designs until she achieved a strong but feminine character, one with whom female gamers could empathize. Noah was also designed by Kodama, as a mysterious and intelligent character. In the original draft, Noah was an androgynous character and would become male or female depending on how the player progressed. Eventually, it was decided the character would be male. Ohshima designed Odin because Kodama did not enjoy drawing muscular men. Kodama envisioned the visual contrast between Noah and Odin as comparable to that between Raistlin Majere and Caramon Majere in the &quot;Dragonlance&quot; book series. Ohshima was also responsible for a third of the monster designs, at most. The lead monster designer enjoyed classic fantasy monsters such as golems and Medusa, so these types of characters appeared in the final game. Myau was designed by Takako Kawaguchi.

At four megabits (500K), the game&#x27;s data was large for the time. &quot;Phantasy Star&quot; was only the second game for the Master System to use a chip this large. It was one of four games where it would be used. In spite of the chip&#x27;s capacity, the team made many compromises to save space. The original story featured four planets, but this was reduced to three. The artists had to make compromises with the backgrounds and battle animations. Background scenes were mirrored vertically to save space. This created inconsistencies with shadowing. There were plans for a password system to save progress, but this was cut due to memory limitations; batteries were used instead. The team wanted to have a password feature as a failsafe in case saving the data corrupted it as was often the case in playtests. Instead, Naka programmed a backup of the save data that could be used to restore a corrupted save file.

Composer Uwabo noted that the game was developed during the Japanese economic bubble, which fueled his enthusiasm which he believes is reflected in the music. The game was compatible with the Master System FM synthesis expansion unit which housed a Yamaha YM2413 chip that added nine more mono channels to the console&#x27;s programmable sound generator (PSG), the SN76489. The expansion gave the soundtrack a wider range and heavier bass. The unit was not released outside Japan.

==Release==

&quot;Phantasy Star&quot; was first released in Japan for the Master System on December 20, 1987, two days after &quot;Final Fantasy&quot; was released for the Famicom. The game was released in the West in November 1988, introducing players outside Japan to the emerging JRPG scene, having been localized before &quot;Dragon Quest&quot; or &quot;Final Fantasy&quot;. It was the most expensive game for the Master System in every market, its price being driven by the large 4 megabit chip, the save battery, and a concurrent chip shortage across the industry. In Japan, the game was difficult to find in stores. Sega often got requests from fans for a Mega Drive port, so they eventually shipped a limited release for the Mega Drive as part of a contest in 1994 under the title &quot;Phantasy Star Fukkokuban&quot; exclusively released in Japan. This version was identical to the Master System version but lacked FM sound enhancements. Tec Toy translated the Master System version to Portuguese and released it in Brazil in 1991. Since the original Western release retained the text formatting of the Japanese version, it used fewer characters than a proper English translation required. In 2008, fans modified the text engine to fit longer lines of dialogue, and released a newly translated version with the Japanese FM soundtrack as well.

A series of &quot;Phantasy Star&quot; compilations were released for the Sega Saturn, Game Boy Advance, and PlayStation 2. The Saturn version was released in 1998. It includes both hiragana and katakana alphabets, an improvement from the original which had only katakana due to limited memory. The 2008 PlayStation 2 version is based on the Saturn version and has additional features. The Game Boy Advance compilation was a straight emulation and was the only compilation released outside Japan. &quot;Phantasy Star&quot; also appeared in emulated form on &quot;Sonic&#x27;s Ultimate Genesis Collection&quot; for the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3, and on the Wii via the Virtual Console in 2009. In 2018, a port developed by M2 was released through the &quot;Sega Ages&quot; label for the Nintendo Switch. This version includes enhancements such as options to make the game easier and faster, guides for items, spells, and monsters, the Japanese Mark-III FM soundtrack, hiragana support, and a dungeon auto-mapping feature. Naka&#x27;s tricky programming efficiencies to save memory in the original proved difficult for the programmers handling the port.
&quot;Phantasy Star&quot; was remade for the PlayStation 2 as &quot;Phantasy Star Generation: 1&quot; and released on August 28, 2003, in Japan. It was the inaugural release in the &quot;Sega Ages 2500&quot; series, Sega&#x27;s budget label for re-releasing old games for the PlayStation 2. The remake features new graphics, real-time 3D dungeons, new music, and more cutscenes with extended dialogue. The battles now depict all the characters. Conspiracy Entertainment planned an American release as part of a &quot;Phantasy Star Trilogy&quot; pack, including remakes of &quot;Phantasy Star II&quot; and &quot;IV&quot; but it never happened. After the remake of &quot;II&quot; was released in Japan, the remake of &quot;IV&quot; was canceled, thus the trilogy set was also canceled. The two remakes were released on the PlayStation Network in Japan as PS2 Classics in 2014. A complete fan translation of &quot;Phantasy Star Generation: 1&quot; was released by fan site Phantasy Star Cave.

==Reception==
&quot;Phantasy Star&quot; was well received. &quot;Computer Gaming World&quot; called it &quot;the big shot in the arm for Sega [...] who was, at that time, being buried under a ton of NES titles and aggressive marketing&quot;. &quot;Electronic Game Player&quot; felt the game was leading the industry into a new era of console RPGs. &quot;Sega Pro&quot; called it the best RPG on the Master System, and &quot;Zzap!&quot; called it a must-have for RPG fans. &quot;Boys&#x27; Life&quot; wrote that along with &quot;The Legend of Zelda&quot; series, &quot;&quot;Phantasy Star&quot; may represent the future of home video games&quot; by combining &quot;the graphic quality of arcade games with the complexity of computer games&quot;. &quot;Computer and Video Games&quot; felt it was a massive and sprawling game, and were left impressed visually and aurally.

The game was commended for its strategy, puzzles, and challenge. &quot;VideoGames &amp; Computer Entertainment&quot; and &quot;S: The Sega Magazine&quot; praised the game for being easy to play and not relying on quick action reflexes. Critics liked the variety of monsters and the combat system. &quot;Computer Gaming World&quot; wrote that &quot;not since &quot;Dungeon Master&quot; had such a good and explicit graphic combat system been seen&quot;. &quot;Computer Entertainer&quot; felt the game&#x27;s large scope and deep gameplay was more typically seen in computer games than on consoles. This large scope made critics thankful for the cart&#x27;s battery back-up, an unusual hardware feature at the time. The save battery and complex gameplay led some critics to compare &quot;Phantasy Star&quot; to &quot;The Legend of Zelda&quot; (1986).

Critics praised the game for its presentation, building a grand sense of adventure and atmosphere. &quot;VideoGames &amp; Computer Entertainment&quot; commended the mix of science fiction and fantasy elements, and felt it had a grander scale than other RPGs. &quot;Electronic Game Player&quot; wrote that the atmosphere was &quot;simply breathtaking by current video game standards&quot;. The graphics were enjoyed by many reviewers, especially for their vivid colors and animation; the monster animations, in particular, received considerable positive attention. Many reviewers enjoyed the dungeons, thinking the lighting and perspective effects made for a realistic presentation. &quot;Electronic Game Player&quot; called &quot;Phantasy Star&quot; a &quot;visual tour-de-force&quot; and &quot;so technologically superior in graphics, that the Nintendo titles pale by comparison&quot;. &quot;Zzap!&quot; called it a technical achievement considering the Master System&#x27;s hardware limitations. It was awarded Best Graphics for 1988 by &quot;Electronic Gaming Monthly&quot;″s Player&#x27;s Choice Awards.

The game was difficult to recommend for some because of its high price. &quot;Computer Entertainer&quot; found the purchase difficult to justify as it was the highest price they had ever seen for a game on any cartridge-based system or disk-based computer. &quot;Computer and Video Games&quot; felt they could only recommend it for hardcore RPG fans for this reason. &quot;VideoGames &amp; Computer Entertainment&quot;, however, called it &quot;such a remarkable video game that it may justify its existence as the most expensive cartridge on the shelf.&quot;

=== Retrospective reviews ===
&quot;Phantasy Star&quot; was reviewed again for its re-releases. Most critics continued to hold the graphics in high regard. &quot;GameSpot&quot; and &quot;G-Force&quot; wrote that the graphics pushed the Master System to its limits, and helped set the game apart in its time. &quot;RPGFan&quot; and &quot;Nintendo Life&quot; called the 3D dungeons &quot;revolutionary&quot;. &quot;Nintendo Life&quot; felt that the graphics did show their age, but noted that it &quot;looks much better than an 8-bit RPG has any right to and it easily surpasses any NES effort of the era&quot;. &quot;1UP.com&quot; and &quot;IGN&quot; agreed, writing that it outclassed both the original &quot;Final Fantasy&quot; and &quot;Dragon Quest&quot;. Some critics commented that the game felt too standard compared to modern RPGs. Some also felt it was more difficult and dull than modern offerings due to heavier grinding. The Game Boy Advance version was commended for being a good emulation but criticized for poor sound and missed opportunities for enhancements. &quot;Nintendo World Report&quot; praised the Switch release for adding FM sound and enhancements to make for a more streamlined experience.

==Legacy==
&quot;Phantasy Star&quot; is considered a landmark RPG; it has been called &quot;revolutionary&quot;, &quot;pioneering&quot;, and &quot;ahead of its time&quot;. It is credited with helping to define the genre and introduce the West to console RPGs. &quot;IGN&quot; wrote: &quot;&quot;Phantasy Star&quot; was the game that defined an entire generation&#x27;s early experiences with the RPG genre as a whole, a role-playing adventure without equal at the time of its initial debut [...] a time when competition was virtually non-existent in the category&quot;. It has been called one of the best games on the Master System. &quot;Nintendo Life&quot; called it a killer app which &quot;not only tested the hardware but also the boundaries and expectations of the genre&quot;. &quot;Retro Gamer&quot; called it &quot;a key release for the genre&#x27;s popularity in the West and a key reason to own a Master System&quot;.

In 1996 &quot;Next Generation&quot;, listing the entire series as number 72 on their &quot;Top 100 Games of All Time&quot;, opined that &quot;the best game in the series is still the first ... There was a lot more variety in the settings, a deeper storyline, and just plain more of everything.&quot; The following year it was ranked the 62nd best console video game of all time by &quot;Electronic Gaming Monthly&quot;, the only appearance of a Master System game on the list. In 2001, &quot;Game Informer&quot; included it on its own list of greatest video games at #94. The staff praised it for its innovation and graphical superiority (specifically to &quot;Dragon Warrior&quot;). In 2006, &quot;1UP&quot; and &quot;Electronic Gaming Monthly&quot; placed it at #26 on &quot;The Greatest 200 Videogames of Their Time&quot; list, which puts it as the second highest-ranking RPG on the list, behind only &quot;Phantasy Star Online&quot; at #21. In 2023, Time Extension included the game on their &quot;Best JRPGs of All Time&quot; list, noting that it &quot;had some of the best visuals and grandest sense of adventure&quot; among its contemporaries.

The game introduced many elements that later became staples of the RPG genre. Its fusion of science fiction with medieval fantasy contrasted with the traditional fantasy seen in other RPGs of its era. &quot;Nintendo Power&quot; explained that &quot;Phantasy Star&quot; &quot;was the first RPG to break out of the &quot;Dragon Quest&quot; / &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot; mold of generic Arthurian fantasy by introducing sci-fi elements&quot;. The inclusion of pre-defined characters with unique personalities and abilities in the game is also considered revolutionary when compared to the customizable characters in other RPGs. The graphics are considered ahead of their time, particularly the 3D dungeons and monster animations. It was also one of the earliest video games to feature a female protagonist, which &quot;Nintendo Life&quot; called &quot;perhaps [its] most revolutionary aspect&quot;.

&quot;Phantasy Star&quot; launched the careers of its staff. Some worked on a series of sequels starting on the Mega Drive, known as some of the best RPGs of their era. Both programmer Yuji Naka and artist Rieko Kodama worked on the sequel &quot;Phantasy Star II&quot; (1989),&quot;&quot; and Kodama directed &quot;Phantasy Star IV: The End of the Millennium&quot; (1993), considered by some industry journalists to be one of the greatest games ever made. She later served as producer on &quot;Skies of Arcadia&quot; (2000), a critically acclaimed RPG for the Dreamcast. Meanwhile, Naka served as producer on &quot;Phantasy Star Online&quot; (2000), the first online RPG for home consoles. Character designer Naoto Ohshima went on to create the character Sonic the Hedgehog and collaborated with Naka on several games including &quot;Sonic the Hedgehog&quot; (1991), &quot;Nights into Dreams&quot; (1996), and &quot;Burning Rangers&quot; (1998)&quot;.&quot;

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q744038" start="5" end="28" title="role-playing video game" label="role-playing video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q122741" start="48" end="52" title="Sega" label="Sega"/>
<link wikidata="Q209868" start="74" end="87" title="Master System" label="Master System"/>
<link wikidata="Q14623846" start="117" end="130" title="History of Eastern role-playing video games" label="Japanese RPGs"/>
<link wikidata="Q125447061" start="190" end="194" title="Alis Landale" label="Alis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4136241" start="539" end="555" title="random encounter" label="random encounter"/>
<link wikidata="Q604973" start="561" end="577" title="experience point" label="experience point"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313869" start="891" end="903" title="Dragon Quest (video game)" label="Dragon Quest"/>
<link wikidata="Q172742" start="924" end="931" title="Famicom" label="Famicom"/>
<link wikidata="Q726119" start="974" end="983" title="Yuji Naka" label="Yuji Naka"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333106" start="1075" end="1087" title="Rieko Kodama" label="Rieko Kodama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265717" start="1193" end="1209" title="dungeon crawling" label="dungeon crawling"/>
<link wikidata="Q603291" start="1299" end="1315" title="medieval fantasy" label="medieval fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="1320" end="1335" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q462" start="1363" end="1372" title="Star Wars" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q8805" start="1454" end="1461" title="megabit" label="megabit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415970" start="1571" end="1584" title="Final Fantasy (video game)" label="Final Fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078759" start="1967" end="2017" title="Phantasy Star Collection" label="a series of &amp;quot;Phantasy Star&amp;quot; compilations"/>
<link wikidata="Q4393107" start="2030" end="2036" title="Video game remake" label="remake"/>
<link wikidata="Q10680" start="2065" end="2078" title="PlayStation 2" label="PlayStation 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080374" start="2182" end="2197" title="science fantasy" label="science fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q964613" start="2221" end="2240" title="Phantasy Star" label="a series of sequels"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2330" end="2373" title="Phantasy Star IV: The End of the Millennium" label="Phantasy Star IV: The End of the Millennium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084882" start="2411" end="2431" title="Phantasy Star Online" label="Phantasy Star Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q14623846" start="2503" end="2529" title="Japanese role-playing game" label="Japanese role-playing game"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927914" start="2551" end="2571" title="top-down perspective" label="top-down perspective"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299049" start="2633" end="2645" title="First-person (gaming)" label="first-person"/>
<link wikidata="Q125447061" start="2985" end="2989" title="Alis Landale" label="Alis"/>
<link wikidata="Q604973" start="3501" end="3517" title="experience point" label="experience point"/>
<link wikidata="Q744038" start="4852" end="4870" title="Role-playing video game" label="Role-playing games"/>
<link wikidata="Q952606" start="5027" end="5045" title="Ultima (series)" label="&amp;quot;Ultima&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296879" start="5056" end="5064" title="Wizardry (video game series)" label="Wizardry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343212" start="5072" end="5076" title="Enix" label="Enix"/>
<link wikidata="Q615908" start="5090" end="5102" title="Dragon Quest" label="Dragon Quest"/>
<link wikidata="Q172742" start="5154" end="5161" title="Famicom" label="Famicom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142226" start="5215" end="5221" title="Falcom" label="Falcom"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5249" end="5274" title="Ys I: Ancient Ys Vanished" label="Ys I: Ancient Ys Vanished"/>
<link wikidata="Q739552" start="5285" end="5291" title="Square (video game company)" label="Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415970" start="5322" end="5335" title="Final Fantasy (video game)" label="Final Fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2312762" start="5371" end="5386" title="Dragon Quest II" label="Dragon Quest II"/>
<link wikidata="Q122741" start="5410" end="5414" title="Sega" label="Sega"/>
<link wikidata="Q209868" start="5449" end="5462" title="Master System" label="Master System"/>
<link wikidata="Q726119" start="5716" end="5725" title="Yuji Naka" label="Yuji Naka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354273" start="5847" end="5873" title="Alex Kidd in Miracle World" label="Alex Kidd in Miracle World"/>
<link wikidata="Q270159" start="5905" end="5910" title="8-bit" label="8-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142287" start="5963" end="5970" title="Out Run" label="Out Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707792" start="5987" end="6000" title="Space Harrier" label="Space Harrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333106" start="6296" end="6308" title="Rieko Kodama" label="Rieko Kodama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7203549" start="6513" end="6524" title="playtesting" label="playtesting"/>
<link wikidata="Q658384" start="6817" end="6830" title="Naoto Ohshima" label="Naoto Ohshima"/>
<link wikidata="Q640945" start="7204" end="7216" title="Noriko Sakai" label="Noriko Sakai"/>
<link wikidata="Q462" start="7755" end="7764" title="Star Wars" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q11420" start="7861" end="7865" title="judo" label="judo"/>
<link wikidata="Q19873" start="7880" end="7890" title="lightsaber" label="lightsaber"/>
<link wikidata="Q172736" start="7907" end="7921" title="Katana" label="samurai swords"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="8009" end="8024" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q603291" start="8042" end="8058" title="medieval fantasy" label="medieval fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q133585" start="8088" end="8095" title="airship" label="airship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333015" start="8484" end="8491" title="Sprite (computer graphics)" label="sprites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265717" start="8852" end="8865" title="dungeon crawl" label="dungeon crawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q583169" start="9454" end="9463" title="Wire-frame model" label="wireframe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293837" start="10030" end="10048" title="damsel in distress" label="damsel in distress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264362" start="10614" end="10629" title="Raistlin Majere" label="Raistlin Majere"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712010" start="10634" end="10648" title="Caramon Majere" label="Caramon Majere"/>
<link wikidata="Q746244" start="10662" end="10673" title="Dragonlance" label="Dragonlance"/>
<link wikidata="Q215085" start="10834" end="10839" title="golem" label="golem"/>
<link wikidata="Q160730" start="10845" end="10851" title="Medusa" label="Medusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q8805" start="10958" end="10965" title="megabit" label="megabit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392940" start="11686" end="11694" title="failsafe" label="failsafe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7203549" start="11757" end="11766" title="playtests" label="playtests"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500827" start="11933" end="11957" title="Japanese asset price bubble" label="Japanese economic bubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141651" start="12079" end="12091" title="Frequency modulation synthesis" label="FM synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192638" start="12122" end="12135" title="Yamaha YM2413" label="Yamaha YM2413"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995838" start="12198" end="12226" title="programmable sound generator" label="programmable sound generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708134" start="12238" end="12245" title="Texas Instruments SN76489" label="SN76489"/>
<link wikidata="Q10676" start="13019" end="13029" title="Mega Drive" label="Mega Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985314" start="13303" end="13310" title="Tectoy" label="Tec Toy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078759" start="13709" end="13759" title="Phantasy Star Collection" label="A series of &amp;quot;Phantasy Star&amp;quot; compilations"/>
<link wikidata="Q200912" start="13782" end="13793" title="Sega Saturn" label="Sega Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q188642" start="13795" end="13811" title="Game Boy Advance" label="Game Boy Advance"/>
<link wikidata="Q10680" start="13817" end="13830" title="PlayStation 2" label="PlayStation 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q48332" start="13890" end="13898" title="hiragana" label="hiragana"/>
<link wikidata="Q82946" start="13903" end="13911" title="katakana" label="katakana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573699" start="14271" end="14311" title="Sonic&amp;#x27;s Ultimate Genesis Collection" label="Sonic&amp;#x27;s Ultimate Genesis Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q48263" start="14326" end="14334" title="Xbox 360" label="Xbox 360"/>
<link wikidata="Q10683" start="14339" end="14352" title="PlayStation 3" label="PlayStation 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q8079" start="14365" end="14368" title="Wii" label="Wii"/>
<link wikidata="Q821067" start="14377" end="14392" title="Virtual Console" label="Virtual Console"/>
<link wikidata="Q6713732" start="14431" end="14433" title="M2 (game developer)" label="M2"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477710" start="14465" end="14474" title="Sega Ages" label="Sega Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q19610114" start="14495" end="14510" title="Nintendo Switch" label="Nintendo Switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4393107" start="14891" end="14897" title="Video game remake" label="remade"/>
<link wikidata="Q10680" start="14906" end="14919" title="PlayStation 2" label="PlayStation 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477710" start="15048" end="15062" title="Sega Ages" label="Sega Ages 2500"/>
<link wikidata="Q2816476" start="15186" end="15195" title="Real-time computer graphics" label="real-time"/>
<link wikidata="Q245056" start="15229" end="15237" title="cutscene" label="cutscene"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163431" start="15306" end="15330" title="Conspiracy Entertainment" label="Conspiracy Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q721001" start="15439" end="15455" title="Phantasy Star II" label="Phantasy Star II"/>
<link wikidata="" start="15472" end="15474" title="Phantasy Star IV: The End of the Millennium" label="IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q719629" start="15682" end="15701" title="PlayStation Network" label="PlayStation Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q6617222" start="15714" end="15726" title="List of PlayStation 2 Classics for PlayStation 3" label="PS2 Classics"/>
<link wikidata="Q707182" start="15917" end="15938" title="Computer Gaming World" label="Computer Gaming World"/>
<link wikidata="Q793981" start="16100" end="16122" title="Electronic Game Player" label="Electronic Game Player"/>
<link wikidata="Q7446156" start="16206" end="16214" title="Sega Pro" label="Sega Pro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077297" start="16276" end="16281" title="Zzap!64" label="Zzap!"/>
<link wikidata="Q126900267" start="16330" end="16345" title="Boys&amp;#x27; Life" label="Boys&amp;#x27; Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q12393" start="16380" end="16399" title="The Legend of Zelda" label="The Legend of Zelda"/>
<link wikidata="Q277666" start="16603" end="16627" title="Computer and Video Games" label="Computer and Video Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q17049268" start="16794" end="16833" title="VideoGames &amp;amp; Computer Entertainment" label="VideoGames &amp;amp; Computer Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7446157" start="16850" end="16870" title="Sega Power" label="S: The Sega Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587638" start="17087" end="17101" title="Dungeon Master (video game)" label="Dungeon Master"/>
<link wikidata="Q124169187" start="17182" end="17202" title="Computer Entertainer" label="Computer Entertainer"/>
<link wikidata="Q12395" start="17538" end="17557" title="The Legend of Zelda (video game)" label="The Legend of Zelda"/>
<link wikidata="Q793981" start="18618" end="18643" title="Electronic Gaming Monthly" label="Electronic Gaming Monthly"/>
<link wikidata="Q45836" start="19405" end="19413" title="GameSpot" label="GameSpot"/>
<link wikidata="Q65089906" start="19580" end="19593" title="Nintendo Life" label="Nintendo Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q207708" start="19883" end="19886" title="IGN" label="IGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094706" start="20165" end="20173" title="Grinding (gaming)" label="grinding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047507" start="21131" end="21141" title="killer app" label="killer app"/>
<link wikidata="Q3021204" start="21250" end="21261" title="Retro Gamer" label="Retro Gamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7021002" start="21404" end="21419" title="Next Generation (magazine)" label="Next Generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17042483" start="21481" end="21506" title="List of video games considered the best" label="Top 100 Games of All Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q27197" start="21882" end="21895" title="Game Informer" label="Game Informer"/>
<link wikidata="Q615908" start="22051" end="22065" title="Dragon Warrior" label="Dragon Warrior"/>
<link wikidata="Q4595902" start="22089" end="22092" title="1UP.com" label="1UP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084882" start="22300" end="22320" title="Phantasy Star Online" label="Phantasy Star Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q603291" start="22655" end="22671" title="medieval fantasy" label="medieval fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q719801" start="22749" end="22763" title="Nintendo Power" label="Nintendo Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375" start="22888" end="22910" title="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons" label="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons"/>
<link wikidata="Q45792" start="22933" end="22942" title="King Arthur" label="Arthurian"/>
<link wikidata="Q964613" start="23522" end="23541" title="Phantasy Star" label="a series of sequels"/>
<link wikidata="Q10676" start="23558" end="23568" title="Mega Drive" label="Mega Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q721001" start="23692" end="23708" title="Phantasy Star II" label="Phantasy Star II"/>
<link wikidata="" start="23761" end="23804" title="Phantasy Star IV: The End of the Millennium" label="Phantasy Star IV: The End of the Millennium"/>
<link wikidata="Q17042483" start="23876" end="23900" title="List of video games considered the best" label="greatest games ever made"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292272" start="23940" end="23956" title="Skies of Arcadia" label="Skies of Arcadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q184198" start="24006" end="24015" title="Dreamcast" label="Dreamcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084882" start="24061" end="24081" title="Phantasy Star Online" label="Phantasy Star Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q191626" start="24201" end="24219" title="Sonic the Hedgehog (character)" label="Sonic the Hedgehog"/>
<link wikidata="Q37123" start="24280" end="24298" title="Sonic the Hedgehog (1991 video game)" label="Sonic the Hedgehog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855957" start="24319" end="24337" title="Nights into Dreams" label="Nights into Dreams"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713183" start="24362" end="24377" title="Burning Rangers" label="Burning Rangers"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="145429" wikidata="Q8269" url="?curid=145429" title="The Tale of Genji">
<text>, also known as Genji Monogatari, is a classic work of Japanese literature written by the noblewoman, poet, and lady-in-waiting Murasaki Shikibu around the peak of the Heian period, in the early 11th century. The original manuscript no longer exists. It was made in &quot;concertina&quot; or style: several sheets of paper pasted together and folded alternately in one direction then the other.

The work is a unique depiction of the lifestyles of high courtiers during the Heian period. It is written in archaic language and a poetic style that requires specialised study. In the early 20th century &quot;Genji&quot; was translated into modern Japanese by the poet Akiko Yosano. The first English translation of &quot;Genji&quot; was made in 1882 by Suematsu Kencho, but was of poor quality and left incomplete. Arthur Waley translated an almost complete version which excludes only the 38th chapter (Suzumushi/The Bell Cricket) between 1925 to 1933. Since then, complete English translations have been made by Edward Seidensticker, Royall Tyler, and Dennis Washburn.

The work recounts the life of Hikaru Genji, or &quot;Shining Genji&quot;. Genji is the son of the emperor (known to readers as Emperor Kiritsubo) and a low-ranking concubine called Kiritsubo Consort, but for political reasons the emperor removes Genji from the line of succession, demoting him to commoner status by giving him the surname Minamoto. Genji then pursues a career as an imperial officer. The tale concentrates on Genji&#x27;s romantic life and describes the customs of the aristocratic society of the time. It is one of history&#x27;s first novels, the first by a woman to have won global recognition, and in Japan today has a stature like that of Shakespeare in England.

==Historical context==

Murasaki lived at the height of the Fujiwara clan&#x27;s power. Fujiwara no Michinaga was the regent in all but name, and the most significant political figure of his day. Consequently, Murasaki is believed to have formed the character of Genji partly through her experience of Michinaga.

&quot;The Tale of Genji&quot; may have been written chapter by chapter, as Murasaki delivered installments to aristocratic women (ladies-in-waiting). It has many elements found in a modern novel: a central character and a large number of major and minor characters, well-developed characterization of the major players, a sequence of events covering the central character&#x27;s lifetime and beyond. There is no specified plot, but events play out and characters grow older. Despite a &quot;dramatis personæ&quot; of some four hundred characters, it maintains internal consistency; for instance, all characters age in step, and both family and feudal relationships stay intact throughout.

Almost none of the characters in the original text are given an explicit name. They are instead referred to by their function or role (e.g. Minister of the Left), an honorific (e.g. His Excellency), or their relation to other characters (e.g. Heir Apparent), which changes as the novel progresses. This lack of names stems from Heian-era court manners that would have made it unacceptably familiar and blunt to freely mention a person&#x27;s given name. Modern readers and translators have used various nicknames to keep track of the many characters.

==Authorship==

There is debate over how much of &quot;Genji&quot; was actually written by Murasaki Shikibu. Debates over the novel&#x27;s authorship have gone on for centuries, and are unlikely to ever be settled unless some major archival discovery is made.

It is generally accepted that the tale was finished in its present form by 1021, when the author of the wrote a diary entry about her joy at acquiring a complete copy of the tale. She writes that there are over 50 chapters and mentions a character introduced at the end of the work, so if other authors besides Murasaki did work on the tale, the work was finished very near to the time of her writing. Murasaki&#x27;s own diary includes a reference to the tale, and indeed the application to herself of the name &#x27;Murasaki&#x27; in an allusion to the main female character. That entry confirms that some if not all of the diary was available in 1008 when internal evidence convincingly suggests that the entry was written.

Murasaki is said to have written the character of Genji based on the Minister on the Left at the time she was at court. Other translators, such as Tyler, believe the character Murasaki no Ue, whom Genji marries, is based on Murasaki Shikibu herself.

Yosano Akiko, who made the first modern Japanese translation of &quot;Genji&quot;, believed that Murasaki had written only chapters 1 to 33, and that chapters 35 to 54 were written by her daughter, Daini no Sanmi. Other scholars have also doubted the authorship of chapters 42 to 54, particularly 44, which contains continuity mistakes (in the rest of the book such mistakes are rare). Royall Tyler writes that computer analysis has turned up &quot;statistically significant&quot; discrepancies of style between chapters 45–54 and the rest, and also among the early chapters.
==Plot==



Genji&#x27;s mother dies when he is three years old, and the Emperor cannot forget her. The Emperor Kiritsubo then hears of a woman (Lady Fujitsubo), formerly a princess of the preceding emperor, who resembles his deceased concubine, and later she becomes one of his wives. Genji loves her first as a stepmother, but later as a woman, and they fall in love with each other. Genji is frustrated by his forbidden love for the Lady Fujitsubo and is on bad terms with his own wife (Aoi no Ue, the Lady Aoi). He engages in a series of love affairs with many other women. These are however unfulfilling, as in most cases his advances are rebuffed, or his lover dies suddenly, or he becomes bored.

Genji visits Kitayama, a rural hilly area north of Kyoto, where he finds a beautiful ten-year-old girl. He is fascinated by this little girl (Murasaki no Ue), and discovers that she is a niece of the Lady Fujitsubo. Finally he kidnaps her, brings her to his own palace and educates her to be like the Lady Fujitsubo, who is his womanly ideal. During this time Genji also meets Lady Fujitsubo secretly, and she bears his son, Reizei. Everyone except the two lovers believes the father of the child is the Emperor Kiritsubo. Later the boy becomes the Crown Prince and Lady Fujitsubo becomes the Empress, but Genji and Lady Fujitsubo swear to keep the child&#x27;s true parentage secret.

Genji and his wife, Lady Aoi, reconcile. She gives birth to a son but dies soon after. Genji is sorrowful but finds consolation in Murasaki, whom he marries. Genji&#x27;s father, the Emperor Kiritsubo, dies. He is succeeded by his son Suzaku, whose mother (Kokiden), together with Kiritsubo&#x27;s political enemies, take power in the court. Then another of Genji&#x27;s secret love affairs is exposed: Genji and a concubine of the Emperor Suzaku are discovered while meeting in secret. The Emperor Suzaku confides his personal amusement at Genji&#x27;s exploits with the woman (Oborozukiyo), but is duty-bound to punish Genji even though he is his half-brother. He exiles Genji to the town of Suma in rural Harima Province (now part of Kobe in Hyōgo Prefecture). There, a prosperous man known as the Akashi Novice (because he is from Akashi in Settsu Province) entertains Genji, and Genji has an affair with Akashi&#x27;s daughter. She gives birth to Genji&#x27;s only daughter, who will later become the Empress.

In the capital, the Emperor Suzaku is troubled by dreams of his late father, Kiritsubo, and something begins to affect his eyes. Meanwhile, his mother, Kokiden, grows ill, which weakens her influence over the throne, and leads to the Emperor ordering Genji to be pardoned. Genji returns to Kyoto. His son by Lady Fujitsubo, Reizei, becomes the emperor. The new Emperor Reizei knows Genji is his real father, and raises Genji&#x27;s rank to the highest possible.

However, when Genji turns 40 years old, his life begins to decline. His political status does not change, but his love and emotional life begin to incrementally diminish as middle age takes hold. He marries another wife, the Third Princess (known as Onna san no miya in the Seidensticker version, or Nyōsan in Waley&#x27;s). Genji&#x27;s nephew, Kashiwagi, later forces himself on the Third Princess, and she bears Kaoru (who, in a similar situation to that of Reizei, is legally known as the son of Genji). Genji&#x27;s new marriage changes his relationship with Murasaki, who had expressed her wish of becoming a nun () though the wish was rejected by Genji.

Genji&#x27;s beloved Murasaki dies. In the following chapter, (&quot;Illusion&quot;), Genji contemplates how fleeting life is. The next chapter is titled (&quot;Vanished into the Clouds&quot;), which is left blank, but implies the death of Genji.

Chapter 45–54 are known as the &quot;Uji Chapters&quot;. These chapters follow Kaoru and his best friend, Niou. Niou is an imperial prince, the son of Genji&#x27;s daughter, the current Empress now that Reizei has abdicated the throne, while Kaoru is known to the world as Genji&#x27;s son but is in fact fathered by Genji&#x27;s nephew. The chapters involve Kaoru and Niou&#x27;s rivalry over several daughters of an imperial prince who lives in Uji, a place some distance away from the capital. The tale ends abruptly, with Kaoru wondering if Niou is hiding Kaoru&#x27;s former lover away from him. Kaoru has sometimes been called the first anti-hero in literature.

==Completion==

The tale has an abrupt ending. Opinions vary on whether this was intended by the author. Arthur Waley, who made the first English translation of the whole of &quot;The Tale of Genji&quot;, believed that the work as we have it was finished. Ivan Morris, however, author of &quot;The World of the Shining Prince&quot;, believed that it was not complete and that later chapters were missing. Edward Seidensticker, who made the second translation of the &quot;Genji&quot;, believed that Murasaki Shikibu had not had a planned story structure with an ending as such but would simply have continued writing as long as she could.

==Literary context==
Because it was written to entertain the Japanese court of the 11th century, the work presents many difficulties to modern readers. First and foremost, Murasaki&#x27;s language, Heian-period court Japanese, was highly inflected and had very complex grammar. Another problem is that almost none of the characters are named within the work. Instead, the narrator refers to men often by their rank or their station in life, and to women often by the color of their clothing, or by the words used at a meeting, or by the rank of a prominent male relative. This results in different appellations for the same character, depending on the chapter.

Another aspect of the language is the importance of using poetry in conversations. Modifying or rephrasing a classic poem according to the current situation was expected behavior in Heian court life, and often served to communicate thinly veiled allusions. The poems in the &quot;Genji&quot; are often in the classic Japanese form. Many of the poems were well known to the intended audience, so usually only the first few lines are given, and the reader is supposed to complete the thought themselves, leaving the rest – which the reader would be expected to know – unspoken.

As with most literature in the Heian period, &quot;Genji&quot; was written mostly in kana (Japanese phonetic script), specifically hiragana, and not in kanji. Writing in kanji was at the time a masculine pursuit. Women were generally discreet when using kanji, confining themselves mostly to native Japanese words ().

Outside of vocabulary related to politics and Buddhism, &quot;Genji&quot; contains remarkably few Chinese loan words (). This has the effect of giving the story a very even smooth flow. However it also introduces confusion: there are a number of homophones (words with the same pronunciation but different meanings); and for modern readers context is not always sufficient to determine which meaning was intended.

==Structure==
===Outline===
The novel is traditionally divided into three parts, the first two dealing with the life of Genji and the last with the early years of two of Genji&#x27;s prominent descendants, Niou and Kaoru. There are also several short transitional chapters which are usually grouped separately and whose authorships are sometimes questioned.

# Genji&#x27;s rise and fall
## Youth, chapters 1–33: Love, romance, and exile
## Success and setbacks, chapters 34–41: A taste of power and the death of his beloved wife
# The transition (chapters 42–44): Very short episodes following Genji&#x27;s death
# Uji, chapters 45–54: Genji&#x27;s official and secret descendants, Niou and Kaoru

The 54th and last chapter, &quot;The Floating Bridge of Dreams&quot;, is sometimes argued by modern scholars to be a separate part from the Uji part. It seems to continue the story from the previous chapters but has an unusually abstract chapter title. It is the only chapter whose title has no clear reference within the text, although this may be due to the chapter being unfinished. This question is made more difficult by the fact that we do not know exactly when the chapters acquired their titles.

===List of chapters===
The English translations here are taken from the Arthur Waley, the Edward Seidensticker, the Royall Tyler, and the Dennis Washburn translations. It is not known for certain when the chapters acquired their titles. Early mentions of the Tale refer to chapter numbers, or contain alternate titles for some of the chapters. This may suggest that the titles were added later. The titles are largely derived from poetry that is quoted within the text, or allusions to various characters.


The additional chapter between 41 and 42 in some manuscripts is called which means &quot;Vanished into the Clouds&quot;—the chapter is a title only, and is probably intended to evoke Genji&#x27;s death. Some scholars have posited the earlier existence of a chapter between 1 and 2 which would have introduced some characters that seem to appear very abruptly in the book as it stands.

The Waley translation completely omits the 38th chapter.

Later authors have composed additional chapters, most often either between 41 and 42, or after the end.

==Manuscripts==

The original manuscript written by Murasaki Shikibu no longer exists. Numerous copies, totaling around 300 according to Ikeda Kikan, exist with differences between each. It is thought that Shikibu often went back and edited early manuscripts introducing discrepancies with earlier copies.

The various manuscripts are classified into three categories:
* 

In the 13th century, two major attempts by Minamoto no Chikayuki and Fujiwara Teika were made to edit and revise the differing manuscripts. The Chikayuki manuscript is known as the ; edits were many beginning in 1236 and completing in 1255. The Teika manuscript is known as the ; its edits are more conservative and thought to better represent the original. These two manuscripts were used as the basis for many future copies.

The category represents all other manuscripts not belonging to either or . This includes older but incomplete manuscripts, mixed manuscripts derived from both and , and commentaries.

On 10 March 2008, it was announced that a late Kamakura period (1192–1333) manuscript had been found in Kyoto, containing the sixth chapter, ; the manuscript was 65 pages in length. Most remaining manuscripts are based on copies of the Teika manuscript which introduced revisions in the original; this manuscript, however, belongs to a different lineage and was not influenced by Teika. Professor Yamamoto Tokurō, who examined the manuscript, said, &quot;This is a precious discovery as Kamakura manuscripts are so rare.&quot; Professor Katō Yōsuke said, &quot;This is an important discovery as it asserts that non-Teika manuscripts were being read during the Kamakura period.&quot;

On 29 October 2008, Konan Women&#x27;s University announced that a mid-Kamakura period manuscript had been found,
containing the 32nd chapter, . The manuscript was recognized as the oldest extant copy of this chapter, dating to between 1240 and 1280. The manuscript, considered to be of the category, is 74 pages in length and differs from manuscripts in at least four places, raising the &quot;possibility that the contents may be closer to the undiscovered Murasaki Shikibu original manuscript&quot;.

On 9 October 2019, it was announced that an original copy of Teika&#x27;s had been found in Tokyo at the home of the current head of the Okochi-Matsudaira clan, who ran the Yoshida Domain. The manuscript is the 5th chapter, , and is the oldest version of the chapter. Blue ink common in Teika&#x27;s manuscript and handwriting analysis confirmed that the manuscript was written by Teika, making it among the 5 original versions of the known to exist.

==Illustrated scrolls==

Numerous illustrations of scenes from &quot;Genji&quot; have been produced, most notably a 12th-century scroll, the , containing illustrated scenes from &quot;Genji&quot; together with handwritten text. This scroll is the earliest extant example of a Japanese &quot;picture scroll&quot;: collected illustrations and calligraphy of a single work. The original scroll is believed to have comprised 10–20 rolls and covered all 54 chapters. The extant pieces include only 19 illustrations and 65 pages of text, plus nine pages of fragments. This is estimated at 15% of the envisioned original.

The Tokugawa Art Museum in Nagoya has three of the scrolls handed down in the Owari branch of the Tokugawa clan and one scroll held by the Hachisuka family is now in the Gotoh Museum in Tokyo. The scrolls are designated National Treasures of Japan. The scrolls are so fragile that they normally are not shown in public. The original scrolls in the Tokugawa Museum were shown from 21 November to 29 November in 2009. Since 2001, they have been displayed in the Tokugawa Museum annually for around one week in November. An oversize English photoreproduction and translation was published in limited edition in 1971 by Kodansha International.

Other notable illustrated scrolls of &quot;Genji&quot; are by Tosa Mitsuoki, who lived from 1617 to 1691. His paintings are closely based on Heian style from the existing scrolls from the 12th century and are fully complete. The tale was also a popular theme in ukiyo-e prints from the Edo period.

==Modern readership==

===Japanese===
&quot;The Tale of Genji&quot; was written in an archaic court language, and a century after its completion it was difficult to read without specialized study. Annotated and illustrated versions existed as early as the 12th century. It was not until the early 20th century that &quot;Genji&quot; was translated into modern Japanese by the poet Akiko Yosano. Translations into modern Japanese have made it easier to read though changed some meaning, and has given names to the characters, usually the traditional names used by academics. This gives rise to anachronisms; for instance, Genji&#x27;s first wife is named Aoi because she is known as the lady of the Aoi chapter, in which she dies.

Other known translations were done by the novelists Jun&#x27;ichirō Tanizaki and Fumiko Enchi.

Because of the cultural differences, reading an annotated version of the &quot;Genji&quot; is quite common, even among Japanese readers. There are several annotated versions by novelists, including Seiko Tanabe, Jakucho Setouchi and Osamu Hashimoto. Many works, including a manga series and different television dramas, are derived from &quot;The Tale of Genji&quot;. There have been at least five manga adaptations of &quot;Genji&quot;. A manga version was created by Waki Yamato, (&quot;The Tale of Genji&quot; in English), and a current version by Sugimura Yoshimitsu is in progress. Another manga, , by Miyako Maki, won the Shogakukan Manga Award in 1989.

===Selected English translations===
The first partial translation of &quot;Genji&quot; into English was by Suematsu Kenchō, published in 1882. Arthur Waley published a six-volume translation of all but one chapter, with the first volume published in 1925 and the last in 1933. In 1976, Edward Seidensticker published the first complete translation into English, made using a self-consciously &quot;stricter&quot; approach with regards to content if not form. The English translation published in 2001 by Royall Tyler aims at fidelity in content and form to the original text.

The major translations into English are each slightly different, mirroring the personal choices of the translator and the period in which the translation was made. Each version has its merits, its detractors and its advocates, and each is distinguished by the name of the translator. For example, the version translated by Arthur Waley would typically be referred to as &quot;the Waley &quot;Genji&quot;&quot;.
* The Suematsu &quot;Genji&quot; (1882) – Suematsu&#x27;s &quot;Genji&quot; was the first translation into English, but is considered of poor quality and is not often read today. It includes seventeen of the chapters.
* The Waley &quot;Genji&quot; (1925–1933) – Waley&#x27;s &quot;Genji&quot; is considered a great achievement for his time, although some purists have criticized Waley&#x27;s changes to the original. Others have criticized as overly-free the manner in which Waley translated the original text. Regardless, it continues to be well-appreciated and widely read today. When the Waley &quot;Genji&quot; was first published, it was eagerly received. For example, &quot;Time&quot; explained that &quot;the reviewers&#x27; floundering tributes indicate something of its variegated appeal. In limpid prose The Tale combines curiously modern social satire with great charm of narrative. Translator Waley has done service to literature in salvaging to the Occident this masterpiece of the Orient.&quot; The translation omits the 38th chapter completely.
* The Seidensticker &quot;Genji&quot; (1976) – Seidensticker&#x27;s &quot;Genji&quot; is an attempt to correct what were perceived to have been Waley&#x27;s failings without necessarily making his translation obsolete. Seidensticker hews more closely to the original text, but in the interests of readability, he takes some liberties. For example, he identifies most of the characters by name so that the narrative can be more easily followed by a broad-based audience of Western readers. (In 2008, a 4,400-page Braille version of the Seidensticker &quot;Genji&quot; was completed. This Braille edition was the product of five Japanese housewives from Setagaya, Tokyo, working voluntarily for five years and was subsequently donated to the and the Library of Congress. It is also available for download.)
* The McCullough &quot;Genji&quot; (1994) – A selection from ten chapters of &quot;The Tale of Genji&quot; along with selections from &quot;The Tale of the Heike&quot;, translated by Helen Craig McCullough for Stanford University Press.
* The Tyler &quot;Genji&quot; (2001) – Tyler&#x27;s &quot;Genji&quot; contains more extensive explanatory footnotes and commentary than the previous translations, describing the numerous poetical allusions and cultural aspects of the tale. Tyler consciously attempted to mimic the original style in ways that the previous translations did not. For example, this version does not use names for most characters, identifying them instead by their titles in a manner which was conventional in the context of the 11th-century original text. Writing for &quot;The New York Times&quot;, reviewer Janice Nimura described it as &quot;wonderfully evocative of the original, [but] can be difficult to follow&quot;. According to Michael Wood, Tyler&#x27;s version &quot;makes a special virtue of attending to a certain ceremonial indirectness in the way the characters address one another. The great temptation for a translator is to say the unsaid things, and Tyler never gives in to it.&quot; Machiko Midorikawa notes in a review of Genji translations that more recent translators from classical Japanese &quot;have endeavoured to find ways of preserving more of what once seemed unfamiliar or strange to English readers&quot;.
* The Washburn &quot;Genji&quot; (2015) – Dennis Washburn&#x27;s &quot;Genji&quot; separates the poems from the prose and puts interior thoughts in italics. The translation has been received slightly more controversially than Tyler&#x27;s, with most criticism aimed at the perceived over-clarification of the text and addition of modern colloquialisms.

==Reception and legacy==
&quot;The Tale of Genji&quot; is an important work of world literature. Jorge Luis Borges is among the modern authors who have cited it as inspiration. He said of it, &quot;&quot;The Tale of Genji&quot;, as translated by Arthur Waley, is written with an almost miraculous naturalness, and what interests us is not the exoticism—the horrible word—but rather the human passions of the novel. Such interest is just: Murasaki&#x27;s work is what one would quite precisely call a psychological novel ... I dare to recommend this book to those who read me. &quot; It is noted for its internal consistency, psychological depiction, and characterization. The novelist Yasunari Kawabata said in his Nobel Prize acceptance speech: &quot;&quot;The Tale of Genji&quot; in particular is the highest pinnacle of Japanese literature. Even down to our day there has not been a piece of fiction to compare with it.&quot;

The &quot;Genji&quot; is also often referred to as &quot;the first novel&quot;, though there is considerable debate over this; other texts that predate &quot;Genji&quot;, such as the 7th-century Sanskrit , or the Greek and Roman novels from classical antiquity, such as Daphnis and Chloe and the Satyricon, are considered to be novels, and there is debate around whether &quot;Genji&quot; can even be considered a &quot;novel&quot;. Ivan Morris considers the psychological insight, complexity and unity of the work to qualify it for &quot;novel&quot; status while simultaneously disqualifying earlier works of prose fiction. Others see these arguments as subjective and unconvincing.

Related claims, perhaps in an attempt to sidestep these debates, are that &quot;Genji&quot; is the &quot;first psychological novel&quot; or &quot;historical novel&quot;, &quot;the first novel still considered to be a classic&quot; or other more qualified terms. However, critics have almost consistently described &quot;The Tale of Genji&quot; as the oldest, first, and/or greatest novel in Japanese literature, though enthusiastic proponents may have later neglected the qualifying category of &#x27;in Japanese literature&#x27;, leading to the debates over the book&#x27;s place in world literature. Even in Japan, the status of &quot;Tale of Genji&quot; as &quot;first&quot; is not universally embraced; the slightly-earlier has been proposed as the &quot;world&#x27;s first full-length novel&quot;, even though its author is unknown. Despite these debates, &quot;The Tale of Genji&quot; enjoys solid respect, and its influence on Japanese literature has been compared to that of Philip Sidney&#x27;s &quot;Arcadia&quot; on English literature.

The novel and other works by Lady Murasaki are staple reading material in the curricula of Japanese schools. The Bank of Japan issued the 2000 yen banknote in her honor, featuring a scene from the novel based on the 12th-century illustrated handscroll. Since a 1 November 1008 entry in &quot;The Diary of Lady Murasaki&quot; is the oldest date on which a reference to &quot;The Tale of Genji&quot; has appeared, 1 November was designated as the official day to celebrate Japanese classics. According to Act on Classics Day, the &quot;classics&quot; that are honored not only include literature, but encompass a wide range of arts such as music, art, traditional performing arts, entertainment, lifestyle art including tea ceremony and flower arrangement and other cultural products.

The names of the chapters became a central element in a incense-based game called Genjikō, part of the larger practice of Monkō popular among the nobility. In Genjikō, players must match the scents of a series of five incense samples without being told the names of said samples. Each possible combination was matched to a symbol, called a , that represented a chapter from the story.

==Adaptations in other media==
* 12th-century illustrated hand scroll, 
* 1951 film &quot;The Tale of Genji&quot; by Kōzaburō Yoshimura
* 1966 film by Tetsuji Takechi
* 1980 manga by Waki Yamato
* 1981 theatre performance run by the Takarazuka Revue
* 1987 anime film &quot;The Tale of Genji&quot; by Gisaburō Sugii – covers only the first 12 chapters, while adding in some psychological motivation that is not explicit in the novel.
* 1987 film O Desejado ou As montanhas da lua by Paulo Rocha
* 1988 manga by Miyako Maki
* 1989 theatre performance run by the Takarazuka Revue
* 2000 opera by Miki Minoru
* 2001 film &quot;Sennen no Koi Story of Genji&quot;
* 2009 anime series by Osamu Dezaki
* 2011 film 
* 2015 theatre performance run by the Takarazuka Revue; actress Asumi Rio received the Agency for Cultural Affairs Arts Festival award for her portrayal of Genji.
* 2022 manga in English Lady Murasaki’s Tale of Genji by Ai Takita and Sean Michael Wilson

==See also==

* Ghost stories
* Hagiwara Hiromichi
* , the layered, colour-coded robes worn by female members of the Imperial court
* &quot;The Pillow Book&quot;
* The Tale of Genji Museum
* Tales of Ise
* Yang Guifei

==Notes==
==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* De Wolf, Charles (2014). &quot;Glimpses of Genji Through the Looking-Glass of Language&quot;. &quot;The Transactions of the Asiatic Society of Japan&quot;. fifth series, volume 6.
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Jackson, Reginald (2021). &quot;A Proximate Remove: Queering Intimacy and Loss in &#x27;The Tale of Genji.&quot;&#x27; Oakland, CA: University of California Press. doi:. ISBN 978-0-520-38254-1.
* 
* Kornicki, P. F., &quot;Unsuitable Books for Women? &quot;Genji Monogatari&quot; and &quot;Ise Monogatari&quot; in Late Seventeenth-Century Japan&quot;, &quot;Monumenta Nipponica&quot;, Vol. 60, No. 2 (Summer, 2005), pp. 147–93, Sophia University, JSTOR
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Sestili Daniele (1996). &quot;Musica e danza del principe Genji. Le arti dello spettacolo nell’antico Giappone&quot;. Lucca: LIM,
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
* 
* &quot;Japanese Literature – Including Selections from Genji Monogatari and Classical Poetry and Drama of Japan&quot; Contains the 1882 Suematsu translation of the first 17 chapters of &quot;The Tale of Genji&quot;, with an introduction and notes.
* World Digital Library presentation of 源氏物語 &quot;Genji monogatari: Volume One, Kiritsubo&quot;. Library of Congress. Primary source moveable type book. 1596–1615, first printed edition of the world&#x27;s first great novel.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q231425" start="55" end="74" title="Japanese literature" label="Japanese literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q715222" start="112" end="127" title="lady-in-waiting" label="lady-in-waiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q81731" start="128" end="144" title="Murasaki Shikibu" label="Murasaki Shikibu"/>
<link wikidata="Q193292" start="168" end="180" title="Heian period" label="Heian period"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="272" end="282" title="Folded leaflet#Concertina fold" label="concertina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511216" start="453" end="461" title="courtier" label="courtier"/>
<link wikidata="Q464104" start="666" end="678" title="Akiko Yosano" label="Akiko Yosano"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="751" end="766" title="Suematsu Kencho#Literary activities" label="Suematsu Kencho"/>
<link wikidata="Q711869" start="813" end="825" title="Arthur Waley" label="Arthur Waley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272933" start="1012" end="1032" title="Edward Seidensticker" label="Edward Seidensticker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826510" start="1034" end="1046" title="Royall Tyler (academic)" label="Royall Tyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q21061664" start="1052" end="1067" title="Dennis Washburn" label="Dennis Washburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q997646" start="1100" end="1112" title="Hikaru Genji" label="Hikaru Genji"/>
<link wikidata="Q208233" start="1168" end="1175" title="Japanese emperor" label="emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11112643" start="1251" end="1268" title="Kiritsubo Consort" label="Kiritsubo Consort"/>
<link wikidata="Q599881" start="1409" end="1417" title="Minamoto clan" label="Minamoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q8261" start="1624" end="1629" title="novel" label="novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q641628" start="1816" end="1829" title="Fujiwara clan" label="Fujiwara clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q433133" start="1844" end="1865" title="Fujiwara no Michinaga" label="Fujiwara no Michinaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758354" start="2492" end="2496" title="Plot (narrative)" label="plot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234220" start="2561" end="2577" title="dramatis personæ" label="dramatis personæ"/>
<link wikidata="Q37739" start="2714" end="2720" title="feudal" label="feudal"/>
<link wikidata="Q35165" start="2926" end="2935" title="Japanese honorifics" label="honorific"/>
<link wikidata="Q837212" start="3294" end="3309" title="list of The Tale of Genji characters" label="many characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q772766" start="3975" end="4000" title="The Diary of Lady Murasaki" label="Murasaki&amp;#x27;s own diary"/>
<link wikidata="Q464104" start="4552" end="4564" title="Yosano Akiko" label="Yosano Akiko"/>
<link wikidata="Q3012130" start="4750" end="4764" title="Daini no Sanmi" label="Daini no Sanmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826510" start="4938" end="4950" title="Royall Tyler (academic)" label="Royall Tyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q997646" start="5140" end="5145" title="Hikaru Genji" label="Genji"/>
<link wikidata="Q837256" start="5273" end="5287" title="Lady Fujitsubo" label="Lady Fujitsubo"/>
<link wikidata="Q837259" start="5618" end="5627" title="Aoi no Ue" label="Aoi no Ue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028559" start="5974" end="5988" title="Murasaki no Ue" label="Murasaki no Ue"/>
<link wikidata="Q207293" start="6381" end="6393" title="Crown Prince" label="Crown Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155010" start="7212" end="7216" title="Suma-ku, Kōbe" label="Suma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047523" start="7226" end="7241" title="Harima Province" label="Harima Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q48320" start="7255" end="7259" title="Kobe" label="Kobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q130290" start="7263" end="7279" title="Hyōgo Prefecture" label="Hyōgo Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q26406" start="7353" end="7359" title="Akashi, Hyōgo" label="Akashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q864163" start="7363" end="7378" title="Settsu Province" label="Settsu Province"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8218" end="8236" title="the Third Princess" label="the Third Princess"/>
<link wikidata="Q6366252" start="8412" end="8417" title="Kaoru Genji" label="Kaoru"/>
<link wikidata="Q326956" start="9354" end="9357" title="Uji, Kyoto" label="Uji"/>
<link wikidata="Q110910" start="9550" end="9559" title="anti-hero" label="anti-hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q711869" start="9681" end="9693" title="Arthur Waley" label="Arthur Waley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826587" start="9832" end="9843" title="Ivan Morris" label="Ivan Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272933" start="9981" end="10001" title="Edward Seidensticker" label="Edward Seidensticker"/>
<link wikidata="Q482" start="10936" end="10942" title="poetry" label="poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q187659" start="11540" end="11544" title="kana" label="kana"/>
<link wikidata="Q48332" start="11586" end="11594" title="hiragana" label="hiragana"/>
<link wikidata="Q82772" start="11607" end="11612" title="kanji" label="kanji"/>
<link wikidata="Q221079" start="12020" end="12030" title="homophones" label="homophones"/>
<link wikidata="Q711869" start="13465" end="13477" title="Arthur Waley" label="Arthur Waley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272933" start="13483" end="13503" title="Edward Seidensticker" label="Edward Seidensticker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826510" start="13509" end="13521" title="Royall Tyler (academic)" label="Royall Tyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q21061664" start="13531" end="13546" title="Dennis Washburn" label="Dennis Washburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q378425" start="14892" end="14906" title="Fujiwara Teika" label="Fujiwara Teika"/>
<link wikidata="Q236205" start="15482" end="15497" title="Kamakura period" label="Kamakura period"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826800" start="16139" end="16168" title="Konan Women&amp;#x27;s University" label="Konan Women&amp;#x27;s University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141077" start="16760" end="16782" title="Matsudaira clan" label="Okochi-Matsudaira clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q858917" start="16796" end="16810" title="Yoshida Domain" label="Yoshida Domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077236" start="17695" end="17714" title="Tokugawa Art Museum" label="Tokugawa Art Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11751" start="17718" end="17724" title="Nagoya" label="Nagoya"/>
<link wikidata="Q514506" start="17769" end="17774" title="Owari Province" label="Owari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412769" start="17789" end="17802" title="Tokugawa clan" label="Tokugawa clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2374140" start="17861" end="17873" title="Gotoh Museum" label="Gotoh Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139795" start="17911" end="17938" title="National Treasures of Japan" label="National Treasures of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q726081" start="18307" end="18315" title="Kodansha" label="Kodansha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180225" start="18394" end="18407" title="Tosa Mitsuoki" label="Tosa Mitsuoki"/>
<link wikidata="Q185905" start="18594" end="18601" title="ukiyo-e" label="ukiyo-e"/>
<link wikidata="Q184963" start="18618" end="18628" title="Edo period" label="Edo period"/>
<link wikidata="Q464104" start="19012" end="19024" title="Akiko Yosano" label="Akiko Yosano"/>
<link wikidata="Q7553" start="19026" end="19059" title="modern translation" label="Translations into modern Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q189203" start="19224" end="19236" title="anachronisms" label="anachronisms"/>
<link wikidata="Q316213" start="19414" end="19438" title="Jun&amp;#x27;ichirō Tanizaki" label="Jun&amp;#x27;ichirō Tanizaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q264247" start="19443" end="19455" title="Fumiko Enchi" label="Fumiko Enchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11577386" start="19656" end="19668" title="Seiko Tanabe" label="Seiko Tanabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142761" start="19670" end="19686" title="Jakucho Setouchi" label="Jakucho Setouchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8274" start="19732" end="19737" title="manga" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738694" start="19927" end="19938" title="Waki Yamato" label="Waki Yamato"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502300" start="19947" end="19964" title="The Tale of Genji (manga)" label="The Tale of Genji"/>
<link wikidata="Q836736" start="20086" end="20108" title="Shogakukan Manga Award" label="Shogakukan Manga Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058300" start="20226" end="20241" title="Suematsu Kenchō" label="Suematsu Kenchō"/>
<link wikidata="Q711869" start="20262" end="20274" title="Arthur Waley" label="Arthur Waley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272933" start="20405" end="20425" title="Edward Seidensticker" label="Edward Seidensticker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826510" start="20623" end="20635" title="Royall Tyler (academic)" label="Royall Tyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q711869" start="21019" end="21031" title="Arthur Waley" label="Arthur Waley"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="21787" end="21791" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q79894" start="22679" end="22686" title="Braille" label="Braille"/>
<link wikidata="Q231645" start="22819" end="22834" title="Setagaya, Tokyo" label="Setagaya, Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="22915" end="22934" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q830740" start="23112" end="23133" title="The Tale of the Heike" label="The Tale of the Heike"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="23763" end="23781" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q111976867" start="23798" end="23811" title="Janice Nimura" label="Janice Nimura"/>
<link wikidata="Q909" start="24878" end="24895" title="Jorge Luis Borges" label="Jorge Luis Borges"/>
<link wikidata="Q711869" start="25027" end="25039" title="Arthur Waley" label="Arthur Waley"/>
<link wikidata="Q286328" start="25281" end="25300" title="psychological novel" label="psychological novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q43736" start="25466" end="25483" title="Yasunari Kawabata" label="Yasunari Kawabata"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="25496" end="25507" title="Nobel Prize" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="25906" end="25914" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q318333" start="25981" end="25998" title="Daphnis and Chloe" label="Daphnis and Chloe"/>
<link wikidata="Q246732" start="26007" end="26016" title="Satyricon" label="Satyricon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196408" start="26542" end="26558" title="historical novel" label="historical novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q315509" start="27379" end="27392" title="Philip Sidney" label="Philip Sidney"/>
<link wikidata="Q4069405" start="27406" end="27413" title="The Countess of Pembroke&amp;#x27;s Arcadia" label="Arcadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8146" start="27587" end="27590" title="Japanese yen" label="yen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11410935" start="27954" end="27966" title="Classics Day" label="Classics Day"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28350" end="28355" title="Kōdō#Monkō" label="Monkō"/>
<link wikidata="Q3226622" start="28704" end="28721" title="The Tale of Genji (1951 film)" label="The Tale of Genji"/>
<link wikidata="Q3131001" start="28731" end="28749" title="Kōzaburō Yoshimura" label="Kōzaburō Yoshimura"/>
<link wikidata="Q7706872" start="28765" end="28780" title="Tetsuji Takechi" label="Tetsuji Takechi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738694" start="28797" end="28808" title="Waki Yamato" label="Waki Yamato"/>
<link wikidata="Q586430" start="28847" end="28863" title="Takarazuka Revue" label="Takarazuka Revue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3328034" start="28888" end="28905" title="The Tale of Genji (1987 film)" label="The Tale of Genji"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243380" start="28915" end="28929" title="Gisaburō Sugii" label="Gisaburō Sugii"/>
<link wikidata="Q19555635" start="29060" end="29093" title="O Desejado" label="O Desejado ou As montanhas da lua"/>
<link wikidata="Q540926" start="29097" end="29108" title="Paulo Rocha (film director)" label="Paulo Rocha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3759753" start="29116" end="29121" title="Genji Monogatari (manga)" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q535183" start="29125" end="29136" title="Miyako Maki" label="Miyako Maki"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533290" start="29199" end="29204" title="Genji monogatari (opera)" label="opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422441" start="29208" end="29219" title="Miki Minoru" label="Miki Minoru"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776011" start="29238" end="29266" title="Sennen no Koi Story of Genji" label="Sennen no Koi Story of Genji"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315839" start="29296" end="29308" title="Osamu Dezaki" label="Osamu Dezaki"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29509" end="29538" title="Lady Murasaki’s Tale of Genji" label="Lady Murasaki’s Tale of Genji"/>
<link wikidata="Q7441260" start="29556" end="29575" title="Sean Michael Wilson" label="Sean Michael Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519335" start="29593" end="29606" title="Ghost story" label="Ghost stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q984479" start="29609" end="29627" title="Hagiwara Hiromichi" label="Hagiwara Hiromichi"/>
<link wikidata="Q615137" start="29717" end="29732" title="The Pillow Book" label="The Pillow Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q5677900" start="29741" end="29765" title="The Tale of Genji Museum" label="The Tale of Genji Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539995" start="29768" end="29780" title="Tales of Ise" label="Tales of Ise"/>
<link wikidata="Q298046" start="29783" end="29794" title="Yang Guifei" label="Yang Guifei"/>
<link wikidata="Q25670" start="30195" end="30198" title="Doi (identifier)" label="doi"/>
<link wikidata="Q475225" start="30931" end="30952" title="World Digital Library" label="World Digital Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="31027" end="31046" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="145430" wikidata="Q403125" url="?curid=145430" title="Queen Anne">
<text>Queen Anne, Ann, or Anna may refer to:
==Related to Anne, queen regnant of Great Britain==
* Anne, Queen of Great Britain (1665–1714), queen of England and Scotland (1702–1707), Ireland (1702–1714) and of Great Britain (1707–1714)
**Queen Anne style architecture, an architectural style from her reign, and its revivals
**Queen Anne style furniture
**&quot;Queen Anne&quot; (play), a 2015 play on Anne&#x27;s life
**Queen Anne&#x27;s War during her reign
**MS &quot;Queen Anne&quot; Ship named after the Monarch

==Other queens called Anne, Ann or Anna==
*Anne of Kiev (c. 1024–1075), queen of France
*Anne of Bohemia (1290–1313), queen of Bohemia
*Anne of Bavaria (1329–1353), queen of Germany and Bohemia
*Anna von Schweidnitz (1339–1362), queen of Germany and Bohemia
*Anne of Bohemia (1366–1394), queen of England
*Anne Neville (1456–1485), queen of England
*Anne of Brittany (1477–1514), queen of France
*Anne of Foix-Candale (1484–1506), queen of Hungary and Bohemia
*Anne Boleyn (1501/7–1536), queen of England
*Anne of Bohemia and Hungary (1503–1547), queen of Hungary, Germany and Bohemia
*Anne of Cleves (1515–1557), queen of England
*Anna Jagiellon (1523–1596), queen of Poland
*Anna of Austria, Queen of Spain (1549–1580), queen of Spain and Portugal
*Anne of Austria, Queen of Poland (1573–1598), queen of Poland and Sweden
*Anne of Denmark (1574–1619), queen of Scotland and England
*Anne Catherine of Brandenburg (1575–1612), queen of Denmark and Norway
*Nzinga of Ndongo and Matamba (c. 1583–1663), queen of Ndongo and Matamba, also known by her Christian name, Anna
*Anna of Tyrol (1585–1618), queen of Germany, Hungary and Bohemia
*Anne of Austria (1601–1666), queen of France
*Queen Ann (Pamunkey chief) (c. 1650–c. 1725), Native American tribal leader in colonial Virginia
*Maria Anna of Neuburg (1667–1740), queen of Spain
*Anne Marie d&#x27;Orléans (1669–1728), queen of Sardinia
*Anna of Russia (1730–1740), empress of Russia 
*Maria Anna of Austria (1683–1754), queen of Portugal
*Anne Sophie Reventlow (1693–1743), queen of Denmark and Norway
*Anna Pavlovna of Russia (1795–1865), queen of the Netherlands
*Maria Anna of Savoy (1803–1884), queen of Hungary
*Anne of Bourbon-Parma (1923–2016), titular queen of Romania
*Anne-Marie of Denmark (born 1946), queen of the Hellenes

==Places==
*Queen Anne, Maryland, USA; on Maryland&#x27;s Eastern Shore
*Queen Anne, Prince George&#x27;s County, Maryland, USA; census-designated place on the Patuxent River
*Queen Anne&#x27;s County, Maryland, USA
*Queen Anne, Seattle, Washington, USA

==Other uses==
*Anna (&quot;Frozen&quot;), a character from Disney&#x27;s &quot;Frozen&quot;

==See also==
*Queen Anne-Marie of Greece (born 1946), queen of Greece
*Keran, Queen of Armenia (before 1262–1285)
*Queen Anne style (disambiguation)
*Ann Regina (disambiguation); Latin for &quot;Ann the Queen&quot;; including Anne, Anna, Ana
*Princess Anne (disambiguation)
*Anne (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q403125" start="0" end="10" title="Queen Anne" label="Queen Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q403125" start="12" end="15" title="Queen Anne" label="Ann"/>
<link wikidata="Q403125" start="20" end="24" title="Queen Anne" label="Anna"/>
<link wikidata="Q119702" start="93" end="121" title="Anne, Queen of Great Britain" label="Anne, Queen of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q529819" start="233" end="262" title="Queen Anne style architecture" label="Queen Anne style architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270219" start="322" end="348" title="Queen Anne style furniture" label="Queen Anne style furniture"/>
<link wikidata="Q21203270" start="351" end="380" title="Queen Anne (play)" label="&amp;quot;Queen Anne&amp;quot; (play)"/>
<link wikidata="Q869045" start="416" end="437" title="Queen Anne&amp;#x27;s War" label="Queen Anne&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q85760924" start="457" end="482" title="MS Queen Anne" label="MS &amp;quot;Queen Anne&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q230073" start="556" end="568" title="Anne of Kiev" label="Anne of Kiev"/>
<link wikidata="Q269565" start="602" end="629" title="Anne of Bohemia (1290–1313)" label="Anne of Bohemia (1290–1313)"/>
<link wikidata="Q63373" start="649" end="664" title="Anne of Bavaria" label="Anne of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q258917" start="708" end="728" title="Anna von Schweidnitz" label="Anna von Schweidnitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q170202" start="772" end="787" title="Anne of Bohemia" label="Anne of Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q229218" start="819" end="831" title="Anne Neville" label="Anne Neville"/>
<link wikidata="Q201143" start="863" end="879" title="Anne of Brittany" label="Anne of Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q231126" start="910" end="930" title="Anne of Foix-Candale" label="Anne of Foix-Candale"/>
<link wikidata="Q80823" start="974" end="985" title="Anne Boleyn" label="Anne Boleyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q233335" start="1019" end="1046" title="Anne of Bohemia and Hungary" label="Anne of Bohemia and Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q57126" start="1099" end="1113" title="Anne of Cleves" label="Anne of Cleves"/>
<link wikidata="Q233989" start="1145" end="1159" title="Anna Jagiellon" label="Anna Jagiellon"/>
<link wikidata="Q156657" start="1190" end="1221" title="Anna of Austria, Queen of Spain" label="Anna of Austria, Queen of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q161133" start="1264" end="1296" title="Anne of Austria, Queen of Poland" label="Anne of Austria, Queen of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q158248" start="1338" end="1353" title="Anne of Denmark" label="Anne of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q170394" start="1398" end="1427" title="Anne Catherine of Brandenburg" label="Anne Catherine of Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q467650" start="1470" end="1498" title="Nzinga of Ndongo and Matamba" label="Nzinga of Ndongo and Matamba"/>
<link wikidata="Q235540" start="1584" end="1597" title="Anna of Tyrol" label="Anna of Tyrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q151209" start="1650" end="1665" title="Anne of Austria" label="Anne of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270205" start="1696" end="1722" title="Queen Ann (Pamunkey chief)" label="Queen Ann (Pamunkey chief)"/>
<link wikidata="Q57651" start="1794" end="1815" title="Maria Anna of Neuburg" label="Maria Anna of Neuburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q230873" start="1845" end="1870" title="Anne Marie d&amp;#x27;Orléans" label="Anne Marie d&amp;#x27;Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q160165" start="1903" end="1917" title="Anna of Russia" label="Anna of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q84156" start="1951" end="1972" title="Maria Anna of Austria" label="Maria Anna of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q237745" start="2005" end="2026" title="Anne Sophie Reventlow" label="Anne Sophie Reventlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q160800" start="2069" end="2092" title="Anna Pavlovna of Russia" label="Anna Pavlovna of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q170182" start="2132" end="2151" title="Maria Anna of Savoy" label="Maria Anna of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q563765" start="2183" end="2204" title="Queen Anne of Romania" label="Anne of Bourbon-Parma"/>
<link wikidata="Q564889" start="2244" end="2265" title="Queen Anne-Marie of Greece" label="Anne-Marie of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q753737" start="2314" end="2334" title="Queen Anne, Maryland" label="Queen Anne, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270203" start="2375" end="2424" title="Queen Anne, Prince George&amp;#x27;s County, Maryland" label="Queen Anne, Prince George&amp;#x27;s County, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q511150" start="2478" end="2512" title="Queen Anne&amp;#x27;s County, Maryland" label="Queen Anne&amp;#x27;s County, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3413999" start="2519" end="2538" title="Queen Anne, Seattle" label="Queen Anne, Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q15614636" start="2573" end="2598" title="Anna (Frozen)" label="Anna (&amp;quot;Frozen&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q564889" start="2665" end="2691" title="Queen Anne-Marie of Greece" label="Queen Anne-Marie of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814737" start="2722" end="2745" title="Keran, Queen of Armenia" label="Keran, Queen of Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q69358438" start="2766" end="2799" title="Queen Anne style (disambiguation)" label="Queen Anne style (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q114243286" start="2801" end="2828" title="Ann Regina (disambiguation)" label="Ann Regina (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031750" start="2894" end="2924" title="Princess Anne (disambiguation)" label="Princess Anne (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2850954" start="2926" end="2947" title="Anne (disambiguation)" label="Anne (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="145431" wikidata="Q452075" url="?curid=145431" title="Amadís de Gaula">
<text> (in English &quot;Amadis of Gaul&quot;) (, ) (, ) is an Iberian landmark work among the Spanish and Portuguese chivalric romances which were in vogue in the 16th century, although its first version, much revised before printing, was written at the onset of the 14th century in an uncertain place of the Iberian Peninsula.

The earliest surviving edition of the known text, by Garci Rodríguez de Montalvo (not Ordóñez de Montalvo), was printed in Zaragoza, Spain, in 1508, although almost certainly there were earlier printed editions, now lost. It was published in four books in Castilian, but its origins are unclear: The narrative originates in the late post-Arthurian genre and had certainly been read as early as the 14th century by the chancellor Pero López de Ayala, as well as his contemporary Pero Ferrús.

Montalvo himself confesses to have amended the first three volumes, and to be the author of the fourth. Additionally, in the Portuguese &quot;Chronicle&quot; by Gomes Eanes de Zurara (1454), &quot;Amadis&quot; is attributed to Vasco de Lobeira, who was knighted after the Battle of Aljubarrota (1385). Other sources claim that the work was, in fact, a copy of João de Lobeira, and that it was a translation into Castilian Spanish of an earlier work, probably from the beginning of the 14th century, however, no primitive version in Portuguese is known. A more recent sources attribute &quot;Amadis&quot; to Henry of Castile, due to evidence linking his biography with the events in &quot;Amadis&quot;. The inspiration for the &quot;Amadis de Gaula&quot; appears to be the forbidden marriage of Infanta Constanza of Aragon with Henry in 1260 (see Don Juan Manuel&#x27;s &quot;&quot; of 1335), as forbidden as was also Oriana&#x27;s marriage to Amadis. 

In the introduction to the text, Garci Rodríguez de Montalvo explains that he edited the first three books of a text in circulation since the 14th century. Montalvo also admits to adding a fourth as yet unpublished book as well as adding a continuation, &quot;Las sergas de Esplandián&quot;, which he claims was found in a buried chest in Constantinople and transported to Spain by a Hungarian merchant (the famous motif of the found manuscript).

 was the fictional character in Don Quixote&#x27;s favorite book in the novel by Miguel de Cervantes.

==Plot==
The story narrates the star-crossed love of King Perión of Gaula and Elisena of England, resulting in the secret birth of Amadís. The place called &quot;Gaula&quot; is a fictional kingdom within Brittany. It has in the past been identified with Wales or France, but it is best understood as a completely legendary place.

Abandoned at birth on a raft in England, the child is raised by the knight Gandales in Scotland and investigates his origins through fantastic adventures.

He is persecuted by the wizard Arcaláus, but protected by Urganda la Desconocida (Urganda the Unknown or Unrecognized), an ambiguous priestess with magical powers and a talent for prophecy. Knighted by his father King Perión, Amadís overcomes the challenges of the enchanted Ínsola Firme (a sort of peninsula), including passing through the Arch of Faithful Lovers.

Despite Amadís&#x27; celebrated fidelity, his childhood sweetheart, Oriana, heiress to the throne of Great Britain, becomes jealous of a rival princess and sends a letter to chastise Amadís. The knight changes his name to Beltenebros and indulges in a long period of madness on the isolated Peña Pobre (Poor Peak or Mountain).

He recovers his senses only when Oriana sends her maid to retrieve him. He then helps Oriana&#x27;s father, Lisuarte, repel invaders. A short time later he and Oriana scandalously consummate their love. Their son Esplandián is the result of this one illicit meeting.

Rodríguez de Montalvo asserts that in the &quot;original&quot; &quot;Amadís&quot;, Esplandián eventually kills his father for this offense against his mother&#x27;s honor; however, Montalvo amends this defect and resolves their conflict peaceably.

Oriana and Amadís defer their marriage for many years due to enmity between Amadís and Oriana&#x27;s father, Lisuarte. Amadís absents himself from Britain for at least 10 years, masquerading as &quot;The Knight of the Green Sword&quot;. He travels as far as Constantinople and secures the favor of the child-princess Leonorina, who will become Esplandián&#x27;s wife. His most famous adventure during this time of exile is the battle with the giant Endriago, a monster born of incest who exhales a poisonous gas and whose body is covered in scales.

As a knight, Amadís is courteous, gentle, sensitive, and a Christian, who dares to defend free love. Unlike most literary heroes of his time (French and German, for example), Amadís is a handsome man who would cry if refused by his lady, but is invincible in battle and usually emerges drenched in his own and his opponents&#x27; blood.

==Principal characters==
* Amadís: Greatest of knights-errant, renowned in feats of arms
* Perión: King of Gaula, father of Amadís
* Elisena: Queen of Gaula, mother of Amadís
* Galaor: Brother of Amadís
* Melicia: Sister of Amadís
* Gandales: Scottish knight, foster-father of Amadís
* Gandalin: Son of Gandales, squire of Amadís
* Lisuarte: King of Britain
* Brisena: Queen of Britain
* Oriana: Daughter of Lisuarte and Brisena, beloved of Amadís
* Esplandián: Son of Amadís and Oriana
* Leonorina: Princess of Constantinople, beloved of Esplandián
* Languines: King of Scotland
* Agrajes: Son of Languines
* Mabilia: Daughter of Languines
* Ardian: Dwarf who serves Amadís
* Abies: King of Ireland, defeated by Amadís
* Endriago: Monster defeated by Amadís
* Arcaláus: Wizard who opposes Amadís
* Urganda the Unknown: Sorceress who protects Amadís

==Literary significance==
Called also &quot;Amadís sin tiempo&quot; (Amadis without Time) by his mother (in allusion to the fact that being conceived outside marriage she would have to abandon him and he would probably die), he is the most representative Iberian hero of chivalric romance. His adventures ran to four volumes, probably the most popular such tales of their time. François de la Noue, one of the Huguenot captains of the 16th century, affirmed that reading the romances of Amadis had caused a &quot;spirit of vertigo&quot; even in his more rationally-minded generation. The books show a complete idealization and simplification of knight-errantry. Even servants are hardly heard of, but there are many princesses, ladies and kings. Knights and damsels in distress are found everywhere. The book&#x27;s style is reasonably modern, but lacks dialogue and the character&#x27;s impressions, mostly describing the action.

The book&#x27;s style was praised by the usually demanding Juan de Valdés, although he considered that from time to time it was too low or too high a style. The language is characterized by a certain &quot;Latinizing&quot; influence in its syntax, especially the tendency to place the verb at the end of the sentence; as well as other such details, such as the use of the present participle, which bring &quot;Amadís&quot; into line with the allegorical style of the 15th century.

Nevertheless, there is a breach of style when Garci Rodriguez de Montalvo presents the fourth book. It becomes dull and solemn, reflecting the nature of the intruding writer. The first three books are inspired in deeds and feats by knights-errant, dating back to the 13th century, while the fourth book emerges as a less brilliant attachment of the 15th century. The pristine style of &quot;Amadís&quot; can be perceived in the few original famous pages analyzed by Antonio Rodríguez Moñino: It is lively and straight to the facts of war and love, with brief dialogs, all quite elegant and amusing. &quot;Amadís of Gaula&quot; is frequently referenced in the humorous classic &quot;Don Quixote&quot;, written by Miguel de Cervantes in the early 17th century. The character Don Quixote idolizes Amadís and tries to imitate him.

Historically, &quot;Amadís&quot; was very influential amongst the Spanish conquistadores. Bernal Díaz del Castillo mentioned the wonders of &quot;Amadís&quot; when he marveled at his first sight of Tenochtitlan (modern Mexico City) – and such place names as California come directly from the work.

The English literary historian Helen Moore in her 2020 book &quot;Amadis in English: A Study in the Reading of Romance&quot; suggested the book has been popular over the centuries because:
The British writer C.S. Lewis said that &quot;Amadis&quot; was among his &quot;own favourite reading&quot; and that he had an &quot;early &amp; lasting love of Oriana.&quot;

==Origins==
As mentioned above, the origins of the book of &quot;Amadís&quot; are disputed.

===The existing texts===
====The version of Montalvo====
The only known complete text of is that of Garci Rodríguez de Montalvo, a Castilian writer. The earliest surviving text (book) is from 1508, although scholars accept that there were earlier editions.

If this text had been based on a Portuguese original, there would be linguistic evidence in the text. As there is none, the text of Montalvo must have been written in Castilian.

====Manuscript fragments====
The only known manuscript are the 15th-century fragments found in a book binding (a discarded manuscript, in this case &quot;Amadís&quot;, was used as raw material for binding another book), and identified and published by . He claimed sole ownership of only Book IV. The existence of a prior version of Books I to III has been supported by Antonio Rodríguez Moñino&#x27;s identification of four 15th-century manuscript fragments (). The name &quot;Esplandián&quot; is clearly visible in one of these. The fragments belong to the collection of the Bancroft Library at the University of California, Berkeley. They show that, contrary to the usual view that Montalvo &quot;expanded&quot; the first three books, instead he abbreviated them.

===Earlier mentions of Amadis===
In the Spanish translation of Egidio Colonna&#x27;s &quot;De regimine principum&quot;, &quot;Amadís&quot; is mentioned and also the poet Enrico, who could well be Enrico de Castiglia. Egidio Colonna was in Rome in 1267 when Henry of Castile was elected Senator. The translation was made around 1350 under King Peter the Cruel. This is the oldest mention of &quot;Amadís&quot;.

==Sequels in Spanish==
&quot;Amadis of Gaul&quot;″s popularity was such that in the decades following its publication, dozens of sequels of sometimes minor quality were published in Spanish, Italian, and German, together with a number of other imitative works. Montalvo himself cashed in with the continuation &quot;Las sergas de Esplandián&quot; (Book V), and the sequel-specialist Feliciano de Silva (also the author of &quot;Second Celestina&quot;) added four more books including &quot;Amadis of Greece&quot; (Book IX). Miguel de Cervantes wrote &quot;Don Quixote&quot; as a burlesque attack on the resulting genre. Cervantes and his protagonist Quixote, however, keep the original &quot;Amadís&quot; in very high esteem.

The Spanish volumes, with their authors and the names of their main characters:

* Books I–IV: 1508 (Garci Rodríguez de Montalvo): &quot;Amadís de Gaula&quot;
* Book V: 1510 (Garci Rodríguez de Montalvo): &quot;Las sergas de Esplandián&quot;
* Book VI: 1510 (Páez de Ribera): &quot;Florisando&quot;
* Book VII: 1514 (Feliciano de Silva): &quot;Lisuarte de Grecia&quot;
* Book VIII: 1526 (Juan Díaz): &quot;Lisuarte de Grecia&quot;
* Book IX: 1530 (Feliciano de Silva): &quot;Amadis of Greece&quot;
* Book X: 1532 (Feliciano de Silva): &quot;Florisel de Niquea&quot; (Parts I-II)
* Book XI: 1535 (Feliciano de Silva): &quot;Florisel de Niquea&quot; (Parts III-IV)
* Book XII: 1546 (Pedro de Luján): &quot;Silves de la Selva&quot;

==Translations, continuations and sequels in Castilian and other languages==
Castilian sequels:
* – original anonymous text in Castilian: 1511
* (son of Palmerin de Olivia) – original anonymous text in Castilian: 1512

In Germany and England, &quot;Amadís&quot; was known chiefly through its French translations, sometimes much revised, and in England the cycle was generally referred to by its French title &quot;Amadis de Gaule&quot;. The French translations did not follow the Spanish book divisions exactly, and the entire cycle in the French version extends to 24 books. Note that the book numbers of the French translation do not always correspond to the book numbers of the Spanish originals, and in both languages, &quot;book&quot; is not the same as &quot;printed volume&quot;; physical printed books sometimes contained more than one &quot;book&quot; of the series.

French translations, with their translators:
* Book I: 1540 (Nicolas de Herberay des Essarts)
* Book II: 1541 (Nicolas de Herberay des Essarts)
* Book III: 1542 (Nicolas de Herberay des Essarts)
* Book IV: 1543 (Nicolas de Herberay des Essarts)
* Book V: 1544 (Nicolas de Herberay des Essarts)
* (Spanish book VI was rejected as apocryphal)
* Book VI: 1545 (Nicolas de Herberay des Essarts) (actually Spanish Book VII)
* (Spanish Book VIII was rejected because it told of the death of Amadis)
* Book VII: 1546 (Nicolas de Herberay des Essarts) (actually Spanish Book IXa)
* Book VIII: 1548 (Nicolas de Herberay des Essarts) (actually Spanish Book IXb)
* Book IX: 1551 (Giles Boileau &amp; Claude Colet) (actually Spanish Book Xa)
* Book X: 1552 (Jacques Gohory) (actually Spanish Book Xb)
* Book XI: 1554 (Jacques Gohory) (actually Spanish Book XIa)
* Book XII: 1556 (Guillaume Aubert) (actually Spanish Book XIb)
* Book XIII: 1571 (Jacques Gohory) (actually Spanish Book XIIa)
* Book XIV: 1574 (Antoine Tyron) (actually Spanish Book XIIb)
* Books XV–XXI: 1576–1581
* Books XXII–XXIV: after 1594

The German Continuation:
* Books XIX–XXI : 1594–5

The Italian Continuation:
* Books XIII–XVIII (Mambrino Roseo da Fabriano)

In Portugal, the Amadis cycle also launched other adventure series, such as:
* (&quot;Palmeirim of England&quot;) – original Portuguese text by Francisco de Morais Cabral: c.1544 (published 1567)
* – original Portuguese text by Diogo Fernandes
* – original Portuguese text by Gonçalves Lobato
* (&quot;Chronicle of Emperor Clarimund&quot;) – original Portuguese text by João de Barros
* – original Portuguese text by Gonçalo Fernandes Trancoso

==Operas==
*&quot;Amadis&quot; (1684) by Jean-Baptiste Lully
*&quot;Amadis de Grèce&quot; (1699) by André Cardinal Destouches
*&quot;Amadigi di Gaula&quot; (1715) by George Frideric Handel
*&quot;Amadis de Gaule&quot; (1771) by Jean-Benjamin de La Borde and Pierre Montan Berton
*&quot;Amadis de Gaule&quot; (1779) by Johann Christian Bach
*&quot;Amadis&quot; (first performed 1922) by Jules Massenet

==References==
==External links==

* Full text in Spanish
* &quot;Amadis de Gaula&quot; – images of a 1526 edition of the original Spanish text
* &quot;The ancient, famous and honourable history of Amadis de Gaule.&quot; [books 1 and 2] - Early English Books Online
* Vasco Lobeira: &quot;Amadis de Gaul&quot;, Book I, translated by Robert Southey, who erroneously says the author&#x27;s name was Garciordonez de Montalvo.
* Volumes 2-4 in English. The Gutenberg Project
* – Italian libretto by Nicola Francesco Haym for the opera by Handel</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q452075" start="0" end="0" title="Amadís de Gaula" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="57" end="64" title="Iberian Peninsula" label="Iberian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="89" end="96" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="101" end="111" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159457" start="112" end="129" title="chivalric romance" label="chivalric romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q723468" start="377" end="404" title="Garci Rodríguez de Montalvo" label="Garci Rodríguez de Montalvo"/>
<link wikidata="Q10305" start="447" end="455" title="Zaragoza" label="Zaragoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585442" start="540" end="544" title="Lost literary work" label="lost"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="580" end="589" title="Spanish language" label="Castilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q507738" start="657" end="671" title="Matter of Britain" label="post-Arthurian"/>
<link wikidata="Q373085" start="742" end="752" title="chancellor" label="chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q81678" start="753" end="772" title="Pero López de Ayala" label="Pero López de Ayala"/>
<link wikidata="Q9058599" start="802" end="813" title="Pero Ferrús" label="Pero Ferrús"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="941" end="951" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377941" start="977" end="998" title="Gomes Eanes de Zurara" label="Gomes Eanes de Zurara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402130" start="1043" end="1059" title="Vasco de Lobeira" label="Vasco de Lobeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341972" start="1088" end="1109" title="Battle of Aljubarrota" label="Battle of Aljubarrota"/>
<link wikidata="Q169836" start="1176" end="1191" title="João de Lobeira" label="João de Lobeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357700" start="1423" end="1439" title="Henry of Castile the Senator" label="Henry of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006303" start="1610" end="1637" title="Constance of Aragon, Lady of Villena" label="Infanta Constanza of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q373007" start="1662" end="1677" title="Don Juan Manuel" label="Don Juan Manuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1909432" start="2029" end="2053" title="Las sergas de Esplandián" label="Las sergas de Esplandián"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="2108" end="2122" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="2153" end="2162" title="Hungary" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q42757690" start="2197" end="2213" title="false document" label="found manuscript"/>
<link wikidata="Q480" start="2249" end="2260" title="Don Quixote" label="Don Quixote"/>
<link wikidata="Q5682" start="2298" end="2317" title="Miguel de Cervantes" label="Miguel de Cervantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600519" start="2352" end="2364" title="star-crossed" label="star-crossed"/>
<link wikidata="Q327" start="2524" end="2532" title="Brittany" label="Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q202415" start="2651" end="2660" title="Child abandonment" label="Abandoned"/>
<link wikidata="Q30905293" start="2865" end="2887" title="Urganda la Desconocida" label="Urganda la Desconocida"/>
<link wikidata="Q61998951" start="3610" end="3618" title="Lisuarte of Britain" label="Lisuarte"/>
<link wikidata="Q16515017" start="4592" end="4601" title="courteous" label="courteous"/>
<link wikidata="Q61998951" start="5239" end="5247" title="Lisuarte of Britain" label="Lisuarte"/>
<link wikidata="Q30905293" start="5706" end="5713" title="Urganda" label="Urganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q202415" start="5943" end="5950" title="child abandonment" label="abandon"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="6013" end="6020" title="Iberian Peninsula" label="Iberian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159457" start="6029" end="6046" title="chivalric romance" label="chivalric romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451253" start="6136" end="6155" title="François de la Noue" label="François de la Noue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293837" start="6516" end="6535" title="damsel in distress" label="damsels in distress"/>
<link wikidata="Q223393" start="6706" end="6711" title="literary genre" label="style"/>
<link wikidata="Q666687" start="6749" end="6763" title="Juan de Valdés" label="Juan de Valdés"/>
<link wikidata="Q37437" start="6930" end="6936" title="syntax" label="syntax"/>
<link wikidata="Q24905" start="6975" end="6979" title="verb" label="verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q41796" start="6998" end="7006" title="Sentence (linguistics)" label="sentence"/>
<link wikidata="Q814722" start="7062" end="7080" title="present participle" label="present participle"/>
<link wikidata="Q18535" start="7132" end="7143" title="allegory" label="allegorical"/>
<link wikidata="Q126236" start="8074" end="8086" title="conquistador" label="conquistador"/>
<link wikidata="Q315795" start="8090" end="8114" title="Bernal Díaz del Castillo" label="Bernal Díaz del Castillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q13695" start="8198" end="8210" title="Tenochtitlan" label="Tenochtitlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3207221" start="8258" end="8268" title="Origin of the name California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q57531618" start="8330" end="8341" title="Helen Moore (literary scholar)" label="Helen Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q9204" start="8507" end="8517" title="C.S. Lewis" label="C.S. Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4854158" start="9770" end="9786" title="Bancroft Library" label="Bancroft Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="9794" end="9828" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q380647" start="10024" end="10038" title="Egidio Colonna" label="Egidio Colonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357700" start="10157" end="10176" title="Henry of Castile the Senator" label="Enrico de Castiglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q310963" start="10299" end="10319" title="Peter of Castile" label="King Peter the Cruel"/>
<link wikidata="Q261636" start="10501" end="10507" title="sequel" label="sequel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1909432" start="10688" end="10712" title="Las sergas de Esplandián" label="Las sergas de Esplandián"/>
<link wikidata="Q3755311" start="10755" end="10773" title="Feliciano de Silva" label="Feliciano de Silva"/>
<link wikidata="Q3755311" start="10862" end="10878" title="Amadis of Greece" label="Amadis of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q5682" start="10896" end="10915" title="Miguel de Cervantes" label="Miguel de Cervantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q480" start="10928" end="10939" title="Don Quixote" label="Don Quixote"/>
<link wikidata="Q1909432" start="11310" end="11334" title="Las sergas de Esplandián" label="Las sergas de Esplandián"/>
<link wikidata="Q3755311" start="11416" end="11434" title="Feliciano de Silva" label="Feliciano de Silva"/>
<link wikidata="Q3755311" start="11574" end="11590" title="Amadis of Greece" label="Amadis of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062568" start="12767" end="12798" title="Nicolas de Herberay des Essarts" label="Nicolas de Herberay des Essarts"/>
<link wikidata="Q352810" start="14073" end="14099" title="Francisco de Moraes" label="Francisco de Morais Cabral"/>
<link wikidata="Q703704" start="14299" end="14313" title="João de Barros" label="João de Barros"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840837" start="14392" end="14398" title="Amadis (Lully)" label="Amadis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192" start="14415" end="14434" title="Jean-Baptiste Lully" label="Jean-Baptiste Lully"/>
<link wikidata="Q16827728" start="14442" end="14457" title="Amadis de Grèce" label="Amadis de Grèce"/>
<link wikidata="Q517636" start="14474" end="14499" title="André Cardinal Destouches" label="André Cardinal Destouches"/>
<link wikidata="Q452022" start="14507" end="14523" title="Amadigi di Gaula" label="Amadigi di Gaula"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302" start="14540" end="14562" title="George Frideric Handel" label="George Frideric Handel"/>
<link wikidata="Q16827724" start="14570" end="14585" title="Amadis de Gaule (La Borde and Berton)" label="Amadis de Gaule"/>
<link wikidata="Q932694" start="14602" end="14627" title="Jean-Benjamin de La Borde" label="Jean-Benjamin de La Borde"/>
<link wikidata="Q178336" start="14632" end="14652" title="Pierre Montan Berton" label="Pierre Montan Berton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3613531" start="14660" end="14675" title="Amadis de Gaule (J.C. Bach)" label="Amadis de Gaule"/>
<link wikidata="Q106641" start="14692" end="14713" title="Johann Christian Bach" label="Johann Christian Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840832" start="14721" end="14727" title="Amadis (Massenet)" label="Amadis"/>
<link wikidata="Q194436" start="14760" end="14774" title="Jules Massenet" label="Jules Massenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="14907" end="14914" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q216838" start="15109" end="15123" title="Robert Southey" label="Robert Southey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986170" start="15271" end="15292" title="Nicola Francesco Haym" label="Nicola Francesco Haym"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="145432" wikidata="Q294192" url="?curid=145432" title="Guy of Lusignan">
<text>Guy of Lusignan ( 1150 – 18 July 1194) was King of Jerusalem, first as husband and co-ruler of Queen Sibylla from 1186 to 1190 then as disputed ruler from 1190 to 1192. He was also Lord of Cyprus from 1192 to 1194. 

A French Poitevin knight, Guy was the youngest son of Hugh VIII of Lusignan and the younger brother of Aimery of Lusignan. Having arrived in the Holy Land (where his brother Aimery was already prominent) at an unknown date, Guy was hastily married to Sibylla in 1180 to prevent a political incident within the kingdom. As the health of his brother-in-law Baldwin IV of Jerusalem deteriorated, Sibylla appointed Guy as regent for his stepson, Baldwin V. Baldwin IV died in 1185, followed shortly by Baldwin V in 1186, leading to the succession of Sibylla and Guy to the throne. Guy&#x27;s reign was marked by increased hostilities with the Ayyubids ruled by Saladin, culminating in the Battle of Hattin in July 1187—during which Guy was captured—and the fall of Jerusalem itself three months later.

Following a year of imprisonment in Damascus, Guy was released by Saladin. After being denied entry to Tyre, one of the last crusader strongholds, by Conrad of Montferrat, Guy besieged Acre in 1189. The siege, during which Guy&#x27;s wife died, developed into a rallying point for the Third Crusade, led by Philip II of France and Richard I of England. Guy entered a bitter row with Conrad over the kingship of Jerusalem; despite Richard&#x27;s support for the widower king, Conrad married Sibylla&#x27;s half-sister Isabella and was elected king by the kingdom&#x27;s nobility. Conrad was killed by Assassins days after the election; Richard&#x27;s and Guy&#x27;s involvement in the incident is suspected but unproven. Nevertheless, Guy was compensated for the dispossession of his crown by being given lordship of Cyprus in 1192, which Richard had taken from the Byzantine Empire en route to the Levant. Guy ruled the Kingdom of Cyprus until he died in 1194 when he was succeeded by his brother Aimery.

==Background==
Guy was a member of the House of Lusignan. The family&#x27;s holdings were in Poitou, which was a part of King Henry II of England&#x27;s territories within the Kingdom of France. Guy was the youngest son of Hugh VIII of Lusignan and Bourgogne of Rancon. Both the Lusignans and the Rancons had a long history of involvement in the crusades, starting with the participation of Guy&#x27;s great-grandfather Hugh VI of Lusignan at the 1102 Battle of Ramla. Guy&#x27;s father and maternal uncle Geoffrey the Poitevin both took part in the Second Crusade.

In 1168, Guy and his brothers, in an attempt to capture Eleanor of Aquitaine, ambushed and killed Patrick, 1st Earl of Salisbury, governor of Poitou, who was returning from a pilgrimage to Santiago of Compostela. They captured Patrick&#x27;s nephew William the Marshal, then a knight-errant serving in his uncle&#x27;s household, and allowed him to be ransomed by Eleanor, but were banished from Poitou by their overlord, Richard I, Duke of Aquitaine.

Guy went to Jerusalem at some date between 1173 and 1180, initially as a pilgrim or Crusader. He may have arrived with the French Crusaders of 1179. In 1174, his older brother Aimery had married the daughter of Baldwin of Ibelin and entered court circles. Amalric had also obtained the patronage of King Baldwin IV and of his mother Agnes of Courtenay who held the County of Jaffa and Ascalon and was married to Reginald of Sidon. He was appointed Agnes&#x27;s Constable in Jaffa and later Constable of the Kingdom. Later, hostile rumours alleged he was Agnes&#x27;s lover, but this is questionable. It is likely that his promotions were aimed at weaning him away from the political orbit of the Ibelin family, who were associated with Raymond III of Tripoli, Amalric I&#x27;s cousin and the former &quot;bailli&quot; or regent. Amalric of Lusignan&#x27;s success likely facilitated Guy&#x27;s social and political advancement whenever he arrived.

Raymond of Tripoli and his ally Bohemond III of Antioch were preparing to invade the kingdom to force the king to give his older sister Sibylla in marriage to Baldwin of Ibelin, Amalric&#x27;s father-in-law. Guy and Sibylla were hastily married at Eastertide in April 1180 to prevent this coup. By his marriage, Guy also became Count of Jaffa and Ascalon in April 1180, and bailiff of Jerusalem. He and Sibylla had two daughters, Alix and Maria. Sibylla already had one child, a son from her first marriage to William of Montferrat.

The mid-thirteenth century &quot;Old French Continuation of William of Tyre&quot; (attributed to Ernoul) claims that Agnes advised her son to marry Sibylla to Guy and that Amalric had brought Guy to Jerusalem specifically for him to marry Sibylla. However, this is improbable: given the speed with which the marriage was arranged, Guy must have already been in the kingdom when the decision was made. With the new king of France, Philip II, a minor, the chief hope of external aid was Baldwin&#x27;s first cousin Henry II, who owed the pope a penitential pilgrimage on account of the Thomas Becket affair. Guy was a vassal of Richard and Henry II, and as a formerly rebellious vassal, it was in their interests to keep him overseas.

Early in 1182, as his health markedly declined, Baldwin IV named Guy regent. However, he and Raynald of Châtillon made provocations against Saladin during two years of truce. But his military hesitance at the siege of Kerak disillusioned the king with him. Throughout late 1183 and 1184, Baldwin IV tried to have his sister&#x27;s marriage to Guy annulled, showing that Baldwin still held his sister in some favour. Baldwin IV wanted a loyal brother-in-law and was frustrated by Guy&#x27;s disobedience. Sibylla was in Ascalon with her husband. Unsuccessful in prying his sister and close heir away from Guy, the king, and the &quot;Haute Cour&quot; altered the succession, placing Baldwin V, Sibylla&#x27;s son from her first marriage, in precedence over Sibylla, and decreeing a process to choose the monarch afterwards between Sibylla and Isabella (whom Baldwin and the Haute Cour thus recognized as at least equally entitled to succession as Sibylla). However, she was not excluded from the succession herself. Guy kept a low profile from 1183 until his wife became Queen in 1186.

==Accession==
When Baldwin IV finally succumbed to his leprosy in 1185, Baldwin V became king, but he was a sickly child and died within a year. Guy went with Sibylla to Jerusalem for his stepson&#x27;s funeral in 1186, along with an armed escort, with which he garrisoned the city. Raymond III, who wanted to protect his influence and his new political ally, the dowager queen Maria Comnena, was making arrangements to summon the &quot;Haute Cour&quot; when Sibylla was crowned queen by Patriarch Eraclius. Raynald of Châtillon gained widespread support for Sibylla by affirming that she was &quot;li plus apareissanz et plus dreis heis dou rouame&quot; (&quot;the most evident and rightful heir of the kingdom&quot;). With the explicit support of the church, Sibylla was undisputed sovereign.

However, before she was crowned, she agreed with oppositional court members that she would annul her marriage with Guy to please them, as long as she was given free choice in her next husband. The leaders of the &quot;Haute Cour&quot; agreed, and Sibylla was crowned queen regnant. Taking her choice as husband, to the astonishment of the rival court faction, she remarried Guy, who became king in August 1186. The Queen removed the crown from her head and handed it to Guy, permitting him to crown himself at the Church of the Holy Sepulchre in Jerusalem in September 1186. As Hamilton writes, &quot;There could be no doubt after the ceremony that Guy only held the crown matrimonial&quot;.

Sibylla&#x27;s half-sister Isabella and her husband Humphrey IV of Toron were Raymond III and the Ibelins&#x27; choice for the throne. As Sibylla&#x27;s parents&#x27; marriage had been annulled and the church had legitimized both her and Baldwin, Isabella was seen by many as the legal heiress. However, Humphrey would not assert his wife&#x27;s claim, and he disassociated himself from them, swearing fealty instead to Sibylla. Humphrey would become one of Guy&#x27;s closest allies in the kingdom.

==Hattin and the fall of Jerusalem==

Immediately after, the chief concern in the kingdom was checking Saladin&#x27;s advance. In 1187, Guy, under pressure and surrounded by conflicting advice, attempted to relieve Saladin&#x27;s siege of Tiberias. Guy&#x27;s army left the springs of Sepphora and marched towards Tiberias to give a pitched battle. Stationary, it was surrounded and cut off from a supply of water, and on 4 July, the army of Jerusalem was utterly destroyed at the Battle of Hattin. Guy was one of the few captives the Saracens spared after the battle, along with his brother Geoffrey, Raynald, and Humphrey.

The exhausted captives were brought to Saladin&#x27;s tent, where Guy was given a goblet of water as a sign of Saladin&#x27;s generosity, for offering a prisoner food or drink was a sign that his life was safe. When Guy offered the goblet to his fellow captive Raynald, Saladin chastised him, indicating his clemency did not extend to Raynald. Saladin then accused Raynald of being an oath-breaker, and Raynald replied that &quot;kings have always acted thus&quot;. Saladin proceeded to execute Raynald himself, beheading him with his sword. When Guy was brought in, he fell to his knees at the sight of Raynald&#x27;s corpse. Saladin bade him to rise, saying, &quot;A king does not kill a king.&quot;

Guy was imprisoned in Damascus, while Sibylla, together with Balian of Ibelin, brother of Baldwin of Ibelin, remained behind to defend Jerusalem, which was handed over to Saladin on 2 October. Sibylla wrote to Saladin and begged for her husband&#x27;s release, and Guy was finally granted release in 1188 and allowed to rejoin his wife. Guy and Sibylla sought refuge in Tyre, the only city remaining in Christian hands, thanks to the defence of Conrad of Montferrat (younger brother of Sibylla&#x27;s first husband).

==Guy versus Conrad==

Conrad denied sanctuary to Sibylla and Guy, who camped outside the city walls for months. Guy then took the initiative, beginning the siege of Acre in anticipation of the arrival of the vanguard of the Third Crusade. The queen followed him but died during an epidemic in the summer of 1190, along with their young daughters. According to the surviving members of the &quot;Haute Cour&quot;, Guy lost the authority he held as her husband with Sibylla&#x27;s death, and the crown passed to Isabella. The Ibelins hastily divorced Isabella from Humphrey and married her to Conrad, who now claimed the kingship. However, Guy continued to demand recognition as king.

In 1191, Guy left Acre with a small fleet and landed at Limassol to seek support from Richard I of England, whose vassal he had been in Poitou. He swore allegiance to King Richard and attended his wedding to Berengaria of Navarre. He participated in the campaign against Isaac Comnenus of Cyprus. In return for this, when Richard arrived at Acre, he supported Guy against Conrad, who had the support of his kinsmen Philip II of France and Leopold V of Austria.

The conflict continued throughout the siege of Acre, although it did not deter Guy from gallantly saving Conrad&#x27;s life when the enemy surrounded him. A temporary settlement was then reached, by which Guy was to remain king in his lifetime but be succeeded by Conrad and Isabella or their heirs. However, in April 1192, Richard finally realised he could not return home without a final resolution, definitely relinquishing the crown in May 1192. The kingship was put to a vote among the barons of the kingdom: Conrad was elected unanimously, and Guy accepted defeat. Only days later, Conrad was murdered by Assassins, and Isabella married Richard&#x27;s nephew Henry II of Champagne; when he died in 1197, Isabella married Guy&#x27;s brother Amalric.

==Lord of Cyprus==

Meanwhile, Guy was compensated for the loss of his kingdom by purchasing Cyprus from the Templars in 1192, who had themselves bought it from Richard, who had wrested it from Isaac Comnenus &quot;en route&quot; to Palestine. Technically, Guy was Lord of Cyprus, not yet a kingdom, and used the royal title (if at all) as a remnant from Jerusalem, which was not held fully legally. During his reign in Cyprus, the famous travelling philosopher Altheides was born (1193).

Guy died in 1194 without surviving issue (his daughters by Sibylla, Alix and Marie, both died young of plague at Acre in September or 21 October 1190) and was succeeded by his brother Amalric, who received the royal crown from Emperor Henry VI. The House of Lusignan ruled the Kingdom of Cyprus until 1474. Guy was buried at the Church of the Templars in Nicosia.

==In fiction and film==

Guy appears as the main leading character in a tale of &quot;Decameron&quot; by Giovanni Boccaccio, where the censure of a Gascon lady rouses the King of Cyprus from lethargy to take responsibility for his realm.

Sir Walter Scott, in &quot;Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border&quot; (1802–1803), recounts the legend of Melusina, a supernatural creature

who married Guy de Lusignan, Count of Poitou, under condition that he should never attempt to intrude upon her privacy... She bore the count many children, and erected for him a magnificent castle by her magical art. Their harmony was uninterrupted until the prying husband broke the conditions of their union, by concealing himself to behold his wife make use of her enchanted bath. Hardly had Melusina discovered the indiscreet intruder, than, transforming herself into a dragon, she departed with a loud yell of lamentation, and was never again visible to mortal eyes; although, even in the days of Brantome, she was supposed to be the protectress of her descendants, and was heard wailing as she sailed upon the blast round the turrets of the castle of Lusignan the night before it was demolished.

Guy has also appeared in several historical novels, such as in the &quot;Crusades&quot; trilogy by the Swedish author Jan Guillou which depicts him as a scheming, incompetent and selfish as well as religiously fanatical villain accelerating the loss of the Holy Land to Saladin; in &quot;The Sir Balian d&#x27;Ibelin Trilogy&quot; by Helena P. Schrader; in &quot;Templar Silks&quot; by Elizabeth Chadwick, Zofia Kossak-Szczucka&#x27;s &quot;Król trędowaty&quot; (&quot;The Leper King&quot;), Graham Shelby&#x27;s &quot;The Knights of Dark Renown&quot;, Cecelia Holland&#x27;s &quot;Jerusalem&quot;, &quot;Knight Crusader&quot; by Ronald Welch, &quot;The Heart of the Lion&quot; by Jean Plaidy (Eleanor Hibbert) and also Sharon Kay Penman&#x27;s &quot;The Land Beyond The Sea&quot;.

Guy is portrayed as a peace-loving elderly man, goaded into war by Raynald of Châtillon, in Egyptian director Youssef Chahine&#x27;s 1963 film &quot;Saladin the Victorious&quot;. 

Another fictionalised version of him—as an arrogant, scheming villain (and a Templar)—is portrayed by Marton Csokas in the 2005 movie &quot;Kingdom of Heaven&quot;. The film distorts his relationship with Sibylla, which seems to have been one of mutual loyalty; it also implies that he was her only husband, though this is clarified in the director&#x27;s cut of the film.

A character named Guy appears in &quot;Ironclad&quot;, played by Aneurin Barnard; he serves as squire to William d&#x27;Aubigny (Brian Cox)—in the sequel &quot;&quot;, set five years after the events of the first film, he is played by Tom Austen—and his name is revealed to be Guy De Lusignan—it is unlikely that he is the historical Guy, who lived in the mid- to late 12th century.
The first film is set during the First Baron&#x27;s War (1215–1217)—at the end of &quot;Battle for Blood&quot;, it states that Guy went on to fight in the Hundred Years&#x27; War (1337–1453). This is impossible, as that war began in 1337—and the film is set five years after the Siege of Rochester Castle (1215)—a gap of some 117 years.

==Notes==
==References==
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q294192" start="0" end="15" title="Guy of Lusignan" label="Guy of Lusignan"/>
<link wikidata="Q693614" start="43" end="60" title="King of Jerusalem" label="King of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q728870" start="71" end="91" title="husband and co-ruler" label="husband and co-ruler"/>
<link wikidata="Q234782" start="95" end="108" title="Sibylla, Queen of Jerusalem" label="Queen Sibylla"/>
<link wikidata="Q213638" start="181" end="195" title="Lord of Cyprus" label="Lord of Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q954076" start="226" end="234" title="Poitou" label="Poitevin"/>
<link wikidata="Q948032" start="271" end="292" title="Hugh VIII of Lusignan" label="Hugh VIII of Lusignan"/>
<link wikidata="Q453325" start="320" end="338" title="Aimery of Lusignan" label="Aimery of Lusignan"/>
<link wikidata="Q48175" start="362" end="371" title="Holy Land" label="Holy Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q296850" start="572" end="595" title="Baldwin IV of Jerusalem" label="Baldwin IV of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q345687" start="659" end="668" title="Baldwin V" label="Baldwin V"/>
<link wikidata="Q180114" start="856" end="864" title="Ayyubids" label="Ayyubids"/>
<link wikidata="Q8581" start="874" end="881" title="Saladin" label="Saladin"/>
<link wikidata="Q233568" start="902" end="918" title="Battle of Hattin" label="Battle of Hattin"/>
<link wikidata="Q815161" start="970" end="987" title="Siege of Jerusalem (1187)" label="fall of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766" start="1052" end="1060" title="Damascus" label="Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q82070" start="1119" end="1123" title="Tyre, Lebanon" label="Tyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q169329" start="1166" end="1186" title="Conrad of Montferrat" label="Conrad of Montferrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q815116" start="1192" end="1205" title="Siege of Acre (1189–1191)" label="besieged Acre"/>
<link wikidata="Q51655" start="1301" end="1314" title="Third Crusade" label="Third Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q34428" start="1323" end="1342" title="Philip II of France" label="Philip II of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q42305" start="1347" end="1367" title="Richard I of England" label="Richard I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q235629" start="1533" end="1541" title="Isabella I of Jerusalem" label="Isabella"/>
<link wikidata="Q187715" start="1616" end="1625" title="Order of Assassins" label="Assassins"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="1881" end="1897" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q378193" start="2061" end="2078" title="House of Lusignan" label="House of Lusignan"/>
<link wikidata="Q954076" start="2115" end="2121" title="Poitou" label="Poitou"/>
<link wikidata="Q102140" start="2148" end="2167" title="Henry II of England" label="Henry II of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q70972" start="2198" end="2215" title="Kingdom of France" label="Kingdom of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q948032" start="2245" end="2266" title="Hugh VIII of Lusignan" label="Hugh VIII of Lusignan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="2368" end="2376" title="crusades" label="crusades"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635800" start="2442" end="2461" title="Hugh VI of Lusignan" label="Hugh VI of Lusignan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13553978" start="2469" end="2489" title="1102 Battle of Ramla" label="1102 Battle of Ramla"/>
<link wikidata="Q51654" start="2572" end="2586" title="Second Crusade" label="Second Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q730926" start="2687" end="2717" title="Patrick, 1st Earl of Salisbury" label="Patrick, 1st Earl of Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q954076" start="2731" end="2737" title="Poitou" label="Poitou"/>
<link wikidata="Q41150" start="2764" end="2800" title="Camino de Santiago" label="pilgrimage to Santiago of Compostela"/>
<link wikidata="Q348911" start="2838" end="2857" title="William the Marshal" label="William the Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q42305" start="3011" end="3039" title="Richard I of England" label="Richard I, Duke of Aquitaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q453325" start="3218" end="3224" title="Aimery of Cyprus" label="Aimery"/>
<link wikidata="Q804832" start="3253" end="3270" title="Baldwin of Ibelin" label="Baldwin of Ibelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q296850" start="3346" end="3356" title="Baldwin IV" label="Baldwin IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q241228" start="3375" end="3393" title="Agnes of Courtenay" label="Agnes of Courtenay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1893486" start="3407" end="3434" title="County of Jaffa and Ascalon" label="County of Jaffa and Ascalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388825" start="3454" end="3471" title="Reginald of Sidon" label="Reginald of Sidon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3532" end="3541" title="Officers of the Kingdom of Jerusalem#Constables" label="Constable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142429" start="3738" end="3751" title="Ibelin family" label="Ibelin family"/>
<link wikidata="Q354389" start="3778" end="3800" title="Raymond III of Tripoli" label="Raymond III of Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q311808" start="3802" end="3811" title="Amalric I" label="Amalric I"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3841" end="3869" title="Officers of the Kingdom of Jerusalem#Bailiffs" label="&amp;quot;bailli&amp;quot; or regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q349062" start="4023" end="4046" title="Bohemond III of Antioch" label="Bohemond III of Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q234782" start="4127" end="4134" title="Sibylla, Queen of Jerusalem" label="Sibylla"/>
<link wikidata="Q804832" start="4150" end="4167" title="Baldwin of Ibelin" label="Baldwin of Ibelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q867783" start="4239" end="4249" title="Eastertide" label="Eastertide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1893486" start="4319" end="4345" title="Count of Jaffa and Ascalon" label="Count of Jaffa and Ascalon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4365" end="4385" title="Officers of the Kingdom of Jerusalem#Bailiffs" label="bailiff of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q255101" start="4501" end="4522" title="William of Montferrat, Count of Jaffa and Ascalon" label="William of Montferrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q311822" start="4585" end="4600" title="William of Tyre" label="William of Tyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1222790" start="4622" end="4628" title="Ernoul" label="Ernoul"/>
<link wikidata="Q34428" start="4955" end="4964" title="Philip II of France" label="Philip II"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5068" end="5090" title="penitential pilgrimage" label="penitential pilgrimage"/>
<link wikidata="Q192236" start="5109" end="5122" title="Thomas Becket" label="Thomas Becket"/>
<link wikidata="Q223266" start="5141" end="5147" title="vassal" label="vassal"/>
<link wikidata="Q316831" start="5352" end="5372" title="Raynald of Châtillon" label="Raynald of Châtillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8581" start="5399" end="5406" title="Saladin" label="Saladin"/>
<link wikidata="Q815156" start="5468" end="5482" title="siege of Kerak" label="siege of Kerak"/>
<link wikidata="Q345687" start="5941" end="5950" title="Baldwin V" label="Baldwin V"/>
<link wikidata="Q255737" start="6723" end="6736" title="Maria Komnene, Queen of Jerusalem" label="Maria Comnena"/>
<link wikidata="Q653774" start="6833" end="6851" title="Heraclius of Jerusalem" label="Patriarch Eraclius"/>
<link wikidata="Q187702" start="7655" end="7683" title="Church of the Holy Sepulchre" label="Church of the Holy Sepulchre"/>
<link wikidata="Q235629" start="7861" end="7869" title="Isabella I of Jerusalem" label="Isabella"/>
<link wikidata="Q913574" start="7886" end="7906" title="Humphrey IV of Toron" label="Humphrey IV of Toron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142429" start="7932" end="7939" title="House of Ibelin" label="Ibelins"/>
<link wikidata="Q151920" start="8574" end="8582" title="Tiberias" label="Tiberias"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8620" end="8628" title="Sepphoris#Islamic conquest and the Crusaders" label="Sepphora"/>
<link wikidata="Q233568" start="8816" end="8832" title="Battle of Hattin" label="Battle of Hattin"/>
<link wikidata="Q940005" start="8927" end="8935" title="Geoffrey of Lusignan" label="Geoffrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766" start="9686" end="9694" title="Damascus" label="Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q374385" start="9725" end="9741" title="Balian of Ibelin" label="Balian of Ibelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q815161" start="9792" end="9808" title="Siege of Jerusalem (1187)" label="defend Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q82070" start="10034" end="10038" title="Tyre (Lebanon)" label="Tyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q169329" start="10109" end="10129" title="Conrad of Montferrat" label="Conrad of Montferrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q815116" start="10339" end="10352" title="Siege of Acre (1189–1191)" label="siege of Acre"/>
<link wikidata="Q51655" start="10407" end="10420" title="Third Crusade" label="Third Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q185632" start="10923" end="10931" title="Limassol" label="Limassol"/>
<link wikidata="Q42305" start="10953" end="10973" title="Richard I of England" label="Richard I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q229807" start="11075" end="11096" title="Berengaria of Navarre" label="Berengaria of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q27424" start="11138" end="11162" title="Isaac Comnenus of Cyprus" label="Isaac Comnenus of Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q34428" start="11282" end="11301" title="Philip II of France" label="Philip II of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q319713" start="11306" end="11326" title="Leopold V of Austria (Babenberg)" label="Leopold V of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q187715" start="11940" end="11949" title="Order of Assassins" label="Assassins"/>
<link wikidata="Q354422" start="11994" end="12015" title="Henry II of Champagne" label="Henry II of Champagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="12178" end="12184" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41300" start="12194" end="12202" title="Templars" label="Templars"/>
<link wikidata="Q27424" start="12279" end="12293" title="Isaac Komnenos of Cyprus" label="Isaac Comnenus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4736666" start="12547" end="12556" title="Altheides" label="Altheides"/>
<link wikidata="Q126084" start="12688" end="12692" title="Acre, Israel" label="Acre"/>
<link wikidata="Q453325" start="12759" end="12766" title="Amalric II of Jerusalem" label="Amalric"/>
<link wikidata="Q150953" start="12802" end="12818" title="Emperor Henry VI" label="Emperor Henry VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q213638" start="12852" end="12869" title="Kingdom of Cyprus" label="Kingdom of Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3856" start="12930" end="12937" title="Nicosia" label="Nicosia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16438" start="13026" end="13035" title="Decameron" label="Decameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402" start="13045" end="13063" title="Giovanni Boccaccio" label="Giovanni Boccaccio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058947" start="13075" end="13082" title="censure" label="censure"/>
<link wikidata="Q191085" start="13088" end="13094" title="Gascony" label="Gascon"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="13119" end="13125" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q79025" start="13179" end="13195" title="Sir Walter Scott" label="Sir Walter Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q7751599" start="13206" end="13239" title="Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border" label="Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border"/>
<link wikidata="Q940279" start="13282" end="13290" title="Melusina" label="Melusina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559" start="13791" end="13797" title="dragon" label="dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196408" start="14153" end="14169" title="historical novel" label="historical novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364144" start="14183" end="14215" title="Crusades trilogy" label="the &amp;quot;Crusades&amp;quot; trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q315773" start="14238" end="14249" title="Jan Guillou" label="Jan Guillou"/>
<link wikidata="Q8581" start="14390" end="14397" title="Saladin" label="Saladin"/>
<link wikidata="Q273453" start="14506" end="14524" title="Elizabeth Chadwick" label="Elizabeth Chadwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q218309" start="14526" end="14547" title="Zofia Kossak-Szczucka" label="Zofia Kossak-Szczucka"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593228" start="14612" end="14625" title="Graham Shelby" label="Graham Shelby"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055869" start="14673" end="14688" title="Cecelia Holland" label="Cecelia Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6422218" start="14725" end="14740" title="Knight Crusader" label="Knight Crusader"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404949" start="14750" end="14762" title="Ronald Welch" label="Ronald Welch"/>
<link wikidata="Q142106" start="14801" end="14812" title="Jean Plaidy" label="Jean Plaidy"/>
<link wikidata="Q142106" start="14814" end="14829" title="Eleanor Hibbert" label="Eleanor Hibbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q7490109" start="14840" end="14857" title="Sharon Kay Penman" label="Sharon Kay Penman"/>
<link wikidata="Q316831" start="14970" end="14990" title="Raynald of Châtillon" label="Raynald of Châtillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="14995" end="15000" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q312611" start="15013" end="15028" title="Youssef Chahine" label="Youssef Chahine"/>
<link wikidata="Q251692" start="15052" end="15074" title="Saladin the Victorious" label="Saladin the Victorious"/>
<link wikidata="Q315118" start="15186" end="15199" title="Marton Csokas" label="Marton Csokas"/>
<link wikidata="Q207698" start="15224" end="15241" title="Kingdom of Heaven (film)" label="Kingdom of Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150930" start="15497" end="15505" title="Ironclad (film)" label="Ironclad"/>
<link wikidata="Q245880" start="15523" end="15538" title="Aneurin Barnard" label="Aneurin Barnard"/>
<link wikidata="Q8020739" start="15563" end="15585" title="William d&amp;#x27;Aubigny (rebel)" label="William d&amp;#x27;Aubigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q34975" start="15587" end="15596" title="Brian Cox (actor)" label="Brian Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q6148146" start="15693" end="15703" title="Tom Austen" label="Tom Austen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086498" start="15874" end="15896" title="First Barons&amp;#x27; War" label="First Baron&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q12551" start="15996" end="16019" title="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16120" end="16145" title="First Barons&amp;#x27; War#Sieges of Windsor and Rochester" label="Siege of Rochester Castle"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="145436" wikidata="Q1501071" url="?curid=145436" title="Network Rail">
<text>Network Rail Limited is the owner (via its subsidiary Network Rail Infrastructure Limited, which was known as Railtrack plc before 2002) and infrastructure manager of most of the railway network in Great Britain. Network Rail is a non-departmental public body of the Department for Transport with no shareholders, which reinvests its income in the railways.

Network Rail&#x27;s main customers are the private train operating companies (TOCs), responsible for passenger transport, and freight operating companies (FOCs), who provide train services on the infrastructure that the company owns and maintains. Since 1 September 2014, Network Rail has been classified as a &quot;public sector body&quot;.

To cope with rapidly increasing passenger numbers, () Network Rail has been undertaking a £38 billion programme of upgrades to the network, including Crossrail, electrification of lines and upgrading Thameslink.

In May 2021, the UK government announced its intent to replace Network Rail with a new public body called Great British Railways, which was formally established in 2024.

==History==

===Background===

Britain&#x27;s railway system was built by private companies, but it was nationalised by the Transport Act 1947 and run by British Railways until re-privatisation which was begun in 1994 and completed in 1997. As a part of the privatisation process, the railway infrastructure, passenger and freight services were separated into separate organisations. Between 1994 and 2002, the infrastructure was owned and operated by Railtrack, a privately-owned company.

A spate of accidents, including the Southall rail crash in 1997 and the Ladbroke Grove rail crash in 1999 called into question the negative consequences that the fragmentation of the railway network had introduced to both safety and maintenance procedures. Railtrack was severely criticised for both its performance for infrastructure improvement and for its safety record. The Hatfield train crash on 17 October 2000 was a defining moment in the collapse of Railtrack. The immediate major repairs undertaken across the whole British railway network were estimated to have cost in the order of £580 million and Railtrack had no idea how many more &#x27;Hatfields&#x27; were waiting to happen because it had lost considerable in-house engineering skill following the sale or closure of many of the engineering and maintenance functions of British Rail to external companies; nor did the company have any way of assessing the consequence of the speed restrictions it was ordering. These restrictions brought the railway network to an almost total standstill and drew significant public ire. According to railway historian Christian Wolmar, Railtrack&#x27;s board panicked in the wake of Hatfield. Railtrack&#x27;s first chief executive, John Edmonds, had pursued a deliberate strategy of outsourcing engineers&#x27; work wherever possible with the goal of reducing costs.
Various major schemes being undertaken by Railtrack had also gone awry. The modernisation of the West Coast Main Line had suffered from spiralling costs, rising from an estimated £2 billion to roughly £10 billion. This programme suffered failures that were technical as well as managerial, such as the moving block signalling apparatus being immature for such a busy mixed-traffic mainline. In 2000, reports emerged that Railtrack may not be able to go through with its planned commitment to purchase section 2 of High Speed 1, resulting in disruption and uncertainty for that programme as well.

In February 2001, Steve Marshall, Railtrack&#x27;s chairman, warned that Railtrack could have a net debt of approximately £8 billion by 2003. During May 2001, Railtrack announced that, despite making a pre-tax profit before exceptional expenses of £199m, the £733m of costs and compensation paid out over the Hatfield crash had plunged Railtrack from profit into a loss of £534m, and it approached the government for funding, which it controversially used to pay a £137m dividend to its shareholders in May 2001. Months later, Railtrack sought another bailout from the government. On 7 October 2001, Railtrack plc was placed into railway administration under the Railways Act 1993, following an application to the High Court by the then Transport Secretary, Stephen Byers.

===Initial activities===
Network Rail Ltd. was created with the express purpose of taking over Britain&#x27;s railway infrastructure control; this was achieved via its purchase of Railtrack plc from Railtrack Group plc for £500 million; Railtrack plc was then renamed and reconstituted as &quot;Network Rail Infrastructure Limited&quot;. The transaction was completed on 3 October 2002. The former company had thus never ceased to exist but continued under another name: for this reason Network Rail Infrastructure Ltd was the defendant in later prosecutions in respect of events which had occurred in the days of Railtrack.

Network Rail owns the infrastructure, including the railway tracks, signals, overhead wires, tunnels, bridges, level crossings and most stations, but not the passenger or commercial freight rolling stock, other than its limited departmental stock. While it owns over 2,500 railway stations, it manages only 20 of the biggest and busiest of them as all the other stations are managed by the various train operating companies (TOCs). Network Rail should not be confused with National Rail, the latter is a brand rather than an organisation, used to inform and promote a nationwide network of passenger railway services. The majority of Network Rail lines also carry freight traffic; some lines are freight only. A few lines that carry passenger traffic are not part of the National Rail network (such as the Tyne and Wear Metro and the London Underground). Conversely, a few National Rail services operate over track which is not part of the Network Rail network, such as the line between Harrow-on-the-Hill and Amersham being owned by London Underground.

Following an initial period in which Network Rail established itself and demonstrated its competence in addressing the principal challenges of improving asset condition, reducing unit costs and tackling delay, the Government&#x27;s Rail Review in 2004 said that Network Rail should be given responsibility for whole-industry performance reporting, timetable development, specification of small and medium network enhancements, and the delivery of route-specific utilisation strategies (RUS). Some of these are functions which Network Rail already had; others – such as the obligation to devise route utilisation strategies – were transferred to Network Rail from the Strategic Rail Authority, a non-departmental public body, part of the UK government. The SRA was abolished in November 2006.

Network Rail initially sub-contracted much of the infrastructure work to private maintenance companies, such as Carillion and First Engineering; other sub-contractors perform specialist work or additional labour, such as Prima Services Group, Sky Blue, Balfour Beatty, Laboursite, BCL, Atkins (Atkins Rail) and McGinleys. In October 2003, Network Rail announced that it would take over all infrastructure maintenance work from private contractors, following concerns about the quality of work carried out by certain private firms and spiralling costs. In 2007, it was announced that the number of track renewal contractors would be reduced from six to four; Amey/SECO, Balfour Beatty, Babcock First Engineering and Jarvis plc. Network Rail has expanded its in-house engineering skills, including funding of apprenticeship and foundation degree schemes, and has reported significant savings from transferring work away from contracting companies. Additional work was taken back in-house after the serious accident at Potters Bar and other accidents at Rotherham and King&#x27;s Cross led to Jarvis&#x27;s collapse into administration in March 2010.

The company moved its headquarters to Kings Place, 90 York Way, from 40 Melton Street, Euston, in August 2008. Two months later, Sir Ian McAllister announced that he would not stand for re-election as chairman of Network Rail after holding the position for six years. He noted that as Network Rail moved to a &quot;new phase in its development&quot; it was appropriate for a new chairman to lead it there. Network Rail also has a 15-year lease on Square One in Manchester with 800 staff in one of Manchester&#x27;s largest refurbished office spaces. During June 2012, work was completed on the company&#x27;s new national centre, known as the . Based in Milton Keynes about five minutes&#x27; walk from , it comprises four buildings connected to a central street, accommodating more than 3,000 people. Various divisions, including engineering, logistics, operations (including timetable planning), IT, procurement, planning and finance departments, and Route Services Supply Chain operations have been transferred to the Quadrant.

===Allegations and controversies===
In 2009, allegations appeared in the media from the Transport Salaried Staffs&#x27; Association concerning treatment of Network Rail employees. Former chief executive Iain Coucher was also accused of financial impropriety involving unspecified payments to his business partner Victoria Pender during his tenure at Network Rail. An internal investigation held by Network Rail in 2010, vetted by its auditors PricewaterhouseCoopers, uncovered no evidence of wrongdoing. An independent enquiry headed by Anthony White QC in 2011 further examined the claims, but also exonerated Coucher.

Critical commentary appeared in the media concerning the knighthood awarded to John Armitt in the 2012 New Year Honours for services to engineering and construction. Armitt was Chief Executive of Network Rail at the time of the 2007 Grayrigg derailment and the family of a victim of the accident criticised the award, which coincidentally was conferred on the same day that Network Rail were prosecuted for the accident.

In 2023, one of Network Rail&#x27;s managing directors resigned after a litany of problems in the areas she was responsible for. Michelle Handforth resigned after infrastructure problems left hundreds of passengers stranded in carriages in London, one of the latest issues with the lines outside Paddington Station. The Office of Rail and Road was already investigating poor reliability and punctuality in the Wales and Western region.

===Regional reorganisation and shared responsibilities===
During February 2011, it was announced that Network Rail had begun the process of reorganising its operational structure into nine semi-autonomous regional entities, each with their own managing director; the first two units to be created were Scotland and Wessex regions. The reorganisation has been interpreted as a move back towards vertical integration of track and train operations.

In December 2016, the Transport Secretary, Chris Grayling announced that Network Rail would lose sole control of track maintenance and repairs, and instead would share this with the Train Operating Companies.

===Electrification schemes===
During March 2011, the British government announced that the Great Western Main Line would be electrified as far as Bristol Temple Meads. Within four years, this programme, which was headed by Network Rail, was beset by poor planning and cost overruns, leading to the shortcomings being scrutinised by Parliament. Specifically, the projected cost had increased from £1.2 billion to £2.8 billion by the end of 2015, while the project&#x27;s timetable was also delayed to the extent that the government had to request Hitachi to retrofit the new high speed trainsets procured under the Intercity Express Programme with diesel engines as well as electric traction. In July 2017, the government announced that, in response to the programme&#x27;s continued difficulties, the scope of the electrification scheme had been decreased; specifically, it would only be completed as far as Thingley Junction, west of Chippenham, while the electrification of other lines, including Bristol Parkway to Temple Meads and Didcot to Oxford, was also postponed.

During 2011, work commenced to extend the electrification of the Midland Main Line, including to both Corby and Nottingham. In July 2017, it was announced the then-Secretary of State for Transport Chris Grayling that the electrification scheme north of Kettering to Derby, Nottingham and Sheffield had been cancelled and that bi-mode trains would be used instead. However, in May 2022, a briefing to contractors was released ahead of an invitation to tender for Midland Mainline Electrification project work to extend electrification to Nottingham and Sheffield. This scheme is expected to cost £1.3 billion.
Network Rail has undertaken numerous schemes to develop its own renewable electrical generation footprint, which is used in part to power the operational railway. In January 2014, Network Rail opened the world&#x27;s largest solar-powered bridge, adjacent to the remains of the old Blackfriars Railway Bridge, across the River Thames. The roof of the new railway bridge is covered with 4,400 photovoltaic panels, providing up to half of the energy requirement for London Blackfriars station. Solar panels are used at various locations across Network Rail&#x27;s property portfolio, including stations and depots. In August 2022, an agreement between the company and EDF was signed to provide more solar energy.

===Planned demise===
In May 2021, the Conservative UK government announced that Network Rail would be superseded by a new body, Great British Railways, in 2023. After some delay, the new body was established by the successor Labour government in November 2024.

==Funding==

Network Rail is a not-for-profit organisation. The majority of funding comes from a mix of direct grants and borrowing from the UK and Scottish Governments, payments from train and freight operators and previously a small amount of income from commercial property estate. In February 2019 Network Rail sold its commercial property business consisting of 5,200 properties, mainly railway arches, to a consortium of Telereal Trillium and Blackstone Property Partners for £1.46bn.

Network Rail works in five-year funding cycles called &quot;Control Periods&quot; (CP for short). The government specifies what is needed from Network Rail and sets out how much the government can afford to contribute. The Office of Rail and Road (ORR) then sets the level of fixed income that Network Rail is allowed to charge and assesses the amount of money needed by Network Rail to run efficiently. The last Control Period ran from 2014 to 2019; 1 April 2019 was the start of &quot;Control Period 6&quot;.

In 2019, government funding for train operating companies amounted to £4.1 billion, paying access charges to use the rail network, £2.1 billion and freight £58 million. In 2019, it spent £3.1 billion on renewals (restoring existing infrastructure back to how it was when new) and £3.2 billion on enhancements, with the rest spent on maintenance and other costs.

==Assets==

=== Infrastructure ===

Network Rail covers 20,000 miles of track, and 30,000 bridges, tunnels and viaducts. They claim to run the world&#x27;s largest third rail network.

In February 2004, an operations centre at Waterloo station in London was opened, which was operated jointly by Network Rail and South West Trains. This was the first full collaboration of its kind since privatisation, and it is regarded as a model for other areas of the network, with a further six integrated Network Rail + TOC Control Centres having opened since then, at Blackfriars, Croydon (Leading Control for Thameslink), , , Glasgow and, most recently, Liverpool Street and South Wales based in Cardiff Canton.

Track renewal, the ongoing modernisation of the railway network by replacing track and signalling, continues to be carried out by private engineering firms under contract. The biggest renewals projects include the multibillion-pound upgrade of the London – Glasgow West Coast Main Line, which was completed in 2008, the Thameslink Programme to upgrade the north–south railway through London and work on the part of Crossrail which is operated by Network Rail. A line closure for engineering or renewal works is known as a possession.

Network Rail has an internal infrastructure database known as GEOGIS. The system uses codes for four-digit Track IDs to identify which line at any location is referred to. The first number refers to track direction, with values of 1 (Up), 2 (Down), 3 (Reversible/Bi-directional), or 4 (Merry Go Round Loop). The second number refers to track use, which can be 1 (Main or Fast), 2 (Slow, Local or Relief), 3 (Goods), 4 (Single line), 5 (Loop), 6 (Terminal or Bay), 7 (Crossover), 8 (Other or Engine), or 9 (Single Siding). The third and fourth numbers refer to the track number, which can be any number from 00 to 99 inclusive, and are usually numbered sequentially.

In 2006, Network Rail made public a high-tech plan to combat the effects of slippery rail. This plan involves the use of satellites for tracking trouble areas, water-jetting trains and crews using railhead scrubbers, sand sticks and a substance called Natrusolve, which dissolves leaf mulch.

===Stations===
Network Rail owns more than 2,500 railway stations, divided into six categories. Management and operation of most of them is carried out mostly by the principal train operating company serving that station; however, in a few cases the train operating company does not serve the station. For example, is served by CrossCountry, but it is managed by East Midlands Railway. , Network Rail manages 20 stations directly, with Clapham Junction and Guildford becoming managed stations on 1 April 2018. The stations Network Rail operate are:
National
*
*
*
*

London stations
*London Bridge
*London Cannon Street
*
*
*London Liverpool Street
*London Paddington
*London St Pancras International 
*London Victoria
*London Waterloo
Glasgow Central and Liverpool Lime Street stations are divided into high and low-level stations – the high-level stations are all termini used primarily by the main inter-city services to those stations. The low-level stations are through routes on local commuter networks that are largely separate from other routes to the main station; these platforms are not managed by Network Rail, but instead by the rail operator that primarily uses them, ScotRail and Merseyrail respectively.

Network Rail operated station until January 2012 when it was transferred to Southern, and until November 2014 when it was transferred to c2c. Network Rail took over management of Bristol Temple Meads and Reading in April 2014.

A DfT franchise report in 2014 stated Network Rail&#x27;s intention to subsume more major stations into Network Rail&#x27;s directly operated portfolio. The report earmarked for Network Rail management, as well as Manchester Oxford Road and Manchester Victoria which are currently undergoing major rebuilding as part of the Northern Hub. However the two Manchester stations remained under the operatorship of Arriva Rail North.

There are a small number of stations on the National Rail network that are not owned by Network Rail. As of 2022 these are:
===Training facilities===

Network Rail has several training and development sites around Britain. These include sites in York, Peterborough, Derby, Leeds, Walsall and Larbert which provide refresher courses, and train staff in new equipment. Advanced Apprentice Scheme trainees are trained at Network Rail&#x27;s Westwood training centre for the first five months of their apprenticeship and then are trained further at in Gosport over seven 2-week periods or five 3-week periods (throughout their second and third year) of their apprenticeship, using a combination of Royal Navy facilities and a specially installed training centre. All courses are taught by VT Flagship (part of Babcock International) in the first year but apprentices are trained by Network Rail staff in the second and third years. Network Rail bought a residential centre from Cable and Wireless in the Westwood Business Centre near Coventry for leadership development. The company and other industry partners such as VolkerRail and Balfour Beatty also operate a Foundation Degree in conjunction with Sheffield Hallam University.

In 2008, Network Rail piloted its first qualification in &quot;track engineering&quot;. It has been given permission to develop courses equivalent to GCSE and A-levels.

===Telecoms assets===

Network Rail operates various essential telecommunication circuits for signalling and electrification control systems, train radio systems, lineside communications, level crossing CCTV, station information and security systems as well as more general IT and business telephony needs. The fixed bearer network infrastructure comprises transmission systems and telephone exchanges linked by a fibre optic and copper cable network that is located mainly within trackside troughing routes on the former British Rail Telecommunications network. (It is the largest private telecoms network in the UK).

Network Rail operates several analogue radio networks that support mobile communication applications for drivers and lineside workers which consist of base stations, antenna systems and control equipment. The National Radio Network (NRN) was developed specifically for the operational railway; it provides radio coverage for 98% of the rail network through 500 base stations and 21 radio exchanges. The Radio Electronic Token Block RETB system is based on similar technology as the NRN and ORN but provides data communication for signalling token exchange as well as voice communication.

Fixed communication at trackside is provided by telephone. These are primarily provided for signallers to communicate with train crew, via telephones mounted on signal posts, and with the public through telephones located at level crossings.
GAI-Tronics provides many of the telephones sited on trackside and at level crossings. They also provide Public Access Help Points on platforms and stations to provide passengers with easy access to Information and Emergency control centres.

GSM-R radio systems are being introduced across Europe under EU legislation for interoperability. In the UK, as of March 2014, Network Rail is well underway in the UK implementation of GSM-R to replace its legacy National Radio Network (NRN) and Cab Secure Radio (CSR) systems currently in use.

===Rolling stock===

Network Rail operates a large variety of DMUs, locomotives and rolling stock to perform safety checks and maintenance (this fleet is not to be confused with the combined rolling stock assets of Rail Delivery Group members who work in combination as &quot;National Rail&quot;). As well as the multiple units and locomotives, Network Rail own and operate a large stock of rolling stock for particular testing duties and track maintenance. Network Rail also hire freight locomotives from various freight operators including DB Cargo UK, Freightliner, Colas Rail and GB Railfreight amongst others to operate engineers&#x27; trains in support of maintenance and renewal work. Network Rail&#x27;s Infrastructure Monitoring fleet of test trains is operated by Colas Rail, primarily using locomotives from Colas&#x27; and Network Rail&#x27;s own fleets, but have also used locomotives hired from other companies such as Direct Rail Services, GB Railfreight and Europhoenix as required.
==Development==

===Current investment programme===
From 1997 to 2014 (inclusive), passenger numbers have more than doubled, following little growth in the previous decades. To cope with the increasing passenger numbers, Network Rail is currently undertaking a £38 billion programme of upgrades to the network, including Crossrail, electrification of lines, in-cab signalling, new inter-city trains, upgrading Thameslink, and a new high-speed line.

===The GRIP process===
For investment projects, as opposed to routine maintenance, Network Rail has developed an eight-stage process designed to minimise and mitigate risks. This is known as the Governance for Railway Investment Projects (GRIP), previously known as “Guide to Rail Investment Projects”. The stages are as follows:
# output definition;
# pre-feasibility;
# option selection;
# single option development;
# detailed design;
# construction, test and commission;
# scheme hand back;
# project close out.

Each stage delivers an agreed set of outputs to defined quality criteria. The process has been criticised as cumbersome by some and it is proposed to replace it with a new process with the acronym PACE- Project Acceleration in a Controlled Environment.

===Control periods===
For financial and other planning purposes, Network Rail works within 5-year &quot;Control Periods&quot;, each one beginning on 1 April and ending on 31 March to coincide with the financial reporting year. These periods were inherited from Railtrack, so that the earlier ones are retrospective, and not necessarily of 5 years duration. They are as follows:
* Control Period 1 (CP1): 1995–1999
* Control Period 2 (CP2): 1999–2004
* Control Period 3 (CP3): 2004–2009
* Control Period 4 (CP4): 2009–2014
* Control Period 5 (CP5): 2014–2019
* Control Period 6 (CP6): 2019–2024
* Control Period 7 (CP7): 2024–2029
* Control Period 8 (CP8): 2029–2034

The Secretary of State for Transport regularly issues a &quot;High-Level Output Specification&quot; (HLOS) indicating what work the Government wishes to be undertaken during a given Control Period.

===Route plans===

Network Rail regularly publishes a Strategic Business Plan detailing their policies, processes and plans, as well as financial expenditure and other data. The most recent complete business plan was published in January 2013. Within these plans the rail network is divided into ten “devolved routes” or “operational routes”, with a Route Plan for each being published annually.
Each route or other plan covers a number of railway lines usually defined by geographical area and the routes are further subdivided into 17 “strategic routes”, each divided into Strategic Route Sections (SRS) and given an SRS number and name. The plans also detail the geography of routes, stations, major junctions, capacity constraints and other issues and provide data on freight gauge, electrification, line speed, number of tracks, capacity and other information. The plans also detail the expected future demand and development of each route, their predicted expenditure and their maintenance and investment requirements.

The devolved routes were introduced in 2011, and the 17 strategic routes labelled &quot;A&quot; to &quot;Q&quot; were introduced in 2010. From 2004 to 2009, the network had been divided into 26 strategic routes numbered &quot;1&quot; to &quot;26&quot;. In 2003, the network had been divided into 41 strategic routes numbered &quot;1&quot; to &quot;41&quot;.

The 2011 devolved routes and strategic routes are organised as in the table below.

==Governance structure and accountability==

===Formal governance structure===
The company is accountable to a body of members through its corporate constitution, to its commercial train operator customers through its contracts with them (the contracts are subject to regulatory oversight), and to the public interest through the statutory powers of the Office of Rail and Road (ORR).

Since Network Rail does not have shareholders, its members hold the board of directors to account for their management of the business. From 1 July 2015 all the members were removed leaving the special member, the Secretary of State for Transport, as the sole member of Network Rail.

Previously at any one time there were around 100 members in total, drawn from a wide range of industry partners and members of the public. There were two general categories of membership, industry members comprising any organisation holding a licence to operate on the railway or preferred bidder for a railway franchise, and public members who were drawn from the wider stakeholder community. Members were appointed by an independent panel and served a three-year term. They had a number of statutory rights and duties which included attending annual general meetings, receiving the Annual Report and Accounts, and approving the appointment or re-appointment of Network Rail&#x27;s directors. Members had a duty to act in the best interests of the company without personal bias. They received no payments other than travel expenses.

Setting the strategic direction and the day-to-day management of Network Rail is the responsibility of the company&#x27;s board of directors. That direction must be consistent with the regulatory jurisdiction of the ORR, and with the requirements of its contracts. The ORR in turn operates within the overall transport policy set by the UK Department for Transport and the Scottish government, including as to what the government wants the railway industry to achieve and how much money the government is prepared to put into the industry. This means that the degree of government influence and control over the company is higher than it was before these enlargements of the powers and role of the government were introduced by the Railways Act 2005.

The board of Network Rail are:
*Chair Mike Putnam (acting)
*Chief executive officer Andrew Haines
*Chief financial officer Jeremy Westlake

===Monitoring Network Rail&#x27;s performance===
The Office of Rail and Road (ORR) monitors Network Rail&#x27;s performance on a continuous basis against targets established by the regulatory authority in the most recent access charges review (2003), against obligations in the company&#x27;s network licence and against forecasts in its own business plan. If performance is poor, the company will face criticism and possible enforcement action from its commercial customers (under their contracts) and from the ORR (enforcing the company&#x27;s network licence). It may also be criticised by its members in general meeting.

In the annual report 2014/15, the ORR reported that the Public Performance Measure (PPM) was 89.6%, 1.4 percentage points (pp) below target in England and Wales, and PPM in Scotland was 90.5%, 1.5pp below its regulatory performance target of 92%.

===Informal governance groups===
====Railway Industry Planning Group (RIPG)====
The Railway Industry Planning Group (RIPG), chaired by Network Rail, has as its purpose railway industry input into the structure and development of the national railway strategic planning processes. Its members are drawn from railway funders, operators and users, and the group meets quarterly to consider:
* rail industry liaison with regional and local government
* Regional (and Scotland and Wales) Planning Assessments
* Route Utilisation Strategies
* specification of passenger operator franchises
* High Level Output Specifications and Network Rail&#x27;s Strategic Business Plan
* Network Rail&#x27;s Business Planning Criteria, Business Plan and Route Plans.

==Safety==
While generally good, the safety record of the company was marred in February 2007 when a Virgin express derailed at Grayrigg in Cumbria. Network Rail admitted responsibility for the incident. The RAIB investigation concluded in 2009 that a faulty set of points had caused the derailment. In 2012 the Office of Rail Regulation announced that Network Rail was to be prosecuted under the Health and Safety Act for &quot;failure to provide and implement suitable and sufficient standards, procedures, guidance, training, tools and resources for the inspection and maintenance of fixed stretcher bar points&quot;. Network Rail pleaded guilty and were fined £4.1 million including legal costs.

In December 2005, two young girls were killed by a train as they were crossing the railway line via a pedestrian level crossing at in Essex. Network Rail was prosecuted for breaching health and safety law and fined £1 million in March 2012. The court heard that risk assessments carried out by Network Rail staff in 2002 had identified potential dangers with the crossing and recommended the installation of gates that would lock automatically as trains approached, but this was not acted upon.

Many track safety initiatives have been introduced in the time Network Rail has been operational. One high-profile measure, announced in December 2008, known as &quot;All Orange&quot;, states that all track personnel must not only wear orange hi-vis waistcoats or jackets, but must also wear orange hi-vis trousers at all times when working on or near the track. This ruling came into force in January 2009 for maintenance and property workers and in April 2009 for infrastructure and investment sites.

All workers working on or near the line or trackside have to pass a medical assessment and a drug and alcohol test. They must also sit a Personal Track Safety training course and undergo assessment to be issued with a PTS card (reassessment is required every two years). Network Rail workers undergo periodic assessments as part of the Skills Assessment Scheme, formerly called the AITL process (Assessment in the Line). This requires each worker to go through questions on a computer based program on all the competencies held.

==Private versus public-sector status==

In 2001, the Labour government denied that it had nationalised the rail network in order to prevent Railtrack&#x27;s shareholders claiming, via the European Court of Human Rights, the four-year average price of Railtrack, about £10 per share. Instead, Railtrack&#x27;s shareholders were given only £2.60. &quot;The Times&quot; reported that Gordon Brown&#x27;s aide, Shriti Vadera e-mailed Stephen Byers in July 2001 asking: &quot;Can we engineer the solution through insolvency ... and therefore avoid compensation under the Human Rights Act?&quot;

Railtrack plc was placed into railway administration under the Railways Act 1993 on 7 October 2001, following an application to the High Court by the then Transport Secretary, Stephen Byers. It was reported in November 2001 that a further £3.5 billion might be needed to keep the national railway network running, a sum disputed by Ernst &amp; Young, the administrators. To get Railtrack out of administration, the government had to return to the High Court and present evidence that the company was no longer insolvent. The principal reason given by the government to the court for this assertion was the decision of the rail regulator in 2002 to carry out an interim review of the company&#x27;s finances, with the potential to advance significant additional sums to the company. The High Court accepted that the company was not insolvent, and the railway administration order was discharged in October 2002.

Until 2013, there was discussion over whether Network Rail should be classified as a public-sector or a private-sector entity. Although it was officially a private sector organisation, the fact that its debts were underwritten by the government, and it was partly funded by the government, led to the description of &quot;nationalisation in all but name&quot;. It was also claimed that the government is keen for Network Rail not to be classified as a public-sector organisation, as this would mean that the company&#x27;s debt would be counted as public expenditure liabilities. The Office for National Statistics (ONS) repeatedly clashed with the National Audit Office and the Statistics Commission over whether the successor to Railtrack should be considered a private company – as the ONS believed – or included on the Government&#x27;s books, as the National Audit Office argued. The NAO said that as the Government is bearing the risk that would normally be borne by equity capital, and as it can appoint, through the SRA, a director who cannot be removed by members, Network Rail is effectively a subsidiary of the Government-controlled SRA.

In December 2013, the ONS announced that Network Rail would be classified as a &quot;government body&quot; from September 2014. As a result, the company&#x27;s debt of £34 billion was added to the national debt. In the 2016–17 financial year, Network Rail&#x27;s net debt rose from £41.6 billion to £46.3 billion.

==Photography competition==
Network Rail organises the Landscape Photographer of the Year competition. Shortlisted photos are displayed at London Waterloo and other major stations.

==See also==
* Campaign to Bring Back British Rail
* Northern Ireland Railways
* Financing of the rail industry in Great Britain
* Network Rail Certification Body

==References==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1501071" start="0" end="20" title="Network Rail" label="Network Rail Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q489224" start="110" end="119" title="Railtrack" label="Railtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q521458" start="141" end="163" title="railway infrastructure manager" label="infrastructure manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="198" end="211" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3343298" start="231" end="259" title="non-departmental public body" label="non-departmental public body"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982287" start="267" end="291" title="Department for Transport" label="Department for Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q17102188" start="410" end="435" title="train operating company" label="train operating companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283931" start="485" end="512" title="freight operating company" label="freight operating companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060248" start="715" end="751" title="history of rail transport in Great Britain 1995 to date" label="rapidly increasing passenger numbers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="804" end="825" title="History of rail transport in Great Britain 1995 to date#Timeline of improvements" label="programme of upgrades"/>
<link wikidata="Q732649" start="852" end="861" title="Crossrail" label="Crossrail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7284242" start="863" end="887" title="Railway electrification in Great Britain" label="electrification of lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7709968" start="892" end="912" title="Thameslink Programme" label="upgrading Thameslink"/>
<link wikidata="Q106910077" start="1021" end="1043" title="Great British Railways" label="Great British Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505124" start="1117" end="1146" title="Rail transport in Great Britain" label="Britain&amp;#x27;s railway system"/>
<link wikidata="Q178564" start="1190" end="1202" title="nationalisation" label="nationalised"/>
<link wikidata="Q975780" start="1210" end="1228" title="Transport Act 1947" label="Transport Act 1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q605169" start="1240" end="1252" title="British Rail" label="British Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404257" start="1263" end="1279" title="Privatisation of British Rail" label="re-privatisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q489224" start="1538" end="1547" title="Railtrack" label="Railtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q7061225" start="1613" end="1632" title="Southall rail crash" label="Southall rail crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q2728539" start="1649" end="1674" title="Ladbroke Grove rail crash" label="Ladbroke Grove rail crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822729" start="1955" end="1975" title="Hatfield train crash" label="Hatfield train crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="2171" end="2172" title="Pound sterling" label="£"/>
<link wikidata="Q605169" start="2415" end="2427" title="British Rail" label="British Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110287" start="2697" end="2713" title="Christian Wolmar" label="Christian Wolmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q61515" start="2863" end="2874" title="outsource" label="outsourcing"/>
<link wikidata="Q19889" start="3044" end="3064" title="West Coast Main Line" label="West Coast Main Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2936849" start="3249" end="3261" title="moving block" label="moving block"/>
<link wikidata="Q277604" start="3461" end="3473" title="High Speed 1" label="High Speed 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q181201" start="4015" end="4023" title="dividend" label="dividend"/>
<link wikidata="Q381136" start="4031" end="4042" title="shareholder" label="shareholder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617747" start="4258" end="4268" title="High Court of Justice of England and Wales" label="High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246797" start="4281" end="4300" title="Secretary of State for Transport" label="Transport Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q332837" start="4302" end="4315" title="Stephen Byers" label="Stephen Byers"/>
<link wikidata="Q811983" start="5172" end="5190" title="departmental train" label="departmental stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q26334" start="5417" end="5430" title="National Rail" label="National Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q541027" start="5750" end="5769" title="Tyne and Wear Metro" label="Tyne and Wear Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q20075" start="5778" end="5796" title="London Underground" label="London Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q654577" start="5931" end="5949" title="Harrow-on-the-Hill station" label="Harrow-on-the-Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q800384" start="5954" end="5962" title="Amersham station" label="Amersham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371596" start="6593" end="6621" title="Route Utilisation Strategy" label="route utilisation strategies"/>
<link wikidata="Q489287" start="6666" end="6690" title="Strategic Rail Authority" label="Strategic Rail Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q5039561" start="6904" end="6913" title="Carillion" label="Carillion"/>
<link wikidata="Q385426" start="6918" end="6935" title="Babcock International Group" label="First Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745963" start="7450" end="7454" title="Amey plc" label="Amey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982351" start="7455" end="7459" title="Seco Rail" label="SECO"/>
<link wikidata="Q804920" start="7461" end="7475" title="Balfour Beatty" label="Balfour Beatty"/>
<link wikidata="Q385426" start="7477" end="7502" title="Babcock International Group" label="Babcock First Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q16830924" start="7507" end="7517" title="Jarvis plc" label="Jarvis plc"/>
<link wikidata="Q4587312" start="7796" end="7819" title="Potters Bar rail crash" label="accident at Potters Bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5982242" start="8074" end="8088" title="Ian McAllister" label="Ian McAllister"/>
<link wikidata="Q204234" start="8595" end="8608" title="Milton Keynes" label="Milton Keynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q17062795" start="9061" end="9104" title="Transport Salaried Staffs&amp;#x27; Association" label="Transport Salaried Staffs&amp;#x27; Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5980415" start="9176" end="9188" title="Iain Coucher" label="Iain Coucher"/>
<link wikidata="Q488048" start="9416" end="9438" title="PricewaterhouseCoopers" label="PricewaterhouseCoopers"/>
<link wikidata="Q833163" start="9651" end="9661" title="Knight Bachelor" label="knighthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q4626336" start="9692" end="9713" title="2012 New Year Honours" label="2012 New Year Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028014" start="9827" end="9846" title="Grayrigg derailment" label="Grayrigg derailment"/>
<link wikidata="Q214788" start="10312" end="10330" title="Paddington Station" label="Paddington Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349587" start="10336" end="10359" title="Office of Rail and Road" label="Office of Rail and Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q337453" start="10943" end="10957" title="Chris Grayling" label="Chris Grayling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415063" start="11201" end="11224" title="Great Western Main Line" label="Great Western Main Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621110" start="11656" end="11663" title="Hitachi Rail" label="Hitachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q655431" start="11724" end="11751" title="Intercity Express Programme" label="Intercity Express Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931975" start="12249" end="12266" title="Midland Main Line" label="Midland Main Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q337453" start="12381" end="12395" title="Chris Grayling" label="Chris Grayling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483757" start="13018" end="13031" title="Solar power" label="solar-powered"/>
<link wikidata="Q880838" start="13075" end="13101" title="Blackfriars Railway Bridge" label="Blackfriars Railway Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="13114" end="13126" title="River Thames" label="River Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q192127" start="13185" end="13197" title="Photovoltaics" label="photovoltaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q284195" start="13257" end="13283" title="Blackfriars station" label="London Blackfriars station"/>
<link wikidata="Q274591" start="13459" end="13462" title="Électricité de France" label="EDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q106910077" start="13633" end="13655" title="Great British Railways" label="Great British Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q163740" start="13798" end="13825" title="Nonprofit organization" label="not-for-profit organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696778" start="14194" end="14211" title="Telereal Trillium" label="Telereal Trillium"/>
<link wikidata="Q880942" start="14216" end="14244" title="Blackstone Inc." label="Blackstone Property Partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349587" start="14482" end="14505" title="Office of Rail and Road" label="Office of Rail and Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q748825" start="15298" end="15308" title="third rail" label="third rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q795691" start="15361" end="15377" title="London Waterloo railway station" label="Waterloo station"/>
<link wikidata="Q938861" start="15447" end="15464" title="South West Trains" label="South West Trains"/>
<link wikidata="Q284195" start="15693" end="15704" title="Blackfriars station" label="Blackfriars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213391" start="15706" end="15713" title="Croydon" label="Croydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q800825" start="15752" end="15759" title="Glasgow Central station" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q801124" start="15780" end="15796" title="Liverpool Street station" label="Liverpool Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q19889" start="16104" end="16124" title="West Coast Main Line" label="West Coast Main Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7709968" start="16159" end="16179" title="Thameslink Programme" label="Thameslink Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q732649" start="16254" end="16263" title="Crossrail" label="Crossrail"/>
<link wikidata="Q17156930" start="17117" end="17130" title="slippery rail" label="slippery rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888186" start="17414" end="17428" title="United Kingdom railway station categories" label="six categories"/>
<link wikidata="Q769619" start="17510" end="17533" title="List of companies operating trains in the United Kingdom" label="train operating company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141120" start="17662" end="17674" title="CrossCountry" label="CrossCountry"/>
<link wikidata="Q65090907" start="17697" end="17718" title="East Midlands Railway" label="East Midlands Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q801125" start="17918" end="17931" title="London Bridge station" label="London Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q800615" start="17933" end="17953" title="Cannon Street station" label="London Cannon Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q801124" start="17959" end="17982" title="Liverpool Street station" label="London Liverpool Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q214788" start="17984" end="18001" title="London Paddington station" label="London Paddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q720102" start="18003" end="18034" title="St Pancras station" label="London St Pancras International"/>
<link wikidata="Q985210" start="18037" end="18052" title="London Victoria station" label="London Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q795691" start="18054" end="18069" title="London Waterloo railway station" label="London Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q107980329" start="18516" end="18524" title="ScotRail" label="ScotRail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922100" start="18529" end="18539" title="Merseyrail" label="Merseyrail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258373" start="18631" end="18639" title="Southern (train operating company)" label="Southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q286262" start="18692" end="18695" title="c2c" label="c2c"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859538" start="18997" end="19019" title="Manchester Oxford Road railway station" label="Manchester Oxford Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859573" start="19024" end="19043" title="Manchester Victoria railway station" label="Manchester Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q17015850" start="19107" end="19119" title="Northern Hub" label="Northern Hub"/>
<link wikidata="Q22079702" start="19192" end="19209" title="Arriva Rail North" label="Arriva Rail North"/>
<link wikidata="Q504530" start="19492" end="19499" title="Walsall" label="Walsall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389537" start="19504" end="19511" title="Larbert" label="Larbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="19906" end="19916" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q385426" start="20018" end="20039" title="Babcock International" label="Babcock International"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024869" start="20186" end="20204" title="Cable &amp;amp; Wireless plc" label="Cable and Wireless"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225" start="20242" end="20250" title="Coventry" label="Coventry"/>
<link wikidata="Q129694935" start="20327" end="20337" title="VolkerRail" label="VolkerRail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752117" start="20410" end="20437" title="Sheffield Hallam University" label="Sheffield Hallam University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970938" start="21132" end="21163" title="British Rail Telecommunications" label="British Rail Telecommunications"/>
<link wikidata="Q2126061" start="21662" end="21666" title="RETB" label="RETB"/>
<link wikidata="Q549379" start="22304" end="22309" title="GSM-R" label="GSM-R"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="22352" end="22358" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="22365" end="22367" title="European Union" label="EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q489589" start="22815" end="22834" title="Rail Delivery Group" label="Rail Delivery Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q26334" start="22876" end="22889" title="National Rail" label="National Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q472941" start="23142" end="23153" title="DB Cargo UK" label="DB Cargo UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q472109" start="23155" end="23167" title="Freightliner Group" label="Freightliner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982351" start="23169" end="23179" title="Colas Rail" label="Colas Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q454879" start="23184" end="23198" title="GB Railfreight" label="GB Railfreight"/>
<link wikidata="Q456226" start="23533" end="23553" title="Direct Rail Services" label="Direct Rail Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q56525750" start="23574" end="23585" title="Europhoenix" label="Europhoenix"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23872" end="23893" title="History of rail transport in Great Britain 1995 to date#Timeline of improvements" label="programme of upgrades"/>
<link wikidata="Q732649" start="23920" end="23929" title="Crossrail" label="Crossrail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7284242" start="23931" end="23955" title="Railway electrification in Great Britain" label="electrification of lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q22908256" start="23957" end="23974" title="European Rail Traffic Management System in Great Britain" label="in-cab signalling"/>
<link wikidata="Q655431" start="23980" end="23997" title="Intercity Express Programme" label="inter-city trains"/>
<link wikidata="Q7709968" start="23999" end="24019" title="Thameslink Programme" label="upgrading Thameslink"/>
<link wikidata="Q798868" start="24031" end="24046" title="HS2" label="high-speed line"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246797" start="25491" end="25523" title="Secretary of State for Transport" label="Secretary of State for Transport"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26458" end="26471" title="Loading gauge#Great Britain" label="freight gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q388201" start="26473" end="26488" title="Railway electrification system" label="electrification"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349587" start="27509" end="27532" title="Office of Rail and Road" label="Office of Rail and Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246797" start="27755" end="27787" title="Secretary of State for Transport" label="Secretary of State for Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982287" start="29001" end="29025" title="Department for Transport" label="Department for Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q32521" start="29034" end="29053" title="Scottish government" label="Scottish government"/>
<link wikidata="Q280030" start="29393" end="29410" title="Railways Act 2005" label="Railways Act 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349587" start="29606" end="29629" title="Office of Rail and Road" label="Office of Rail and Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q19604514" start="30235" end="30261" title="Public Performance Measure" label="Public Performance Measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371596" start="30933" end="30961" title="Route Utilisation Strategy" label="Route Utilisation Strategies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028014" start="31292" end="31312" title="Grayrigg derailment" label="derailed at Grayrigg"/>
<link wikidata="Q23066" start="31316" end="31323" title="Cumbria" label="Cumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283877" start="31384" end="31388" title="Rail Accident Investigation Branch" label="RAIB"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349587" start="31488" end="31513" title="Office of Rail Regulation" label="Office of Rail Regulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q208934" start="31573" end="31594" title="Health and Safety at Work Act 1974" label="Health and Safety Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q171448" start="31990" end="32004" title="level crossing" label="level crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q629029" start="32060" end="32077" title="health and safety" label="health and safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170551" start="33014" end="33035" title="Personal Track Safety" label="Personal Track Safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q1793381" start="33815" end="33828" title="Shriti Vadera, Baroness Vadera" label="Shriti Vadera"/>
<link wikidata="Q332837" start="33838" end="33851" title="Stephen Byers" label="Stephen Byers"/>
<link wikidata="Q178564" start="33951" end="33963" title="Compensation (nationalization)" label="compensation"/>
<link wikidata="Q477072" start="33974" end="33990" title="Human Rights Act 1998" label="Human Rights Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q489224" start="33999" end="34008" title="Railtrack" label="Railtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q2127685" start="34062" end="34079" title="Railways Act 1993" label="Railways Act 1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617747" start="34131" end="34141" title="High Court of Justice of England and Wales" label="High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246797" start="34154" end="34173" title="Secretary of State for Transport" label="Transport Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q489097" start="34331" end="34348" title="Ernst &amp;amp; Young" label="Ernst &amp;amp; Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283903" start="34621" end="34635" title="Rail Regulator" label="rail regulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334971" start="35495" end="35525" title="Office for National Statistics" label="Office for National Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970828" start="35560" end="35581" title="National Audit Office (United Kingdom)" label="National Audit Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604425" start="35590" end="35611" title="Statistics Commission" label="Statistics Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024789" start="36258" end="36271" title="Government debt" label="national debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q795691" start="36515" end="36530" title="London Waterloo railway station" label="London Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q30589088" start="36573" end="36608" title="Campaign to Bring Back British Rail" label="Campaign to Bring Back British Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937120" start="36611" end="36636" title="Northern Ireland Railways" label="Northern Ireland Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q30592548" start="36639" end="36686" title="Financing of the rail industry in Great Britain" label="Financing of the rail industry in Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q18161554" start="36689" end="36720" title="Network Rail Certification Body" label="Network Rail Certification Body"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="145438" wikidata="Q866209" url="?curid=145438" title="Meta-Object Facility">
<text>The Meta-Object Facility (MOF) is an Object Management Group (OMG) standard for model-driven engineering. Its purpose is to provide a type system for entities in the CORBA architecture and a set of interfaces through which those types can be created and manipulated.
MOF may be used for domain-driven software design and object-oriented modelling.

== Overview ==
MOF was developed to provide a type system for use in the CORBA architecture, a set of schemas by which the structure, meaning and behaviour of objects could be defined, and a set of CORBA interfaces through which these schemas could be created, stored and manipulated. 

MOF is designed as a four-layered architecture. It provides a meta-meta model at the top layer, called the M3 layer. This M3-model is the language used by MOF to build metamodels, called M2-models. The most prominent example of a Layer 2 MOF model is the UML metamodel, the model that describes the UML itself. These M2-models describe elements of the M1-layer, and thus M1-models. These would be, for example, models written in UML. The last layer is the M0-layer or data layer. It is used to describe real-world objects.

Beyond the M3-model, MOF describes the means to create and manipulate models and metamodels by defining CORBA interfaces that describe those operations. Because of the similarities between the MOF M3-model and UML structure models, MOF metamodels are usually modeled as UML class diagrams. 

=== File formats ===
A conversion from MOF specification models (M3-, M2-, or M1-Layer) to W3C XML and XSD are specified by the XMI (ISO/IEC 19503) specification. XMI is an XML-based exchange format for models.

From MOF to Java™ there is the Java Metadata Interchange (JMI) specification by Java Community Process.

It also provides specs to make easier automatic CORBA IDL interfaces generation.

== Metamodeling architecture ==
MOF is a &quot;closed&quot; metamodeling architecture; it defines an M3-model, which conforms to itself. MOF allows a &quot;strict&quot; meta-modeling architecture; every model element on every layer is strictly in correspondence with a model element of the layer above. MOF only provides a means to define the structure, or abstract syntax of a language or of data. For defining metamodels, MOF plays exactly the role that EBNF plays for defining programming language grammars. MOF is a Domain Specific Language (DSL) used to define metamodels, just as EBNF is a DSL for defining grammars. Similarly to EBNF, MOF could be defined in MOF.

In short, MOF uses the notion of MOF::Classes (not to be confused with UML::Classes), as known from object orientation, to define concepts (model elements) on a metalayer. MOF may be used to define object-oriented metamodels (as UML for example) as well as non object-oriented metamodels (e.g. a Petri net or a Web Service metamodel). 

As of May 2006, the OMG has defined two compliance points for MOF:
*EMOF for Essential MOF 
*CMOF for Complete MOF

In June 2006, a &quot;request for proposal&quot; was issued by OMG for a third variant, SMOF (Semantic MOF).

The variant ECore that has been defined in the Eclipse Modeling Framework is more or less aligned on OMG&#x27;s EMOF. 

Another related standard is OCL, which describes a formal language that can be used to define model constraints in terms of predicate logic.

QVT, which introduces means to query, view and transform MOF-based models, is a very important standard, approved in 2008. See Model Transformation Language for further information.

== International standard ==
MOF is an international standard:
;MOF 2.4.2
:ISO/IEC 19508:2014 Information technology — Object Management Group Meta Object Facility (MOF) Core
;MOF 1.4
:ISO/IEC 19502:2005 Information technology — Meta Object Facility (MOF)

MOF can be viewed as a standard to write metamodels, for example in order to model the abstract syntax of Domain Specific Languages. Kermeta is an extension to MOF allowing executable actions to be attached to EMOF meta-models, hence making it possible to also model a DSL operational semantics and readily obtain an interpreter for it.

JMI defines a Java API for manipulating MOF models.

OMG&#x27;s MOF is not to be confused with the Managed Object Format (MOF) defined by the Distributed Management Task Force (DMTF) in section 6 of the Common Information Model (CIM) Infrastructure Specification, version 2.5.0.

== See also ==

* Common Warehouse Metamodel
* Domain-specific language
* Kermeta
* KM3
* Metamodeling
* Metadata
* Model-driven architecture
* OGML
* Platform-specific model
* QVT
* SPEM
* XML Metadata Interchange
==References==

== Further reading ==
*Official MOF specification from OMG
*Ralph Sobek, MOF Specifications Documents
*Johannes Ernst, &quot;What is metamodeling?&quot;
*Woody Pidcock, &quot;What are the differences between a vocabulary, a taxonomy, a thesaurus, an ontology, and a meta-model?&quot;
*Anna Gerber and Kerry Raymond, MOF to EMF and Back Again.
*Weaving Executability into Object-Oriented Meta-Languages
*MOF Support for Semantic Structures RFP Request For Proposal on SMOF

== External links ==

* OMG&#x27;s MetaObject Facility</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q866209" start="4" end="24" title="Meta-Object Facility" label="Meta-Object Facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q866209" start="26" end="29" title="Meta-Object Facility" label="MOF"/>
<link wikidata="Q252733" start="37" end="60" title="Object Management Group" label="Object Management Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1941909" start="80" end="104" title="model-driven engineering" label="model-driven engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q865760" start="134" end="145" title="type system" label="type system"/>
<link wikidata="Q691593" start="166" end="171" title="CORBA" label="CORBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q524367" start="287" end="316" title="Domain-driven design" label="domain-driven software design"/>
<link wikidata="Q3318171" start="321" end="346" title="Object-oriented modeling" label="object-oriented modelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q865760" start="395" end="406" title="type system" label="type system"/>
<link wikidata="Q691593" start="422" end="427" title="CORBA" label="CORBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q691593" start="1264" end="1269" title="CORBA" label="CORBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q548264" start="1580" end="1583" title="XML Metadata Interchange" label="XMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q840596" start="1744" end="1766" title="Java Community Process" label="Java Community Process"/>
<link wikidata="Q333373" start="2208" end="2223" title="abstract syntax" label="abstract syntax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165219" start="2307" end="2311" title="EBNF" label="EBNF"/>
<link wikidata="Q691358" start="2371" end="2395" title="Domain Specific Language" label="Domain Specific Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q79872" start="2623" end="2641" title="Object-oriented programming" label="object orientation"/>
<link wikidata="Q169411" start="2752" end="2755" title="Unified Modeling Language" label="UML"/>
<link wikidata="Q724168" start="2819" end="2828" title="Petri net" label="Petri net"/>
<link wikidata="Q193424" start="2834" end="2845" title="Web Service" label="Web Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q252733" start="2880" end="2883" title="Object Management Group" label="OMG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281972" start="3133" end="3159" title="Eclipse Modeling Framework" label="Eclipse Modeling Framework"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397689" start="3234" end="3237" title="Object Constraint Language" label="OCL"/>
<link wikidata="Q4055684" start="3330" end="3345" title="predicate logic" label="predicate logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q474356" start="3348" end="3351" title="QVT" label="QVT"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888352" start="3475" end="3504" title="Model Transformation Language" label="Model Transformation Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q15028" start="3606" end="3609" title="International Organization for Standardization" label="ISO"/>
<link wikidata="Q193858" start="3610" end="3613" title="International Electrotechnical Commission" label="IEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q15028" start="3716" end="3719" title="International Organization for Standardization" label="ISO"/>
<link wikidata="Q193858" start="3720" end="3723" title="International Electrotechnical Commission" label="IEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925081" start="3829" end="3839" title="Metamodeling" label="metamodels"/>
<link wikidata="Q691358" start="3894" end="3918" title="Domain Specific Language" label="Domain Specific Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195466" start="3921" end="3928" title="Kermeta" label="Kermeta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2402520" start="4126" end="4129" title="Java Metadata Interface" label="JMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229586" start="4268" end="4301" title="Distributed Management Task Force" label="Distributed Management Task Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q358585" start="4424" end="4450" title="Common Warehouse Metamodel" label="Common Warehouse Metamodel"/>
<link wikidata="Q691358" start="4453" end="4477" title="Domain-specific language" label="Domain-specific language"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195466" start="4480" end="4487" title="Kermeta" label="Kermeta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3191453" start="4490" end="4493" title="KM3" label="KM3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925081" start="4496" end="4508" title="Metamodeling" label="Metamodeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q180160" start="4511" end="4519" title="Metadata" label="Metadata"/>
<link wikidata="Q15188241" start="4522" end="4547" title="Model-driven architecture" label="Model-driven architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7072535" start="4550" end="4554" title="OGML" label="OGML"/>
<link wikidata="Q6131507" start="4557" end="4580" title="Platform-specific model" label="Platform-specific model"/>
<link wikidata="Q474356" start="4583" end="4586" title="QVT" label="QVT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752462" start="4589" end="4593" title="SPEM" label="SPEM"/>
<link wikidata="Q548264" start="4596" end="4620" title="XML Metadata Interchange" label="XML Metadata Interchange"/>
</links>
</doc>
