<doc id="143149" wikidata="Q276172" url="?curid=143149" title="Jewish exodus from the Muslim world">
<text>The Jewish exodus from the Muslim world occurred during the 20th century, when approximately 900,000 Jews migrated, fled, or were expelled from Muslim-majority countries throughout Africa and Asia, primarily as a consequence of the establishment of the State of Israel. Large-scale migrations were also organized, sponsored, and facilitated by Zionist organizations such as Mossad LeAliyah Bet, the Jewish Agency, and the Hebrew Immigrant Aid Society. The mass movement mainly transpired from 1948 to the early 1970s, with one final exodus of Iranian Jews occurring shortly after the Islamic Revolution in 1979–1980. An estimated 650,000 (72%) of these Jews resettled in Israel. 

A number of small-scale Jewish migrations began across the Middle East in the early 20th century, with the only substantial &quot;aliyot&quot; (Jewish immigrations to the Land of Israel) coming from Yemen and Syria. Few Jews from Muslim countries immigrated during the British Mandate for Palestine. Prior to Israel&#x27;s independence in 1948, approximately 800,000 Jews were living on lands that now make up the Arab world. Of these, just under two-thirds lived in the French- and Italian-controlled regions of North Africa, 15–20% lived in the Kingdom of Iraq, approximately 10% lived in the Kingdom of Egypt, and approximately 7% lived in the Aden Protectorate and the Kingdom of Yemen. A further 200,000 Jews lived in the Imperial State of Iran and the Republic of Turkey. The first large-scale exoduses took place in the late 1940s and early 1950s, primarily from Iraq, Yemen, and Libya. In these cases, over 90% of the Jewish population left, leaving their assets and properties behind. Between 1948 and 1951, 250,000 Jews immigrated to Israel from Arab countries. In response, the Israeli government implemented policies to accommodate 600,000 immigrants over four years, doubling the country&#x27;s Jewish population. Reactions in the Knesset were mixed; in addition to some Israeli officials, there were those within the Jewish Agency who opposed promoting a large-scale emigration movement among Jews whose lives were not in immediate danger.

Later waves peaked at different times in different regions over the subsequent decades. The exodus from Egypt peaked in 1956, following the Suez Crisis; emigrations from other North African countries peaked in the 1960s. Lebanon&#x27;s Jewish population temporarily increased due to an influx of Jews from other Arab countries, before it dwindled by the mid-1970s. 600,000 Jews from Arab and Muslim countries had relocated to Israel by 1972, while another 300,000 migrated to France, the United States and Canada. Today, the descendants of Jews who immigrated to Israel from other Middle Eastern lands (known as Mizrahi Jews and Sephardic Jews) constitute more than half of all Israelis. By 2019, the total number of Jews in Arab countries and Iran had declined to 12,700, and in Turkey to 14,800.

The reasons for the exoduses include: such as the desire to fulfill Zionism, better economic prospects and security, and the Israeli government&#x27;s &quot;One Million Plan&quot; to accommodate Jewish immigrants from Arab- and Muslim-majority countries; and such as violent and other forms of antisemitism in the Arab world, political instability, poverty, and expulsion. The history of the exodus has been politicized, given its proposed relevance to the historical narrative of the Arab–Israeli conflict. Those who view the Jewish exodus as analogous to the 1948 Palestinian expulsion and flight generally emphasize the push factors and consider those who left to have been refugees, while those who oppose that view generally emphasize the pull factors and consider the Jews to have been willing immigrants.

==Background==

At the time of the Muslim conquests of the 7th century, ancient Jewish communities had existed in many parts of the Middle East and North Africa since Antiquity. Jews under Islamic rule were given the status of dhimmi, along with Christians and certain other pre-Islamic religious groups. As such, these groups were accorded certain rights as &quot;People of the Book&quot;.

During waves of persecution in Medieval Europe, many Jews found refuge in Muslim lands, though in other times and places, Jews fled persecution in Muslim lands and found refuge in Christian lands. Jews expelled from the Iberian Peninsula were invited to settle in various parts of the Ottoman Empire, where they would often form a prosperous model minority of merchants acting as intermediaries for their Muslim rulers.

Ella Shohat has described the Zionist master narrative of the migration of Jews from Muslim lands to Israel as a discourse in which &quot;European Zionism &#x27;saved&#x27; Sephardi Jews from the harsh rule of their Arab &#x27;captors&#x27;&quot; and &quot;took them out of &#x27;primitive conditions&#x27; of poverty and superstition and ushered them gently into a modern Western society characterized by tolerance, democracy, and &#x27;humane values.&#x27;&quot; She cites the impression of Israeli journalist in &quot;Haaretz&quot; in 1949:&quot;This is immigration of a race we have not yet known in the country ... We are dealing with people whose primitivism is at a peak, whose level of knowledge is one of virtually absolute ignorance, and worse, who have little talent for understanding anything intellectual. Generally, they are only slightly better than the general level of the Arabs, Negroes, and Berbers in the same regions. In any case, they are at an even lower level than what we knew with regard to the former Arabs of Eretz Israel ... . These Jews also lack roots in Judaism, as they are totally subordinated to the play of savage and primitive instincts... As with the Africans you will find card games for money, drunkenness and prostitution. Most of them have serious eye, skin and sexual diseases, without mentioning robberies and thefts. Chronic laziness and hatred for work, there is nothing safe about this asocial element... &quot;Aliyat HaNoar&quot; [the official organization dealing with young immigrants] refuses to receive Moroccan children and the Kibbutzim will not hear of their absorption among them.&quot;

==North Africa==

===French colonial rule===
In the 19th century, Francization of Jews in the French colonial North Africa, due to the work of organizations such as the Alliance Israelite Universelle and French policies such as the Algerian citizenship decree of 1870, resulted in a separation of the community from the local Muslims.

France began its conquest of Algeria in 1830. The following century had a profound influence on the status of the Algerian Jews; following the 1870 Crémieux Decree, they were elevated from the protected minority dhimmi status to French citizens. The decree began a wave of Pied-Noir-led anti-Jewish protests (such as the 1897 anti-Jewish riots in Oran), which the Muslim community did not participate in, to the disappointment of the European agitators. Though there were also cases of Muslim-led anti-Jewish riots, such as in Constantine in 1934 when 34 Jews were killed.

Neighbouring Husainid Tunisia began to come under European influence in the late 1860s and became a French protectorate in 1881. Since the 1837 accession of Ahmed Bey, and continued by his successor Muhammed Bey, Tunisia&#x27;s Jews were elevated within Tunisia society with improved freedom and security, which was confirmed and safeguarded during the French protectorate.&quot; Around a third of Tunisian Jews took French citizenship during the protectorate.

Morocco, which had remained independent during the 19th century, became a French protectorate in 1912. However, during less than half a century of colonization, the equilibrium between Jews and Muslims in Morocco was upset, and the Jewish community was again positioned between the colonisers and the Muslim majority. French penetration into Morocco between 1906 and 1912 created significant Morocco Muslim resentment, resulting in nationwide protests and military unrest. During the period a number of anti-European or anti-French protests extended to include anti-Jewish manifestations, such as in Casablanca, Oujda and Fes in 1907-08 and later in the 1912 Fes riots.

The situation in colonial Libya was similar; as in the French North African countries, the Italian influence in Libya was welcomed by the Jewish community, increasing their separation from the non-Jewish Libyans.

The Alliance Israélite Universelle, founded in France in 1860, set up schools in Algeria, Morocco and Tunisia as early as 1863.

===World War II===
During World War II, Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia and Libya came under Nazi or Vichy French occupation and their Jews were subject to various forms of persecution. In Libya, the Axis powers established labor camps to which many Jews were forcibly deported. In other areas Nazi propaganda targeted Arab populations to incite them against British or French rule. National Socialist propaganda contributed to the transfer of racial antisemitism to the Arab world and is likely to have unsettled Jewish communities. An anti-Jewish riot took place in Casablanca in 1942 in the wake of Operation Torch, where a local mob attacked the Jewish mellah. (&quot;Mellah&quot; is the Moroccan name for a Jewish ghetto.) However, according to the Hebrew University of Jerusalem&#x27;s Dr. Haim Saadon, &quot;Relatively good ties between Jews and Muslims in North Africa during World War II stand in stark contrast to the treatment of their co-religionists by gentiles in Europe.&quot;

From 1943 until the mid-1960s, the American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee was an important foreign organization driving change and modernization in the North African Jewish community. It had initially become involved in the region whilst carrying out relief work during World War II.

===Morocco===

The migration of Moroccan Jews to Israel was sponsored, facilitated and administered by Zionist organizations, notably through Cadima (1949–1956) and Operation Yachin (1961–1964). As in Tunisia and Algeria, Moroccan Jews did not face large scale expulsion or outright asset confiscation or any similar government persecution during the period of exile, and Zionist agents were relatively allowed freedom of action to encourage emigration.

In Morocco, the Vichy regime during World War II passed discriminatory laws against Jews; for example, Jews were no longer able to get any form of credit, Jews who had homes or businesses in European neighborhoods were expelled, and quotas were imposed limiting the percentage of Jews allowed to practice professions such as law and medicine to no more than two percent. King Mohammed V expressed his personal distaste for these laws, assuring Moroccan Jewish leaders that he would never lay a hand &quot;upon either their persons or property&quot;. While there is no concrete evidence of him actually taking any actions to defend Morocco&#x27;s Jews, it has been argued that he may have worked on their behalf behind the scenes.

In June 1948, soon after Israel was established and in the midst of the first Arab–Israeli war, violent anti-Jewish riots broke out in Oujda and Djerada, leading to deaths of 44 Jews. In 1948–49, after the massacres, 18,000 Moroccan Jews left the country for Israel. Later, however, Jewish migration from Morocco slowed to a few thousand a year. 

==== Cadima ====
Through the early 1950s, Zionist organizations encouraged immigration, particularly in the poorer south of the country, seeing Moroccan Jews as valuable contributors to the Jewish State:


Incidents of anti-Jewish violence continued through the 1950s, although French officials later stated that Moroccan Jews &quot;had suffered comparatively fewer troubles than the wider European population&quot; during the struggle for independence. In August 1953, riots broke out in the city of Oujda and resulted in the death of four Jews, including an 11-year-old girl. In the same month, French security forces prevented a mob from breaking into the Jewish &quot;mellah&quot; of Rabat. In 1954, a nationalist event in the town of Petitjean (known today as Sidi Kacem) turned into an anti-Jewish riot and resulted in the death of 6 Jewish merchants from Marrakesh. However, according to Francis Lacoste, French Resident-General in Morocco, &quot;the ethnicity of the Petitjean victims was coincidental, terrorism rarely targeted Jews, and fears about their future were unwarranted.&quot;

In 1955, a mob broke into the Jewish &quot;mellah&quot; in Mazagan (known today as El Jadida) and caused its 1,700 Jewish residents to flee to the European quarters of the city. The houses of some 200 Jews were too badly damaged during the riots for them to return. In 1954, Mossad had established an undercover base in Morocco, sending agents and emissaries within a year to appraise the situation and organize continuous emigration. The operations were composed of five branches: self-defense, information and intelligence, illegal immigration, establishing contact, and public relations. Mossad chief Isser Harel visited the country in 1959 and 1960, reorganized the operations, and created a clandestine militia named the &quot;Misgeret&quot; (&quot;framework&quot;).

Jewish emigration to Israel jumped from 8,171 people in 1954 to 24,994 in 1955, increasing further in 1956. Between 1955 and independence in 1956, Jews emigrated. On 7 April 1956, Morocco attained independence. Jews occupied several political positions, including three parliamentary seats and the cabinet position of Minister of Posts and Telegraphs. However, that minister, Leon Benzaquen, did not survive the first cabinet reshuffling, and no Jew was appointed again to a cabinet position. Although the relations with the Jewish community at the highest levels of government were cordial, these attitudes were not shared by the lower ranks of officialdom, which exhibited attitudes that ranged from traditional contempt to outright hostility. Morocco&#x27;s increasing identification with the Arab world, and pressure on Jewish educational institutions to Arabize and conform culturally added to the fears of Moroccan Jews. Between 1956 and 1961, emigration to Israel was prohibited by law; clandestine emigration continued, and a further Jews left Morocco.

On 10 January 1961 the &quot;Egoz&quot;, a Mossad-leased ship carrying Jews attempting to emigrate undercover, sank off the northern coast of Morocco. According to Tad Szulc, the Misgeret commander in Morocco, Alex Gattmon, decided to precipitate a crisis on the back of the tragedy, consistent with Mossad Director Isser Harel&#x27;s scenario that &quot;a wedge had to be forced between the royal government and the Moroccan Jewish community and that anti-Hassan nationalists had to be used as leverage as well if a compromise over emigration was ever to be attained&quot;. A pamphlet agitating for illegal emigration, supposedly by an underground Zionist organization, was printed by Mossad and distributed throughout Morocco, causing the government to &quot;hit the roof&quot;. These events prompted King Mohammed V to allow Jewish emigration, and over the three following years, more than 70,000 Moroccan Jews left the country, primarily as a result of Operation Yachin.

In June 1961, reports surfaced regarding the continued removal of Jewish officials from prominent positions within the Moroccan government. M. Zaoui, the director of Conservation Fonciere in the Moroccan Finance Ministry, was dismissed without a specified reason. The extremist Muslim journal &quot; Al Oumal&quot; then launched a campaign against him, accusing him of Zionist affiliations. Earlier in the year, Meyer Toledano had also been removed from his role as judicial counselor to the Moroccan Foreign Ministry. Simultaneously, uneasiness arose among Moroccan Jews as they examined the 17 articles of the new &quot;Fundamental Law&quot; signed by King Hassan on 2 June. Article 15, in particular, raised concerns, emphasizing Morocco&#x27;s commitment to the Arab League and the intention to strengthen ties with it. Although the new law did not revoke the equal rights of Jews and Muslims in Morocco, it notably omitted the term &quot;Jew,&quot; and the first two articles underscored Morocco as an Arab and Muslim country with Islam as the official state religion.

==== Operation Yachin ====
Operation Yachin was fronted by the New York-based Hebrew Immigrant Aid Society (HIAS), who financed approximately $50 million of costs. HIAS provided an American cover for underground Israeli agents in Morocco, whose functions included organizing emigration, arming of Jewish Moroccan communities for self-defense and negotiations with the Moroccan government. By 1963, the Moroccan Interior Minister Colonel Oufkir and Mossad chief Meir Amit agreed to swap Israeli training of Moroccan security services and some covert military assistance for intelligence on Arab affairs and continued Jewish emigration.

By 1967, only 50,000 Jews remained. The 1967 Six-Day War led to increased Arab–Jewish tensions worldwide, including in Morocco, and significant Jewish emigration out of the country continued. By the early 1970s, the Jewish population of Morocco fell to 25,000; however, most of the emigrants went to France, Belgium, Spain, and Canada, rather than Israel.

According to Esther Benbassa, the migration of Jews from the North African countries was prompted by uncertainty about the future. In 1948, 250,000–265,000 Jews lived in Morocco. By 2001, an estimated 5,230 remained.

Despite their dwindling numbers, Jews continue to play a notable role in Morocco; the King retains a Jewish senior adviser, André Azoulay, and Jewish schools and synagogues receive government subsidies. Despite this, Jewish targets have sometimes been attacked (notably the 2003 bombing attacks on a Jewish community center in Casablanca), and there is sporadic antisemitic rhetoric from radical Islamist groups. Tens of thousands of Israeli Jews with Moroccan heritage visit Morocco every year, especially around Rosh Hashana or Passover, although few have taken up the late King Hassan II&#x27;s offer to return and settle in Morocco.

===Algeria===


As in Tunisia and Morocco, Algerian Jews did not face large scale expulsion or outright asset confiscation or any similar government persecution during the period of exile, and Zionist agents were relatively allowed freedom of action to encourage emigration.

Jewish emigration from Algeria was part of a wider ending of French colonial control and the related social, economic and cultural changes.

The Israeli government had been successful in encouraging Morocco and Tunisian Jews to emigrate to Israel, but were less so in Algeria. Despite offers of visa and economic subsidies, only 580 Jews moved from Algeria to Israel in 1954–55.

Emigration peaked during the Algerian War of 1954–1962, during which thousands of Muslims, Christians and Jews left the country, particularly the Pied-Noir community. In 1956, Mossad agents worked underground to organize and arm the Jews of Constantine, who comprised approximately half the Jewish population of the country. In Oran, a Jewish counter-insurgency movement was thought to have been trained by former members of Irgun.

As of the last French census in Algeria, taken on 1 June 1960, there were non-Muslim civilians in Algeria, constituting 10 percent of the total population; this included Algerian Jews. After Algeria became independent in 1962, about &quot;Pieds-Noirs&quot; (including Jews) were evacuated to mainland France while about chose to remain in Algeria. Of the latter, there were still about in 1965 and about by the end of the 1960s.

As the Algerian Revolution intensified from the late 1950s onward, most of Algeria&#x27;s Jews began to leave. The community had lived mainly in Algiers and Blida, Constantine, and Oran.

Between late 1961 and late summer 1962, 130,000 of Algeria&#x27;s approximately 140,000 Jews left for France, while about 10,000 of them emigrated to Israel. Their &quot;repatriation&quot; represents a unique case in the history of Jewish migration given that even though they were psychologically uprooted, they &quot;returned&quot; to France as citizens and not as refugees.

The Great Synagogue of Algiers was consequently abandoned after 1994.

Jewish migration from North Africa to France led to the rejuvenation of the French Jewish community, which is now the third largest in the world.

===Tunisia===
As in Morocco and Algeria, Tunisian Jews did not face large scale expulsion or outright asset confiscation or any similar government persecution during the period of exile, and Jewish emigration societes were relatively allowed freedom of action to encourage emigration.

In 1948, approximately Jews lived in Tunisia. About 1500 remain today, mostly in Djerba, Tunis, and Zarzis. Following Tunisia&#x27;s independence from France in 1956 emigration of the Jewish population to Israel and France accelerated. After attacks in 1967, Jewish emigration both to Israel and France accelerated. There were also attacks in 1982, in 1985 following Israel&#x27;s Operation Wooden Leg, and most recently in 2002 when a bombing in Djerba took 21 lives (most of them German tourists) near the local synagogue, a terrorist attack claimed by Al-Qaeda.

===Libya===

According to Maurice Roumani, a Libyan emigrant who was previously the executive director of WOJAC, the most important factors that influenced the Libyan Jewish community to emigrate were &quot;the scars left from the last years of the Italian occupation and the entry of the British Military in 1943 accompanied by the Jewish Palestinian soldiers&quot;.

Zionist emissaries, so-called &quot;shlichim&quot;, had begun arriving in Libya in the early 1940s, with the intention to &quot;transform the community and transfer it to Palestine&quot;. In 1943, Mossad LeAliyah Bet began to send emissaries to prepare the infrastructure for the emigration of the Libyan Jewish community.

In 1942, German troops fighting the Allies in North Africa occupied the Jewish quarter of Benghazi, plundering shops and deporting more than 2000 Jews across the desert. Sent to work in labor camps like Giado, more than one-fifth of that group of Jews perished. At the time, most Libyan Jews lived in the cities of Tripoli and Benghazi; there were smaller numbers in Bayda and Misrata. Following the Allied victory at the Battle of El Agheila in December 1942, German and Italian troops were driven out of Libya. The British assigned as garrison in Cyrenaica the Palestine Regiment. This unit later became the core of the Jewish Brigade, which was later also stationed in Tripolitania. The pro-Zionist soldiers encouraged the spread of Zionism throughout the local Jewish population

Following the liberation of North Africa by Allied forces, antisemitic incitements were still widespread. The most severe racial violence between the start of World War II and the establishment of Israel erupted in Tripoli in November 1945. Over a period of several days more than 140 Jews (including 36 children) were killed, hundreds were injured, 4000 were displaced and 2,400 were reduced to poverty. Five synagogues in Tripoli and four in provincial towns were destroyed, and over 1000 Jewish residences and commercial buildings were plundered in Tripoli alone. Gil Shefler writes that &quot;As awful as the pogrom in Libya was, it was still a relatively isolated occurrence compared to the mass murders of Jews by locals in Eastern Europe.&quot; The same year, violent anti-Jewish violence also occurred in Cairo, which resulted in 10 Jewish victims.

In 1948, about Jews lived in Libya. The pogroms continued in June 1948, when 15 Jews were killed and 280 Jewish homes destroyed. In November 1948, a few months after the events in Tripoli, the American consul in Tripoli, Orray Taft Jr., reported that: &quot;There is reason to believe that the Jewish Community has become more aggressive as the result of the Jewish victories in Palestine. There is also reason to believe that the community here is receiving instructions and guidance from the State of Israel. Whether or not the change in attitude is the result of instructions or a progressive aggressiveness is hard to determine. Even with the aggressiveness or perhaps because of it, both Jewish and Arab leaders inform me that the inter-racial relations are better now than they have been for several years and that understanding, tolerance and cooperation are present at any top level meeting between the leaders of the two communities.&quot;

Immigration to Israel began in 1949, following the establishment of a Jewish Agency for Israel office in Tripoli. According to Harvey E. Goldberg, &quot;a number of Libyan Jews&quot; believe that the Jewish Agency was behind the riots, given that the riots helped them achieve their goal. Between the establishment of the State of Israel in 1948 and Libyan independence in December 1951 over Libyan Jews emigrated to Israel.

On 31 December 1958, the President of the Executive Council of Tripolitania ordered the dissolution of the Jewish Community Council and the appointment of a Muslim commissioner nominated by the Government. A law issued in 1961 required Libyan citizenship for the possession and transfer of property in Libya, a requirement that was met by only six Libyan Jews. 

In 1967, during the Six-Day War, the Jewish population of over 4000 was again subjected to riots in which 18 were killed and many more injured. The pro-Western Libyan government of King Idris tried unsuccessfully to maintain law and order. On 17 June 1967, Lillo Arbib, leader of the Jewish community in Libya, sent a formal request to Libyan prime minister Hussein Maziq requesting that the government &quot;allow Jews so desiring to leave the country for a time, until tempers cool and the Libyan population understands the position of Libyan Jews, who have always been and will continue to be loyal to the State, in full harmony and peaceful coexistence with the Arab citizens at all times.&quot;

According to David Harris, the executive director of the Jewish advocacy organization AJC, the Libyan government &quot;faced with a complete breakdown of law and order ... urged the Jews to leave the country temporarily&quot;, permitting them each to take one suitcase and the equivalent of $50. Through an airlift and the aid of several ships, over 4000 Libyan Jews were evacuated to Italy by the Italian Navy, where they were assisted by the Jewish Agency for Israel. Of the Jews evacuated, 1,300 subsequently immigrated to Israel, 2,200 remained in Italy, and most of the rest went to the United States. A few scores remained in Libya. Some Libyan Jews who had been evacuated temporarily returned to Libya between 1967 and 1969 in an attempt to recover lost property. In September 1967 only 100 Jews remained in Libya, falling to less than 40 five years later in 1972 and just 16 by 1977.

On 21 July 1970 the Libyan government issued a law which confiscated assets of the Jews who had previously left Libya, issuing in their stead 15-year bonds. However, when the bonds matured in 1985 no compensation was paid. Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi later justified this on the grounds that &quot;the alignment of the Jews with Israel, the Arab nations&#x27; enemy, has forfeited their right to compensation.&quot;

Although the main synagogue in Tripoli was renovated in 1999, it has not reopened for services. In 2002, Esmeralda Meghnagi, who was thought to be the last Jew in Libya, died. However, that same year, it was discovered that Rina Debach, an 80-year old Jewish woman who was thought to be dead by her family in Rome, was still alive and living in a nursing home in the country. With her subsequent departure for Rome, there were no more Jews left in Libya.

Israel is home to a significant population of Jews of Libyan descent, who maintain their unique traditions. Jews of Libyan descent also make up a significant part of the Italian Jewish community. About 30% of the registered Jewish population of Rome is of Libyan origin.

==Middle East==

===Iraq===

====1930s and early 1940s====

The British mandate over Iraq came to an end in June 1930, and in October 1932 the country became independent. The Iraqi government response to the demand of Assyrian autonomy (the Assyrians being the indigenous Eastern Aramaic-speaking Semitic descendants of the ancient Assyrians and Mesopotamians, and largely affiliated to the Assyrian Church of the East, Chaldean Catholic Church and Syriac Orthodox Church), turned into a bloody massacre of Assyrian villagers by the Iraqi army in August 1933.

This event was the first sign to the Jewish community that minority rights were meaningless under the Iraqi monarchy. King Faisal, known for his liberal policies, died in September 1933, and was succeeded by Ghazi, his nationalistic anti-British son. Ghazi began promoting Arab nationalist organizations, headed by Syrian and Palestinian exiles. With the 1936–39 Arab revolt in Palestine, they were joined by rebels, such as the Grand Mufti of Jerusalem. The exiles preached pan-Arab ideology and fostered anti-Zionist propaganda.

Under Iraqi nationalists, Nazi propaganda began to infiltrate the country, as Nazi Germany was anxious to expand its influence in the Arab world. Dr. Fritz Grobba, who resided in Iraq since 1932, began to vigorously and systematically disseminate hateful propaganda against Jews. Among other things, Arabic translation of &quot;Mein Kampf&quot; was published and Radio Berlin had begun broadcasting in Arabic language. Anti-Jewish policies had been implemented since 1934, and the confidence of Jews was further shaken by the growing crisis in Palestine in 1936. Between 1936 and 1939 ten Jews were murdered and on eight occasions bombs were thrown on Jewish locations.
In 1941, immediately following the British victory in the Anglo-Iraqi War, riots known as the Farhud broke out in Baghdad in the power vacuum following the collapse of the pro-Axis government of Rashid Ali al-Gaylani while the city was in a state of instability. 180 Jews were killed and another 240 wounded; 586 Jewish-owned businesses were looted and 99 Jewish houses were destroyed.

In some accounts the Farhud marked the turning point for Iraq&#x27;s Jews. Other historians, however, see the pivotal moment for the Iraqi Jewish community much later, between 1948 and 1951, since Jewish communities prospered along with the rest of the country throughout most of the 1940s, and many Jews who left Iraq following the Farhud returned to the country shortly thereafter and permanent emigration did not accelerate significantly until 1950–51.

Either way, the Farhud is broadly understood to mark the start of a process of politicization of the Iraqi Jews in the 1940s, primarily among the younger population, especially as a result of the impact it had on hopes of long term integration into Iraqi society. In the direct aftermath of the Farhud, many joined the Iraqi Communist Party in order to protect the Jews of Baghdad, yet they did not want to leave the country and rather sought to fight for better conditions in Iraq itself. At the same time the Iraqi government that had taken over after the Farhud reassured the Iraqi Jewish community, and normal life soon returned to Baghdad, which saw a marked betterment of its economic situation during World War II.
Shortly after the Farhud in 1941, Mossad LeAliyah Bet sent emissaries to Iraq to begin to organize emigration to Israel, initially by recruiting people to teach Hebrew and hold lectures on Zionism. In 1942, Shaul Avigur, head of Mossad LeAliyah Bet, entered Iraq undercover in order to survey the situation of the Iraqi Jews with respect to immigration to Israel. During the 1942–43, Avigur made four further trips to Baghdad to arrange the required Mossad machinery, including a radio transmitter for sending information to Tel Aviv, which remained in use for 8 years.

In late 1942, one of the emissaries explained the size of their task of converting the Iraqi community to Zionism, writing that &quot;we have to admit that there is not much point in [organizing and encouraging emigration]. ... We are today eating the fruit of many years of neglect, and what we didn&#x27;t do can&#x27;t be corrected now through propaganda and creating one-day-old enthusiasm.&quot; It was not until 1947 that legal and illegal departures from Iraq to Israel began. Around 8000 Jews left Iraq between 1919 and 1948, with another 2000 leaving between mid-1948 to mid-1950.

====1948 Arab–Israeli War====
In 1948, there were approximately Jews in Iraq. The community was concentrated in Baghdad and Basra.

A few months before the UN vote on partition of Palestine, Iraq&#x27;s prime minister Nuri al-Said told British diplomat Douglas Busk that he had nothing against the Iraqi Jews who were a long established and useful community. However, if the United Nations solution was not satisfactory, the Arab League might decide on severe measures against the Jews in Arab countries, and he would be unable to resist the proposal. In a speech at the General Assembly Hall at Flushing Meadow, New York, on Friday, 28 November 1947, Iraq&#x27;s Foreign Minister, Fadel Jamall, included the following statement: &quot;Partition imposed against the will of the majority of the people will jeopardize peace and harmony in the Middle East. Not only the uprising of the Arabs of Palestine is to be expected, but the masses in the Arab world cannot be restrained. The Arab–Jewish relationship in the Arab world will greatly deteriorate. There are more Jews in the Arab world outside of Palestine than there are in Palestine. In Iraq alone, we have about one hundred and fifty thousand Jews who share with Moslems and Christians all the advantages of political and economic rights. Harmony prevails among Moslems, Christians and Jews. But any injustice imposed upon the Arabs of Palestine will disturb the harmony among Jews and non-Jews in Iraq; it will breed inter-religious prejudice and hatred.&quot;

On 19 February 1949, al-Said acknowledged the bad treatment that the Jews had been victims of in Iraq during the recent months. He warned that unless Israel would behave itself, events might take place concerning the Iraqi Jews. Al-Said&#x27;s threats had no impact at the political level on the fate of the Jews but were widely published in the media.

In 1948, the country was placed under martial law, and the penalties for Zionism were increased. Courts martial were used to intimidate wealthy Jews, Jews were again dismissed from civil service, quotas were placed on university positions, Jewish businesses were boycotted (E. Black, p. 347) and Shafiq Ades, one of the most important Jewish businessmen in the country (who was non-Zionist) was arrested and publicly hanged for allegedly selling goods to Israel. The Jewish community&#x27;s general sentiment was that if a man as well connected and powerful as Ades could be eliminated by the state, other Jews would not be protected any longer.

Additionally, like most Arab League states, Iraq forbade any legal emigration of its Jews after the 1948 war on the grounds that they might go to Israel and could strengthen that state. At the same time, increasing government oppression of the Jews fueled by anti-Israeli sentiment together with public expressions of antisemitism created an atmosphere of fear and uncertainty.

However, by 1949 Jews were escaping Iraq at about a rate of 1000 a month. At the time, the British believed that the Zionist underground was agitating in Iraq in order to assist US fund-raising and to &quot;offset the bad impression caused by the Jewish attitudes to Arab refugees&quot;.

The Iraqi government took in only 5000 of the approximately Palestinians who became refugees in 1948–49, &quot;despite British and American efforts to persuade Iraq&quot; to admit more. In January 1949, the pro-British Iraqi Prime Minister Nuri al-Said discussed the idea of deporting Iraqi Jews to Israel with British officials, who explained that such a proposal would benefit Israel and adversely affect Arab countries. According to Meir-Glitzenstein, such suggestions were &quot;not intended to solve either the problem of the Palestinian Arab refugees or the problem of the Jewish minority in Iraq, but to torpedo plans to resettle Palestinian Arab refugees in Iraq&quot;.

In July 1949 the British government proposed to Nuri al-Said a population exchange in which Iraq would agree to settle Palestinian refugees in Iraq; Nuri stated that if a fair arrangement could be agreed, &quot;the Iraqi government would permit a voluntary move by Iraqi Jews to Palestine.&quot; The Iraqi-British proposal was reported in the press in October 1949.

On 14 October 1949 Nuri al-Said raised the exchange of population concept with the economic mission survey. At the Jewish Studies Conference in Melbourne in 2002, Philip Mendes summarised the effect of al-Said&#x27;s vacillations on Jewish expulsion as: &quot;In addition, the Iraqi Prime Minister Nuri al-Said tentatively canvassed and then shelved the possibility of expelling the Iraqi Jews, and exchanging them for an equal number of Palestinian Arabs.&quot;

====Temporary legalization of Jewish immigration to Israel====

In March 1950, Iraq reversed their earlier ban on Jewish emigration to Israel and passed a law of one-year duration allowing Jews to emigrate on the condition of relinquishing their Iraqi citizenship. According to Abbas Shiblak, many scholars state that this was a result of American, British and Israeli political pressure on Tawfiq al-Suwaidi&#x27;s government, with some studies suggesting there were secret negotiations. According to Ian Black, the Iraqi government was motivated by &quot;economic considerations, chief of which was that almost all the property of departing Jews reverted to the state treasury&quot; and also that &quot;Jews were seen as a restive and potentially troublesome minority that the country was best rid of.&quot; Israel mounted an operation called &quot;Operation Ezra and Nehemiah&quot; to bring as many of the Iraqi Jews as possible to Israel.

The Zionist movement at first tried to regulate the amount of registrants until issues relating to their legal status were clarified. Later, it allowed everyone to register. Two weeks after the law went into force, the Iraqi interior minister demanded a CID investigation over why Jews were not registering. A few hours after the movement allowed registration, four Jews were injured in a bomb attack at a café in Baghdad.

Immediately following the March 1950 Denaturalisation Act, the emigration movement faced significant challenges. Initially, local Zionist activists forbade the Iraqi Jews from registering for emigration with the Iraqi authorities, because the Israeli government was still discussing absorption planning. However, on 8 April, a bomb exploded in a Jewish cafe in Baghdad, and a meeting of the Zionist leadership later that day agreed to allow registration without waiting for the Israeli government; a proclamation encouraging registration was made throughout Iraq in the name of the State of Israel. However, at the same time immigrants were also entering Israel from Poland and Romania, countries in which Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion assessed there was a risk that the communist authorities would soon &quot;close their gates&quot;, and Israel therefore delayed the transportation of Iraqi Jews. As a result, by September 1950, while 70,000 Jews had registered to leave, many selling their property and losing their jobs, only 10,000 had left the country. According to Esther Meir-Glitzenstein, &quot;The thousands of poor Jews who had left or been expelled from the peripheral cities, and who had gone to Baghdad to wait for their opportunity to emigrate, were in an especially bad state. They were housed in public buildings and were being supported by the Jewish community. The situation was intolerable.&quot; The delay became a significant problem for the Iraqi government of Nuri al-Said (who replaced Tawfiq al-Suwaidi in mid-September 1950), as the large number of Jews &quot;in limbo&quot; created problems politically, economically and for domestic security. &quot;Particularly infuriating&quot; to the Iraqi government was the fact that the source of the problem was the Israeli government.

As a result of these developments, al-Said was determined to drive the Jews out of his country as quickly as possible. On 21 August 1950 al-Said threatened to revoke the license of the company transporting the Jewish exodus if it did not fulfill its daily quota of 500 Jews, and in September 1950, he summoned a representative of the Jewish community and warned the Jewish community of Baghdad to make haste; otherwise, he would take the Jews to the borders himself.

Two months before the law expired, after about 85,000 Jews had registered, a bombing campaign began against the Jewish community of Baghdad. The Iraqi government convicted and hanged a number of suspected Zionist agents for perpetrating the bombings, but the issue of who was responsible remains a subject of scholarly dispute. All but a few thousand of the remaining Jews then registered for emigration. In all, about 120,000 Jews left Iraq. Historian Esther Meir-Glitzenstein disputed the claim that these bombings were the primary motive for the emigration of Iraqi Jews, noting that most accounts by these Jews did not mention the bombings as a cause for immigration.

According to Gat, it is highly likely that one of Nuri as-Said&#x27;s motives in trying to expel large numbers of Jews was the desire to aggravate Israel&#x27;s economic problems (he had declared as such to the Arab world), although Nuri was well aware that the absorption of these immigrants was the policy on which Israel based its future. The Iraqi Minister of Defence told the U.S. ambassador that he had reliable evidence that the emigrating Jews were involved in activities injurious to the state and were in contact with communist agents.

Between April 1950 and June 1951, Jewish targets in Baghdad were struck five times. Iraqi authorities then arrested 3 Jews, claiming they were Zionist activists, and sentenced two — Shalom Salah Shalom and Yosef Ibrahim Basri—to death. The third man, Yehuda Tajar, was sentenced to 10 years in prison. In May and June 1951, arms caches were discovered that allegedly belonged to the Zionist underground, allegedly supplied by the Yishuv after the Farhud of 1941. There has been much debate as to whether the bombs were planted by the Mossad to encourage Iraqi Jews to emigrate to Israel or if they were planted by Muslim extremists to help drive out the Jews. This has been the subject of lawsuits and inquiries in Israel.

The emigration law was to expire in March 1951, one year after the law was enacted. On 10 March 1951, 64,000 Iraqi Jews were still waiting to emigrate, the government enacted a new law blocking the assets of Jews who had given up their citizenship, and extending the emigration period.

The bulk of the Jews leaving Iraq did so via Israeli airlifts named Operation Ezra and Nehemiah with special permission from the Iraqi government.

====After 1951====
A small Jewish community remained in Iraq following Operation Ezra and Nehemiah. Restrictions were placed on them after the Ba&#x27;ath Party came to power in 1963, and following the Six-Day War, persecution greatly increased. Jews had their property expropriated and bank accounts frozen, their ability to do business was restricted, they were dismissed from public positions, and were placed under house arrest for extended periods of time. In 1968, scores of Jews were imprisoned on charges of spying for Israel. In 1969, about 50 were executed following show trials, most infamously in a mass public hanging of 14 men including 9 Jews, and a hundred thousand Iraqis marched past the bodies in a carnival-like atmosphere. Jews began sneaking across the border to Iran, from where they proceeded to Israel or the UK. In the early 1970s, the Iraqi government permitted Jewish emigration and the majority of the remaining community left Iraq. By 2003, it was estimated that this once-thriving community had been reduced to 35 Jews in Baghdad and a handful more in Kurdish areas of the country.

===Egypt===


====Anti-Jewish sentiment====
Although there was a small indigenous community, most Jews in Egypt in the early twentieth century were recent immigrants to the country, who did not share the Arabic language and culture. Many were members of the highly diverse Mutamassirun community, which included other groups such as Greeks, Armenians, Syrian Christians and Italians, in addition to the British and French colonial authorities. Until the late 1930s, the Jews, both indigenous and new immigrants, like other minorities tended to apply for foreign citizenship in order to benefit from a foreign protection. The Egyptian government made it very difficult for non-Muslim foreigners to become naturalized. The poorer Jews, most of them indigenous and Oriental Jews, were left stateless, although they were legally eligible for Egyptian nationality. The drive to Egyptianize public life and the economy harmed the minorities, but the Jews had more strikes against them than the others. In the agitation against the Jews of the late thirties and the forties, the Jew was seen as an enemy The Jews were attacked because of their real or alleged links to Zionism. Jews were not discriminated because of their religion or race, like in Europe, but for political reasons.

The Egyptian Prime Minister Mahmoud an-Nukrashi Pasha told the British ambassador: &quot;All Jews were potential Zionists [and] ... anyhow all Zionists were Communists.&quot; On 24 November 1947, the head of the Egyptian delegation to the United Nations General Assembly, Muhammad Hussein Heykal Pasha, said, &quot;the lives of Jews in Moslem countries would be jeopardized by the establishment of a Jewish state.&quot; On 24 November 1947, Dr Heykal Pasha said: &quot;if the U.N decide to amputate a part of Palestine in order to establish a Jewish state, ... Jewish blood will necessarily be shed elsewhere in the Arab world ... to place in certain and serious danger a million Jews.&quot; Mahmud Bey Fawzi (Egypt) said: &quot;Imposed partition was sure to result in bloodshed in Palestine and in the rest of the Arab world.&quot;

The exodus of the foreign mutamassirun (&quot;Egyptianized&quot;) community, which included a significant number of Jews, began following the First World War, and by the end of the 1960s the entire mutamassirun was effectively eliminated. According to Andrew Gorman, this was primarily a result of the &quot;decolonization process and the rise of Egyptian nationalism&quot;.

The exodus of Egyptian Jews was impacted by the 1945 Anti-Jewish Riots in Egypt, though such emigration was not significant as the government stamped the violence out and the Egyptian Jewish community leaders were supportive of King Farouk. In 1948, approximately 75,000 Jews lived in Egypt. Around 20,000 Jews left Egypt during 1948–49 following the events of the 1948 Arab–Israeli War (including the 1948 Cairo bombings). A further 5000 left between 1952 and 1956, in the wake of the Egyptian Revolution of 1952 and later the false flag Lavon Affair. The Israeli invasion as part of the Suez Crisis caused a significant upsurge in emigration, with 14,000 Jews leaving in less than six months between November 1956 and March 1957, and 19,000 further emigrating over the next decade.

====1956 Suez Crisis====

In October 1956, when the Suez Crisis erupted, the position of the mutamassirun, including the Jewish community, was significantly impacted.

1000 Jews were arrested and 500 Jewish businesses were seized by the government. A statement branding the Jews as &quot;Zionists and enemies of the state&quot; was read out in the mosques of Cairo and Alexandria. Jewish bank accounts were confiscated and many Jews lost their jobs. Lawyers, engineers, doctors and teachers were not allowed to work in their professions. Thousands of Jews were ordered to leave the country and told that they may be sent to concentration camps if they stayed. They were allowed to take only one suitcase and a small sum of cash, and forced to sign declarations &quot;donating&quot; their property to the Egyptian government. Foreign observers reported that members of Jewish families were taken hostage, apparently to insure that those forced to leave did not speak out against the Egyptian government. Jews were expelled or left, forced out by the anti-Jewish feeling in Egypt. Some 25,000 Jews, almost half of the Jewish community left, mainly for Europe, the United States, South America and Israel, after being forced to sign declarations that they were leaving voluntarily, and agreed with the confiscation of their assets. Similar measures were enacted against British and French nationals in retaliation for the invasion. By 1957 the Jewish population of Egypt had fallen to 15,000.

====1960s and 1970s====
In 1960, the American embassy in Cairo wrote of Egyptian Jews that: &quot;There is definitely a strong desire among most Jews to emigrate, but this is prompted by the feeling that they have limited opportunity, or from fear for the future, rather than by any direct or present tangible mistreatment at the hands of the government.&quot;

In 1967, Jews were detained and tortured, and Jewish homes were confiscated. The vast majority of Jewish men without foreign passports were detained. Following the Six Day War, the community fell to 2,500 members and by the 1970s practically ceased to exist, with the exception of a few remaining families. As of 2015, an estimated 30 Jews remained in Egypt, most of them elderly.

===Yemen===


The Yemeni exodus began in 1881, seven months prior to the more well-known First Aliyah from Eastern Europe. The exodus came about as a result of European Jewish investment in the Mutasarrifate of Jerusalem, which created jobs for labouring Jews alongside local Muslim labour thereby providing an economic incentive for emigration. This was aided by the reestablishment of Ottoman control over the Yemen Vilayet allowing freedom of movement within the empire, and the opening of the Suez canal, which reduced the cost of travelling considerably. Between 1881 and 1948, 15,430 Jews had immigrated to Palestine legally.

In 1942, prior to the formulation of the One Million Plan, David Ben-Gurion described his intentions with respect to such potential policy to a meeting of experts and Jewish leaders, stating that &quot;It is a mark of great failure by Zionism that we have not yet eliminated the Yemen exile [diaspora].&quot;

If one includes Aden, there were about 63,000 Jews in Yemen in 1948. Today, there are about 200 left. In 1947, rioters killed at least 80 Jews in Aden, a British colony in southern Yemen. In 1948 the new Zaydi Imam Ahmad bin Yahya unexpectedly allowed his Jewish subjects to leave Yemen, and tens of thousands poured into Aden. The Israeli government&#x27;s Operation Magic Carpet evacuated around 44,000 Jews from Yemen to Israel in 1949 and 1950. Emigration continued until 1962, when the civil war in Yemen broke out. A small community remained until 1976, though it has mostly immigrated from Yemen since. In March 2016, the Jewish population in Yemen was estimated to be about 50.

===Lebanon and Syria===

====Background====

The area now known as Lebanon and Syria was the home of one of the oldest Jewish communities in the world, dating back to at least 300 BCE.

====Lebanon====
In November 1945, fourteen Jews were killed in anti-Jewish riots in Tripoli. Unlike in other Arab countries, the Lebanese Jewish community did not face grave peril during the 1948 Arab–Israel War and was reasonably protected by governmental authorities. Lebanon was also the only Arab country that saw a post-1948 increase in its Jewish population, principally due to the influx of Jews coming from Syria and Iraq.

The 1932 national census puts the country&#x27;s Jewish population at around 3,500. In 1948, there were approximately 5,200 Jews in Lebanon. Their number increased after the first Arab-Israeli war to roughly 9000 in 1951, including an estimated 2000 Jewish asylum seekers. The largest communities of Jews in Lebanon were in Beirut, and the villages near Mount Lebanon, Deir al Qamar, Barouk, Bechamoun, and Hasbaya. While the French mandate saw a general improvement in conditions for Jews, the Vichy regime placed restrictions on them. The Jewish community actively supported Lebanese independence after World War II and had mixed attitudes toward Zionism.

However, negative attitudes toward Jews increased after 1948, and, by 1967, most Lebanese Jews had emigrated—to Israel, the United States, Canada, and France. In 1971, Albert Elia, the 69-year-old Secretary-General of the Lebanese Jewish community, was kidnapped in Beirut by Syrian agents and imprisoned under torture in Damascus, along with Syrian Jews who had attempted to flee the country. A personal appeal by the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees, Prince Sadruddin Aga Khan, to the late President Hafez al-Assad failed to secure Elia&#x27;s release.

The remaining Jewish community was particularly hard hit by the civil war in Lebanon, and by the mid-1970s, the community collapsed. In the 1980s, Hezbollah kidnapped several Lebanese Jewish businessmen, and in the 2004 elections, only one Jew voted in the municipal elections. There are now only between 20 and 40 Jews living in Lebanon.

====Syria====

In 1947, rioters in Aleppo burned the city&#x27;s Jewish quarter and killed 75 people. As a result, nearly half of the Jewish population of Aleppo opted to leave the city, initially to neighbouring Lebanon.

In 1948, there were approximately 30,000 Jews in Syria. In 1949, following defeat in the Arab–Israeli War, the CIA-backed March 1949 Syrian coup d&#x27;état installed Husni al-Za&#x27;im as the President of Syria. Za&#x27;im permitted the emigration of large numbers of Syrian Jews, and 5000 left to Israel.

The subsequent Syrian governments placed severe restrictions on the Jewish community, including barring emigration. In 1948, the government banned the sale of Jewish property and in 1953 all Jewish bank accounts were frozen. The Syrian secret police closely monitored the Jewish community. Over the following years, many Jews managed to escape, and the work of supporters, particularly Judy Feld Carr, in smuggling Jews out of Syria, and bringing their plight to the attention of the world, raised awareness of their situation.

Although the Syrian government attempted to stop Syrian Jews from exporting their assets, the American consulate in Damascus noted in 1950 that &quot;the majority of Syrian Jews have managed to dispose of their property and to emigrate to Lebanon, Italy, and Israel&quot;. In November 1954, the Syrian government temporarily lifted its ban on Jewish emigration. The various restrictions that the Syrian government placed on the Jewish population were severe. Jews were legally barred from working for the government or for banks, obtaining driver&#x27;s licenses, having telephones in their homes or business premises, or purchasing property.

In March 1964, the Syrian government issued a decree prohibiting Jews from traveling more than three miles from the limits of their hometowns. In 1967, in the aftermath of the Six-Day War, antisemitic riots broke out in Damascus and Aleppo. Jews were allowed to leave their homes only for few hours daily. Many Jews found it impossible to pursue their business ventures because the larger community was boycotting their products. In 1970, Israel launched Operation Blanket, a covert military and intelligence operation to evacuate Syrian Jews, managing to bring a few dozen young Jews to Israel.

Clandestine Jewish emigration continued, as Jews attempted to sneak across the borders into Lebanon or Turkey, often with the help of smugglers, and make contact with Israeli agents or local Jewish communities. In 1972, demonstrations were held by 1000 Syrian Jews in Damascus, after four Jewish women were killed as they attempted to flee Syria. The protest surprised Syrian authorities, who closely monitored Jewish community, eavesdropped on their telephone conversations, and tampered with their mail.

Following the Madrid Conference of 1991, the United States put pressure on the Syrian government to ease its restrictions on Jews, and during Passover in 1992, the government of Syria began granting exit visas to Jews on condition that they did not emigrate to Israel. At that time, the country had several thousand Jews. The majority left for the United States—most to join the large Syrian Jewish community in South Brooklyn, New York—although some went to France and Turkey, and 1262 Syrian Jews who wanted to immigrate to Israel were brought there in a two-year covert operation.

In 2004, the Syrian government attempted to establish better relations with its emigrants, and a delegation of a dozen Jews of Syrian origin visited Syria in the spring of that year. As of December 2014, only 17 Jews remain in Syria, according to Rabbi Avraham Hamra; nine men and eight women, all over 60 years of age.

===Transjordan and Jordanian-annexed West Bank===
==== Depopulation of local Jewish communities ====
Following the 1948 Arab–Israeli War and the 1949 Armistice Agreements, all Jewish communities in Transjordan, the Jordanian-annexed West Bank, and the Egyptian-occupied Gaza Strip were depopulated.

The communities and localities affected included the Jerusalem Jewish Quarter, Hebron, Ein Tzurim, Masu&#x27;ot Yitzhak, Revadim, Beit HaArava, Kalya, Kfar Etzion, Atarot, Kfar Darom, Neve Yaakov, and Tel Or

In many cases, these depopulations represented final stages of earlier evacuations begun in response to both the 1929 Palestine riots and 1936–1939 Arab Revolt. 
The Hebron Jewish Community, already having lost a majority of its population as a result of mandatory British evacuation following the 1929 Hebron Massacre, lost its sole remaining Jewish resident Ya&#x27;akov Ben Shalom Ezra during the war.
Kfar Darom, the last of the Gaza Jewish communities following mandatory evacuations in 1929, was itself ultimately abandoned following a three-month siege by the Egyptian army in 1948.

In the case of Dead Sea-region kibbutzim of Beit HaArava and Kalya, negotiations with Transjordan&#x27;s King Abdullah were conducted in an attempt for residents to remain. When those talks failed, the villagers fled by boat to an Israeli military post at Mount Sodom.

Judean settlements Kfar Etzion, a kibbutz established southwest of Bethlehem, and Jerusalem adjascent Atarot and Neve Yaakov fared less peacefully during the conflict. All three villages were besieged by a combined force of Arab Legion and local irregulars, resulting in complete evacuation of Atarot and Neve Yaakov, and massacre of 127 of Etzion&#x27;s defending force and citizens.

The village of Tel Or had the distinction of being the only Jewish locality permitted in Transjordan proper at the time. Established in 1930 in the vicinity of the Naharayim hydroelectric power plant, the village of was built as a housing compound for Jewish crews operating the power plant, and their families. Following a prolonged battle between Yishuv forces and the Arab Legion in the area, the residents of Tel Or were given an ultimatum to surrender or leave the village.

==== Depopulation of Jerusalem&#x27;s Jewish Quarter ====
The largest depopulation during the war occurred in Jerusalem&#x27;s Jewish Quarter, where its entire population of about 2000 Jews were besieged and ultimately forced to leave en masse. The defenders surrendered on 28 May 1948.
The Jordanian commander is reported to have told his superiors: &quot;For the first time in 1000 years not a single Jew remains in the Jewish Quarter. Not a single building remains intact. This makes the Jews&#x27; return here impossible.&quot;

===Bahrain===

Bahrain&#x27;s tiny Jewish community, mostly the Jewish descendants of immigrants who entered the country in the early 20th century from Iraq, numbered between 600 and 1500 in 1948. In the wake of 29 November 1947 U.N. Partition vote, demonstrations against the vote in the Arab world were called for 2–5 December. The first two days of demonstrations in Bahrain saw rock-throwing against Jews, but on 5 December, mobs in the capital of Manama looted Jewish homes and shops, destroyed the synagogue, beat any Jews they could find, and murdered one elderly woman.

As a result, many Bahraini Jews fled Bahrain. Some remained behind, but after riots broke out following the Six-Day War, the majority left. Bahraini Jews emigrated mainly to Israel (where a particularly large number settled in Pardes Hanna-Karkur), the United Kingdom, and the United States. As of 2006, only 36 Jews remained.

===Iran===

The exodus of Iran&#x27;s Jews refers to the emigration of Persian Jews from Pahlavi Iran in the 1950s and a later migration wave from Iran during and after the Iranian Revolution of 1979. At the time of Israeli independence in 1948, there were an estimated 140,000 to 150,000 Jews in Iran. Between 1948 and 1953, about one-third of Iranian Jews immigrated to Israel. Between 1948 and 1978, an estimated 70,000 Iranian Jews immigrated to Israel.

==== 1979 Islamic Revolution ====
In 1979, the year of the Islamic Revolution, there were about 80,000 Jews in Iran. In the aftermath of the revolution, emigration reduced the community to less than 20,000. The migration of Persian Jews after Iranian Revolution was mainly due to fear of religious persecution, economic hardships and insecurity after the deposition of the Shah regime and consequent internal violence and the Iran–Iraq War. In the years following the Islamic Revolution, about 31,000 Jews emigrated from Iran, of whom about 36,000 went to the United States, 20,000 to Israel, and 5000 to Europe.

While the Iranian constitution generally respects minority rights of non-Muslims (though there are some forms of discrimination), the strong anti-Zionist policy of the Islamic Republic of Iran created a tense and uncomfortable situation for Iranian Jews, who became vulnerable to accusations of alleged collaboration with Israel. In total, more than 80% of Iranian Jews fled or migrated from the country between 1979 and 2006.

===Turkey===
When the Republic of Turkey was established in 1923, Aliyah was not particularly popular among Turkish Jewry; migration from Turkey to Palestine was minimal in the 1920s.

During 1923–1948, approximately 7300 Jews emigrated from Turkey to Palestine. After the 1934 Thrace pogroms following the 1934 Turkish Resettlement Law, immigration to Palestine increased; it is estimated that 521 Jews left for Palestine from Turkey in 1934 and 1,445 left in 1935. Immigration to Palestine was organized by the Jewish Agency and the Palestine Aliya Anoar Organization. The Varlık Vergisi, a capital tax established in 1942, was also significant in encouraging emigration from Turkey to Palestine; between 1943 and 1944, 4000 Jews emigrated.&quot;

The Jews of Turkey reacted very favorably to the creation of the State of Israel. Between 1948 and 1951, Jews immigrated to Israel, nearly 40% of the Jewish population at the time. Immigration was stunted for several months in November 1948, when Turkey suspended migration permits as a result of pressure from Arab countries.

In March 1949, the suspension was removed when Turkey officially recognized Israel, and emigration continued, with emigrating within the same year. The migration was entirely voluntary, and was primary driven by economic factors given the majority of emigrants were from the lower classes. In fact, the migration of Jews to Israel is the second largest mass emigration wave out of Turkey, the first being the population exchange between Greece and Turkey.

After 1951, emigration of Jews from Turkey to Israel slowed materially.

In the mid-1950s, 10% of those who had moved to Israel returned to Turkey. A new synagogue, the Neve Şalom, was constructed in Istanbul in 1951. Generally, Turkish Jews in Israel have integrated well into society and are not distinguishable from other Israelis. However, they maintain their Turkish culture and connection to Turkey, and are strong supporters of close relations between Israel and Turkey.

Even though historically speaking populist antisemitism was rarer in the Ottoman Empire and Anatolia than in Europe, historic antisemitism still existed in the empire, started from the maltreatment of Jewish Yishuv prior to World War I, but most notably, the 1917 Tel Aviv and Jaffa deportation, which was considered as the first anti-Semitic act by the empire. Since the establishment of the state of Israel in 1948, there has been a rise in anti-Semitism. On the night of 6–7 September 1955, the Istanbul pogrom was unleashed. Although primarily aimed at the city&#x27;s Greek population, the Jewish and Armenian communities of Istanbul were also targeted to a degree. The caused damage was mainly material - more than 4000 shops and 1000 houses belonging to Greeks, Armenians and Jews were destroyed - but it deeply shocked minorities throughout the country

Since 1986, increased attacks on Jewish targets throughout Turkey impacted the security of the community, and urged many to emigrate. The Neve Shalom Synagogue in Istanbul has been attacked by Islamic militants three times. On 6 September 1986, Arab terrorists gunned down 22 Jewish worshippers and wounded 6 during &quot;Shabbat&quot; services at Neve Shalom. This attack was blamed on the Palestinian militant Abu Nidal. In 1992, the Lebanon-based Shi&#x27;ite Muslim group of Hezbollah carried out a bombing against the synagogue, but nobody was injured. The synagogue was hit again during the 2003 Istanbul bombings alongside the Bet Israel Synagogue, killing 20 and injuring over 300 people, both Jews and Muslims.

With the increasing anti-Israeli and anti-Jewish attitudes in modern Turkey, especially under the Turkish government of Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, the country&#x27;s Jewish community, while still believed to be the largest among Muslim countries, declined from about 26,000 in 2010 to about 17,000-18,000 in 2016.

== Other Muslim-majority countries ==
===Afghanistan===

The Afghan Jewish community declined from about 40,000 in the early 20th century to 5000 by 1934 due to persecution. Many Afghan Jews fled to Persia, although some came to Palestine.

Following the Kazakh famine of 1930–1933, a significant number of Bukharan Jews crossed the border into the Kingdom of Afghanistan as part of the wider famine-related refugee crisis; leaders of the communities petitioned Jewish communities in Europe and the United States for support. In total, some refugees had fled from the Soviet Union and reached Afghanistan. In 1932, Mohammed Nadir Shah signed a border treaty with the Soviets in order to prevent asylum seekers from crossing into Afghanistan from Soviet Central Asia. Later that year, Afghanistan began deporting Soviet-origin refugees either back to the Soviet Union or to specified territories in China. Soviet Jews who were already present in Afghanistan with the intent to flee further south were detained in Kabul, and all Soviet Jews who were apprehended at the border were immediately deported. All Soviet citizens, including these Bukharan Jews, were suspected by both the Afghan and British government officials of conducting espionage with the intention to disseminate Bolshevik propaganda.

From September 1933, many of these ex-Soviet Jewish refugees in northern Afghanistan were forcibly relocated to major cities such as Kabul and Herat, but continued to live in under restrictions on work and trade. Whilst it has been claimed that the November 1933 assassination of Mohammad Nadir Shah made the situation worse, this is likely to have had only limited impact. In 1935, the Jewish Telegraph Agency reported that &quot;Ghetto rules&quot; had been imposed on Afghan Jews, requiring them to wear particular clothes, that Jewish women stay out of markets, that no Jews live within certain distances of mosques and that Jews did not ride horses.

From 1935 to 1941, under Prime Minister Mohammad Hashim Khan (uncle of the King) Germany was the most influential country in Afghanistan. The Nazis regarded the Afghans (like the Iranians) as Aryans. In 1938, it was reported that Jews were only allowed to work as shoe-polishers.

Contact with Afghanistan was difficult at this time and with many Jews facing persecution around the world, reports reached the outside world after a delay and were rarely researched thoroughly. 
Jews were allowed to emigrate in 1951 and most moved to Israel and the United States. By 1969, some 300 remained, and most of these left after the Soviet invasion of 1979, leaving 10 Afghan Jews in 1996, most of them in Kabul. As of 2007, more than 10,000 Jews of Afghan descent were living in Israel and over 200 families of Afghan Jews lived in New York City.

==== Evacuation of the last Afghan Jew ====
In 2001 it was reported that two Jews were left in Afghanistan, Ishaq Levin and Zablon Simintov, and that they did not talk to each other. Levin died in 2005, leaving Simintov as the last Jew living in Afghanistan. Simintov left on 7 September 2021, leaving no known Jews in the country.

===Malaysia===
Penang was historically home to a Jewish community of Baghdadi origin that dated back to colonial times. Much of this community emigrated overseas in the decades following World War II, and the last Jewish resident of Penang died in 2011, making this community extinct.

===Pakistan===

At the time of Pakistani independence in 1947, some 1,300 Jews remained in Karachi, many of them Bene Israel Jews, observing Sephardic Jewish rites. A small Ashkenazi population was also present in the city. Some Karachi streets still bear names that hark back to a time when the Jewish community was more prominent; such as Ashkenazi Street, Abraham Reuben Street (named after the former member of the Karachi Municipal Corporation), Ibn Gabirol Street, and Moses Ibn Ezra Street—although some streets have been renamed, they are still locally referred to by their original names. Bani Israel Graveyard - a small Jewish cemetery - still exists in the vast Mewa Shah Graveyard near the shrine of a Sufi saint.

The neighbourhood of Baghdadi in Lyari Town is named for the Baghdadi Jews who once lived there. A community of Bukharan Jews was also found in the city of Peshawar, where many buildings in the old city feature a Star of David as exterior decor as a sign of the Hebrew origins of its owners. Members of the community settled in the city as merchants as early as the 17th century, although the bulk arrived as refugees fleeing the advance of the Russian Empire into Bukhara, and later the Russian Revolution in 1917. Today, there are virtually no Jewish communities remaining in Karachi or Peshawar.

The exodus of Jews from Pakistan to Bombay and other cities in India came just prior to the creation of Israel in 1948, when anti-Israeli sentiments rose. By 1953, fewer than 500 Jews were reported to reside in all of Pakistan. Anti-Israeli sentiment and violence often flared during ensuing conflicts in the Middle East, resulting in a further movement of Jews out of Pakistan. Presently, a large number of Jews from Karachi live in the city of Ramla in Israel.

===Sudan===
The Jewish community in Sudan was concentrated in the capital Khartoum, and had been established in the late 19th century. At its peak between 1930 and 1950, the community had about 800 to 1000 members, mainly Jews of Sephardi and Mizrahi backgrounds from North Africa, Syria, and Iraq, though some came from Europe in the 1930s. The community had constructed a synagogue a club at its peak. Between 1948 and 1956, some members of the community left the country. Following independence in 1956 hostility against the Jewish community began to grow, and from 1957 many Sudanese Jews began to leave for Israel, the United States, and Europe, particularly the UK and Switzerland. By the early 1960s the Sudanese Jewish community had been greatly depleted.

In 1967, anti-semitic attacks began to appear in Sudanese newspapers following the Six-Day War, advocating the torture and murder of prominent Jewish community leaders, and there was a mass arrest of Jewish men. Jewish emigration intensified as a result. The last Jews of Sudan left the country in the early 1970s. About 500 Sudanese Jews went to Israel and the rest to Europe and the US.

===Bangladesh===

The Jewish population in East Bengal was 200 at the time of the Partition of India in 1947. They included a Baghdadi Jewish merchant community that settled in Dhaka during the 17th-century. A prominent Jew in East Pakistan was Mordecai Cohen, who was a Bengali and English newsreader on East Pakistan Television. By the late 1960s, much of the Jewish community had left for Calcutta.

==Table of the Jewish population in Muslim countries==
In 1948, there were between 758,000 and 881,000 Jews (see table below) living in communities throughout the Arab world. Today, there are fewer than 8,600. In some Arab states, such as Libya, which was about 3% Jewish, the Jewish community no longer exists; in other Arab countries, only a few dozen to a few hundred Jews remain.

==Absorption==
Of the Jewish emigrants, around emigrated to Israel, and to France. The remainder went to other countries in Europe as well as to the Americas. About two thirds of the exodus was from the North Africa region, of which Morocco&#x27;s Jews went mostly to Israel, Algeria&#x27;s Jews went mostly to France, and Tunisia&#x27;s Jews departed for both countries.

===Israel===

The majority of Jews in Arab countries eventually immigrated to the modern State of Israel. Hundreds of thousands of Jews were temporarily settled in the numerous immigrant camps throughout the country. Those were later transformed into ma&#x27;abarot (transit camps), where tin dwellings were provided to house up to residents. The ma&#x27;abarot existed until 1963. The population of transition camps was gradually absorbed and integrated into Israeli society. Many of the North African and Middle-Eastern Jews had a hard time adjusting to the new dominant culture, change of lifestyle and there were claims of discrimination.

===France===
France was a major destination. About 50% ( people) of modern French Jews have roots from North Africa. In total, it is estimated that between 1956 and 1967, about North African Jews from Algeria, Tunisia and Morocco immigrated to France due to the decline of the French Empire and following the Six-Day War.

===United States===
The United States was a destination of many Egyptian, Lebanese and Syrian Jews.

==Advocacy groups==
Advocacy groups acting on behalf of Jews from Arab countries include:
* World Organization of Jews from Arab Countries (WOJAC) seeks to secure rights and redress for Jews from Arab countries who suffered as a result of the Arab–Israeli conflict.
* Justice for Jews from Arab Countries
* JIMENA (Jews Indigenous to the Middle East and North Africa) publicizes the history and plight of the Jews indigenous to the Middle East and North Africa who were forced to leave their homes and abandon their property, who were stripped of their citizenship
* HARIF (UK Association of Jews from the Middle East and North Africa) promotes the history and heritage of Jews from the Arab and Muslim world
* Historical Society of the Jews from Egypt and International Association of Jews from Egypt
* Babylonian Jewry Heritage Center

WOJAC, JJAC and JIMENA have been active in recent years in presenting their views to various governmental bodies in the US, Canada and UK, among others, as well as appearing before the United Nations Human Rights Council.

==Views on the exodus==

===American government===
In 2003, was introduced into the House of Representatives by congresswoman Ileana Ros-Lehtinen. In 2004 simple resolutions and were issued into the House of Representatives and Senate by Jerrold Nadler and Rick Santorum, respectively. In 2007 simple resolutions and were issued into the House of Representatives and Senate. The resolutions had been written together with lobbyist group Justice for Jews from Arab Countries, whose founder Stanley Urman described the resolution in 2009 as &quot;perhaps our most significant accomplishment&quot;

The House of Representatives resolution was sponsored by Jerrold Nadler, who followed the resolutions in 2012 with House Bill . The 2007–08 resolutions proposed that any &quot;comprehensive Middle East peace agreement to be credible and enduring, the agreement must address and resolve all outstanding issues relating to the legitimate rights of all refugees, including Jews, Christians and other populations displaced from countries in the Middle East&quot;, and encourages President Barack Obama and his administration to mention Jewish and other refugees when mentioning Palestinian refugees at international forums. The 2012 bill, which was moved to committee, proposed to recognize the plight of &quot; Jewish refugees from Arab countries&quot;, as well as other refugees, such as Christians from the Middle East, North Africa, and the Persian Gulf.

Jerrold Nadler explained his view in 2012 that &quot;the suffering and terrible injustices visited upon Jewish refugees in the Middle East needs to be acknowledged. It is simply wrong to recognize the rights of Palestinian refugees without recognizing the rights of nearly 1 million Jewish refugees who suffered terrible outrages at the hands of their former compatriots.&quot; Critics have suggested the campaign is simply an anti-Palestinian &quot;tactic&quot;, which Michael Fischbach explains as &quot;a tactic to help the Israeli government deflect Palestinian refugee claims in any final Israeli–Palestinian peace deal, claims that include Palestinian refugees&#x27; demand for the &#x27;right of return&#x27; to their pre-1948 homes in Israel.&quot;

===Israeli government===
The issue of comparison of the Jewish exodus with the Palestinian exodus was raised by the Israeli Foreign Ministry as early as 1961.

In 2012, a special campaign on behalf of the Jewish refugees from Arab countries was established and gained momentum. The campaign urges the creation of an international fund that would compensate both Jewish and Palestinian Arab refugees, and would document and research the plight of Jewish refugees from Arab countries. In addition, the campaign plans to create a national day of recognition in Israel to remember the Jewish refugees from Arab countries, as well as to build a museum that would document their history, cultural heritage, and collect their testimony.

On 21 September 2012, a special event was held at the United Nations to highlight the issue of Jewish refugees from Arab countries. Israeli ambassador Ron Prosor asked the United Nations to &quot;establish a center of documentation and research&quot; that would document the &quot; untold stories&quot; and &quot;collect the evidence to preserve their history&quot;, which he said was ignored for too long. Israeli Deputy Foreign Minister Danny Ayalon said that &quot;We are 64 years late, but we are not too late.&quot; Diplomats from approximately two dozen countries and organizations, including the United States, the European Union, Germany, Canada, Spain, and Hungary attended the event. In addition, Jews from Arab countries attended and spoke at the event.

===&quot;Jewish Nakba&quot; narrative===

====Comparison with the Palestinians&#x27; Nakba====
In response to the Palestinian Nakba narrative, the term &quot;Jewish Nakba&quot; is sometimes used to refer to the exodus of Jews from Arab countries in the years and decades following the creation of the State of Israel. Israeli columnist Ben Dror Yemini, himself a Mizrahi Jew, wrote:

Professor Ada Aharoni, chairman of The World Congress of the Jews from Egypt, argues in an article entitled &quot;What about the Jewish Nakba?&quot; that exposing the truth about the exodus of the Jews from Arab states could facilitate a genuine peace process, since it would enable Palestinians to realize they were not the only ones who suffered, and thus their sense of &quot;victimization and rejectionism&quot; will decline.

Additionally, Canadian MP and international human rights lawyer Irwin Cotler has referred to the &quot;double Nakba&quot;. He criticizes the Arab states&#x27; rejectionism of the Jewish state, their subsequent invasion to destroy the newly formed nation, and the punishment meted out against their local Jewish populations:

====Israeli criticism of the Jewish Nakba narrative====
Iraqi-born Ran Cohen, a former member of the Knesset, said: &quot;I have this to say: I am not a refugee. I came at the behest of Zionism, due to the pull that this land exerts, and due to the idea of redemption. Nobody is going to define me as a refugee.&quot; Yemeni-born Yisrael Yeshayahu, former Knesset speaker, Labor Party, stated: &quot;We are not refugees. [Some of us] came to this country before the state was born. We had messianic aspirations.&quot; And Iraqi-born Shlomo Hillel, also a former speaker of the Knesset, Labor Party, claimed: &quot;I do not regard the departure of Jews from Arab lands as that of refugees. They came here because they wanted to, as Zionists.&quot;

Historian Tom Segev stated: &quot;Deciding to emigrate to Israel was often a very personal decision. It was based on the particular circumstances of the individual&#x27;s life. They were not all poor, or &#x27;dwellers in dark caves and smoking pits&#x27;. Nor were they always subject to persecution, repression or discrimination in their native lands. They emigrated for a variety of reasons, depending on the country, the time, the community, and the person.&quot;

Iraqi-born Israeli historian Avi Shlaim, speaking of the wave of Iraqi Jewish migration to Israel, concludes that, even though Iraqi Jews were &quot;victims of the Israeli-Arab conflict&quot;, Iraqi Jews are not refugees, saying &quot;nobody expelled us from Iraq, nobody told us that we were unwanted.&quot; He restated that case in a review of Martin Gilbert&#x27;s book, &quot;In Ishmael&#x27;s House&quot;.

Yehuda Shenhav has criticized the analogy between Jewish emigration from Arab countries and the Palestinian exodus. He also says &quot;The unfounded, immoral analogy between Palestinian refugees and Mizrahi immigrants needlessly embroils members of these two groups in a dispute, degrades the dignity of many Mizrahi Jews, and harms prospects for genuine Jewish-Arab reconciliation.&quot; He has stated that &quot;the campaign&#x27;s proponents hope their efforts will prevent conferral of what is called a &#x27;right of return&#x27; on Palestinians, and reduce the size of the compensation Israel is liable to be asked to pay in exchange for Palestinian property appropriated by the state guardian of &#x27;lost&#x27; assets.&quot;

Israeli historian Yehoshua Porath has rejected the comparison, arguing that while there is a superficial similarity, the ideological and historical significance of the two population movements are entirely different. Porath points out that the immigration of Jews from Arab countries to Israel, expelled or not, was the &quot;fulfilment of a national dream&quot;. He also argues that the achievement of this Zionist goal was only made possible through the endeavors of the Jewish Agency&#x27;s agents, teachers, and instructors working in various Arab countries since the 1930s. Porath contrasts this with the Palestinian Arabs&#x27; flight of 1948 as completely different. He describes the outcome of the Palestinian&#x27;s flight as an &quot;unwanted national calamity&quot; that was accompanied by &quot;unending personal tragedies&quot;. The result was &quot;the collapse of the Palestinian community, the fragmentation of a people, and the loss of a country that had in the past been mostly Arabic-speaking and Islamic. &quot;

Alon Liel, a former director-general of the Foreign Ministry says that many Jews escaped from Arab countries, but he does not call them &quot;refugees&quot;.

====Palestinian criticism of the Jewish Nakba narrative====
On 21 September 2012, at a United Nations conference, the issue of Jewish refugees from Arab countries was criticized by Hamas spokesman, Sami Abu Zuhri, who stated that the Jewish refugees from Arab countries were in fact responsible for the Palestinian displacement and that &quot;those Jews are criminals rather than refugees.&quot; In regard to the same conference, Palestinian politician Hanan Ashrawi has argued that Jews from Arab lands are not refugees at all and that Israel is using their claims in order to counterbalance to those of Palestinian refugees against it. Ashrawi said that &quot;If Israel is their homeland, then they are not &#x27;refugees&#x27;; they are emigrants who returned either voluntarily or due to a political decision.&quot;

==Property losses and compensation==
In Libya, Iraq and Egypt many Jews lost vast portions of their wealth and property as part of the exodus because of severe restrictions on moving their wealth out of the country.

In other countries in North Africa, the situation was more complex. For example, in Morocco emigrants were not allowed to take more than $60 worth of Moroccan currency with them, although generally they were able to sell their property prior to leaving, and some were able to work around the currency restrictions by exchanging cash into jewelry or other portable valuables. This led some scholars to speculate the Moroccan and Algerian Jewish populations, comprising a large percentage of the exodus, on the whole did not suffer large property losses. However, opinions on this differ.

Yemeni Jews were usually able to sell what property they possessed prior to departure, although not always at market rates.

===Estimated financial value===
Various estimates of the value of property abandoned by the Jewish exodus have been published, with wide variety in the quoted figures from a few billion dollars to hundreds of billions.

The World Organization of Jews from Arab Countries (WOJAC) estimated in 2006, that Jewish property abandoned in Arab countries would be valued at more than $100 billion, later revising their estimate in 2007 to $300 billion. They also estimated Jewish-owned real-estate left behind in Arab lands at square kilometers (four times the size of the state of Israel).

The type and extent of linkage between the Jewish exodus from Arab countries and the 1948 Palestinian exodus has also been the source of controversy. Advocacy groups have suggested that there are strong ties between the two processes and some of them even claim that decoupling the two issues is unjust.

Holocaust restitution expert Sidney Zabludoff, writing for the Israeli-advocacy group Jerusalem Center for Public Affairs, suggests that the losses sustained by the Jews who fled Arab countries since 1947 amounts to $700m at period prices based on an estimated per capita wealth of $700 multiplied by one million refugees, equating to $6 billion today, assuming that the entire exodus left all of their wealth behind.

===Israeli position===
The official position of the Israeli government is that Jews from Arab countries are considered refugees, and it considers their rights to property left in countries of origin as valid and existent.

In 2008, the Orthodox Sephardi party, Shas, announced its intention to seek compensation for Jewish refugees from Arab states.

In 2009, Israeli lawmakers introduced a bill into the Knesset to make compensation for Jews from Arab and Muslim countries an integral part of any future peace negotiations by requiring compensation on behalf of current Jewish Israeli citizens, who were expelled from Arab countries after Israel was established in 1948 and leaving behind a significant amount of valuable property. In February 2010, the bill passed its first reading. The bill was sponsored by MK Nissim Ze&#x27;ev (Shas) and follows a resolution passed in the United States House of Representatives in 2008, calling for refugee recognition to be extended to Jews and Christians similar to that extended to Palestinians in the course of Middle East peace talks.

==Films and documentaries==
* &quot;I Miss the Sun&quot; (1984), USA, produced and directed by Mary Halawani. Profile of Halawani&#x27;s grandmother, Rosette Hakim. A prominent Egyptian-Jewish family, the Halawanis left Egypt in 1959. Rosette, the family matriarch, chose to remain in Egypt until every member of the large family was free to leave.
* &quot;The Dhimmis: To Be a Jew in Arab Lands&quot; (1987), director Baruch Gitlis and David Goldstein a producer. Presents a history of Jews in the Middle East.
* &quot;The Forgotten Refugees&quot; (2005) is a documentary film by The David Project, describing the events of the Jewish exodus from Arab and Muslim countries
* &quot;The Silent Exodus&quot; (2004) by Pierre Rehov. Selected at the International Human Rights Film Festival of Paris (2004) and presented at the UN Geneva Human Rights Annual Convention (2004).
* &quot;The Last Jews of Libya&quot; (2007) by Vivienne Roumani-Denn. Describes how European colonialism, Italian fascism and the rise of Arab nationalism contributed to the disappearance of Libya&#x27;s Sephardic Jewish community.
* &quot;From Babylonia To Beverly Hills: The Exodus of Iran&#x27;s Jews&quot; Documentary.
* &quot;Goodbye Mothers&quot;. A Moroccan film inspired by the sinking of the &quot;Egoz&quot;

==Memorialization in Israel==

9 May 2021, the first physical memorialization in Israel of the Departure and Expulsion of Jews from Arab Lands and Iran was placed on the Sherover Promenade in Jerusalem. It is titled the Departure and Expulsion Memorial following the Knesset law for the annual recognition of the Jewish experience held annually on 30 November.

The text on the Memorial reads;
The sculpture is the interpretive work of Sam Philipe, a fifth-generation Jerusalemite.

==See also==

* Day to Mark the Departure and Expulsion of Jews from the Arab Countries and Iran
* Arab Jews, History of the Jews under Muslim rule
* Jewish population by country
** Historical Jewish population comparisons
* Jews outside Europe under Axis occupation
* 1948 Palestinian expulsion and flight
* Ma&#x27;abarot, Development town, Refugee camp
* &quot;After Saturday comes Sunday&quot;, Christian emigration, Muhajir (Muslim exodus)
* Jewish refugees, Palestinian refugees, Sahrawi refugees, Greek refugees, Kurdish refugees
* Cicurel family
* Pallache family
* Palestinian expulsion from Kuwait

==References==
===Citations===
===Sources===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
== Further reading ==

===Whole region===

* Abu Shakrah (2001). &quot;Deconstructing the Link: Palestinian Refugees and Jewish Immigrants from Arab Countries&quot; in Naseer Aruri (ed.), &quot;Palestinian Refugees: The Right of Return&quot;. London: Pluto Press:208–216.
* Cohen, Hayyim J. (1973). &quot;The Jews of the Middle East, 1860–1972&quot; Jerusalem, Israel Universities Press. 
* Cohen, Mark (1995) &quot;Under Crescent and Cross&quot;, Princeton, Princeton University Press.
*
* Goldberg, Arthur. 1999. &quot;Findings of the Tribunal relating to the Claims of Jews from Arab Lands&quot;. in Malka Hillel Shulewitz (ed.) &quot;The Forgotten Millions&quot;. London: Cassell: 207–211.
* Gilbert, Sir Martin (1976). &quot;The Jews of Arab lands: Their history in maps&quot;. London. World Organisation of Jews from Arab Countries: Board of Deputies of British Jews. 
*
* Landshut, Siegfried. 1950. &quot;Jewish Communities in the Muslim Countries of the Middle East&quot;. Westport: Hyperion Press.
* Lewis, Bernard (1984). &quot;The Jews of Islam&quot;. Princeton. Princeton University Press. 
* Lewis, Bernard (1986). &quot;Semites and Anti-Semites: An Inquiry into Conflict and Prejudice&quot;, W. W. Norton &amp; Co. 
* Morris, Benny. Black, Ian. (1992). &quot;Israel&#x27;s Secret Wars: A History of Israel&#x27;s Intelligence Services&quot;. Grove Press. 
*
* Roumani, Maurice (1977). &quot;The Case of the Jews from Arab Countries: A Neglected Issue&quot;, Tel Aviv, World Organization of Jews from Arab Countries, 1977 and 1983
* Schulewitz, Malka Hillel. (2001). &quot;The Forgotten Millions: The Modern Jewish Exodus from Arab Lands.&quot; London. 
*
*Shabi, Rachel, &quot;We Look Like the Enemy: The Hidden Story of Israel&#x27;s Jews from Arab Lands&quot;. Bloomsbury Publishing, 2009. 
* Shapiro, Raphael. 1984. &quot;Zionism and Its Oriental Subjects&quot;. in Jon Rothschild (ed.) &quot;Forbidden Agendas: Intolerance and Defiance in the Middle East&quot;. London: Al Saqi Books: 23–48.
* Shohat, Ella. 1988. &quot;Sephardim in Israel: Zionism from the Standpoint of its Jewish Victims&quot;. &quot;Social Text&quot; 19–20:1–35.
* Stillman, Norman (1975). &quot;Jews of Arab Lands a History and Source Book&quot;. Jewish Publication Society
* Swirski, Shlomo. 1989. &quot;Israel The Oriental Majority&quot;. London: Zed Books.
* Zargari, Joseph (2005). &quot;The Forgotten Story of the Mizrachi Jews&quot;. Buffalo Public Interest Law Journal (Volume 23, 2004 – 2005).
===Country or region specific works===
==== North Africa ====

*De Felice, Renzo (1985). &quot;Jews in an Arab Land: Libya, 1835–1970&quot;. Austin, University of Texas Press. 
* Gruen, George E. (1983) Tunisia&#x27;s Troubled Jewish Community (New York: American Jewish Committee, 1983)

Egypt
* Lagnado, Lucette (2007) &quot;The Man in the White Sharkskin Suit: A Jewish Family&#x27;s Exodus from Old Cairo to the New World &quot;. Harper Perennial. 

Iran

Iraq
*
* Hillel, Shlomo. 1987. Operation Babylon. New York: Doubleday.
* Kedourie, Elie. 1989. &quot;The break between Muslims and Jews in Iraq,&quot; in Mark Cohen &amp; Abraham Udovitch (eds.) &quot;Jews Among Arabs&quot;. Princeton: Darwin Press:21–64.
* Rejwan, Nissim (1985) &quot;The Jews of Iraq: 3000 Years of History and Culture&quot; London. Weidenfeld and Nicolson. 

Yemen
* Nini, Yehuda (1992), &quot;The Jews of the Yemen 1800–1914&quot;. Harwood Academic Publishers. 

Other

* Schulze, Kristen (2001) The Jews of Lebanon: Between Coexistence and Conflict. Sussex. 
* Malka, Eli (April 1997). Jacob&#x27;s Children in the Land of the Mahdi: Jews of the Sudan. Syracuse University Press. </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q276172" start="4" end="39" title="Jewish exodus from the Muslim world" label="Jewish exodus from the Muslim world"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="101" end="105" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q779924" start="144" end="169" title="Muslim world" label="Muslim-majority countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="181" end="187" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="192" end="196" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q223732" start="232" end="268" title="establishment of the State of Israel" label="establishment of the State of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="344" end="351" title="Zionism" label="Zionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q25474" start="374" end="393" title="Mossad LeAliyah Bet" label="Mossad LeAliyah Bet"/>
<link wikidata="Q41189" start="399" end="412" title="Jewish Agency for Israel" label="Jewish Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910087" start="422" end="450" title="Hebrew Immigrant Aid Society" label="Hebrew Immigrant Aid Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q42915604" start="523" end="555" title="Exodus of Iranian Jews" label="one final exodus of Iranian Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q126065" start="584" end="602" title="Iranian Revolution" label="Islamic Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="671" end="677" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="740" end="751" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q597260" start="811" end="817" title="Aliyah" label="aliyot"/>
<link wikidata="Q155321" start="852" end="866" title="Land of Israel" label="Land of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q657993" start="880" end="885" title="Yemenite Jews" label="Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120206" start="890" end="895" title="History of the Jews in Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q193714" start="950" end="979" title="Mandatory Palestine" label="British Mandate for Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q143487" start="1095" end="1105" title="Arab world" label="Arab world"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="1194" end="1206" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q149805" start="1228" end="1243" title="Kingdom of Iraq" label="Kingdom of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q124943" start="1276" end="1292" title="Kingdom of Egypt" label="Kingdom of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865132" start="1328" end="1345" title="Aden Protectorate" label="Aden Protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q580188" start="1354" end="1370" title="Mutawakkilite Kingdom of Yemen" label="Kingdom of Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q107258515" start="1408" end="1430" title="Pahlavi Iran" label="Imperial State of Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="1439" end="1457" title="Turkey" label="Republic of Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q133396" start="1925" end="1932" title="Knesset" label="Knesset"/>
<link wikidata="Q41189" start="2012" end="2025" title="Jewish Agency for Israel" label="Jewish Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q49101" start="2276" end="2287" title="Suez Crisis" label="Suez Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q723348" start="2357" end="2364" title="History of the Jews in Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q702758" start="2612" end="2618" title="History of the Jews in France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465619" start="2624" end="2637" title="History of the Jews in the United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q16995" start="2642" end="2648" title="History of the Jews in Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q501837" start="2748" end="2760" title="Mizrahi Jews" label="Mizrahi Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q102251" start="2765" end="2779" title="Sephardic Jews" label="Sephardic Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="3003" end="3010" title="Zionism" label="Zionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17012930" start="3092" end="3108" title="One Million Plan" label="One Million Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117862" start="3229" end="3259" title="antisemitism in the Arab world" label="antisemitism in the Arab world"/>
<link wikidata="Q8669" start="3420" end="3441" title="Arab–Israeli conflict" label="Arab–Israeli conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q13220089" start="3496" end="3533" title="1948 Palestinian expulsion and flight" label="1948 Palestinian expulsion and flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q275918" start="3783" end="3799" title="Early Muslim conquests" label="Muslim conquests"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916490" start="3926" end="3949" title="History of the Jews under Muslim rule" label="Jews under Islamic rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q273603" start="3975" end="3981" title="dhimmi" label="dhimmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="3994" end="4004" title="Christians" label="Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q97253422" start="4023" end="4051" title="Religion in pre-Islamic Arabia" label="pre-Islamic religious groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q216565" start="4113" end="4131" title="People of the Book" label="People of the Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q48136" start="4147" end="4186" title="Christian persecution of Jews" label="waves of persecution in Medieval Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061030" start="4337" end="4377" title="Alhambra Decree" label="Jews expelled from the Iberian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4383" end="4400" title="History of the Jews in the Ottoman Empire#Influx of Sephardi Jews from Iberia" label="invited to settle"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="4425" end="4439" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315586" start="4482" end="4496" title="model minority" label="model minority"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4500" end="4534" title="History of the Jews in the Ottoman Empire#Banking and finance" label="merchants acting as intermediaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2776609" start="4561" end="4572" title="Ella Shohat" label="Ella Shohat"/>
<link wikidata="Q216393" start="5082" end="5089" title="Haaretz" label="Haaretz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2236213" start="6271" end="6283" title="Francization" label="Francization"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="6315" end="6327" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316546" start="6374" end="6404" title="Alliance Israelite Universelle" label="Alliance Israelite Universelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q281348" start="6437" end="6472" title="Crémieux Decree" label="Algerian citizenship decree of 1870"/>
<link wikidata="Q3317226" start="6558" end="6585" title="Invasion of Algiers in 1830" label="conquest of Algeria in 1830"/>
<link wikidata="Q281348" start="6689" end="6704" title="Crémieux Decree" label="Crémieux Decree"/>
<link wikidata="Q466237" start="6814" end="6823" title="Pied-Noir" label="Pied-Noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q131818" start="6888" end="6892" title="Oran" label="Oran"/>
<link wikidata="Q187346" start="7068" end="7079" title="Constantine, Algeria" label="Constantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570523" start="7128" end="7144" title="Husainid Dynasty" label="Husainid Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2017684" start="7215" end="7234" title="French protectorate of Tunisia" label="French protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q400663" start="7272" end="7281" title="Ahmad I ibn Mustafa" label="Ahmed Bey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932630" start="7314" end="7326" title="Muhammad II ibn al-Husayn" label="Muhammed Bey"/>
<link wikidata="Q907234" start="7649" end="7670" title="French protectorate in Morocco" label="a French protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7903" start="8177" end="8187" title="Casablanca" label="Casablanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q193802" start="8189" end="8194" title="Oujda" label="Oujda"/>
<link wikidata="Q80985" start="8199" end="8202" title="Fes" label="Fes"/>
<link wikidata="Q16130700" start="8231" end="8245" title="1912 Fes riots" label="1912 Fes riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q284568" start="8339" end="8365" title="History of Italian Libya" label="Italian influence in Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="8678" end="8682" title="Nazi" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8686" end="8698" title="Operation Torch#Background" label="Vichy French"/>
<link wikidata="Q6093122" start="8809" end="8820" title="Italian concentration camps in Libya" label="labor camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q705157" start="8879" end="8894" title="Propaganda of Nazi Germany" label="Nazi propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q4390212" start="9029" end="9048" title="racial antisemitism" label="racial antisemitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331767" start="9242" end="9248" title="mellah" label="mellah"/>
<link wikidata="Q152018" start="9304" end="9310" title="ghetto" label="ghetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q174158" start="9339" end="9369" title="Hebrew University of Jerusalem" label="Hebrew University of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702533" start="9613" end="9657" title="American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee" label="American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q131378503" start="10011" end="10017" title="Cadima" label="Cadima"/>
<link wikidata="Q2511085" start="10034" end="10050" title="Operation Yachin" label="Operation Yachin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152214" start="10091" end="10104" title="Moroccan Jews" label="Moroccan Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q193874" start="10695" end="10710" title="Mohammed V of Morocco" label="King Mohammed V"/>
<link wikidata="Q223732" start="11080" end="11102" title="Israeli Declaration of Independence" label="Israel was established"/>
<link wikidata="Q49092" start="11127" end="11149" title="1948 Arab–Israeli War" label="first Arab–Israeli war"/>
<link wikidata="Q2020716" start="11151" end="11207" title="1948 Anti-Jewish riots in Oujda and Jerada" label="violent anti-Jewish riots broke out in Oujda and Djerada"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="11445" end="11452" title="Zionism" label="Zionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551" start="12091" end="12096" title="Rabat" label="Rabat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089594" start="12168" end="12178" title="Sidi Kacem" label="Sidi Kacem"/>
<link wikidata="Q101625" start="12265" end="12274" title="Marrakesh" label="Marrakesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q609008" start="12315" end="12349" title="List of French residents-general in Morocco" label="French Resident-General in Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q219583" start="12583" end="12592" title="El Jadida" label="El Jadida"/>
<link wikidata="Q350744" start="13104" end="13115" title="Isser Harel" label="Isser Harel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13461" end="13482" title="French protectorate in Morocco#1956 independence" label="attained independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6524517" start="13649" end="13663" title="Leon Benzaquen" label="Leon Benzaquen"/>
<link wikidata="Q143487" start="14069" end="14079" title="Arab world" label="Arab world"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369900" start="14132" end="14139" title="Arabization" label="Arabize"/>
<link wikidata="Q5348246" start="14364" end="14368" title="Egoz (ship)" label="Egoz"/>
<link wikidata="Q375684" start="14499" end="14508" title="Tad Szulc" label="Tad Szulc"/>
<link wikidata="Q350744" start="14651" end="14662" title="Isser Harel" label="Isser Harel"/>
<link wikidata="Q190399" start="14912" end="14920" title="pamphlet" label="pamphlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2511085" start="15292" end="15308" title="Operation Yachin" label="Operation Yachin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2511085" start="16413" end="16429" title="Operation Yachin" label="Operation Yachin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910087" start="16464" end="16492" title="Hebrew Immigrant Aid Society" label="Hebrew Immigrant Aid Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368152" start="16815" end="16829" title="Mohamed Oufkir" label="Colonel Oufkir"/>
<link wikidata="Q449095" start="16847" end="16856" title="Meir Amit" label="Meir Amit"/>
<link wikidata="Q49077" start="17067" end="17078" title="Six-Day War" label="Six-Day War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285501" start="17392" end="17407" title="Esther Benbassa" label="Esther Benbassa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2847186" start="17721" end="17734" title="André Azoulay" label="André Azoulay"/>
<link wikidata="Q569394" start="17871" end="17891" title="2003 Casablanca bombings" label="2003 bombing attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q69103" start="18178" end="18187" title="Hassan II" label="Hassan II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076740" start="18278" end="18291" title="Algerian Jews" label="Algerian Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q200790" start="18920" end="18932" title="Algerian War" label="Algerian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q207913" start="19316" end="19321" title="Irgun" label="Irgun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076740" start="19494" end="19507" title="History of the Jews in Algeria" label="Algerian Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q466237" start="19563" end="19574" title="Pieds-Noirs" label="Pieds-Noirs"/>
<link wikidata="Q200790" start="19761" end="19780" title="Algerian Revolution" label="Algerian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561" start="19899" end="19906" title="Algiers" label="Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q216990" start="19911" end="19916" title="Blida" label="Blida"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600070" start="20324" end="20350" title="Great Synagogue of Algiers" label="Great Synagogue of Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20467" end="20480" title="History of the Jews in France#21st century" label="French Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916034" start="20579" end="20592" title="Tunisian Jews" label="Tunisian Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q188938" start="20905" end="20911" title="Djerba" label="Djerba"/>
<link wikidata="Q3572" start="20913" end="20918" title="Tunis" label="Tunis"/>
<link wikidata="Q148142" start="20924" end="20930" title="Zarzis" label="Zarzis"/>
<link wikidata="Q45156" start="21205" end="21225" title="Operation Wooden Leg" label="Operation Wooden Leg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2869975" start="21258" end="21277" title="Ghriba synagogue bombing" label="a bombing in Djerba"/>
<link wikidata="Q34490" start="21379" end="21387" title="Al-Qaeda" label="Al-Qaeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036014" start="21496" end="21501" title="World Organization of Jews from Arab Countries" label="WOJAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q25474" start="21956" end="21975" title="Mossad LeAliyah Bet" label="Mossad LeAliyah Bet"/>
<link wikidata="Q153113" start="22092" end="22105" title="Afrika Korps" label="German troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q218678" start="22119" end="22141" title="North African Campaign" label="Allies in North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q40816" start="22173" end="22181" title="Benghazi" label="Benghazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q28498799" start="22286" end="22291" title="Giado concentration camp" label="Giado"/>
<link wikidata="Q3579" start="22398" end="22405" title="Tripoli, Libya" label="Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q35784" start="22450" end="22455" title="Bayda, Libya" label="Bayda"/>
<link wikidata="Q131323" start="22460" end="22467" title="Misrata" label="Misrata"/>
<link wikidata="Q2371769" start="22505" end="22525" title="Battle of El Agheila" label="Battle of El Agheila"/>
<link wikidata="Q88556" start="22620" end="22628" title="garrison" label="garrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q165198" start="22632" end="22641" title="Cyrenaica" label="Cyrenaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127319" start="22646" end="22664" title="Palestine Regiment" label="Palestine Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q700800" start="22705" end="22719" title="Jewish Brigade" label="Jewish Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q192435" start="22755" end="22767" title="Tripolitania" label="Tripolitania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2100623" start="23082" end="23106" title="1945 Tripoli pogrom" label="Tripoli in November 1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q1629966" start="23680" end="23685" title="1945 Cairo pogrom" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2100590" start="23761" end="23795" title="1948 anti-Jewish riots in Tripolitania" label="The pogroms continued in June 1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q41189" start="24745" end="24769" title="Jewish Agency for Israel" label="Jewish Agency for Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q49077" start="25484" end="25495" title="Six-Day War" label="Six-Day War"/>
<link wikidata="Q116430" start="25645" end="25655" title="Idris of Libya" label="King Idris"/>
<link wikidata="Q708612" start="25822" end="25835" title="Hussein Maziq" label="Hussein Maziq"/>
<link wikidata="Q5234740" start="26178" end="26190" title="David Harris (advocate)" label="David Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q465308" start="26251" end="26254" title="American Jewish Committee" label="AJC"/>
<link wikidata="Q833040" start="26563" end="26575" title="Italian Navy" label="Italian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19878" start="27295" end="27310" title="Muammar Gaddafi" label="Muammar Gaddafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="27786" end="27790" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q146720" start="28269" end="28294" title="Mandatory Iraq" label="British mandate over Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q377085" start="28423" end="28431" title="Assyrian people" label="Assyrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q103817" start="28466" end="28476" title="indigenous peoples" label="indigenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="28551" end="28564" title="Mesopotamians" label="Mesopotamians"/>
<link wikidata="Q203179" start="28596" end="28623" title="Assyrian Church of the East" label="Assyrian Church of the East"/>
<link wikidata="Q64868" start="28625" end="28649" title="Chaldean Catholic Church" label="Chaldean Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q210540" start="28654" end="28676" title="Syriac Orthodox Church" label="Syriac Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481878" start="28693" end="28708" title="Simele massacre" label="bloody massacre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28712" end="28730" title="Assyrians in Iraq#Independent Kingdom of Iraq" label="Assyrian villagers"/>
<link wikidata="Q212486" start="28884" end="28895" title="Faisal I of Iraq" label="King Faisal"/>
<link wikidata="Q314784" start="28974" end="28979" title="Ghazi of Iraq" label="Ghazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q114213" start="29039" end="29055" title="Arab nationalism" label="Arab nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q46057" start="29121" end="29153" title="1936–39 Arab revolt in Palestine" label="1936–39 Arab revolt in Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q164745" start="29195" end="29219" title="Amin al-Husayni" label="Grand Mufti of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q215774" start="29448" end="29460" title="Fritz Grobba" label="Fritz Grobba"/>
<link wikidata="Q48244" start="29626" end="29636" title="Mein Kampf" label="Mein Kampf"/>
<link wikidata="Q696848" start="30026" end="30041" title="Anglo-Iraqi War" label="Anglo-Iraqi War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352263" start="30062" end="30068" title="Farhud" label="Farhud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="30082" end="30089" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414461" start="30097" end="30109" title="power vacuum" label="power vacuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="30144" end="30148" title="Axis Powers" label="Axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q369936" start="30163" end="30184" title="Rashid Ali al-Gaylani" label="Rashid Ali al-Gaylani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672366" start="31131" end="31152" title="Iraqi Communist Party" label="Iraqi Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q560616" start="31741" end="31753" title="Shaul Avigur" label="Shaul Avigur"/>
<link wikidata="Q25474" start="31763" end="31782" title="Mossad LeAliyah Bet" label="Mossad LeAliyah Bet"/>
<link wikidata="Q48195" start="32820" end="32825" title="Basra" label="Basra"/>
<link wikidata="Q846795" start="32852" end="32885" title="United Nations Partition Plan for Palestine" label="UN vote on partition of Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q381150" start="32914" end="32926" title="Nuri al-Said" label="Nuri al-Said"/>
<link wikidata="Q57396482" start="32949" end="32961" title="Douglas Busk" label="Douglas Busk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901931" start="34864" end="34875" title="Shafiq Ades" label="Shafiq Ades"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172" start="35239" end="35250" title="Arab League" label="Arab League"/>
<link wikidata="Q13220089" start="35929" end="35975" title="1948 Palestinian exodus" label="approximately Palestinians who became refugees"/>
<link wikidata="Q15589476" start="36625" end="36644" title="population exchange" label="population exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506487" start="36681" end="36701" title="Palestinian refugees" label="Palestinian refugees"/>
<link wikidata="Q4663794" start="37671" end="37684" title="Abbas Shiblak" label="Abbas Shiblak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915050" start="37784" end="37801" title="Tawfiq al-Suwaidi" label="Tawfiq al-Suwaidi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5980925" start="37895" end="37904" title="Ian Black (journalist)" label="Ian Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915021" start="38244" end="38271" title="Operation Ezra and Nehemiah" label="Operation Ezra and Nehemiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q37610" start="39482" end="39498" title="David Ben-Gurion" label="David Ben-Gurion"/>
<link wikidata="Q921721" start="41113" end="41129" title="1950–1951 Baghdad bombings" label="bombing campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q27859503" start="41489" end="41513" title="Esther Meir-Glitzenstein" label="Esther Meir-Glitzenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356549" start="42686" end="42692" title="Yishuv" label="Yishuv"/>
<link wikidata="Q34216" start="42790" end="42796" title="Mossad" label="Mossad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915021" start="43335" end="43362" title="Operation Ezra and Nehemiah" label="Operation Ezra and Nehemiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q179933" start="43558" end="43575" title="Ba&amp;#x27;ath Party" label="Ba&amp;#x27;ath Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q49077" start="43617" end="43628" title="Six-Day War" label="Six-Day War"/>
<link wikidata="Q19893649" start="44026" end="44045" title="1969 Baghdad hangings" label="mass public hanging"/>
<link wikidata="Q18209394" start="44802" end="44814" title="Mutamassirun" label="Mutamassirun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391679" start="45835" end="45860" title="Mahmoud an-Nukrashi Pasha" label="Mahmoud an-Nukrashi Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="46046" end="46060" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994374" start="46988" end="47008" title="Egyptian nationalism" label="Egyptian nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1629966" start="47065" end="47096" title="1945 Anti-Jewish Riots in Egypt" label="1945 Anti-Jewish Riots in Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q213001" start="47245" end="47256" title="Farouk of Egypt" label="King Farouk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4566226" start="47419" end="47438" title="1948 Cairo bombings" label="1948 Cairo bombings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780431" start="47503" end="47530" title="Egyptian Revolution of 1952" label="Egyptian Revolution of 1952"/>
<link wikidata="Q420474" start="47545" end="47555" title="false flag" label="false flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q507542" start="47556" end="47568" title="Lavon Affair" label="Lavon Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q49101" start="47606" end="47617" title="Suez Crisis" label="Suez Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572570" start="47667" end="47686" title="1956–57 exodus and expulsions from Egypt" label="14,000 Jews leaving"/>
<link wikidata="Q933141" start="50126" end="50138" title="First Aliyah" label="First Aliyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q4145971" start="50231" end="50257" title="Mutasarrifate of Jerusalem" label="Mutasarrifate of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q784972" start="50449" end="50462" title="Yemen Vilayet" label="Yemen Vilayet"/>
<link wikidata="Q899" start="50534" end="50544" title="Suez canal" label="Suez canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q17012930" start="50711" end="50727" title="One Million Plan" label="One Million Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q131694" start="50996" end="51000" title="Aden" label="Aden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1270130" start="51091" end="51130" title="1947 Aden pogrom" label="rioters killed at least 80 Jews in Aden"/>
<link wikidata="Q144333" start="51184" end="51189" title="Zaidiyyah" label="Zaydi"/>
<link wikidata="Q400961" start="51195" end="51210" title="Ahmad bin Yahya" label="Ahmad bin Yahya"/>
<link wikidata="Q113016" start="51338" end="51360" title="Operation Magic Carpet (Yemen)" label="Operation Magic Carpet"/>
<link wikidata="Q521199" start="51471" end="51489" title="North Yemen Civil War" label="civil war in Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q168954" start="51937" end="51944" title="Tripoli (Lebanon)" label="Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820" start="52609" end="52615" title="Beirut" label="Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q333711" start="52639" end="52652" title="Mount Lebanon" label="Mount Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q613943" start="52654" end="52667" title="Deir al Qamar" label="Deir al Qamar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2884862" start="52669" end="52675" title="Barouk" label="Barouk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893455" start="52677" end="52686" title="Bechamoun" label="Bechamoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q594026" start="52692" end="52699" title="Hasbaya" label="Hasbaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q10560877" start="52862" end="52883" title="Lebanese Independence Day" label="Lebanese independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766" start="53266" end="53274" title="Damascus" label="Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q132551" start="53363" end="53398" title="U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees" label="U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees"/>
<link wikidata="Q123987" start="53400" end="53425" title="Prince Sadruddin Aga Khan" label="Prince Sadruddin Aga Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q118725" start="53449" end="53463" title="Hafez al-Assad" label="Hafez al-Assad"/>
<link wikidata="Q208484" start="53567" end="53587" title="Lebanese civil war" label="civil war in Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q41053" start="53650" end="53659" title="Hezbollah" label="Hezbollah"/>
<link wikidata="Q41183" start="53878" end="53884" title="Aleppo" label="Aleppo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630411" start="53885" end="53922" title="1947 Aleppo pogrom" label="burned the city&amp;#x27;s Jewish quarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q643510" start="54188" end="54222" title="March 1949 Syrian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="March 1949 Syrian coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q167543" start="54233" end="54252" title="Husni al-Za&amp;#x27;im" label="Husni al-Za&amp;#x27;im"/>
<link wikidata="Q6304429" start="54761" end="54775" title="Judy Feld Carr" label="Judy Feld Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q49077" start="55724" end="55735" title="Six-Day War" label="Six-Day War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343802" start="56666" end="56691" title="Madrid Conference of 1991" label="Madrid Conference of 1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q5680753" start="57064" end="57078" title="South Brooklyn" label="South Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q49092" start="57673" end="57694" title="1948 Arab–Israeli War" label="1948 Arab–Israeli War"/>
<link wikidata="Q999143" start="57703" end="57728" title="1949 Armistice Agreements" label="1949 Armistice Agreements"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="57756" end="57767" title="Jordan" label="Transjordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893000" start="57773" end="57800" title="Jordanian annexation of the West Bank" label="Jordanian-annexed West Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075778" start="57810" end="57838" title="Occupation of the Gaza Strip by the United Arab Republic" label="Egyptian-occupied Gaza Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186403" start="57911" end="57935" title="Jewish Quarter (Jerusalem)" label="Jerusalem Jewish Quarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q168225" start="57937" end="57943" title="Hebron" label="Hebron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2889500" start="57945" end="57955" title="Ein Tzurim" label="Ein Tzurim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890735" start="57957" end="57977" title="Masu&amp;#x27;ot Yitzhak" label="Masu&amp;#x27;ot Yitzhak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011518" start="57979" end="57986" title="Revadim" label="Revadim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2777198" start="57988" end="58000" title="Beit HaArava" label="Beit HaArava"/>
<link wikidata="Q2777789" start="58002" end="58007" title="Kalya" label="Kalya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291811" start="58009" end="58020" title="Kfar Etzion" label="Kfar Etzion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2921103" start="58022" end="58028" title="Atarot" label="Atarot"/>
<link wikidata="Q599665" start="58030" end="58040" title="Kfar Darom" label="Kfar Darom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918013" start="58042" end="58053" title="Neve Yaakov" label="Neve Yaakov"/>
<link wikidata="Q20732813" start="58059" end="58065" title="Tel Or" label="Tel Or"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58130" end="58149" title="1929 Palestine riots#Jewish communities attacked" label="earlier evacuations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281806" start="58180" end="58200" title="1929 Palestine riots" label="1929 Palestine riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q46057" start="58205" end="58226" title="1936–1939 Arab Revolt" label="1936–1939 Arab Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58233" end="58256" title="Hebron#British Mandate" label="Hebron Jewish Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417490" start="58365" end="58385" title="1929 Hebron Massacre" label="1929 Hebron Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q599665" start="58472" end="58482" title="Kfar Darom" label="Kfar Darom"/>
<link wikidata="Q39760" start="58500" end="58504" title="Gaza Strip" label="Gaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q4873203" start="58609" end="58626" title="Battles of Kfar Darom" label="three-month siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q23883" start="58673" end="58681" title="Dead Sea" label="Dead Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q161387" start="58689" end="58696" title="kibbutz" label="kibbutz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2777198" start="58702" end="58714" title="Beit HaArava" label="Beit HaArava"/>
<link wikidata="Q2777789" start="58719" end="58724" title="Kalya" label="Kalya"/>
<link wikidata="Q192780" start="58763" end="58776" title="Abdullah I of Jordan" label="King Abdullah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670801" start="58914" end="58925" title="Mount Sodom" label="Mount Sodom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291811" start="58947" end="58958" title="Kfar Etzion" label="Kfar Etzion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5776" start="58995" end="59004" title="Bethlehem" label="Bethlehem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2921103" start="59030" end="59036" title="Atarot" label="Atarot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918013" start="59041" end="59052" title="Neve Yaakov" label="Neve Yaakov"/>
<link wikidata="Q44202" start="59152" end="59163" title="Arab Legion" label="Arab Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027138" start="59250" end="59311" title="Kfar Etzion massacre" label="massacre of 127 of Etzion&amp;#x27;s defending force and citizens"/>
<link wikidata="Q20732813" start="59478" end="59487" title="Naharayim" label="Naharayim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186403" start="59921" end="59935" title="Jewish Quarter (Jerusalem)" label="Jewish Quarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q398" start="60342" end="60349" title="Bahrain" label="Bahrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2100579" start="60741" end="60754" title="1947 Manama pogrom" label="on 5 December"/>
<link wikidata="Q3882" start="60779" end="60785" title="Manama" label="Manama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475182" start="61133" end="61152" title="Pardes Hanna-Karkur" label="Pardes Hanna-Karkur"/>
<link wikidata="Q42915604" start="61250" end="61276" title="exodus of Iran&amp;#x27;s Jews" label="exodus of Iran&amp;#x27;s Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q2309935" start="61305" end="61317" title="Persian Jews" label="Persian Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="61381" end="61385" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q126065" start="61407" end="61425" title="Iranian Revolution" label="Iranian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q126065" start="61752" end="61770" title="Iranian Revolution" label="Islamic Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163326" start="62082" end="62110" title="consolidation of the Iranian Revolution" label="consequent internal violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q82664" start="62119" end="62132" title="Iran–Iraq War" label="Iran–Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q597260" start="62801" end="62807" title="Aliyah" label="Aliyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q193714" start="62987" end="62996" title="Mandatory Palestine" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129968" start="63008" end="63027" title="1934 Thrace pogroms" label="1934 Thrace pogroms"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000672" start="63042" end="63071" title="1934 Turkish Resettlement Law" label="1934 Turkish Resettlement Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384023" start="63310" end="63324" title="Varlık Vergisi" label="Varlık Vergisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q131017" start="64222" end="64267" title="population exchange between Greece and Turkey" label="population exchange between Greece and Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q747244" start="64439" end="64449" title="Neve Shalom Synagogue" label="Neve Şalom"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="64470" end="64478" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q182231" start="64711" end="64746" title="Israel–Turkey relations" label="relations between Israel and Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="64841" end="64849" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891518" start="64934" end="64963" title="Aliyah and Yishuv during World War I" label="maltreatment of Jewish Yishuv"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="64973" end="64984" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7695557" start="65013" end="65043" title="Tel Aviv and Jaffa deportation" label="Tel Aviv and Jaffa deportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q934470" start="65247" end="65262" title="Istanbul pogrom" label="Istanbul pogrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5602105" start="65322" end="65338" title="Greeks in Turkey" label="Greek population"/>
<link wikidata="Q79797" start="65355" end="65363" title="Armenians" label="Armenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140370" start="65804" end="65821" title="Islamic fundamentalism" label="Islamic militants"/>
<link wikidata="Q102477" start="65933" end="65940" title="Shabbat" label="Shabbat"/>
<link wikidata="Q201190" start="66002" end="66013" title="Palestinian people" label="Palestinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q316408" start="66023" end="66032" title="Abu Nidal" label="Abu Nidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="66061" end="66080" title="Shia Islam" label="Shi&amp;#x27;ite Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254917" start="66208" end="66230" title="2003 Istanbul bombings" label="2003 Istanbul bombings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1593224" start="66245" end="66265" title="Bet Israel Synagogue (Istanbul)" label="Bet Israel Synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q39259" start="66452" end="66472" title="Recep Tayyip Erdoğan" label="Recep Tayyip Erdoğan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4142069" start="66897" end="66923" title="Kazakh famine of 1930–1933" label="Kazakh famine of 1930–1933"/>
<link wikidata="Q44949" start="66949" end="66962" title="Bukharan Jews" label="Bukharan Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138904" start="66991" end="67013" title="Kingdom of Afghanistan" label="Kingdom of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="67210" end="67222" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q355610" start="67257" end="67276" title="Mohammed Nadir Shah" label="Mohammed Nadir Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="67395" end="67407" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426199" start="67540" end="67545" title="Republic of China (1912–1949)" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137429" start="67547" end="67558" title="History of the Jews in the Soviet Union" label="Soviet Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q83372" start="67920" end="67929" title="Bolshevik" label="Bolshevik"/>
<link wikidata="Q355610" start="68223" end="68242" title="Mohammad Nadir Shah" label="Mohammad Nadir Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q666186" start="68330" end="68353" title="Jewish Telegraph Agency" label="Jewish Telegraph Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q137752" start="68638" end="68658" title="Mohammad Hashim Khan" label="Mohammad Hashim Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q83085" start="69222" end="69245" title="Soviet–Afghan War" label="Soviet invasion of 1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q5838" start="69295" end="69300" title="Kabul" label="Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q169544" start="69562" end="69577" title="Zablon Simintov" label="Zablon Simintov"/>
<link wikidata="Q188096" start="69786" end="69792" title="Penang" label="Penang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661579" start="70088" end="70118" title="Indian Independence Act 1947" label="Pakistani independence in 1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q8660" start="70148" end="70155" title="Karachi" label="Karachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q817287" start="70170" end="70181" title="Bene Israel" label="Bene Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q102251" start="70198" end="70207" title="Sephardi Jews" label="Sephardic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34069" start="70230" end="70239" title="Ashkenazi" label="Ashkenazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855691" start="70655" end="70676" title="Bani Israel Graveyard" label="Bani Israel Graveyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6825665" start="70730" end="70749" title="Mewa Shah Graveyard" label="Mewa Shah Graveyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6707107" start="70817" end="70827" title="Lyari Town" label="Lyari Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q44949" start="70896" end="70909" title="Bukharan Jews" label="Bukharan Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113311" start="70940" end="70948" title="Peshawar" label="Peshawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q161396" start="70997" end="71010" title="Star of David" label="Star of David"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382025" start="71214" end="71256" title="Russian Conquest of Bukhara" label="advance of the Russian Empire into Bukhara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156" start="71420" end="71426" title="Bombay" label="Bombay"/>
<link wikidata="Q221447" start="71830" end="71835" title="Ramla" label="Ramla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963" start="71922" end="71930" title="Khartoum" label="Khartoum"/>
<link wikidata="Q49077" start="72696" end="72707" title="Six-Day War" label="Six-Day War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347909" start="73046" end="73057" title="East Bengal" label="East Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q129053" start="73085" end="73103" title="Partition of India" label="Partition of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112405" start="73129" end="73141" title="Baghdadi Jew" label="Baghdadi Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354" start="73180" end="73185" title="Dhaka" label="Dhaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q842931" start="73230" end="73243" title="East Pakistan" label="East Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="73395" end="73403" title="Calcutta" label="Calcutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q6004963" start="74341" end="74356" title="immigrant camps (Israel)" label="immigrant camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2288374" start="74415" end="74429" title="ma&amp;#x27;abarot" label="ma&amp;#x27;abarot"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036014" start="75324" end="75370" title="World Organization of Jews from Arab Countries" label="World Organization of Jews from Arab Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449874" start="75500" end="75536" title="Justice for Jews from Arab Countries" label="Justice for Jews from Arab Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q6108237" start="75539" end="75545" title="JIMENA" label="JIMENA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="75664" end="75675" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="75680" end="75692" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q28870049" start="76036" end="76068" title="Babylonian Jewry Heritage Center" label="Babylonian Jewry Heritage Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q205650" start="76255" end="76290" title="United Nations Human Rights Council" label="United Nations Human Rights Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="76377" end="76401" title="United States House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q265791" start="76419" end="76438" title="Ileana Ros-Lehtinen" label="Ileana Ros-Lehtinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7520824" start="76448" end="76465" title="simple resolution" label="simple resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="76521" end="76527" title="United States Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q505598" start="76531" end="76545" title="Jerrold Nadler" label="Jerrold Nadler"/>
<link wikidata="Q155985" start="76550" end="76563" title="Rick Santorum" label="Rick Santorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449874" start="76730" end="76766" title="Justice for Jews from Arab Countries" label="Justice for Jews from Arab Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="77374" end="77386" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q201190" start="78876" end="78892" title="Palestinian Arabs" label="Palestinian Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q2897588" start="79385" end="79395" title="Ron Prosor" label="Ron Prosor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914839" start="79673" end="79685" title="Danny Ayalon" label="Danny Ayalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4885152" start="80336" end="80351" title="Ben Dror Yemini" label="Ben Dror Yemini"/>
<link wikidata="Q12222163" start="80394" end="80405" title="Ada Aharoni" label="Ada Aharoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q983119" start="80879" end="80891" title="Irwin Cotler" label="Irwin Cotler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890702" start="81207" end="81216" title="Ran Cohen" label="Ran Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q133396" start="81241" end="81248" title="Knesset" label="Knesset"/>
<link wikidata="Q983232" start="81470" end="81487" title="Yisrael Yeshayahu" label="Yisrael Yeshayahu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719051" start="81673" end="81686" title="Shlomo Hillel" label="Shlomo Hillel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393067" start="81898" end="81907" title="Tom Segev" label="Tom Segev"/>
<link wikidata="Q790712" start="82386" end="82396" title="Avi Shlaim" label="Avi Shlaim"/>
<link wikidata="Q575610" start="82703" end="82717" title="Martin Gilbert" label="Martin Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686584" start="82769" end="82783" title="Yehuda Shenhav" label="Yehuda Shenhav"/>
<link wikidata="Q8051262" start="83522" end="83537" title="Yehoshua Porath" label="Yehoshua Porath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632417" start="84537" end="84546" title="Alon Liel" label="Alon Liel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="84783" end="84797" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q38799" start="84877" end="84882" title="Hamas" label="Hamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7409344" start="84894" end="84908" title="Sami Abu Zuhri" label="Sami Abu Zuhri"/>
<link wikidata="Q237143" start="85149" end="85162" title="Hanan Ashrawi" label="Hanan Ashrawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904015" start="87422" end="87457" title="Jerusalem Center for Public Affairs" label="Jerusalem Center for Public Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q80970" start="87991" end="87999" title="Orthodox Judaism" label="Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q904635" start="88016" end="88020" title="Shas" label="Shas"/>
<link wikidata="Q133396" start="88160" end="88167" title="Knesset" label="Knesset"/>
<link wikidata="Q2612867" start="88570" end="88587" title="Nissim Ze&amp;#x27;ev" label="Nissim Ze&amp;#x27;ev"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="88634" end="88672" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q7734840" start="89356" end="89378" title="The Forgotten Refugees" label="The Forgotten Refugees"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729117" start="89417" end="89434" title="The David Project Center for Jewish Leadership" label="The David Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505527" start="89552" end="89564" title="Pierre Rehov" label="Pierre Rehov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824432" start="90040" end="90055" title="Goodbye Mothers" label="Goodbye Mothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5348246" start="90116" end="90120" title="Egoz (ship)" label="Egoz"/>
<link wikidata="Q18203784" start="90627" end="90707" title="Day to Mark the Departure and Expulsion of Jews from the Arab Countries and Iran" label="Day to Mark the Departure and Expulsion of Jews from the Arab Countries and Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637729" start="90710" end="90719" title="Arab Jews" label="Arab Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916490" start="90721" end="90758" title="History of the Jews under Muslim rule" label="History of the Jews under Muslim rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916388" start="90761" end="90789" title="Jewish population by country" label="Jewish population by country"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892273" start="90793" end="90833" title="Historical Jewish population comparisons" label="Historical Jewish population comparisons"/>
<link wikidata="Q6190224" start="90836" end="90877" title="Jews outside Europe under Axis occupation" label="Jews outside Europe under Axis occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q13220089" start="90880" end="90917" title="1948 Palestinian expulsion and flight" label="1948 Palestinian expulsion and flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q2288374" start="90920" end="90934" title="Ma&amp;#x27;abarot" label="Ma&amp;#x27;abarot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674675" start="90936" end="90952" title="Development town" label="Development town"/>
<link wikidata="Q622499" start="90954" end="90966" title="Refugee camp" label="Refugee camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q4690560" start="90975" end="91002" title="After Saturday comes Sunday" label="After Saturday comes Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q3944305" start="91010" end="91030" title="Christian emigration" label="Christian emigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q12644212" start="91032" end="91039" title="Muhajir (Pakistan)" label="Muhajir"/>
<link wikidata="Q878794" start="91058" end="91073" title="Jewish refugees" label="Jewish refugees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506487" start="91075" end="91095" title="Palestinian refugees" label="Palestinian refugees"/>
<link wikidata="Q16211603" start="91097" end="91113" title="Sahrawi refugees" label="Sahrawi refugees"/>
<link wikidata="Q3563263" start="91115" end="91129" title="Greek refugees" label="Greek refugees"/>
<link wikidata="Q6445765" start="91131" end="91147" title="Kurdish refugees" label="Kurdish refugees"/>
<link wikidata="Q110250880" start="91150" end="91164" title="Cicurel family" label="Cicurel family"/>
<link wikidata="Q27958063" start="91167" end="91182" title="Pallache family" label="Pallache family"/>
<link wikidata="Q123906912" start="91185" end="91218" title="Palestinian expulsion from Kuwait" label="Palestinian expulsion from Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q4519129" start="92980" end="92993" title="Rachel Shabi" label="Shabi, Rachel"/>
<link wikidata="Q568642" start="93087" end="93108" title="Bloomsbury Publishing" label="Bloomsbury Publishing"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143150" wikidata="Q966031" url="?curid=143150" title="Tom McCall">
<text>Thomas Lawson McCall (March 22, 1913 January 8, 1983) was an American, politician and journalist in the state of Oregon, serving as the state&#x27;s thirtieth governor from 1967 to 1975. A progressive Republican, he was known as a staunch environmentalist and an advocate of sustainable development.

Raised in Massachusetts and in central Oregon, McCall attended the University of Oregon and went on to work as a journalist in Moscow, Idaho and in Portland. He started out as a newspaper reporter and moved on to radio and television broadcasting. While at KGW-TV, he produced a documentary, &quot;Pollution in Paradise?&quot;, which brought public attention to air and water pollution in Oregon.

McCall first entered politics as an administrative assistant to Governor Douglas McKay. He made an unsuccessful bid for Congress in 1954, losing in the general election to Edith Green. In 1964, he was elected as Oregon Secretary of State, and in 1966 he defeated Democrat Bob Straub to become governor. In office, McCall promoted environmentally friendly reforms and criticized overpopulation and excessive industrial development. During his tenure, the state enacted major shoreline conservation, container deposit, and land-use planning legislation. McCall also became known for his colorful rhetoric and for creative problem-solving, notably sponsoring the Vortex I music festival and implementing the country&#x27;s first odd–even gasoline rationing program during the 1973 oil crisis.

After his response to the oil crisis gained him national recognition, he toured the country promoting the &quot;Oregon Story&quot; as an example for other states to follow, and publicly mulled a third party run for president. In his later career, he focused on preventing the repeal of the land-use laws he&#x27;d sponsored and mounted an unsuccessful comeback campaign for governor in 1978.

During Oregon&#x27;s economic downturn in the early 1980s, McCall was criticized by those who considered his environmental legacy detrimental to the state&#x27;s economy. His reputation has subsequently recovered, and he is considered one of the most transformative figures in recent Oregon history. Tom McCall Waterfront Park in Portland is one of several places and institutions named in his honor.

== Early life ==
Born in Scituate, Massachusetts, McCall was the grandson of copper-king Thomas Lawson and Massachusetts governor and congressman Samuel W. McCall. As a child, he divided his time between Thomas Lawson&#x27;s Massachusetts estate named Dreamwold and his father&#x27;s ranch near Prineville, Oregon named Westernwold. This bicoastal upbringing caused him to develop an unusual accent that he characterized as being &quot;a cross between Calvin Coolidge and a Texas Ranger&quot;; his voice would become an asset, setting him apart during his later careers as a public speaker.

Upon graduation from Redmond High School, McCall enrolled at the University of Oregon in Eugene. Due to his family&#x27;s growing financial problems he was forced to sit out long periods and took five years to earn his degree in journalism.

==Journalism career==
After graduating in 1936, McCall worked as a summer replacement at the &quot;Bend Bulletin&quot;. He then moved northeast to the Palouse of north central Idaho in February 1937, to the university town of Moscow. He wrote for the &quot;News-Review,&quot; and following a merger, the &quot;Daily Idahonian.&quot;

After five years in Moscow, he was encouraged to leave in March 1942; upheaval in the UI athletic department the previous year (firing of football head coach Ted Bank (also athletic director) and basketball head coach Forrest Twogood) brought continuing negative criticism by McCall and his boss thought that he should advance his career elsewhere. He traveled back to Oregon to look for work in Portland, where the economy was booming due to World War II. McCall was told by the military that he was not eligible for enlistment (due to bad knees and a recurring hernia) and journalists, still primarily men, were in short supply. He was quickly offered a job at &quot;The Oregonian&quot; at nearly triple his wages 

McCall later put his career on hold for military service in the U.S. Navy, where he served as a battle correspondent aboard the cruiser in the Pacific Theater.

While working on a story, an official of radio station KGW (owned by &quot;The Oregonian&quot;) approached McCall about reading a public service announcement over the air. The station management was impressed by his unique voice and offered him a job as a news announcer. He worked at KGW radio until 1949, when he became administrative assistant to Oregon governor Douglas McKay. In 1952 McCall returned to KGW radio, where he served as a newscaster and political commentator until 1955, when he jumped from radio to television and KGW to KPTV.

McCall was a newscaster and commentator at KPTV, Oregon&#x27;s first TV station, for about a year and a half. In November 1956 he followed colleague Ivan Smith out the door during a dispute with station management over placement of a sponsor&#x27;s product on the news set. Just one month later, KGW-TV went on the air, with McCall and Smith as part of a durable news team that stayed together for seven years, until McCall&#x27;s 1964 departure to run for Secretary of State.

In November 1962, McCall produced and hosted an ambitious KGW-TV documentary which graphically portrayed the poor condition of the Willamette River and air quality throughout Oregon. The award-winning documentary &quot;Pollution in Paradise&quot; helped focus public attention on the problem. KGW repeated the program in January 1963 on the eve of the opening of the legislative session, and the 1963 Legislature was spurred to some of Oregon&#x27;s early attempts at combating pollution. McCall also hosted a show on KGW called &quot;Viewpoint&quot;, which dealt with political issues of the day. He appears briefly (on a TV set) in the 1975 film &quot;One Flew Over the Cuckoo&#x27;s Nest&quot; in a cameo role as a late-night newscaster.

== Political career ==

McCall made his first run for office in 1954, winning the Republican nomination for Oregon&#x27;s third district seat over eight-term incumbent Homer D. Angell. Despite his later reputation as a progressive, McCall ran to Angell&#x27;s right in the primary, portraying himself as a loyal supporter of Dwight D. Eisenhower&#x27;s pro-business policies. He lost the general election to Edith Green, who went on to hold the seat for the next ten terms.

In 1958, when Mark Hatfield was elected governor of Oregon, he vacated the position of Secretary of State. McCall later said he thought Hatfield had promised to appoint him to the unexpired portion of the term, but the job went to Hatfield associate Howell Appling instead. When Appling chose not to run for re-election in 1964, McCall sought and won the office. In this position, he began to focus on fighting pollution and reining in unchecked economic growth, claiming that &quot;Oregon is at a crossroads [...] There is still a chance to choose between the polluted chaos of Southern California and cleanliness.&quot;

=== First term ===

McCall was elected governor in 1966, defeating the Democratic nominee, State Treasurer Robert W. Straub. During his first term, McCall lead a cleanup of pulp mill pollution in the Willamette, championed legislation that strengthened public ownership of Oregon&#x27;s beaches, dealt with a major riot at the state penitentiary, and served as an international monitor for the 1967 South Vietnamese presidential election.

=== Vortex I ===
During the summer of 1970, McCall was faced with a potential riot in Portland. In May of that year a week-long student protest at Portland State University over the Kent State shootings had been violently dispersed by police, and tensions were high. The conservative American Legion had scheduled a convention in Portland later that summer; local antiwar groups were organizing a series of demonstrations at the same time under the name of the &quot;People&#x27;s Army Jamboree&quot; and expected to draw up to 50,000 protesters.

After attempts to convince the People&#x27;s Army Jamboree to either not carry out their plans or to move the date, McCall was convinced by a group of hippies to hold the country&#x27;s first state-sponsored rock festival at Milo McIver State Park near Estacada, Oregon. &quot;Vortex I: A Biodegradable Festival of Life,&quot; as it was called, was inspired by the Woodstock Festival held the previous year, and was intended to draw radical youth out of Portland and reduce the potential for confrontation with the Legionnaires. &quot;I think I just committed political suicide,&quot; McCall is reported to have remarked immediately after approving the event.

However, the festival, nicknamed &quot;The Governor&#x27;s Pot Party&quot;, was a success, attracting between 50,000 and 100,000 people. The feared violent clash between the antiwar groups and the Legion was avoided, and McCall was re-elected in November with 56% of the vote, again defeating Bob Straub.

=== Second term ===
McCall became nationally known in January 1971 for a comment he made in an interview with CBS News&#x27;s Terry Drinkwater:

He was responding to the rapid population growth and suburban sprawl that the state was then experiencing, which was bringing with it strains on utilities and the rapid loss of arable land in the Willamette Valley. McCall&#x27;s second-term agenda was focused on ameliorating these issues and protecting Oregonians&#x27; quality of life from overdevelopment. Elements of this agenda included the Oregon Bottle Bill, a pioneering container-deposit law intended to reduce litter; and the Oregon Land Conservation and Development Act of 1973, which required comprehensive zoning and land-use planning for the entire state and created urban growth boundaries around each Oregon city.

In July 1971, McCall went on a fishing trip on a portion of the Snake River that acts as border between Idaho and Oregon. At the time, under the Oregon Constitution, the Senate President became acting governor when the governor was out of state. Whenever McCall&#x27;s group camped for the night on the Idaho side, Oregon Senate President John Burns, a Democrat, became acting governor. Partisan executive control of the state changed eight times during the trip. The incident led to voters approving a 1972 ballot measure restoring the line of succession that existed prior to 1920, with the Secretary of State assuming the office when the governor left the state, died, or resigned.

=== The Oregon Story and the Third Force ===

During the summer of 1973, Oregon began to suffer from energy shortages, several months before the rest of the United States was affected by the OPEC oil embargo. The state&#x27;s power grid was heavily reliant on hydroelectricity and an unusually dry winter had left reservoir levels critically low. McCall&#x27;s administration took action to encourage energy conservation by lowering speed limits, reducing government energy consumption, and ordering the cessation of all business display lighting. The governor and his aides were not certain whether the latter was legal, but Oregonians generally complied, and McCall later reflected that he had tapped into his constituents&#x27; mood: &quot;People wouldn’t believe there was a crisis with the Golden Arches blazing away [...] People are fed up with garishness. They feel assaulted by blinking, flashing, rotating, ostentatious waste.&quot; In early 1974, Oregon became the first state in America to implement an odd–even gasoline rationing program to control demand amidst shortages.

As the oil shock began to affect the rest of the country, Oregon&#x27;s conservation methods seemed prescient, and the state&#x27;s leaders were applauded by national media. Taking advantage of the attention, McCall launched a national tour to promote the reforms he&#x27;d overseen as an inspiration for other states to follow, referring to the package as the &quot;Oregon Story.&quot; He characterized himself as representing a &quot;Third Force&quot; of political independents opposed to the establishment - a popular position during the unfolding Watergate scandal. McCall was talked up in the media as a potential candidate for president, and later recalled that leading political figures such as Clare Boothe Luce and Eugene McCarthy had encouraged him to mount a third-party bid for the office. Biographer Brent Walth doubts that McCall was ever serious about making the Third Force a third party or running for president, and believes that he was simply enjoying the spotlight and using it to promote his political ideas.

===Later life and death===
Although his popularity was at its peak, Oregon&#x27;s constitution prevented McCall from seeking a third consecutive term as governor in 1974. State Senator Vic Atiyeh won the Republican nomination, but lost the general election to Straub, who McCall had endorsed in the election. McCall returned to journalism, writing a newspaper column and serving as commentator for Portland television station KATU. He sought to return to the governorship in 1978, but Atiyeh defeated McCall in the primary and went on to beat Straub in a rematch of their 1974 race.

McCall&#x27;s prostate cancer eventually returned. He devoted his last years to defending the land-use laws he&#x27;d sponsored, which had been under attack from critics since their enaction. In 1982, opponents of land-use planning successfully placed Measure 6, which would have repealed the 1973 law, on the ballot. During his campaign against Measure 6 McCall said, &quot;You all know I have terminal cancer—and I have a lot of it. But what you may not know is that stress induces its spread and induces its activity. Stress may even bring it on. Yet stress is the fuel of the activist. This activist loves Oregon more than he loves life. I know I can&#x27;t have both very long. The trade-offs are all right with me. But if the legacy we helped give Oregon and which made it twinkle from afar—if it goes, then I guess I wouldn&#x27;t want to live in Oregon anyhow.&quot; Measure 6 ultimately failed to pass.

McCall was admitted to Good Samaritan Hospital in Portland just over a month after the election. He died there at 69 on 

==Legacy==

In 1968, Governor McCall created the Harbor Drive Task Force to come up with proposals to replace the riverfront highway with a public space. The 37-acre (150,000 m2) Waterfront Park was built in 1974, running along the Willamette River for the length of downtown Portland. McCall was honored after his death when the park was renamed Tom McCall Waterfront Park in 1984.

McCall was a leading figure in passing the Oregon Beach Bill to declare Oregon shores public land in 1967.

In 1969, McCall played a major role in the founding of SOLV, an environmental non-profit organization whose goal is to &quot;build community through volunteer action to preserve this treasure called Oregon.&quot;

The Tom McCall Forum, which pairs prominent speakers with opposing political viewpoints, is presented annually by Pacific University.

The Nature Conservancy named a nature preserve in Wasco County, Oregon after McCall.

Oregon schools that have been named for him include: Tom McCall East Upper Elementary School in Forest Grove and Tom McCall Elementary School in Redmond.

In 1998 McCall was inducted into the Hall of Achievement at University of Oregon&#x27;s School of Journalism.

On October 10, 2006, the Salem &quot;Statesman Journal&quot; announced plans by a &quot;committee of citizens&quot; to fund and place the life-size bronze statue of the late governor pictured above in Salem&#x27;s Riverfront Park.

On March 30, 2015, Oregon Governor Kate Brown, a Democrat, signed SB333, which &quot;designates March 22 of each year as Tom McCall Day to commemorate Governor McCall and encourage school districts to educate children about Governor McCall&#x27;s legacy.&quot; The measure took effect January 1, 2016.

==Marriage==
While both were working in Moscow in February 1939, McCall met Audrey Owen of Spokane, and they married three months later on May 20, 1939. They had two sons, Samuel Walker McCall III and Thomas &quot;Tad&quot; McCall, an environmental consultant.

== See also ==
* Land use in Oregon
* 1000 Friends of Oregon, an organization established in 1975 by McCall

==References==
==External links==

* Gubernatorial history and biography of McCall, from the Oregon Historical Society website
* Oregon Secretary of State: Governor Tom McCall
* Thomas William Lawson McCall (1913–1983)
* Tom McCall Preserve at Rowena, named in his honor, from the Nature Conservancy website
*, from the 1000 Friends of Oregon website
* Tom McCall Chapter of the Association of Northwest Steelheaders
* Tom McCall Documentary produced by


|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q966031" start="0" end="20" title="Tom McCall" label="Thomas Lawson McCall"/>
<link wikidata="Q82955" start="71" end="81" title="politician" label="politician"/>
<link wikidata="Q824" start="113" end="119" title="Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q887224" start="159" end="167" title="List of governors of Oregon" label="governor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="189" end="211" title="Factions in the Republican Party (United States)#Progressive Republicans" label="progressive Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q131201" start="275" end="298" title="sustainable development" label="sustainable development"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="311" end="324" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061558" start="332" end="346" title="central Oregon" label="central Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q766145" start="368" end="388" title="University of Oregon" label="University of Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q499927" start="428" end="441" title="Moscow, Idaho" label="Moscow, Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106" start="449" end="457" title="Portland, Oregon" label="Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3191397" start="558" end="561" title="KGW" label="KGW"/>
<link wikidata="Q886026" start="772" end="785" title="Douglas McKay" label="Douglas McKay"/>
<link wikidata="Q525946" start="871" end="882" title="Edith Green" label="Edith Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q7101331" start="911" end="936" title="Oregon Secretary of State" label="Oregon Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q7101446" start="945" end="949" title="1966 Oregon gubernatorial election" label="1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q1561313" start="971" end="981" title="Bob Straub" label="Bob Straub"/>
<link wikidata="Q7113866" start="1077" end="1091" title="overpopulation" label="overpopulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16986499" start="1173" end="1195" title="Oregon Beach Bill" label="shoreline conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7101103" start="1197" end="1214" title="Oregon Bottle Bill" label="container deposit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7101333" start="1220" end="1237" title="Oregon Land Conservation and Development Act of 1973" label="land-use planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7941918" start="1359" end="1367" title="Vortex I" label="Vortex I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7077561" start="1425" end="1460" title="odd–even rationing" label="odd–even gasoline rationing program"/>
<link wikidata="Q316817" start="1472" end="1487" title="1973 oil crisis" label="1973 oil crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6579199" start="1685" end="1696" title="Third party (United States)" label="third party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7101449" start="1873" end="1880" title="1978 Oregon gubernatorial election" label="in 1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q7816762" start="2183" end="2209" title="Tom McCall Waterfront Park" label="Tom McCall Waterfront Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415936" start="2310" end="2333" title="Scituate, Massachusetts" label="Scituate, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q717771" start="2374" end="2387" title="Thomas W. Lawson (businessman)" label="Thomas Lawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q440654" start="2431" end="2447" title="Samuel W. McCall" label="Samuel W. McCall"/>
<link wikidata="Q330678" start="2580" end="2598" title="Prineville, Oregon" label="Prineville, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q36023" start="2737" end="2752" title="Calvin Coolidge" label="Calvin Coolidge"/>
<link wikidata="Q510865" start="2759" end="2771" title="Texas Ranger Division" label="Texas Ranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306121" start="2898" end="2917" title="Redmond High School (Oregon)" label="Redmond High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q766145" start="2942" end="2962" title="University of Oregon" label="University of Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7720574" start="3218" end="3231" title="The Bulletin (Bend)" label="Bend Bulletin"/>
<link wikidata="Q128038" start="3270" end="3277" title="Palouse" label="Palouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054746" start="3281" end="3300" title="North Central Idaho" label="north central Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854488" start="3326" end="3336" title="University of Idaho" label="university"/>
<link wikidata="Q6915449" start="3429" end="3444" title="Moscow-Pullman Daily News" label="Daily Idahonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3554487" start="3542" end="3561" title="Idaho Vandals" label="athletic department"/>
<link wikidata="Q43401694" start="3591" end="3599" title="1940 Idaho Vandals football team" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q7692980" start="3611" end="3619" title="Ted Bank" label="Ted Bank"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3626" end="3643" title="Idaho Vandals#Athletic directors" label="athletic director"/>
<link wikidata="Q65062882" start="3649" end="3659" title="1940–41 Idaho Vandals men&amp;#x27;s basketball team" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q16078938" start="3671" end="3686" title="Forrest Twogood" label="Forrest Twogood"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106" start="3849" end="3857" title="Portland, Oregon" label="Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3896" end="3908" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547338" start="4122" end="4135" title="The Oregonian" label="The Oregonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="4235" end="4244" title="United States Navy" label="U.S. Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q184425" start="4314" end="4329" title="Pacific War" label="Pacific Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q3191397" start="4387" end="4390" title="KGW" label="KGW"/>
<link wikidata="Q6335943" start="4872" end="4876" title="KPTV" label="KPTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q131071" start="5488" end="5504" title="Willamette River" label="Willamette River"/>
<link wikidata="Q171669" start="6011" end="6047" title="One Flew Over the Cuckoo&amp;#x27;s Nest (film)" label="One Flew Over the Cuckoo&amp;#x27;s Nest"/>
<link wikidata="Q191796" start="6059" end="6069" title="cameo role" label="cameo role"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002584" start="6221" end="6235" title="Oregon&amp;#x27;s 3rd congressional district" label="third district"/>
<link wikidata="Q524875" start="6267" end="6282" title="Homer D. Angell" label="Homer D. Angell"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="6424" end="6444" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q525946" start="6507" end="6518" title="Edith Green" label="Edith Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q879921" start="6588" end="6601" title="Mark Hatfield" label="Mark Hatfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5921670" start="6824" end="6838" title="Howell Appling" label="Howell Appling"/>
<link wikidata="Q844837" start="7153" end="7172" title="Southern California" label="Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q16986499" start="7420" end="7491" title="Oregon Beach Bill" label="legislation that strengthened public ownership of Oregon&amp;#x27;s beaches"/>
<link wikidata="Q7101366" start="7524" end="7542" title="Oregon State Penitentiary" label="state penitentiary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568748" start="7591" end="7634" title="1967 South Vietnamese presidential election" label="1967 South Vietnamese presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771717" start="7784" end="7809" title="Portland State University" label="Portland State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q482635" start="7819" end="7839" title="Kent State shootings" label="Kent State shootings"/>
<link wikidata="Q468865" start="7921" end="7936" title="American Legion" label="American Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154859" start="8393" end="8406" title="rock festival" label="rock festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q6860332" start="8410" end="8432" title="Milo McIver State Park" label="Milo McIver State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2372438" start="8438" end="8454" title="Estacada, Oregon" label="Estacada, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q164815" start="8550" end="8568" title="Woodstock Festival" label="Woodstock Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q7704320" start="9278" end="9294" title="Terry Drinkwater" label="Terry Drinkwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q192042" start="9350" end="9365" title="suburban sprawl" label="suburban sprawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703681" start="9493" end="9510" title="Willamette Valley" label="Willamette Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7101103" start="9693" end="9711" title="Oregon Bottle Bill" label="Oregon Bottle Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7101333" start="9783" end="9835" title="Oregon Land Conservation and Development Act of 1973" label="Oregon Land Conservation and Development Act of 1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q7900123" start="9928" end="9951" title="urban growth boundary" label="urban growth boundaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q272074" start="10042" end="10053" title="Snake River" label="Snake River"/>
<link wikidata="Q316817" start="10855" end="10871" title="1973 oil crisis" label="OPEC oil embargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="10924" end="10940" title="hydroelectricity" label="hydroelectricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q38076" start="11459" end="11472" title="McDonald&amp;#x27;s" label="Golden Arches"/>
<link wikidata="Q7077561" start="11678" end="11713" title="odd–even rationing" label="odd–even gasoline rationing program"/>
<link wikidata="Q42761" start="12302" end="12319" title="Watergate scandal" label="Watergate scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q456413" start="12453" end="12470" title="Clare Boothe Luce" label="Clare Boothe Luce"/>
<link wikidata="Q380550" start="12475" end="12490" title="Eugene McCarthy" label="Eugene McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q577809" start="12967" end="12977" title="Victor Atiyeh" label="Vic Atiyeh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3191329" start="13208" end="13212" title="KATU" label="KATU"/>
<link wikidata="Q6517242" start="14302" end="14325" title="Legacy Good Samaritan Hospital" label="Good Samaritan Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106" start="14329" end="14337" title="Portland, Oregon" label="Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q104840696" start="14450" end="14462" title="Harbor Drive" label="Harbor Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q7816762" start="14748" end="14774" title="Tom McCall Waterfront Park" label="Tom McCall Waterfront Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7392062" start="14948" end="14952" title="SOLV" label="SOLV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855609" start="14957" end="14970" title="Environmentalism" label="environmental"/>
<link wikidata="Q163740" start="14971" end="14981" title="non-profit" label="non-profit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5929270" start="15221" end="15239" title="Pacific University" label="Pacific University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813186" start="15246" end="15264" title="Nature Conservancy" label="Nature Conservancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q179049" start="15273" end="15288" title="nature preserve" label="nature preserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q495388" start="15292" end="15312" title="Wasco County, Oregon" label="Wasco County, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q766145" start="15543" end="15563" title="University of Oregon" label="University of Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604055" start="15631" end="15648" title="Statesman Journal" label="Statesman Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6375399" start="15861" end="15883" title="Kate Brown" label="Kate Brown, a Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q47034953" start="16205" end="16216" title="Audrey McCall" label="Audrey Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q187805" start="16220" end="16227" title="Spokane, Washington" label="Spokane"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000133" start="16408" end="16426" title="Land use in Oregon" label="Land use in Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4546013" start="16429" end="16451" title="1000 Friends of Oregon" label="1000 Friends of Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q241935" start="16593" end="16618" title="Oregon Historical Society" label="Oregon Historical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677041" start="16744" end="16750" title="Rowena, Oregon" label="Rowena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813186" start="16781" end="16799" title="Nature Conservancy" label="Nature Conservancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4546013" start="16820" end="16842" title="1000 Friends of Oregon" label="1000 Friends of Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809951" start="16879" end="16916" title="Association of Northwest Steelheaders" label="Association of Northwest Steelheaders"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143151" wikidata="Q596077" url="?curid=143151" title="Counterexample">
<text>A counterexample is any exception to a generalization. In logic a counterexample disproves the generalization, and does so rigorously in the fields of mathematics and philosophy. For example, the fact that &quot;student John Smith is not lazy&quot; is a counterexample to the generalization &quot;students are lazy&quot;, and both a counterexample to, and disproof of, the universal quantification &quot;all students are lazy.&quot;

==In mathematics==
In mathematics, counterexamples are often used to prove the boundaries of possible theorems. By using counterexamples to show that certain conjectures are false, mathematical researchers can then avoid going down blind alleys and learn to modify conjectures to produce provable theorems. It is sometimes said that mathematical development consists primarily in finding (and proving) theorems and counterexamples.

===Rectangle example===
Suppose that a mathematician is studying geometry and shapes, and she wishes to prove certain theorems about them. She conjectures that &quot;All rectangles are squares&quot;, and she is interested in knowing whether this statement is true or false. 

In this case, she can either attempt to prove the truth of the statement using deductive reasoning, or she can attempt to find a counterexample of the statement if she suspects it to be false. In the latter case, a counterexample would be a rectangle that is not a square, such as a rectangle with two sides of length 5 and two sides of length 7. However, despite having found rectangles that were not squares, all the rectangles she did find had four sides. She then makes the new conjecture &quot;All rectangles have four sides&quot;. This is logically weaker than her original conjecture, since every square has four sides, but not every four-sided shape is a square.

The above example explained — in a simplified way — how a mathematician might weaken her conjecture in the face of counterexamples, but counterexamples can also be used to demonstrate the necessity of certain assumptions and hypothesis. For example, suppose that after a while, the mathematician above settled on the new conjecture &quot;All shapes that are rectangles and have four sides of equal length are squares&quot;. This conjecture has two parts to the hypothesis: the shape must be &#x27;a rectangle&#x27; and must have &#x27;four sides of equal length&#x27;. The mathematician then would like to know if she can remove either assumption, and still maintain the truth of her conjecture. This means that she needs to check the truth of the following two statements:

# &quot;All shapes that are rectangles are squares.&quot;
# &quot;All shapes that have four sides of equal length are squares&quot;.

A counterexample to (1) was already given above, and a counterexample to (2) is a non-square rhombus. Thus, the mathematician now knows that each assumption by itself is insufficient.

===Other mathematical examples===
A counterexample to the statement &quot;all prime numbers are odd numbers&quot; is the number 2, as it is a prime number but is not an odd number. Neither of the numbers 7 or 10 is a counterexample, as neither of them are enough to contradict the statement. In this example, 2 is in fact the only possible counterexample to the statement, even though that alone is enough to contradict the statement. In a similar manner, the statement &quot;All natural numbers are either prime or composite&quot; has the number 1 as a counterexample, as 1 is neither prime nor composite.

Euler&#x27;s sum of powers conjecture was disproved by counterexample. It asserted that at least &quot;n&quot; &quot;n&quot;th powers were necessary to sum to another &quot;n&quot;th power. This conjecture was disproved in 1966, with a counterexample involving &quot;n&quot; = 5; other &quot;n&quot; = 5 counterexamples are now known, as well as some &quot;n&quot; = 4 counterexamples.

Witsenhausen&#x27;s counterexample shows that it is not always true (for control problems) that a quadratic loss function and a linear equation of evolution of the state variable imply optimal control laws that are linear.

All Euclidean plane isometries are mappings that preserve area, but the converse is false as shown by counterexamples shear mapping and squeeze mapping.

Other examples include the disproofs of the Seifert conjecture, the Pólya conjecture, the conjecture of Hilbert&#x27;s fourteenth problem, Tait&#x27;s conjecture, and the Ganea conjecture.

==In philosophy==

In philosophy, counterexamples are usually used to argue that a certain philosophical position is wrong by showing that it does not apply in certain cases. Alternatively, the first philosopher can modify their claim so that the counterexample no longer applies; this is analogous to when a mathematician modifies a conjecture because of a counterexample.

For example, in Plato&#x27;s &quot;Gorgias&quot;, Callicles, trying to define what it means to say that some people are &quot;better&quot; than others, claims that those who are stronger are better. Socrates replies that, because of their strength of numbers, the class of common rabble is stronger than the propertied class of nobles, even though the masses are &quot;prima facie&quot; of worse character. Thus Socrates has proposed a counterexample to Callicles&#x27; claim, by looking in an area that Callicles perhaps did not expect — groups of people rather than individual persons.

Callicles might challenge Socrates&#x27; counterexample, arguing perhaps that the common rabble really are better than the nobles, or that even in their large numbers, they still are not stronger. But if Callicles accepts the counterexample, then he must either withdraw his claim, or modify it so that the counterexample no longer applies. For example, he might modify his claim to refer only to individual persons, requiring him to think of the common people as a collection of individuals rather than as a mob. As it happens, he modifies his claim to say &quot;wiser&quot; instead of &quot;stronger&quot;, arguing that no amount of numerical superiority can make people wiser.

==See also==
*Contradiction
*Exception that proves the rule
*Minimal counterexample

==References==
==Further reading==
* Imre Lakatos, &quot;Proofs and Refutations&quot; (1976) Cambridge University Press 
* James Franklin and Albert Daoud (2011) &quot;Proof in Mathematics: An Introduction&quot;, Kew, Sydney , ch. 6.
* Lynn Arthur Steen and J. Arthur Seebach, Jr. (1978) &quot;Counterexamples in Topology&quot;, Springer, New York .
* Joseph P. Romano and Andrew F. Siegel (1986) &quot;Counterexamples in Probability and Statistics&quot; Chapman &amp; Hall, New York, London .
* Gary L. Wise and Eric B. Hall (1993) &quot;Counterexamples in Probability and Real Analysis&quot;. Oxford University Press, New York .
* Bernard R. Gelbaum, John M. H. Olmsted (2003) &quot;Counterexamples in Analysis&quot;. Corrected reprint of the second (1965) edition, Dover Publications, Mineola, NY .
* Jordan M. Stoyanov (1997) &quot;Counterexamples in Probability&quot; Second edition, Wiley, Chichester .
* Michael Copobianco &amp; John Mulluzzo (1978) &quot;Examples and Counterexamples in Graph Theory&quot;, Elsevier North-Holland .

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q596077" start="2" end="16" title="Counterexample" label="counterexample"/>
<link wikidata="Q170084" start="39" end="53" title="generalization" label="generalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078" start="58" end="63" title="logic" label="logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890076" start="123" end="133" title="rigor" label="rigorously"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="151" end="162" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="167" end="177" title="philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q126695" start="373" end="397" title="universal quantification" label="universal quantification"/>
<link wikidata="Q8087" start="932" end="940" title="geometry" label="geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q207961" start="945" end="950" title="shape" label="shape"/>
<link wikidata="Q319141" start="1010" end="1020" title="conjecture" label="conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q209" start="1037" end="1047" title="rectangles" label="rectangles"/>
<link wikidata="Q164" start="1052" end="1059" title="Square (geometry)" label="squares"/>
<link wikidata="Q11538" start="1183" end="1188" title="Mathematical proof" label="prove"/>
<link wikidata="Q484284" start="1222" end="1241" title="deductive reasoning" label="deductive reasoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q41719" start="2040" end="2050" title="hypothesis" label="hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q41159" start="2817" end="2824" title="rhombus" label="rhombus"/>
<link wikidata="Q49008" start="2987" end="2999" title="prime number" label="prime number"/>
<link wikidata="Q230967" start="3005" end="3016" title="Parity (mathematics)" label="odd numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q21199" start="3389" end="3403" title="natural number" label="natural number"/>
<link wikidata="Q49008" start="3416" end="3421" title="Prime number" label="prime"/>
<link wikidata="Q50707" start="3425" end="3434" title="Composite number" label="composite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096450" start="3517" end="3554" title="Euler&amp;#x27;s sum of powers conjecture" label="Euler&amp;#x27;s sum of powers conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q8028527" start="3904" end="3938" title="Witsenhausen&amp;#x27;s counterexample" label="Witsenhausen&amp;#x27;s counterexample"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501221" start="3977" end="3993" title="control theory" label="control problems"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036748" start="4012" end="4025" title="loss function" label="loss function"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603913" start="4068" end="4082" title="state variable" label="state variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q908686" start="4132" end="4158" title="Euclidean plane isometries" label="Euclidean plane isometries"/>
<link wikidata="Q11500" start="4186" end="4190" title="area" label="area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375963" start="4200" end="4208" title="converse (logic)" label="converse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411898" start="4246" end="4259" title="shear mapping" label="shear mapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q7582218" start="4264" end="4279" title="squeeze mapping" label="squeeze mapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q376443" start="4326" end="4344" title="Seifert conjecture" label="Seifert conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441904" start="4350" end="4366" title="Pólya conjecture" label="Pólya conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4515163" start="4386" end="4419" title="Hilbert&amp;#x27;s fourteenth problem" label="Hilbert&amp;#x27;s fourteenth problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7676457" start="4421" end="4443" title="Tait&amp;#x27;s conjecture" label="Tait&amp;#x27;s conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520800" start="4453" end="4469" title="Ganea conjecture" label="Ganea conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="4494" end="4504" title="philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="4863" end="4868" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q264241" start="4882" end="4889" title="Gorgias (dialogue)" label="Gorgias"/>
<link wikidata="Q553801" start="4897" end="4906" title="Callicles" label="Callicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q913" start="5046" end="5054" title="Socrates" label="Socrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q837138" start="5216" end="5227" title="prima facie" label="prima facie"/>
<link wikidata="Q363948" start="6131" end="6144" title="Contradiction" label="Contradiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q590904" start="6146" end="6176" title="Exception that proves the rule" label="Exception that proves the rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865307" start="6178" end="6200" title="Minimal counterexample" label="Minimal counterexample"/>
<link wikidata="Q296249" start="6239" end="6251" title="Imre Lakatos" label="Imre Lakatos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032593" start="6259" end="6281" title="Proofs and Refutations" label="Proofs and Refutations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3895609" start="6325" end="6339" title="James Franklin (philosopher)" label="James Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356985" start="6438" end="6455" title="Lynn Arthur Steen" label="Lynn Arthur Steen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3805097" start="6460" end="6482" title="J. Arthur Seebach, Jr." label="J. Arthur Seebach, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q5176952" start="6496" end="6523" title="Counterexamples in Topology" label="Counterexamples in Topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q124844082" start="6605" end="6650" title="Counterexamples in Probability and Statistics" label="Counterexamples in Probability and Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q130711029" start="7038" end="7068" title="Counterexamples in Probability" label="Counterexamples in Probability"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143160" wikidata="Q214665" url="?curid=143160" title="Nino Rota">
<text>Giovanni &quot;Nino&quot; Rota Rinaldi (; ; 3 December 1911 – 10 April 1979) was an Italian composer, pianist, conductor and academic who is best known for his film scores, notably for the films of Federico Fellini and Luchino Visconti. He also composed the music for two of Franco Zeffirelli&#x27;s Shakespeare screen adaptations, and for the first two installments of Francis Ford Coppola&#x27;s &quot;The Godfather&quot; trilogy, earning the Academy Award for Best Original Score for &quot;The Godfather Part II&quot; (1974).

During his long career, Rota was an extraordinarily prolific composer, especially of music for the cinema. He wrote more than 150 scores for Italian and international productions from the 1930s until his death in 1979 – an average of three scores each year over a 46-year period, and in his most productive period from the late 1940s to the mid-1950s he wrote as many as ten scores every year, and sometimes more, with a remarkable thirteen film scores to his credit in 1954. Alongside this great body of film work, he composed ten operas, five ballets and dozens of other orchestral, choral and chamber works, the best known being his string concerto. He also composed the music for many theatre productions by Visconti, Zeffirelli and Eduardo De Filippo as well as maintaining a long teaching career at the Liceo Musicale in Bari, Italy, where he was the director for almost 30 years.

==Early career==

Giovanni Rota Rinaldi was born on 3 December 1911 into a musical family in Milan, Italy. Rota was a renowned child prodigy – his first &quot;oratorio&quot;, &quot;L&#x27;infanzia di San Giovanni Battista&quot;, was written at age 11 and performed in Milan and Paris as early as 1923; his three-act lyrical comedy after Hans Christian Andersen, &quot;Il Principe Porcaro&quot;, was composed when he was just 13 and published in 1926. He studied at the Milan conservatory there under Giacomo Orefice and then undertook serious study of composition under Ildebrando Pizzetti and Alfredo Casella at the Conservatorio Santa Cecilia in Rome, graduating in 1930.

Encouraged by Arturo Toscanini, Rota moved to the United States, where he lived from 1930 to 1932. He won a scholarship to the Curtis Institute of Philadelphia, where he was taught conducting by Fritz Reiner and had Rosario Scalero as an instructor in composition. Returning to Milan, he wrote a thesis on the Renaissance composer Gioseffo Zarlino. Rota earned a degree in literature from the University of Milan, graduating in 1937, and began a teaching career that led to the directorship of the Liceo Musicale in Bari, a title he held from 1950 until 1978.

==Film scores==
Nino Rota wrote scores to more than 150 films. These included the score for &quot;The Glass Mountain&quot; in 1949, which was notable for the singing of Tito Gobbi. The film won a number of awards.

In his entry on Rota in the 1988 edition of &quot;The Concise Baker&#x27;s Biographical Dictionary of Composers and Musicians&quot;, music scholar Nicolas Slonimsky described him as &quot;brilliant&quot; and stated that his musical style:

One of Rota&#x27;s compositional habits, however, came up for disapproving remarks: his penchant for pastiche of various past styles, which quite often turned into outright quotation of his own earlier music or even others&#x27; music. One of the most noticed examples of such incorporation is his use of the &quot;Larghetto&quot; from Dvorák&#x27;s &quot;Serenade for Strings in E major&quot; as a theme for a character in Fellini&#x27;s &quot;La Strada&quot;.

During the 1940s, Rota composed scores for more than 32 films, including Renato Castellani&#x27;s &quot;&quot; (1944). His association with Fellini began with &quot;Lo Sceicco Bianco (The White Sheik)&quot; (1952), followed by &quot;I Vitelloni&quot; (1953) and &quot;La Strada (The Road)&quot; (1954). They continued to work together for decades, and Fellini recalled:

The relationship between Fellini and Rota was so strong that at Fellini&#x27;s funeral Giulietta Masina, Fellini&#x27;s wife, asked trumpeter Mauro Maur to play Rota&#x27;s &quot;Improvviso dell&#x27;Angelo&quot; in the Basilica di Santa Maria degli Angeli e dei Martiri in Rome.

Rota&#x27;s score for Fellini&#x27;s &quot;8½&quot; (1963) is often cited as one of the factors that makes the film cohesive. His score for Fellini&#x27;s &quot;Juliet of the Spirits&quot; (1965) included a collaboration with Eugene Walter on the song, &quot;Go Milk the Moon&quot; (cut from the final version of the film), and they teamed again for the song &quot;What Is a Youth?&quot;, part of Rota&#x27;s score for Franco Zeffirelli&#x27;s &quot;Romeo and Juliet&quot;.

The American Film Institute ranked Rota&#x27;s score for &quot;The Godfather&quot; number 5 on their list of the greatest film scores. After being nominated for an Academy Award for this score, the nomination was later revoked when it was discovered that Rota recycled a theme from a previous score, one he wrote two decades prior for the film &quot;Fortunella&quot; and thus no longer considered original despite being played differently. The nomination was then given to the film &quot;Sleuth&quot;, while Charlie Chaplin and two co-authors for their score featured in &quot;Limelight&quot;, a 21-year-old film that had just become eligible because it had not been screened in Los Angeles until 1972, went on to win the award. He went on to win an Oscar for his score for &quot;The Godfather Part II&quot;. His score for &quot;War and Peace&quot; was also nominated for the list. 

==Orchestral, chamber and choral music==
Rota wrote numerous concerti and other orchestral works as well as piano, chamber and choral music, much of which has been recorded and released on CD. After his death from heart failure in 1979, Rota&#x27;s music was the subject of Hal Willner&#x27;s 1981 tribute album &quot;Amarcord Nino Rota&quot;, which featured several jazz musicians who were relatively unknown at the time who went on to become famous. Gus Van Sant used some of Rota&#x27;s music in his 2007 film &quot;Paranoid Park&quot; and director Michael Winterbottom used several Rota selections in the 2005 film &quot;Tristram Shandy: A Cock and Bull Story&quot;. Danny Elfman frequently cites Nino Rota as a major influence (particularly on his scores for the Pee-Wee films). Director Mario Monicelli filmed a documentary &quot;Un amico magico: il maestro Nino Rota&quot; which featured interviews with Franco Zeffirelli and Riccardo Muti (a student under Rota at Bari Conservatory), and was followed by a German documentary &quot;Nino Rota - Un maestro della musica&quot;. Both explored film and concert sides of the composer.

==Operas==
His 1955 opera &quot;Il cappello di paglia di Firenze&quot; (&quot;The Florentine Straw Hat&quot;) is an adaptation of the play by Eugène Labiche and was presented by the Santa Fe Opera in 1977. In 2005 his opera &quot;Aladino e la lampada magica&quot; (&quot;Aladdin and the Magical Lamp&quot;), with Cosmin Ifrim in the title role, was performed in German translation at the Vienna State Opera and released on DVD. &quot;Il cappello di paglia di Firenze&quot; and &quot;Aladino e la lampada magica&quot; are regularly staged in Europe as are many symphonic and chamber titles

Written for a radio production by RAI in 1950, his short opera, &quot;I due timidi&quot; (&quot;The Two Timid Ones&quot;), was presented by the Santa Fe Opera as part of their pre-season &quot;One-Hour Opera&quot; program in May/June 2008.

==Personal life and death==
Rota had one daughter, Nina Rota, from a relationship with pianist Magda Longari.

Rota died in Rome on 10 April 1979, aged 67, from a coronary thrombosis.

==Works==
==Discography==
==References==
==Further reading==
*Kennedy, Michael (2006), &quot;The Oxford Dictionary of Music&quot;, 985 pages, 
*Richard Dyer. &quot;Nino Rota: Music, Film, and Feeling&quot;. New York: Palgrave and Macmillan (on behalf of the British Film Institute), 2010.
*Franco Sciannameo. &quot;Nino Rota&#x27;s The Godfather Trilogy: A Film Score Guide&quot;. Scarecrow Press, 2010.
*John Simon. &quot;The Other Rota&quot;. The New Criterion, Vol. 34, No. 10 / June 2016

==External links==
* 
* Schott Music profile</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q214665" start="0" end="8" title="Nino Rota" label="Giovanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q214665" start="15" end="19" title="Nino Rota" label="Nino"/>
<link wikidata="Q214665" start="26" end="38" title="Nino Rota" label="Rota Rinaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q36834" start="92" end="100" title="composer" label="composer"/>
<link wikidata="Q492264" start="160" end="170" title="film score" label="film score"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371" start="198" end="214" title="Federico Fellini" label="Federico Fellini"/>
<link wikidata="Q13888" start="219" end="235" title="Luchino Visconti" label="Luchino Visconti"/>
<link wikidata="Q53040" start="275" end="292" title="Franco Zeffirelli" label="Franco Zeffirelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q644549" start="300" end="330" title="List of William Shakespeare screen adaptations" label="Shakespeare screen adaptations"/>
<link wikidata="Q56094" start="370" end="390" title="Francis Ford Coppola" label="Francis Ford Coppola"/>
<link wikidata="Q3225260" start="398" end="431" title="The Godfather (film series)" label="&amp;quot;The Godfather&amp;quot; trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q488651" start="445" end="482" title="Academy Award for Best Original Score" label="Academy Award for Best Original Score"/>
<link wikidata="Q184768" start="493" end="514" title="The Godfather Part II" label="The Godfather Part II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344" start="1062" end="1067" title="opera" label="opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q41425" start="1075" end="1081" title="ballet" label="ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q332632" start="1267" end="1285" title="Eduardo De Filippo" label="Eduardo De Filippo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519" start="1357" end="1361" title="Bari" label="Bari"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="1511" end="1516" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q205178" start="1545" end="1558" title="child prodigy" label="child prodigy"/>
<link wikidata="Q85477" start="1577" end="1585" title="oratorio" label="oratorio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5673" start="1755" end="1778" title="Hans Christian Andersen" label="Hans Christian Andersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3762210" start="1918" end="1933" title="Giacomo Orefice" label="Giacomo Orefice"/>
<link wikidata="Q379267" start="1988" end="2007" title="Ildebrando Pizzetti" label="Ildebrando Pizzetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q337343" start="2012" end="2027" title="Alfredo Casella" label="Alfredo Casella"/>
<link wikidata="Q3687231" start="2035" end="2062" title="Conservatorio Santa Cecilia" label="Conservatorio Santa Cecilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="2066" end="2070" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q13003" start="2107" end="2123" title="Arturo Toscanini" label="Arturo Toscanini"/>
<link wikidata="Q60450" start="2220" end="2236" title="Curtis Institute" label="Curtis Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="2240" end="2252" title="Philadelphia, Pennsylvania" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q364179" start="2288" end="2300" title="Fritz Reiner" label="Fritz Reiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q354187" start="2309" end="2324" title="Rosario Scalero" label="Rosario Scalero"/>
<link wikidata="Q201405" start="2403" end="2414" title="Renaissance music" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q365805" start="2424" end="2440" title="Gioseffo Zarlino" label="Gioseffo Zarlino"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519" start="2609" end="2613" title="Bari, Italy" label="Bari"/>
<link wikidata="Q3425330" start="2752" end="2770" title="The Glass Mountain (1949 film)" label="The Glass Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q363254" start="2823" end="2833" title="Tito Gobbi" label="Tito Gobbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q555602" start="3016" end="3033" title="Nicolas Slonimsky" label="Nicolas Slonimsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q189214" start="3424" end="3433" title="Larghetto" label="Larghetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q7298" start="3445" end="3451" title="Antonín Dvořák" label="Dvorák"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758561" start="3459" end="3502" title="Serenade for Strings (Dvořák)" label="&amp;quot;Serenade for Strings in E major&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q18402" start="3554" end="3563" title="La Strada" label="La Strada"/>
<link wikidata="Q978075" start="3645" end="3662" title="Renato Castellani" label="Renato Castellani"/>
<link wikidata="Q18397" start="3737" end="3754" title="Lo Sceicco Bianco" label="Lo Sceicco Bianco"/>
<link wikidata="Q18397" start="3756" end="3771" title="The White Sheik" label="The White Sheik"/>
<link wikidata="Q18399" start="3805" end="3816" title="I Vitelloni" label="I Vitelloni"/>
<link wikidata="Q18402" start="3840" end="3849" title="La Strada" label="La Strada"/>
<link wikidata="Q106907" start="4030" end="4046" title="Giulietta Masina" label="Giulietta Masina"/>
<link wikidata="Q319451" start="4085" end="4095" title="Mauro Maur" label="Mauro Maur"/>
<link wikidata="Q569253" start="4175" end="4213" title="Santa Maria degli Angeli e dei Martiri" label="Santa Maria degli Angeli e dei Martiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q12018" start="4267" end="4269" title="8½" label="8½"/>
<link wikidata="Q18411" start="4385" end="4406" title="Juliet of the Spirits" label="Juliet of the Spirits"/>
<link wikidata="Q2058342" start="4450" end="4463" title="Eugene Walter" label="Eugene Walter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7363137" start="4589" end="4605" title="Romeo and Juliet 1968 film soundtrack" label="What Is a Youth?"/>
<link wikidata="Q53040" start="4643" end="4660" title="Franco Zeffirelli" label="Franco Zeffirelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q517265" start="4674" end="4690" title="Romeo and Juliet (1968 film)" label="Romeo and Juliet"/>
<link wikidata="Q207460" start="4703" end="4726" title="American Film Institute" label="American Film Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q47703" start="4762" end="4775" title="The Godfather" label="The Godfather"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454952" start="4794" end="4832" title="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years of Film Scores" label="their list of the greatest film scores"/>
<link wikidata="Q3748858" start="5049" end="5059" title="Fortunella (film)" label="Fortunella"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419980" start="5187" end="5193" title="Sleuth (1972 film)" label="Sleuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q882" start="5207" end="5222" title="Charlie Chaplin" label="Charlie Chaplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q584509" start="5276" end="5285" title="Limelight (1952 film)" label="Limelight"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="5378" end="5389" title="Los Angeles, California" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q184768" start="5479" end="5500" title="The Godfather Part II" label="The Godfather Part II"/>
<link wikidata="Q643811" start="5528" end="5541" title="War and Peace (1956 film)" label="War and Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q181754" start="5797" end="5810" title="congestive heart failure" label="heart failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q447509" start="5857" end="5868" title="Hal Willner" label="Hal Willner"/>
<link wikidata="Q482994" start="5881" end="5894" title="tribute album" label="tribute album"/>
<link wikidata="Q39053486" start="5901" end="5919" title="Amarcord Nino Rota" label="Amarcord Nino Rota"/>
<link wikidata="Q25186" start="6035" end="6047" title="Gus Van Sant" label="Gus Van Sant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139284" start="6102" end="6115" title="Paranoid Park (film)" label="Paranoid Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q380237" start="6135" end="6155" title="Michael Winterbottom" label="Michael Winterbottom"/>
<link wikidata="Q300371" start="6208" end="6246" title="A Cock and Bull Story" label="Tristram Shandy: A Cock and Bull Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q193338" start="6254" end="6266" title="Danny Elfman" label="Danny Elfman"/>
<link wikidata="Q53026" start="6376" end="6391" title="Mario Monicelli" label="Mario Monicelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q53040" start="6494" end="6511" title="Franco Zeffirelli" label="Franco Zeffirelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q276038" start="6516" end="6529" title="Riccardo Muti" label="Riccardo Muti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157165" start="6752" end="6784" title="Il cappello di paglia di Firenze" label="Il cappello di paglia di Firenze"/>
<link wikidata="Q379929" start="6862" end="6876" title="Eugène Labiche" label="Eugène Labiche"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204962" start="6902" end="6916" title="Santa Fe Opera" label="Santa Fe Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q209937" start="7108" end="7126" title="Vienna State Opera" label="Vienna State Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157165" start="7154" end="7186" title="Il cappello di paglia di Firenze" label="Il cappello di paglia di Firenze"/>
<link wikidata="Q19616" start="7344" end="7347" title="RAI" label="RAI"/>
<link wikidata="Q8012864" start="7380" end="7392" title="I due timidi" label="I due timidi"/>
<link wikidata="Q707774" start="7714" end="7733" title="coronary thrombosis" label="coronary thrombosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308292" start="7798" end="7814" title="Michael Kennedy (music critic)" label="Kennedy, Michael"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143163" wikidata="Q827212" url="?curid=143163" title="Gadsden Purchase">
<text>The Gadsden Purchase ( &quot;La Mesilla sale&quot;) is a region of present-day southern Arizona and southwestern New Mexico that the United States acquired from Mexico by the Treaty of Mesilla, which took effect on June 8, 1854. The purchase included lands south of the Gila River and west of the Rio Grande where the United States wanted the construction of what is now known as the Sunset Route, a transcontinental railroad, to be carried out, which the Southern Pacific Railroad later completed in 1881–1883. The purchase also aimed to resolve other border issues.

The first draft was signed on December 30, 1853, by James Gadsden, U.S. Minister to Mexico, and by Antonio López de Santa Anna, president of Mexico. The U.S. Senate voted in favor of ratifying it with amendments on April 25, 1854, and then sent it to President Franklin Pierce. Mexico&#x27;s government and its General Congress or Congress of the Union took final approval action on June 8, 1854, when the treaty took effect. The purchase was the last substantial territorial acquisition in the contiguous United States, and defined the Mexico–United States border. The Arizona cities of Tucson, Yuma and Tombstone are on territory acquired by the U.S. in the Gadsden Purchase. 

The financially-strapped government of Santa Anna agreed to sell the territory for $10 million
(equivalent to $ in ). After the devastating loss of Mexican territory to the U.S. in the Mexican–American War (1846–48) and the continued unauthorized military expeditions in the zone led by William Carr Lane, New Mexico territorial governor and noted filibuster, some historians argue that Santa Anna may have calculated it was better to yield territory by treaty and receive payment rather than have the territory simply seized by the United States.

== Desire for a southern transcontinental rail line ==

As the railroad age evolved, business-oriented Southerners saw that a railroad linking the South with the Pacific Coast would expand trade opportunities. They thought the topography of the southern portion of the original Mexican Cession was too mountainous to allow a direct route. Projected southern railroad routes tended to veer to the north as they proceeded eastward, which would favor connections with northern railroads and ultimately favor northern seaports. Southerners saw that to avoid the mountains, a route with a southeastern terminus might need to swing south into what was still Mexican territory.

The administration of President Pierce, strongly influenced by Secretary of War Jefferson Davis, a Southerner from Mississippi, saw an opportunity to acquire land for the railroad, as well as to acquire significant other territory from northern Mexico. In those years, the debate over slavery in the United States entered into many other debates, as the acquisition of new territory opened the question of whether it would be slave or free territory; in this case, the debate over slavery ended progress on construction of a southern transcontinental rail line until the early 1880s, although the preferred land became part of the nation and was used as intended after the Civil War.

== Southern route for the transcontinental railroad ==
=== Southern commercial conventions ===
 In January 1845, Asa Whitney of New York presented the United States Congress with the first plan to construct a transcontinental railroad. Although Congress took no action on his proposal, a commercial convention of 1845 in Memphis took up the issue. Prominent attendees included John C. Calhoun, Clement C. Clay, Sr., John Bell, William Gwin, and Edmund P. Gaines, but James Gadsden of South Carolina was influential in the convention&#x27;s recommending a southern route for the proposed railroad. The route was to begin in Texas and end in San Diego or Mazatlán. Southerners hoped that such a route would ensure Southern prosperity, while opening the &quot;West to southern influence and settlement&quot;.

Southern interest in railroads in general, and the Pacific railroad in particular, accelerated after the conclusion of the Mexican–American War in 1848. During that war, topographical officers William H. Emory and James W. Abert had conducted surveys that demonstrated the feasibility of a railroad&#x27;s originating in El Paso or western Arkansas and ending in San Diego. J. D. B. DeBow, the editor of &quot;DeBow&#x27;s Review&quot;, and Gadsden both publicized within the South the benefits of building this railroad.

Gadsden had become the president of the South Carolina Canal and Rail Road Company in 1839; about a decade later, the company had laid of track extending west from Charleston, South Carolina, and was $3 million (equivalent to $ in ) in debt. Gadsden wanted to connect all Southern railroads into one sectional network. He was concerned that the increasing railroad construction in the North was shifting trade in lumber, farm and manufacturing goods from the traditional north–south route based on the Ohio and Mississippi rivers to an east–west axis that would bypass the South. He also saw Charleston, his home town, losing its prominence as a seaport. In addition, many Southern business interests feared that a northern transcontinental route would exclude the South from trade with the Orient. Other Southerners argued for diversification from a plantation economy to keep the South independent of northern bankers.

In October 1849, the southern interests held a convention in Memphis, in response to a convention in St. Louis earlier that fall which discussed a northern route. The Memphis convention overwhelmingly advocated the construction of a route beginning there, to connect with an El Paso, Texas to San Diego, California line. Disagreement arose only over the issue of financing. The convention president, Matthew Fontaine Maury of Virginia, preferred strict private financing, whereas John Bell and others thought that federal land grants to railroad developers would be necessary.

=== James Gadsden and California ===
Gadsden supported nullification in 1831. When California was admitted to the Union as a free state in 1850, he advocated secession by South Carolina. Gadsden considered slavery &quot;a social blessing&quot; and abolitionists &quot;the greatest curse of the nation&quot;.

When the secession proposal failed, Gadsden worked with his cousin Isaac Edward Holmes, a lawyer in San Francisco since 1851, and California state senator Thomas Jefferson Green, in an attempt to divide California into northern and southern portions and proposed that the southern part allow slavery. Gadsden planned to establish a slave-holding colony there based on rice, cotton, and sugar, and wanted to use slave labor to build a railroad and highway that originated in either San Antonio or the Red River valley. The railway or highway would transport people to the California gold fields. Toward this end, on December 31, 1851, Gadsden asked Green to secure from the California state legislature a large land grant located between the 34th and 36th parallels, along the proposed dividing line for the two California states.

A few months later, Gadsden and 1,200 potential settlers from South Carolina and Florida submitted a petition to the California legislature for permanent citizenship and permission to establish a rural district that would be farmed by &quot;not less than Two Thousand of their African Domestics&quot;. The petition stimulated some debate, but it finally died in committee.

=== Stephen Douglas and land grants ===
The Compromise of 1850, which created the Utah Territory and the New Mexico Territory, would facilitate a southern route to the West Coast since all territory for the railroad was now organized and would allow for federal land grants as a financing measure. Competing northern or central routes championed, respectively, by U.S. Senators Stephen Douglas of Illinois and Thomas Hart Benton of Missouri, would still need to go through unorganized territories. Millard Fillmore established a precedent for using federal land grants when he signed a bill promoted by Douglas that allowed a south to north, Mobile to Chicago railroad to be financed by &quot;federal land grants for the specific purpose of railroad construction&quot;. To satisfy Southern opposition to the general principle of federally supported internal improvements, the land grants would first be transferred to the appropriate state or territorial government, which would oversee the final transfer to private developers.

By 1850, however, the majority of the South was not interested in exploiting its advantages in developing a transcontinental railroad or railroads in general. Businessmen like Gadsden, who advocated economic diversification, were in the minority. The Southern economy was based on cotton exports, and then-current transportation networks met the plantation system&#x27;s needs. There was little home market for an intra-South trade. In the short term, the best use for capital was to invest it in more slaves and land rather than in taxing it to support canals, railroads, roads, or in dredging rivers. Historian Jere W. Roberson wrote:

== Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo ==
The Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo (1848) ended the Mexican–American War, but left issues affecting both sides that still needed to be resolved: possession of the Mesilla Valley, protection for Mexico from Indian raids, and the right of transit in the Isthmus of Tehuantepec.

=== Mesilla Valley ===
The treaty provided for a joint commission, made up of a surveyor and commissioner from each country, to determine the final boundary between the United States and Mexico. The treaty specified that the boundary, after following the Rio Grande River from the sea, would turn west from the river eight miles (13 km) north of El Paso. The treaty was based on an 1847 copy (the Disturnell Map) of a twenty-five-year-old map which was incorporated into the treaty. However, surveys revealed that El Paso was further south and further west than the map showed. Mexico favored the map, but the United States put faith in the results of the survey. The disputed territory involved a few thousand square miles and about 3,000 residents; more significantly, it included the Mesilla Valley. Bordering the Rio Grande River, the valley consisted of flat desert land measuring about , north to south, by , east to west. This valley was thought to be essential for construction of a transcontinental railroad using a southern route.

John Bartlett of Rhode Island, the United States negotiator, agreed to allow Mexico to retain the Mesilla Valley by setting the point at which the boundary commenced toward the west from the Rio Grande River at 32° 22′ N. This point was north of the American claim of 31° 52′ N and, at the easternmost part, also north of the Mexican-claimed boundary at 32° 15′ N, both also on the Rio Grande River). Bartlett&#x27;s agreement to 32° 22′ N was in exchange for a boundary westward from the river that did not turn north until 110° W in order to include the Santa Rita del Corbe Mountains (sometimes referred to simply as the Corbe Mountains) located in current New Mexico east of current-day Silver City. This area was believed to have rich copper deposits, and some silver and gold which had not yet been mined. Southerners opposed retention of the Mesilla Valley by Mexico because of its implication for the railroad, but President Fillmore supported it. Southerners in Congress prevented any action on the approval of this separate border treaty and eliminated further funding to survey the disputed borderland. Robert B. Campbell, a pro-railroad politician from Alabama, later replaced Bartlett. Mexico asserted that the commissioners&#x27; determinations were valid and prepared to send in troops to enforce the unratified agreement.

=== Native American raids ===
Article XI of the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo contained a guarantee that the United States would protect Mexicans by preventing cross-border raids by local Comanche and Apache tribes. At the time the treaty was ratified, Secretary of State James Buchanan had believed that the United States had both the commitment and resources to enforce this promise. Historian Richard Kluger, however, described the difficulties of the task:

In the five years after approval of the Treaty, the United States spent $12 million (equivalent to $ in ) in this area, and General-in-Chief Winfield Scott estimated that five times that amount would be necessary to police the border. Mexican officials, frustrated with the failure of the United States to effectively enforce its guarantee, demanded reparations for the losses inflicted on Mexican citizens by the raids. The United States argued that the Treaty did not require any compensation nor did it require any greater effort to protect Mexicans than was expended in protecting its own citizens. During the Fillmore administration, Mexico claimed damages of $40 million (equivalent to $ in ) but offered to allow the U.S. to buy-out Article XI for $25 million ($) while President Fillmore proposed a settlement that was $10 million less ($).

=== Isthmus of Tehuantepec ===
During negotiations of the treaty, Americans had failed to secure the right of transit across the Isthmus of Tehuantepec in southern Mexico. The idea of building a railroad here had been considered for a long time, connecting the Gulf of Mexico with the Pacific Ocean. In 1842 Mexican President Antonio López de Santa Anna sold the rights to build a railroad or canal across the isthmus. The deal included land grants wide along the right-of-way for future colonization and development. In 1847 a British bank bought the rights, raising U.S. fears of British colonization in the hemisphere, in violation of the precepts of the Monroe Doctrine. United States interest in the right-of-way increased in 1848 after the gold strikes in the Sierra Nevada, which led to the California Gold Rush.
The Memphis commercial convention of 1849 recommended that the United States pursue the trans-isthmus route, since it appeared unlikely that a transcontinental railroad would be built anytime soon. Interests in Louisiana were especially adamant about this option, as they believed that any transcontinental railroad would divert commercial traffic away from the Mississippi and New Orleans, and they at least wanted to secure a southern route. Also showing interest was Peter A. Hargous of New York who ran an import-export business between New York and Vera Cruz. Hargous purchased the rights to the route for $25,000 (equivalent to $ in ), but realized that the grant had little value unless it was supported by the Mexican and American governments.

In Mexico, topographical officer George W. Hughes reported to Secretary of State John M. Clayton that a railroad across the isthmus was a &quot;feasible and practical&quot; idea. Clayton then instructed Robert P. Letcher, the minister to Mexico, to negotiate a treaty to protect Hargous&#x27; rights. The United States&#x27; proposal gave Mexicans a 20% discount on shipping, guaranteed Mexican rights in the zone, allowed the United States to send in military if necessary, and gave the United States most-favored-nation status for Mexican cargo fees. This treaty, however, was never finalized.

The Clayton–Bulwer Treaty between the United States and the United Kingdom, which guaranteed the neutrality of any such canal, was finalized in April 1850. Mexican negotiators refused the treaty because it would eliminate Mexico&#x27;s ability to play the US and Britain against each other. They eliminated the right of the United States to unilaterally intervene militarily. The United States Senate approved the treaty in early 1851, but the Mexican Congress refused to accept the treaty.

In the meantime, Hargous proceeded as if the treaty would be approved eventually. Judah P. Benjamin and a committee of New Orleans businessmen joined with Hargous and secured a charter from the Louisiana legislature to create the Tehuantepec Railroad Company. The new company sold stock and sent survey teams to Mexico. Hargous started to acquire land even after the Mexican legislature rejected the treaty, a move that led to the Mexicans canceling Hargous&#x27; contract to use the right of way. Hargous put his losses at $5 million (equivalent to $ in ) and asked the United States government to intervene. President Fillmore refused to do so.

Mexico sold the canal franchise, without the land grants, to A. G. Sloo and Associates in New York for $600,000 (equivalent to $ in ). In March 1853 Sloo contracted with a British company to build a railroad and sought an exclusive contract from the new Franklin Pierce Administration to deliver mail from New York to San Francisco. However, Sloo soon defaulted on bank loans and the contract was sold back to Hargous.

== Final negotiations and ratification of the treaty of purchase ==
The Pierce administration, which took office in March 1853, had a strong pro-southern, pro-expansion mindset. It sent Louisiana Senator Pierre Soulé to Spain to negotiate the acquisition of Cuba. Pierce appointed expansionists John Y. Mason of Virginia and Solon Borland of Arkansas as ministers, respectively, to France and Nicaragua. Pierce&#x27;s Secretary of War, Jefferson Davis, was already on record as favoring a southern route for a transcontinental railroad, so southern rail enthusiasts had every reason to be encouraged.

The South as a whole, however, remained divided. In January 1853, Senator Thomas Jefferson Rusk of Texas introduced a bill to create two railroads, one with a northern route, and one with a southern route starting below Memphis on the Mississippi River. Under the Rusk legislation, the President would be authorized to select the specific termini and routes as well as the contractors who would build the railroads. Some southerners, however, worried that northern and central interests would leap ahead in construction and opposed any direct aid to private developers on constitutional grounds. Other southerners preferred the isthmian proposals. An amendment was added to the Rusk bill to prohibit direct aid, but southerners still split their vote in Congress and the amendment failed.

This rejection led to legislative demands, sponsored by William Gwin of California and Salmon P. Chase of Ohio and supported by the railroad interests, for new surveys for possible routes. Gwin expected that a southern route would be approved—both Davis and Robert J. Walker, former Secretary of the Treasury, supported it. Both were stockholders in a Vicksburg-based railroad that planned to build a link to Texas to join up with the southern route. Davis argued that the southern route would have an important military application in the likely event of future troubles with Mexico.

=== Gadsden and Santa Anna ===
A treaty initiated in the Fillmore administration that would provide joint Mexican and United States protection for the Sloo grant was signed in Mexico on March 21, 1853. At the same time that this treaty was received in Washington, Pierce learned that New Mexico Territorial Governor William C. Lane had issued a proclamation claiming the Mesilla Valley as part of New Mexico, leading to protests from Mexico. Pierce was also aware of efforts by France, through its consul in San Francisco, to acquire the Mexican state of Sonora.

Pierce recalled Lane in May and replaced him with David Meriwether of Kentucky. Meriwether was given orders to stay out of the Mesilla Valley until negotiations with Mexico could be completed. With the encouragement of Davis, Pierce also appointed James Gadsden as minister to Mexico, with specific instructions to negotiate with Mexico over the acquisition of additional territory. Secretary of State William L. Marcy gave Gadsden clear instructions: he was to secure the Mesilla Valley for the purposes of building a railroad through it, convince Mexico that the US had done its best regarding the Indian raids, and elicit Mexican cooperation in efforts by US citizens to build a canal or railroad across the Isthmus of Tehuantepec. Supporting the Sloo interests was not part of the instructions. Gadsden met with Santa Anna in Mexico City on September 25, 1853, to discuss the terms of the treaty.

The Mexican government was going through political and financial turmoil. In the process, Santa Anna had been returned to power about the same time that Pierce was inaugurated. Santa Anna was willing to deal with the United States because he needed money to rebuild the Mexican Army for defense against the United States. He initially rejected the extension of the border further south to the Sierra Madre Mountains. He initially insisted on reparations for the damages caused by American Indian raids, but agreed to let an international tribunal resolve this. Gadsden realized that Santa Anna needed money and passed this information along to Secretary Marcy.

Marcy and Pierce responded with new instructions. Gadsden was authorized to purchase any of six parcels of land with a price fixed for each. The price would include the settlement of all Indian damages and relieve the United States from any further obligation to protect Mexicans. $50 million (equivalent to $ in ) would have bought the Baja California Peninsula and a large portion of the northwestern Mexican states while $15 million ($) was to buy the of desert necessary for the railroad plans.

&quot;Gadsden&#x27;s antagonistic manner&quot; alienated Santa Anna. Gadsden had advised Santa Anna that &quot;the spirit of the age&quot; would soon lead the northern Mexican states to secede so he might as well sell them now. Mexico balked at any large-scale sale of territory. The Mexican President felt threatened by William Walker&#x27;s attempt to capture Baja California with 50 troops and annex Sonora. Gadsden disavowed any government backing of Walker, who retreated to the U.S. and was placed on trial as a criminal. Santa Anna worried that the US would allow further aggression against Mexican territory. Santa Anna needed to get as much money for as little territory as possible. When the United Kingdom rejected Mexican requests to assist in the negotiations, Santa Anna opted for the $15 million package.

Santa Anna and Gadsden signed the treaty on December 30, 1853, and the treaty was presented to the U.S. Senate for confirmation.

=== Ratification ===

Pierce and his cabinet began debating the treaty in January 1854. Although disappointed in the amount of territory secured and some of the terms, Pierce signed it, and submitted it to the Senate on February 10. Gadsden, however, suggested that northern Senators would block the treaty to deny the South a railroad.

The treaty needed a two-thirds vote in favor of ratification in the US Senate, where it met strong opposition. Anti-slavery senators opposed further acquisition of slave territory. Lobbying by speculators gave the treaty a bad reputation. Some Senators objected to furnishing Santa Anna financial assistance.

The treaty reached the Senate as that body focused on the debate over the Kansas–Nebraska Act. On April 17, after much debate, the Senate voted 27 to 18 in favor of the treaty, falling three votes short of the necessary two-thirds majority. After this defeat, Secretary Davis and southern Senators pressed Pierce to add more provisions to the treaty including:
* protection for the Sloo grant;
* a requirement that Mexico &quot;protect with its whole power the prosecution, preservation, and security of the work [referring to the isthmian canal]&quot;;
* permission for the United States to intervene unilaterally &quot;when it may feel sanctioned and warranted by the public or international law&quot;; and
* a reduction of the territory to be acquired by more than to the final size of , and dropping the price to $10 million (equivalent to $ in ) from $15 million ($).

The land area included in the treaty is shown in the map at the head of the article, and in the national map in this section.

This version of the treaty successfully passed the US Senate April 25, 1854, by a vote of 33 to 12. The reduction in territory was an accommodation of northern senators who opposed the acquisition of additional slave territory. In the final vote, northerners split 12 to 12. Gadsden took the revised treaty back to Santa Anna, who accepted the changes. The treaty went into effect June 30, 1854.

While the land was available for construction of a southern railroad, the issue had become too strongly associated with the sectional debate over slavery to receive federal funding. Roberson wrote:

The effect was such that railroad development, which accelerated in the North, stagnated in the South.

=== Post-ratification controversy ===
As originally envisioned, the purchase would have encompassed a much larger region, extending far enough south to include most of the current Mexican states of Baja California, Baja California Sur, Coahuila, Chihuahua, Sonora, Nuevo León, and Tamaulipas. The Mexican people opposed such boundaries, as did anti-slavery Americans, who saw the purchase as acquisition of more slave territory. Even the sale of a relatively small strip of land angered the Mexican people, who saw Santa Anna&#x27;s actions as a betrayal of their country. They watched in dismay as he squandered the funds generated by the Purchase. Contemporary Mexican historians continue to view the deal negatively and believe that it has defined the American–Mexican relationship in a deleterious way.

The purchased lands were initially appended to the existing New Mexico Territory. To help control the new land, the US Army established Fort Buchanan on Sonoita Creek in present-day southern Arizona on November 17, 1856. The difficulty of governing the new areas from the territorial capital at Santa Fe led to efforts as early as 1856 to organize a new territory out of the southern portion. Many of the early settlers in the region were, however, pro-slavery and sympathetic to the South, resulting in an impasse in Congress as to how best to reorganize the territory.

The shifting of the course of the Rio Grande would cause a later dispute over the boundary between Purchase lands and those of the state of Texas, known as the Country Club Dispute. Pursuant to the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, the Gadsden Treaty and subsequent treaties, the International Boundary and Water Commission was established in 1889 to maintain the border. Pursuant to still later treaties, the IBWC expanded its duties to allocation of river waters between the two nations, and provided for flood control and water sanitation. Once viewed as a model of international cooperation, in recent decades the IBWC has been heavily criticized as an institutional anachronism, by-passed by modern social, environmental, and political issues.

== Growth of the region after 1854 ==

=== Army control ===
The residents of the area gained full US citizenship and slowly assimilated into American life over the next half-century. The principal threat to the peace and security of settlers and travelers in the area was raids by Apache Indians. The US Army took control of the purchase lands in 1854 but not until 1856 were troops stationed in the troubled region. In June 1857 it established Fort Buchanan south of the Gila at the head of the Sonoita Creek Valley. The fort protected the area until it was evacuated and destroyed in July 1861. The new stability brought miners and ranchers. By the late 1850s mining camps and military posts had not only transformed the Arizona countryside; they had also generated new trade linkages to the state of Sonora, Mexico. Magdalena, Sonora, became a supply center for Tubac; wheat from nearby Cucurpe fed the troops at Fort Buchanan; and the town of Santa Cruz sustained the Mowry mines, just miles to the north.

=== Civil War ===
In 1861, during the American Civil War, the Confederate States of America formed the Confederate Territory of Arizona, including in the new territory mainly areas acquired by the Gadsden Purchase. In 1863, using a north-to-south dividing line, the Union created its own Arizona Territory out of the western half of the New Mexico Territory. The new American Arizona Territory also included most of the lands acquired in the Gadsden Purchase. This territory would be admitted into the Union as the State of Arizona on February 14, 1912, the last area of the Lower 48 States to receive statehood.

=== Social development ===
After the Gadsden Purchase, southern Arizona&#x27;s social elite, including the Estevan Ochoa, Mariano Samaniego, and Leopoldo Carillo families, remained primarily Mexican American until the coming of the railroad in the 1880s. When the Sonora Exploring and Mining Company opened silver mines in southern Arizona, it sought to employ educated, middle-class Americans who shared a work ethic and leadership abilities to operate the mines. A biographical analysis of some 200 of its employees, classed as capitalists, managers, laborers, and general service personnel, reveals that the resulting work force included Europeans, Americans, Mexicans, and Indians. This mixture failed to stabilize the remote area, which lacked formal social, political, and economic organization in the years from the Gadsden Purchase to the Civil War.

=== Economic development ===
From the late 1840s into the 1870s, Texas stockmen drove their beef cattle through southern Arizona on the Texas–California trail. Texans were impressed with the grazing possibilities offered by the Gadsden Purchase country of Arizona. In the last third of the century, they moved their herds into Arizona and established the range cattle industry there. The Texans contributed their proven range methods to the new grass country of Arizona, but also brought their problems as well. Texas rustlers brought lawlessness, poor management resulted in overstocking, and carelessness introduced destructive diseases. But these difficulties did force laws and associations in Arizona to curb and resolve them. The Anglo-American cattleman frontier in Arizona was an extension of the Texas experience.

When the Arizona Territory was formed in 1863 from the southern portion of the New Mexico Territory, Pima County and later Cochise County—created from the easternmost portion of Pima County in January 1881—were subject to ongoing border-related conflicts. The area was characterized by rapidly growing boom towns, ongoing Apache raids, smuggling and cattle rustling across the United States-Mexico border, growing ranching operations, and the expansion of new technologies in mining, railroading, and telecommunications.

In the 1860s conflict between the Apaches and the Americans was at its height. Until 1886, almost constant warfare existed in the region adjacent to the Mexican border. The illegal cattle operations kept beef prices in the border region lower and provided cheap stock that helped small ranchers get by. Many early Tombstone, Arizona residents looked the other way when it was &quot;only Mexicans&quot; being robbed.

Outlaws derisively called &quot;The Cowboys&quot; frequently robbed stagecoaches and brazenly stole cattle in broad daylight, scaring off the legitimate cowboys watching the herds. Bandits used the border between the United States and Mexico to raid across in one direction and take sanctuary in the other. In December 1878, and again the next year, Mexican authorities complained about the &quot;Cowboy&quot; outlaws who stole Mexican beef and resold it in Arizona. The &quot;Arizona Citizen&quot; reported that both U.S. and Mexican bandits were stealing horses from the Santa Cruz Valley and selling them in Sonora. Arizona Territorial Governor Frémont investigated the Mexican government&#x27;s allegations and accused them in turn of allowing outlaws to use Sonora as a base of operations for raiding into Arizona.

In the 1870s and 1880s there was considerable tension in the region—between the rural residents, who were for the most part Democrats from the agricultural South, and town residents and business owners, who were largely Republicans from the industrial Northeast and Midwest. The tension culminated in what has been called the Cochise County feud, and the Earp-Clanton feud, which ended with the historic Gunfight at the O.K. Corral and Wyatt Earp&#x27;s Vendetta Ride.

The Gadsden purchase resulted in the division of the Tohono Oʼodham Nation and its ancestral lands by the new international border. This disrupted traditional migratory practices and transportation of materials and goods essential for their spirituality, economy and traditional culture. Nine communities are on the Mexican side of this boundary. Conflicts have arisen mainly in the 21st century with stronger enforcement of customs laws at the border.

=== Railroad development ===
In 1846, James Gadsden, then president of the South Carolina Railroad, proposed building a transcontinental railroad linking the Atlantic at Charleston with the Pacific at San Diego. Federal and private surveys by Lt. John G. Parke and Andrew B Gray proved the feasibility of the southern transcontinental route, but sectional strife and the Civil War delayed construction of the proposed railroad. The Southern Pacific Railroad from Los Angeles reached Yuma, Arizona, in 1877, Tucson, Arizona in March 1880, Deming, New Mexico in December 1880, and El Paso in May 1881, the first railroad across the Gadsden Purchase.

At the same time, 1879–1881, the Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railroad was building across New Mexico and met the Southern Pacific at Deming, New Mexico March 7, 1881, completing the second transcontinental railroad (the first, the central transcontinental, was completed May 10, 1869 at Promontory Summit, Utah). Acquiring trackage rights over the SP, from Deming to Benson, the Santa Fe then built a line southwest to Guaymas, Sonora, Mexico, completed October 1882, as its first outlet to the Pacific. This line was later sold to the Southern Pacific. The Southern Pacific continued building east from El Paso, completing a junction with the Texas &amp; Pacific in December 1881, and finally in 1883, its own southern transcontinental, the Sunset Route, California to New Orleans, Atlantic waters to the Pacific. These railroads caused an early 1880s mining boom in such locales as Tombstone, Arizona, Bisbee, Arizona, and Santa Rita, New Mexico, the latter two world class copper producers. From Bisbee, a third sub-transcontinental was built across the Gadsden Purchase, the El Paso and Southwestern Railroad, to El Paso by 1905, then to a link with the Rock Island line to form the Golden State Route. The EP&amp;SW was sold to the Southern Pacific in the early 1920s.

The portion of the Southern Pacific in Arizona was originally largely in the Gadsden Purchase but the western part was later rerouted north of the Gila River to serve the city of Phoenix (as part of the agreement in purchasing the EP&amp;SW). The portion in New Mexico runs largely through the territory that had been disputed between Mexico and the United States after the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo had gone into effect, and before the time of the Gadsden Purchase. The Santa Fe Railroad Company also completed a railroad across Northern Arizona, via Holbrook, Winslow, Flagstaff and Kingman in August 1883. These two transcontinental railroads, the Southern Pacific (now part of the Union Pacific Railroad) and the Santa Fe (now part of the BNSF), are among the busiest rail lines in the United States.

During the early twentieth century, a number of short-lines usually associated with mining booms were built in the Gadsden Purchase to Ajo, Silverbell, Twin Buttes, Courtland, Gleeson, Arizona, Shakespeare, New Mexico, and other mine sites. Most of these railroads have been abandoned.

The remainder of the Gila Valley pre-Purchase border area was traversed by the Arizona Eastern Railway by 1899 and the Copper Basin Railway by 1904. Excluded was a section in the San Carlos Apache Indian Reservation, from today&#x27;s San Carlos Lake to Winkelman at the mouth of the San Pedro River, including the Needle&#x27;s Eye Wilderness. The section of US Highway 60 about between Superior and Miami via Top-of-the-World (this road segment is east of Phoenix, in the Tonto National Forest passing through a mountainous region), takes an alternate route (17.4 road miles) between the Magma Arizona Railroad and the Arizona Eastern Railway railheads on each side of this gap. This highway is well north of the Gadsden Purchase. Given the elevations of those three places, at least a 3% grade would have been required for rails built here, rather than the final alignment; railroads prefer 1% or less grade for better operation. This rugged terrain above the Gila River confirms the engineering, technical wisdom of acquiring the Gadsden Purchase for a southern transcontinental railroad. To William H. Emory of the U. S. Army Corps of Topographical Engineers who surveyed the region in the 1840s–1850s, it was a good route &quot;to the Pacific.&quot;

== Population ==

=== Arizona ===
The boundaries of most counties in Arizona do not follow the northern boundary of the Gadsden Purchase, but six counties in Arizona do have most of their populations within the land of the Gadsden Purchase. Four of these also contain areas north of the Gadsden Purchase, but these areas have low population densities, with the exception of northeastern Pinal County including the towns of Apache Junction and Florence. Maricopa County also extends south into the area of the Gadsden Purchase, but this area is also thinly populated. Tucson is the largest city in the Gadsden Purchase.
The northernmost point of the Gadsden Purchase, and also along the national border during the period of 1848–53, is at approximately in Goodyear, about southwest of Phoenix.

=== New Mexico ===
Sunland Park (population 14,267 in 2010), a suburb of El Paso, Texas, in Doña Ana County, New Mexico, is the largest community of New Mexico in the Gadsden Purchase.

Lordsburg, New Mexico (population 2,797 in 2010), the county seat of Hidalgo County, was in the disputed area before the Gadsden Purchase, and Deming, New Mexico, the county seat of Luna County, was north of both the Mexican and American land claims before the Gadsden Purchase, though the proposed Bartlett–Conde compromise of 1851 would have left Deming in Mexico, or stated in positive terms, the negotiations for the Gadsden Purchase resolved the border disputes with Mexico, as well as transferred this land to the U.S.

== Cost effectiveness ==
Geologist Harold L. James stated in 1969 about the Gadsden Purchase: &quot;Although the boundary controversy did not teach any lessons or impart any wisdom, it did lead to the purchase of an extremely valuable strip of territory that has more than paid for itself in subsequent mineral and agricultural resources. Despite the comedy of errors, chaos, and misunderstanding, the Southwest must therefore be grateful.&quot;

However, economist David R. Barker estimated in 2009 that the purchase was likely not profitable for the United States federal government. Stating that &quot;Current historical accounts take it for granted that the purchase has been a boon to the United States&quot;, he calculated that the region produces little tax revenue; most mines are on Indian reservations which receive all royalties. The federal government spent a great deal of money during the 19th century to defend the territory from Apaches that would not have been necessary without the purchase.

== In popular culture ==
The consequences of the Gadsden Purchase for Mexicans and Native Americans living in the region form the background of the story in the film &quot;Conquest of Cochise&quot; (Columbia, 1953).

The United States Post Office Department issued a postage stamp commemorating 100 years since the Gadsden Purchase, on December 30, 1953.

In 2012, the Gadsden Purchase was featured in a segment on &quot;Late Night with Jimmy Fallon&quot;.

A supporting character in the 2021 novel &quot;Billy Summers&quot; by Stephen King is named &quot;Gadsden Drake&quot; after the Gadsden Purchase.

== See also ==

* Butterfield Overland Mail
* Confederate Arizona
* Gadsden Purchase half dollar
* Historic regions of the United States
* Mexico–United States border
* Republic of Sonora

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Bibliography ==
* 
* 
* 
== Further reading ==

* stresses railroad speculation and corruption themes
* 
== External links ==
* US Geological Survey USGS Public Lands Survey Map including survey township (6 mile) lines.
* &quot;Map of proposed Arizona Territory. From explorations by A. B. Gray &amp; others, to accompany memoir by Lieut. Mowry U.S. Army, Delegate elect.&quot; with some proposed railroad routes Medium-sized JPG Zoom navigator
* National Park Service Map including route of the Southern Pacific railroad finally built in the 1880s.
* Gadsden Purchase, 1853–1854, Office of the Historian, US Department of State
* 3-cent commemorative stamp showing small version of northeast boundary of Purchasei.e. claiming more territory for US pre-Purchase.
* Map of North America at the time of the Gadsden Purchase at omniatlas.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q827212" start="4" end="20" title="Gadsden Purchase" label="Gadsden Purchase"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="88" end="95" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="113" end="123" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="133" end="146" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443295" start="161" end="167" title="Second Federal Republic of Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q827212" start="175" end="192" title="Gadsden Purchase" label="Treaty of Mesilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q838143" start="270" end="280" title="Gila River" label="Gila River"/>
<link wikidata="Q160636" start="297" end="307" title="Rio Grande" label="Rio Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q108044438" start="384" end="396" title="Sunset Route" label="Sunset Route"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064041" start="400" end="425" title="transcontinental railroad" label="transcontinental railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473764" start="456" end="481" title="Southern Pacific Transportation Company" label="Southern Pacific Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368645" start="621" end="634" title="James Gadsden" label="James Gadsden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889339" start="636" end="659" title="U.S. Minister to Mexico" label="U.S. Minister to Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q189145" start="668" end="695" title="Antonio López de Santa Anna" label="Antonio López de Santa Anna"/>
<link wikidata="Q628004" start="697" end="716" title="president of Mexico" label="president of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q12312" start="830" end="845" title="Franklin Pierce" label="Franklin Pierce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484825" start="880" end="921" title="Congress of the Union" label="General Congress or Congress of the Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q578170" start="1064" end="1088" title="contiguous United States" label="contiguous United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057263" start="1106" end="1133" title="Mexico–United States border" label="Mexico–United States border"/>
<link wikidata="Q18575" start="1157" end="1163" title="Tucson, Arizona" label="Tucson"/>
<link wikidata="Q79820" start="1165" end="1169" title="Yuma, Arizona" label="Yuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q79873" start="1174" end="1183" title="Tombstone, Arizona" label="Tombstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="1434" end="1454" title="Mexican–American War" label="Mexican–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q568960" start="1536" end="1553" title="William Carr Lane" label="William Carr Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073738" start="1597" end="1607" title="filibuster (military)" label="filibuster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186695" start="2076" end="2091" title="Mexican Cession" label="Mexican Cession"/>
<link wikidata="Q162269" start="2550" end="2565" title="Jefferson Davis" label="Jefferson Davis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2995" end="3030" title="Transcontinental railroad#Subsequent transcontinental routes" label="southern transcontinental rail line"/>
<link wikidata="Q4803179" start="3268" end="3279" title="Asa Whitney" label="Asa Whitney"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="3306" end="3328" title="United States Congress" label="United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q16563" start="3476" end="3483" title="Memphis, Tennessee" label="Memphis"/>
<link wikidata="Q207191" start="3532" end="3547" title="John C. Calhoun" label="John C. Calhoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q304271" start="3549" end="3569" title="Clement Comer Clay" label="Clement C. Clay, Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1349142" start="3571" end="3580" title="John Bell (Tennessee politician)" label="John Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5868980" start="3582" end="3594" title="William M. Gwin" label="William Gwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747899" start="3600" end="3616" title="Edmund P. Gaines" label="Edmund P. Gaines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368645" start="3622" end="3635" title="James Gadsden" label="James Gadsden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="3778" end="3783" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="3795" end="3804" title="San Diego" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q40194" start="3808" end="3816" title="Mazatlán" label="Mazatlán"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="4085" end="4105" title="Mexican–American War" label="Mexican–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q134435" start="4132" end="4145" title="topography" label="topographical"/>
<link wikidata="Q780105" start="4155" end="4171" title="William H. Emory" label="William H. Emory"/>
<link wikidata="Q325612" start="4176" end="4190" title="James William Abert" label="James W. Abert"/>
<link wikidata="Q16562" start="4283" end="4290" title="El Paso, Texas" label="El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612" start="4302" end="4310" title="Arkansas" label="Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6105203" start="4336" end="4350" title="J. D. B. De Bow" label="J. D. B. DeBow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5244276" start="4372" end="4391" title="De Bow&amp;#x27;s Review" label="DeBow&amp;#x27;s Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="4438" end="4443" title="American South" label="South"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566559" start="4525" end="4567" title="South Carolina Canal and Railroad Company" label="South Carolina Canal and Rail Road Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q47716" start="4649" end="4675" title="Charleston, South Carolina" label="Charleston, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915" start="4987" end="4991" title="Ohio River" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="4996" end="5007" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q205653" start="5276" end="5282" title="Orient" label="Orient"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="5508" end="5517" title="St. Louis" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q114385" start="5807" end="5829" title="Matthew Fontaine Maury" label="Matthew Fontaine Maury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="5833" end="5841" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q472699" start="6040" end="6053" title="Nullification crisis" label="nullification"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="6068" end="6078" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q127181" start="6361" end="6380" title="Isaac E. Holmes" label="Isaac Edward Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7791255" start="6449" end="6471" title="Thomas Jefferson Green" label="Thomas Jefferson Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="6775" end="6786" title="San Antonio" label="San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q156032" start="6794" end="6803" title="Red River of the South" label="Red River"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="7206" end="7213" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084210" start="7242" end="7264" title="California State Legislature" label="California legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q39392" start="7543" end="7561" title="Compromise of 1850" label="Compromise of 1850"/>
<link wikidata="Q128026" start="7581" end="7595" title="Utah Territory" label="Utah Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q597711" start="7604" end="7624" title="New Mexico Territory" label="New Mexico Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q12606" start="7667" end="7677" title="West Coast of the United States" label="West Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="7863" end="7876" title="United States Senate" label="U.S. Senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q433174" start="7877" end="7892" title="Stephen A. Douglas" label="Stephen Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="7896" end="7904" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317969" start="7909" end="7927" title="Thomas Hart Benton (politician)" label="Thomas Hart Benton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="7931" end="7939" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q12306" start="7997" end="8013" title="Millard Fillmore" label="Millard Fillmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q79875" start="8141" end="8147" title="Mobile, Alabama" label="Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="8151" end="8158" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q6047872" start="8348" end="8369" title="internal improvements" label="internal improvements"/>
<link wikidata="Q616109" start="9205" end="9232" title="Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo" label="Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6821328" start="9361" end="9375" title="Mesilla Valley" label="Mesilla Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q392250" start="9450" end="9472" title="Isthmus of Tehuantepec" label="Isthmus of Tehuantepec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101332" start="10517" end="10530" title="John Russell Bartlett" label="John Bartlett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387" start="10534" end="10546" title="Rhode Island" label="Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="11257" end="11263" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="11283" end="11289" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="11294" end="11298" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394430" start="11631" end="11649" title="Robert B. Campbell" label="Robert B. Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="11682" end="11689" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q117133" start="12042" end="12050" title="Comanche" label="Comanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q102090" start="12055" end="12061" title="Apache" label="Apache"/>
<link wikidata="Q12325" start="12126" end="12140" title="James Buchanan" label="James Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327107" start="12250" end="12264" title="Richard Kluger" label="Richard Kluger"/>
<link wikidata="Q354759" start="12457" end="12471" title="Winfield Scott" label="Winfield Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q392250" start="13295" end="13317" title="Isthmus of Tehuantepec" label="Isthmus of Tehuantepec"/>
<link wikidata="Q181026" start="13824" end="13839" title="Monroe Doctrine" label="Monroe Doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q26777" start="13932" end="13945" title="Sierra Nevada" label="Sierra Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q17550" start="13964" end="13984" title="California Gold Rush" label="California Gold Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q173270" start="14540" end="14549" title="Veracruz (city)" label="Vera Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2386140" start="14772" end="14788" title="George Wurtz Hughes" label="George W. Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q17889" start="14820" end="14835" title="John M. Clayton" label="John M. Clayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q359430" start="14942" end="14959" title="Robert P. Letcher" label="Robert P. Letcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q444530" start="15340" end="15361" title="Clayton–Bulwer Treaty" label="Clayton–Bulwer Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q466115" start="15910" end="15927" title="Judah P. Benjamin" label="Judah P. Benjamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12312" start="16730" end="16745" title="Franklin Pierce" label="Franklin Pierce"/>
<link wikidata="Q434679" start="17100" end="17112" title="Pierre Soulé" label="Pierre Soulé"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="17278" end="17284" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q811" start="17289" end="17298" title="Nicaragua" label="Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q2290948" start="17572" end="17593" title="Thomas Jefferson Rusk" label="Thomas Jefferson Rusk"/>
<link wikidata="Q433051" start="18375" end="18390" title="Salmon P. Chase" label="Salmon P. Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="18394" end="18398" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q879106" start="18546" end="18562" title="Robert J. Walker" label="Robert J. Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q493787" start="18640" end="18649" title="Vicksburg, Mississippi" label="Vicksburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q568960" start="19190" end="19205" title="William Carr Lane" label="William C. Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q46422" start="19429" end="19435" title="Sonora" label="Sonora"/>
<link wikidata="Q883854" start="19488" end="19504" title="David Meriwether (Kentucky politician)" label="David Meriwether"/>
<link wikidata="Q389258" start="19840" end="19856" title="William L. Marcy" label="William L. Marcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2862975" start="20610" end="20622" title="Mexican Army" label="Mexican Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124584" start="20733" end="20755" title="Sierra Madre Occidental" label="Sierra Madre Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q178543" start="21339" end="21364" title="Baja California Peninsula" label="Baja California Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q196401" start="21823" end="21837" title="William Walker (filibuster)" label="William Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q58731" start="21864" end="21879" title="Baja California" label="Baja California"/>
<link wikidata="Q619762" start="23175" end="23194" title="Kansas–Nebraska Act" label="Kansas–Nebraska Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q28912963" start="24982" end="24996" title="List of states of Mexico" label="Mexican states"/>
<link wikidata="Q58731" start="25000" end="25015" title="Baja California" label="Baja California"/>
<link wikidata="Q46508" start="25017" end="25036" title="Baja California Sur" label="Baja California Sur"/>
<link wikidata="Q53079" start="25038" end="25046" title="Coahuila" label="Coahuila"/>
<link wikidata="Q655" start="25048" end="25057" title="Chihuahua (state)" label="Chihuahua"/>
<link wikidata="Q46422" start="25059" end="25065" title="Sonora" label="Sonora"/>
<link wikidata="Q15282" start="25067" end="25077" title="Nuevo León" label="Nuevo León"/>
<link wikidata="Q80007" start="25083" end="25093" title="Tamaulipas" label="Tamaulipas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853205" start="25146" end="25168" title="Abolitionism in the United States" label="anti-slavery Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="25726" end="25733" title="United States Army" label="US Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q376168" start="25746" end="25759" title="Fort Buchanan, Arizona" label="Fort Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q283683" start="25763" end="25776" title="Sonoita Creek" label="Sonoita Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q38555" start="25905" end="25913" title="Santa Fe, New Mexico" label="Santa Fe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352230" start="25949" end="25973" title="Territories of the United States" label="organize a new territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="26094" end="26099" title="Southern United States" label="South"/>
<link wikidata="Q160636" start="26216" end="26226" title="Rio Grande" label="Rio Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177235" start="26342" end="26362" title="Country Club Dispute" label="Country Club Dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q8348493" start="26457" end="26500" title="International Boundary and Water Commission" label="International Boundary and Water Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="27976" end="27994" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="28000" end="28029" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederate States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364118" start="28041" end="28073" title="Confederate Arizona" label="Confederate Territory of Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q670002" start="28226" end="28243" title="Arizona Territory" label="Arizona Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="28453" end="28469" title="Arizona" label="State of Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q578170" start="28513" end="28528" title="Contiguous United States" label="Lower 48 States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401093" start="28659" end="28672" title="Estevan Ochoa" label="Estevan Ochoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q58688" start="30336" end="30347" title="Pima County, Arizona" label="Pima County"/>
<link wikidata="Q58774" start="30358" end="30372" title="Cochise County, Arizona" label="Cochise County"/>
<link wikidata="Q79873" start="31071" end="31089" title="Tombstone, Arizona" label="Tombstone, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q3696357" start="31206" end="31217" title="Cochise County Cowboys" label="The Cowboys"/>
<link wikidata="Q339249" start="31242" end="31252" title="stagecoach" label="stagecoach"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851148" start="31651" end="31666" title="Tucson Citizen" label="Arizona Citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="32119" end="32128" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="32215" end="32226" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139332" start="32321" end="32340" title="Cochise County in the Old West" label="Cochise County feud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347682" start="32399" end="32426" title="Gunfight at the O.K. Corral" label="Gunfight at the O.K. Corral"/>
<link wikidata="Q44616" start="32431" end="32441" title="Wyatt Earp" label="Wyatt Earp"/>
<link wikidata="Q4009495" start="32449" end="32462" title="Earp Vendetta Ride" label="Vendetta Ride"/>
<link wikidata="Q17108019" start="32518" end="32539" title="Tohono Oʼodham Nation" label="Tohono Oʼodham Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566627" start="32994" end="33017" title="South Carolina Railroad" label="South Carolina Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473764" start="33351" end="33376" title="Southern Pacific Transportation Company" label="Southern Pacific Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="33382" end="33393" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q18575" start="33426" end="33441" title="Tucson, Arizona" label="Tucson, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q988813" start="33457" end="33475" title="Deming, New Mexico" label="Deming, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q16562" start="33498" end="33505" title="El Paso, Texas" label="El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q753942" start="33601" end="33639" title="Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway" label="Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051006" start="33857" end="33880" title="Promontory, Utah" label="Promontory Summit, Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q79873" start="34454" end="34472" title="Tombstone, Arizona" label="Tombstone, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q79720" start="34474" end="34489" title="Bisbee, Arizona" label="Bisbee, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419837" start="34495" end="34517" title="Santa Rita, New Mexico" label="Santa Rita, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050172" start="34649" end="34682" title="El Paso and Southwestern Railroad" label="El Paso and Southwestern Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q753942" start="35318" end="35343" title="Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway" label="Santa Fe Railroad Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058124" start="35377" end="35393" title="Northern Arizona" label="Northern Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q79912" start="35399" end="35407" title="Holbrook, Arizona" label="Holbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q79727" start="35409" end="35416" title="Winslow, Arizona" label="Winslow"/>
<link wikidata="Q79842" start="35418" end="35427" title="Flagstaff, Arizona" label="Flagstaff"/>
<link wikidata="Q79733" start="35432" end="35439" title="Kingman, Arizona" label="Kingman"/>
<link wikidata="Q725793" start="35532" end="35554" title="Union Pacific Railroad" label="Union Pacific Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q267122" start="35590" end="35594" title="BNSF Railway" label="BNSF"/>
<link wikidata="Q4791309" start="36019" end="36042" title="Arizona Eastern Railway" label="Arizona Eastern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5168689" start="36059" end="36079" title="Copper Basin Railway" label="Copper Basin Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3821997" start="36119" end="36155" title="San Carlos Apache Indian Reservation" label="San Carlos Apache Indian Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q452549" start="36175" end="36190" title="San Carlos Lake" label="San Carlos Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949114" start="36194" end="36203" title="Winkelman, Arizona" label="Winkelman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451378" start="36224" end="36239" title="San Pedro River (Arizona)" label="San Pedro River"/>
<link wikidata="Q15261464" start="36255" end="36283" title="Needle&amp;#x27;s Eye Wilderness" label="Needle&amp;#x27;s Eye Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q807323" start="36300" end="36313" title="U.S. Route 60 in Arizona" label="US Highway 60"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012650" start="36328" end="36336" title="Superior, Arizona" label="Superior"/>
<link wikidata="Q991525" start="36341" end="36346" title="Miami, Arizona" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q3254884" start="36351" end="36367" title="Top-of-the-World, Arizona" label="Top-of-the-World"/>
<link wikidata="Q6731211" start="36530" end="36552" title="Magma Arizona Railroad" label="Magma Arizona Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139344" start="36731" end="36736" title="Grade (slope)" label="grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q729140" start="37254" end="37273" title="List of counties in Arizona" label="counties in Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q58712" start="37584" end="37596" title="Pinal County, Arizona" label="Pinal County"/>
<link wikidata="Q79829" start="37620" end="37635" title="Apache Junction, Arizona" label="Apache Junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q845754" start="37640" end="37648" title="Florence, Arizona" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q58691" start="37650" end="37665" title="Maricopa County, Arizona" label="Maricopa County"/>
<link wikidata="Q18575" start="37764" end="37770" title="Tucson, Arizona" label="Tucson"/>
<link wikidata="Q79457" start="37952" end="37960" title="Goodyear, Arizona" label="Goodyear"/>
<link wikidata="Q16556" start="37981" end="37988" title="Phoenix, Arizona" label="Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002908" start="38010" end="38022" title="Sunland Park, New Mexico" label="Sunland Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q112953" start="38083" end="38110" title="Doña Ana County, New Mexico" label="Doña Ana County, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="38140" end="38150" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018231" start="38177" end="38198" title="Lordsburg, New Mexico" label="Lordsburg, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q489613" start="38246" end="38260" title="Hidalgo County, New Mexico" label="Hidalgo County"/>
<link wikidata="Q489652" start="38359" end="38370" title="Luna County, New Mexico" label="Luna County"/>
<link wikidata="Q5238790" start="39169" end="39184" title="David R. Barker" label="David R. Barker"/>
<link wikidata="Q15070606" start="39886" end="39905" title="Conquest of Cochise" label="Conquest of Cochise"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109672" start="39935" end="39971" title="United States Post Office Department" label="United States Post Office Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817561" start="40135" end="40163" title="Late Night with Jimmy Fallon" label="Late Night with Jimmy Fallon"/>
<link wikidata="Q105473555" start="40219" end="40232" title="Billy Summers" label="Billy Summers"/>
<link wikidata="Q39829" start="40242" end="40254" title="Stephen King" label="Stephen King"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018077" start="40337" end="40362" title="Butterfield Overland Mail" label="Butterfield Overland Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364118" start="40365" end="40384" title="Confederate Arizona" label="Confederate Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q65082206" start="40387" end="40415" title="Gadsden Purchase half dollar" label="Gadsden Purchase half dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605186" start="40418" end="40455" title="Historic regions of the United States" label="Historic regions of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057263" start="40458" end="40485" title="Mexico–United States border" label="Mexico–United States border"/>
<link wikidata="Q4207384" start="40488" end="40506" title="Republic of Sonora" label="Republic of Sonora"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647102" start="40728" end="40743" title="survey township" label="survey township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473764" start="41036" end="41052" title="Southern Pacific Transportation Company" label="Southern Pacific"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143164" wikidata="Q1332134" url="?curid=143164" title="The Breeders">
<text>The Breeders are an American alternative rock band based in Dayton, Ohio, consisting of members Kim Deal (rhythm guitar, lead vocals), her twin sister Kelley Deal (lead guitar, vocals), Josephine Wiggs (bass guitar, vocals) and Jim Macpherson (drums).

The earliest incarnation of the band was formed by Kim Deal and Tanya Donelly in 1989 as a side-project alongside their full-time bands Pixies and Throwing Muses respectively. To record their debut album, 1990&#x27;s &quot;Pod&quot;, Deal and Donelly recruited bassist Josephine Wiggs of the Perfect Disaster and drummer Britt Walford of Slint. Kim&#x27;s sister Kelley was brought into the band as a third guitarist (though at the time, Kelley had never played guitar before) in 1992 to record the &quot;Safari&quot; EP, and shortly thereafter Tanya Donelly left to concentrate full-time on her own new band, Belly, leaving Kelley Deal as the sole lead guitarist; Britt Walford left as well around the same time. While the band&#x27;s first record was not initially a commercial success, the band had developed a following among indie rock fans and praise from people such as Nirvana frontman Kurt Cobain, who cited &quot;Pod&quot; as one of his all-time favorite albums. Meanwhile, the band prepared to record their next album.

In 1993, the Pixies broke up, leaving Deal to concentrate on The Breeders as her full-time band. Kim recruited local Dayton musician Jim Macpherson (previously a member of indie rock band the Raging Mantras) to replace the recently departed Walford on drums, cementing the Breeders&#x27; best-known line-up. The band&#x27;s most commercially successful album, &quot;Last Splash&quot;, was released in 1993 during the early 1990s alternative rock boom. The album went on to be certified platinum by the RIAA, and is best known for its hit single &quot;Cannonball&quot;.

A year after the success of &quot;Last Splash&quot;, drug and alcohol issues forced the band into hiatus in 1994, while both the Deal sisters did separate stints in rehab in the following years. During the band&#x27;s hiatus, Kim Deal formed the short-lived alternative rock band &quot;The Amps&quot;, recording a single album, &quot;Pacer&quot;, in 1995. In the late 1990s, Kim and Kelley reformed The Breeders with a new line-up (including members of the band Fear) and released two more albums, &quot;Title TK&quot; in 2002 and &quot;Mountain Battles&quot; in 2008. In 2013, Kim and Kelley had announced that the &quot;classic&quot; line-up (including Josephine Wiggs and Jim Macpherson) had reunited for the first time since the 1990s for a new series of tours celebrating the 20th anniversary of the band&#x27;s hit album &quot;Last Splash&quot;. They released their fifth album &quot;All Nerve&quot; in 2018, the first &quot;classic&quot; Breeders line-up&#x27;s full-length album together since 1993&#x27;s &quot;Last Splash&quot;.

== History ==

=== Formation ===

Kim Deal, not fulfilled in her subordinate role as bassist of the Pixies, began writing new material while the Pixies were touring &quot;Surfer Rosa&quot; in Europe with Throwing Muses. As neither band had plans in the immediate future, Deal discussed possible side projects with Throwing Muses guitarist Tanya Donelly. They recruited Carrie Bradley, violinist and vocalist in Boston band Ed&#x27;s Redeeming Qualities, and recorded a short demo tape. Tracks on the demo tape included early versions of &quot;Lime House&quot;, &quot;Doe&quot;, and &quot;Only in 3&#x27;s&quot;.

With the help of three different drummers—David Narcizo, Mickey Bones, and Carl Haarer—and bassist Ray Halliday, Deal and Donelly completed their demo tape and subsequently played one show at The Rathskeller in Boston. They were not called The Breeders at this point, but were billed as &quot;Boston Girl Super-Group&quot;. The band sent the tape to the English independent record label 4AD because both the Pixies and the Throwing Muses were signed to the label. Upon hearing the tape, 4AD head Ivo Watts-Russell remarked, &quot;This is absolutely magical, beautiful stuff.&quot; Deal originally described the band as &quot;the Bangles from Hell&quot;.

The name Breeders had previously been used for a band Deal led with her twin sister Kelley. &quot;&quot;, a gay derogatory slang term for heterosexuals, was chosen because Kim Deal found it humorous and also reflected her love of horror films, specifically referencing David Cronenberg&#x27;s 1979 film &quot;The Brood&quot;.

=== &quot;Pod&quot; (1990–91) ===

4AD gave Deal and Donelly a budget of $11,000 to make an album. Deal asked the Perfect Disaster&#x27;s Josephine Wiggs to play bass. The two had first met when Perfect Disaster supported the Pixies in London in 1988. Deal asked Steve Albini, who had worked on the Pixies&#x27; 1988 album &quot;Surfer Rosa&quot;, to record the album. The Breeders did not have a drummer, so Albini suggested Britt Walford of Slint. Walford agreed to play on the album under the pseudonym &quot;Shannon Doughton&quot;.

A week of rehearsal took place at Wiggs&#x27;s house in Bedfordshire, England, and &quot;Pod&quot; was recorded in ten days in Edinburgh, Scotland. They used the remaining time to record a Peel Session and a video for &quot;Hellbound.&quot; Returning to London, they played two shows, the only time that this lineup ever appeared onstage together. Released on 28 May 1990, &quot;Pod,&quot; although not commercially successful, received positive reviews from alternative and mainstream critics alike; &quot;The New York Times&quot;&#x27; Karen Schoemer wrote: &quot;The angular melodies, shattered tempos, and screeching dynamics recall elements of each of the women&#x27;s full-time bands, but &quot;Pod&quot; has a smart, innovative edge all its own.&quot;

&quot;Pod&quot; was cited by Kurt Cobain as one of his favorite records ever: &quot;The main reason I like [the Breeders] is for their songs, for the way they structure them, which is totally unique, very atmospheric. I wish Kim was allowed to write more songs for the Pixies, because &#x27;Gigantic&#x27; is the best Pixies song, and Kim wrote it.&quot; He listed &quot;Pod&quot; as one of the 50 albums he thought were most influential to Nirvana&#x27;s sound in his journal in 1993. In July 2007, Albini said he considered the album among his best works.

=== &quot;Safari&quot; and &quot;Last Splash&quot; (1992–94) ===
Following &quot;Pod&quot;, the members of The Breeders returned to their original bands. The Pixies released &quot;Bossanova&quot; in 1990 and &quot;Trompe le Monde&quot; in 1991, but by the end of 1991 were becoming less active. Deal, with time off from the Pixies, visited Wiggs in Brighton, and they went into a London studio with Spacemen 3/Spiritualized drummer Jon Mattock to record a new song called &quot;Safari.&quot; The other three tracks on what became the &quot;Safari&quot; EP were recorded in New York with Walford and Donelly, who was by then planning to form Belly. Deal then asked her sister Kelley to take over on guitar, even though Kelley did not know how to play guitar. The Pixies became inactive in mid-1992, at which time drummer Jim Macpherson was recruited and The Breeders became a full-time band, opening for Nirvana on their 1992 European tour.

In January 1993, The Breeders went to Coast Recorders in San Francisco to record their second album. &quot;Last Splash&quot; was released in August 1993 to widespread acclaim and commercial success. Three singles were released from the album, including &quot;Cannonball&quot;, which made it to no. 2 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Modern Rock Tracks chart. The band contributed a live recording of the song &quot;Iris&quot; to the 1993 AIDS-Benefit Album No Alternative produced by the Red Hot Organization. In 1993, they toured supporting Nirvana on their &quot;In Utero&quot; tour, and in 1994, &quot;Last Splash&quot; received a platinum certification by the Recording Industry Association of America. Also in 1994, the band secured a prime spot on the Lollapalooza tour. This lineup played their last show together on September 5, 1994, at Lollapalooza in Los Angeles, California until reuniting in 2012.

=== Hiatus ===

In 1995, Kelley was involved in a drug bust, which put The Breeders on an indefinite hiatus. Kim formed a side project, The Amps, with Macpherson, Dayton locals bassist Luis Lerma (member of The Tasties) and guitarist Nate Farley, who later joined Guided by Voices. In October 1995, The Amps released the album &quot;Pacer&quot;.

Following drug rehab, Kelley started The Kelley Deal 6000, also forming The Last Hard Men with Skid Row singer Sebastian Bach, Smashing Pumpkins drummer Jimmy Chamberlin, and Jimmy Flemion of The Frogs.

Meanwhile, in New York, Wiggs recorded and co-produced the Kostars&#x27; album &quot;Klassics with a K&quot;, a Luscious Jackson side-project (also touring with them playing drums), released a solo album on the Beastie Boys&#x27; Grand Royal label, and released an album on Atlantic Records under the name Dusty Trails with Luscious Jackson keyboardist Vivian Trimble.

In 1996, Kim reclaimed The Breeders moniker, but with essentially The Amps&#x27; lineup plus violinist Carrie Bradley, and played a few California dates. They made an unsuccessful attempt at recording a third studio album in 1997. Kelley Deal rejoined the band the following year and wrote and recorded songs with her sister, although the only material released during this period was a cover of The Three Degrees&#x27; take on James Gang&#x27;s &quot;Collage&quot;, recorded for &quot;The Mod Squad&quot; soundtrack in 1999.

=== &quot;Title TK&quot; (2001–02) ===
The Deal sisters recruited new personnel to play several live shows in 2001, and returned to the studio with guitarist Richard Presley, bass player Mando Lopez, and drummer Jose Medeles to record the third Breeders studio album, &quot;Title TK&quot;, with Steve Albini. This lineup was profiled in a short documentary film entitled &quot;The Breeders: The Real Deal&quot; (Netherlands, 2002).

The Breeders also performed in an episode of &quot;Buffy the Vampire Slayer&quot; in early 2002. They were approached by the production staff after they had been playing the show&#x27;s theme, written by Nerf Herder, as a regular part of their concert set. The episode is entitled &quot;Him&quot;, and aired November 5, 2002; they sang their song &quot;Little Fury&quot; at the Bronze. They also contributed the track &quot;Wicked Little Town: Hedwig Version&quot; to the 2003 &quot;Hedwig and the Angry Inch&quot; tribute album, &quot;Wig in a Box&quot;.

=== &quot;Mountain Battles&quot; and &quot;Fate to Fatal&quot; (2008–10) ===

&quot;Mountain Battles&quot; was released in April 2008 on 4AD. It features Kim and Kelley, Jose Medeles, and Mando Lopez. They went to Refraze Recording Studio in Dayton, Ohio to record and mix the majority of the tracks.

The Breeders&#x27; third EP, &quot;Fate to Fatal&quot; was released on April 21, 2009. It contains a Bob Marley cover (&quot;Chances Are&quot;) and a song with vocals by Mark Lanegan (&quot;The Last Time&quot;). The title track was recorded at The Fortress Studios, London, by The Go! Team producer Gareth Parton. The music video featured the Arch Rival Roller Girls, a St. Louis roller derby league.

They curated an edition of the All Tomorrow&#x27;s Parties festival in May 2009 in Minehead, England. They played the ATP New York 2010 music festival in Monticello, New York, in September 2010.

=== &quot;LSXX&quot; and &quot;All Nerve&quot; (2012–present) ===

In 2012, the reunited &quot;Last Splash&quot; lineup of Kim and Kelley, Macpherson, and Wiggs announced a tour to coincide with a 20th anniversary reissue by 4AD of &quot;Last Splash,&quot; entitled &quot;LSXX&quot;. The tour began in the US, continued in Europe, Australia, and South America, and included the Deerhunter-curated All Tomorrow&#x27;s Parties festival. A teaser video was made by the band showing the reunited lineup in rehearsal.

In a June 2016 article, Stereogum reported that the band was in their Ohio studio recording a follow-up to &quot;Mountain Battles&quot;, and that Courtney Barnett, who was in town for the Nelsonville Music Festival, recorded some backup vocals for one of the album&#x27;s songs.

A single, &quot;Wait in the Car&quot;, was released on October 3, 2017: as well as the digital release, it came out as three different seven-inch records limited to only 1,500 copies. &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; described the song as &quot;a classic Breeders bruiser, clocking it at two minutes, and packed with punchy drums, sugar-rush power chords, and lead riffs&quot;. During a BBC interview with Lauren Laverne on October 13, 2017, Kim revealed that the band expected to release a new album in 2018, possibly on the 4AD label. 4AD announced on January 9, 2018, that the new album, &quot;All Nerve&quot;, would be released on March 2, 2018. The title track was released as the album&#x27;s second single on the same day. &quot;All Nerve&quot;, was released as planned on March 2, 2018.

In March 2021, the band released their first new recording in over three years: A cover of His Name is Alive&#x27;s &quot;The Dirt Eaters.&quot; The cover is part of a forthcoming 4AD covers compilation, entitled &quot;Bills and Aches and Blues&quot;.

The band performed at the 22nd Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival in April 2023. They went on to undertake a US tour to mark the 30th anniversary of &quot;Last Splash&quot; with Belly in support on some dates, during which Tanya Donelly joined the Breeders onstage for the encore. Early in 2024 they supported the Foo Fighters on their tour of Australia and New Zealand.

On September 13, 2023, Olivia Rodrigo announced her Guts World Tour for February through August 2024. The Breeders opened for her at Madison Square Garden on April 5−6 and 8–9, and again at the Kia Forum in Inglewood, California, on August 13–14 and 16–17. Their MSG set on April 8 was praised by &quot;Billboard&quot;″s Andrew Unterberger, who wrote that seeing the band &quot;get the chance to become arena-rockers that should have long been theirs by right of their inspired &#x27;90s work – which has also since extended to excellent albums in the &#x27;00s and &#x27;10s – was a very powerful thing&quot;, and said that Rodrigo including them &quot;goes beyond a new artist paying her respects to those who came before her, I think, and serves to help connect and re-strengthen a timeline that was at serious risk of being totally severed.&quot; When asked about the MSG shows in an interview, Kim Deal said it was odd at first, but after learning Rodrigo knew St. Vincent and is a fan of Billy Joel and Sheryl Crow, she said &quot;[Rodrigo]&#x27;s just really into music. Knowing that, it made more sense. She just really liked us!&quot;

== Members ==
Current members
* Kim Deal – lead vocals, rhythm guitar , lead guitar 
* Josephine Wiggs – bass, vocals 
* Kelley Deal – lead guitar, vocals , rhythm guitar 
* Jim Macpherson – drums, percussion 

Former members
* Tanya Donelly – lead guitar, vocals 
* Carrie Bradley – violin 
* Britt Walford – drums, backing vocals 
* Jon Mattock – drums 
* Richard Presley – rhythm and lead guitar 
* Mando Lopez – bass 
* Jose Medeles – drums 
Touring musician
* Sophie Galpin – violin, guitar, keyboards 

Former touring musicians
* Nate Farley – guitar 
* Luis Lerma – bass 
* Cheryl Lyndsey – guitar 
===Timeline===
== Discography ==
===Studio albums===
* &quot;Pod&quot; (1990)
* &quot;Last Splash&quot; (1993)
* &quot;Title TK&quot; (2002)
* &quot;Mountain Battles&quot; (2008)
* &quot;All Nerve&quot; (2018)

===EPs===
* &quot;Safari&quot; (1992)
* &quot;Head to Toe&quot; (1994)
* &quot;Fate to Fatal&quot; (2009)

== References ==
===Citations===
===Bibliography===
* 

== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1332134" start="0" end="12" title="The Breeders" label="The Breeders"/>
<link wikidata="Q11366" start="29" end="45" title="alternative rock" label="alternative rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q34739" start="60" end="72" title="Dayton, Ohio" label="Dayton, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q240509" start="96" end="104" title="Kim Deal" label="Kim Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282821" start="151" end="162" title="Kelley Deal" label="Kelley Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3185915" start="186" end="201" title="Josephine Wiggs" label="Josephine Wiggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q434464" start="317" end="330" title="Tanya Donelly" label="Tanya Donelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q188464" start="389" end="395" title="Pixies (band)" label="Pixies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1595152" start="400" end="414" title="Throwing Muses" label="Throwing Muses"/>
<link wikidata="Q577520" start="476" end="479" title="Pod (The Breeders album)" label="Pod"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756684" start="541" end="561" title="the Perfect Disaster" label="the Perfect Disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971564" start="574" end="587" title="Britt Walford" label="Britt Walford"/>
<link wikidata="Q578979" start="591" end="596" title="Slint" label="Slint"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745802" start="758" end="764" title="Safari (EP)" label="Safari"/>
<link wikidata="Q816079" start="863" end="868" title="Belly (band)" label="Belly"/>
<link wikidata="Q183504" start="1083" end="1093" title="indie rock" label="indie rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q11649" start="1130" end="1137" title="Nirvana (band)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q8446" start="1147" end="1158" title="Kurt Cobain" label="Kurt Cobain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2136712" start="1650" end="1661" title="Last Splash" label="Last Splash"/>
<link wikidata="Q11366" start="1713" end="1729" title="alternative rock" label="alternative rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503026" start="1770" end="1778" title="RIAA certification" label="platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="1786" end="1790" title="RIAA" label="RIAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5032812" start="1835" end="1845" title="Cannonball (The Breeders song)" label="Cannonball"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100619" start="2140" end="2148" title="The Amps" label="The Amps"/>
<link wikidata="Q7121934" start="2188" end="2193" title="Pacer (album)" label="Pacer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231142" start="2316" end="2320" title="Fear (band)" label="Fear"/>
<link wikidata="Q2149703" start="2358" end="2366" title="Title TK" label="Title TK"/>
<link wikidata="Q2846502" start="2391" end="2407" title="Mountain Battles" label="Mountain Battles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3185915" start="2509" end="2524" title="Josephine Wiggs" label="Josephine Wiggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2136712" start="2687" end="2698" title="Last Splash" label="Last Splash"/>
<link wikidata="Q51833115" start="2744" end="2753" title="All Nerve" label="All Nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q571213" start="3065" end="3076" title="Surfer Rosa" label="Surfer Rosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1595152" start="3098" end="3112" title="Throwing Muses" label="Throwing Muses"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046209" start="3263" end="3277" title="Carrie Bradley" label="Carrie Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860709" start="3317" end="3346" title="Ed&amp;#x27;s Redeeming Qualities" label="Ed&amp;#x27;s Redeeming Qualities"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271288" start="3549" end="3562" title="David Narcizo" label="David Narcizo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6838583" start="3564" end="3576" title="Mickey Bones" label="Mickey Bones"/>
<link wikidata="Q723403" start="3699" end="3714" title="The Rathskeller" label="The Rathskeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542343" start="3869" end="3893" title="independent record label" label="independent record label"/>
<link wikidata="Q238095" start="3894" end="3897" title="4AD" label="4AD"/>
<link wikidata="Q948832" start="4003" end="4020" title="Ivo Watts-Russell" label="Ivo Watts-Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q214418" start="4132" end="4143" title="the Bangles" label="the Bangles"/>
<link wikidata="Q55422" start="4431" end="4447" title="David Cronenberg" label="David Cronenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q389911" start="4471" end="4480" title="The Brood" label="The Brood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756684" start="4599" end="4619" title="the Perfect Disaster" label="the Perfect Disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q3185915" start="4627" end="4642" title="Josephine Wiggs" label="Josephine Wiggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q435060" start="4752" end="4764" title="Steve Albini" label="Steve Albini"/>
<link wikidata="Q571213" start="4818" end="4829" title="Surfer Rosa" label="Surfer Rosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971564" start="4915" end="4928" title="Britt Walford" label="Britt Walford"/>
<link wikidata="Q578979" start="4932" end="4937" title="Slint" label="Slint"/>
<link wikidata="Q23143" start="5082" end="5094" title="Bedfordshire" label="Bedfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q577520" start="5115" end="5118" title="Pod (The Breeders album)" label="Pod"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="5153" end="5172" title="Edinburgh, Scotland" label="Edinburgh, Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q326542" start="5215" end="5227" title="Peel Session" label="Peel Session"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="5533" end="5551" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q8446" start="5815" end="5826" title="Kurt Cobain" label="Kurt Cobain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3324944" start="6077" end="6085" title="Gigantic (song)" label="Gigantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11649" start="6227" end="6234" title="Nirvana (band)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093303" start="6525" end="6534" title="Bossanova (Pixies album)" label="Bossanova"/>
<link wikidata="Q951898" start="6559" end="6574" title="Trompe le Monde" label="Trompe le Monde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191761" start="6744" end="6754" title="Spacemen 3" label="Spacemen 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144015" start="6755" end="6768" title="Spiritualized" label="Spiritualized"/>
<link wikidata="Q6271209" start="6777" end="6788" title="Jon Mattock" label="Jon Mattock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745802" start="6885" end="6891" title="Safari (EP)" label="Safari"/>
<link wikidata="Q816079" start="6986" end="6991" title="Belly (band)" label="Belly"/>
<link wikidata="Q11649" start="7248" end="7255" title="Nirvana (band)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2136712" start="7393" end="7404" title="Last Splash" label="Last Splash"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="7599" end="7608" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025849" start="7615" end="7633" title="Alternative Songs" label="Modern Rock Tracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043962" start="7739" end="7753" title="No Alternative" label="No Alternative"/>
<link wikidata="Q748704" start="7770" end="7790" title="Red Hot Organization" label="Red Hot Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q222001" start="7847" end="7855" title="In Utero (album)" label="In Utero"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503026" start="7925" end="7938" title="RIAA certification" label="certification"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="7946" end="7987" title="Recording Industry Association of America" label="Recording Industry Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q889643" start="8040" end="8052" title="Lollapalooza" label="Lollapalooza"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100619" start="8330" end="8338" title="The Amps" label="The Amps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472033" start="8458" end="8474" title="Guided by Voices" label="Guided by Voices"/>
<link wikidata="Q7121934" start="8527" end="8532" title="Pacer (album)" label="Pacer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3194873" start="8578" end="8598" title="The Kelley Deal 6000" label="The Kelley Deal 6000"/>
<link wikidata="Q17037822" start="8613" end="8630" title="The Last Hard Men (band)" label="The Last Hard Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q461269" start="8636" end="8644" title="Skid Row (American band)" label="Skid Row"/>
<link wikidata="Q363490" start="8652" end="8666" title="Sebastian Bach" label="Sebastian Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q184217" start="8668" end="8685" title="Smashing Pumpkins" label="Smashing Pumpkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q373733" start="8694" end="8710" title="Jimmy Chamberlin" label="Jimmy Chamberlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520983" start="8716" end="8729" title="Jimmy Flemion" label="Jimmy Flemion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520983" start="8733" end="8742" title="The Frogs (band)" label="The Frogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q16858592" start="8804" end="8811" title="Kostars" label="Kostars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476516" start="8857" end="8873" title="Luscious Jackson" label="Luscious Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q214039" start="8956" end="8968" title="Beastie Boys" label="Beastie Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q3330733" start="8975" end="8986" title="Grand Royal" label="Grand Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5317211" start="9051" end="9063" title="Dusty Trails" label="Dusty Trails"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476516" start="9069" end="9085" title="Luscious Jackson" label="Luscious Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937785" start="9098" end="9112" title="Vivian Trimble" label="Vivian Trimble"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046209" start="9218" end="9232" title="Carrie Bradley" label="Carrie Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q753633" start="9601" end="9614" title="The Mod Squad (film)" label="The Mod Squad"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279478" start="9854" end="9866" title="Jose Medeles" label="Jose Medeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2149703" start="9916" end="9924" title="Title TK" label="Title TK"/>
<link wikidata="Q435060" start="9937" end="9949" title="Steve Albini" label="Steve Albini"/>
<link wikidata="Q183513" start="10126" end="10150" title="Buffy the Vampire Slayer (TV series)" label="Buffy the Vampire Slayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978005" start="10279" end="10290" title="Nerf Herder" label="Nerf Herder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075078" start="10362" end="10365" title="Him (Buffy episode)" label="Him"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753731" start="10558" end="10583" title="Hedwig and the Angry Inch (film)" label="Hedwig and the Angry Inch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7999498" start="10611" end="10623" title="Wig in a Box" label="Wig in a Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q2846502" start="10716" end="10732" title="Mountain Battles" label="Mountain Battles"/>
<link wikidata="Q238095" start="10769" end="10772" title="4AD" label="4AD"/>
<link wikidata="Q34739" start="10874" end="10880" title="Dayton, Ohio" label="Dayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258428" start="10969" end="10982" title="Fate to Fatal (EP)" label="Fate to Fatal"/>
<link wikidata="Q409" start="11035" end="11045" title="Bob Marley" label="Bob Marley"/>
<link wikidata="Q319277" start="11104" end="11116" title="Mark Lanegan" label="Mark Lanegan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514317" start="11211" end="11223" title="The Go! Team" label="The Go! Team"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11233" end="11246" title="Gareth Parton" label="Gareth Parton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785323" start="11277" end="11300" title="Arch Rival Roller Girls" label="Arch Rival Roller Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="11304" end="11313" title="St. Louis" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q43080" start="11314" end="11326" title="roller derby" label="roller derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1941020" start="11367" end="11394" title="All Tomorrow&amp;#x27;s Parties (music festival)" label="All Tomorrow&amp;#x27;s Parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q1941020" start="11454" end="11471" title="All Tomorrow&amp;#x27;s Parties (music festival)" label="ATP New York 2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q96386575" start="11703" end="11709" title="LSXX Tour" label="a tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182499" start="11910" end="11920" title="Deerhunter (band)" label="Deerhunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532689" start="12070" end="12079" title="Stereogum" label="Stereogum"/>
<link wikidata="Q16390683" start="12192" end="12208" title="Courtney Barnett" label="Courtney Barnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q6990829" start="12234" end="12260" title="Nelsonville Music Festival" label="Nelsonville Music Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530295" start="12342" end="12357" title="Wait in the Car" label="Wait in the Car"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="12516" end="12529" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="12706" end="12709" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500287" start="12725" end="12739" title="Lauren Laverne" label="Lauren Laverne"/>
<link wikidata="Q51833115" start="13055" end="13064" title="All Nerve" label="All Nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136462" start="13206" end="13223" title="His Name is Alive" label="His Name is Alive"/>
<link wikidata="Q238095" start="13295" end="13298" title="4AD" label="4AD"/>
<link wikidata="Q118906442" start="13394" end="13439" title="Coachella 2023" label="22nd Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q483718" start="13688" end="13700" title="Foo Fighters" label="Foo Fighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q8564295" start="13710" end="13743" title="List of Foo Fighters concert tours" label="tour of Australia and New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q63243883" start="13769" end="13783" title="Olivia Rodrigo" label="Olivia Rodrigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q122474509" start="13798" end="13813" title="Guts World Tour" label="Guts World Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q186125" start="13879" end="13900" title="Madison Square Garden" label="Madison Square Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q639129" start="13940" end="13949" title="Kia Forum" label="Kia Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q621549" start="13953" end="13974" title="Inglewood, California" label="Inglewood, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="14049" end="14058" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q379033" start="14149" end="14159" title="arena-rock" label="arena-rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q238795" start="14712" end="14723" title="St. Vincent (musician)" label="St. Vincent"/>
<link wikidata="Q194333" start="14740" end="14750" title="Billy Joel" label="Billy Joel"/>
<link wikidata="Q200586" start="14755" end="14766" title="Sheryl Crow" label="Sheryl Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q240509" start="14923" end="14931" title="Kim Deal" label="Kim Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3185915" start="14978" end="14993" title="Josephine Wiggs" label="Josephine Wiggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282821" start="15012" end="15023" title="Kelley Deal" label="Kelley Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q434464" start="15119" end="15132" title="Tanya Donelly" label="Tanya Donelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046209" start="15158" end="15172" title="Carrie Bradley" label="Carrie Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971564" start="15185" end="15198" title="Britt Walford" label="Britt Walford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6271209" start="15226" end="15237" title="Jon Mattock" label="Jon Mattock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279478" start="15315" end="15327" title="Jose Medeles" label="Jose Medeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q577520" start="15558" end="15561" title="Pod (The Breeders album)" label="Pod"/>
<link wikidata="Q2136712" start="15583" end="15594" title="Last Splash" label="Last Splash"/>
<link wikidata="Q2149703" start="15616" end="15624" title="Title TK" label="Title TK"/>
<link wikidata="Q2846502" start="15646" end="15662" title="Mountain Battles" label="Mountain Battles"/>
<link wikidata="Q51833115" start="15684" end="15693" title="All Nerve" label="All Nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745802" start="15726" end="15732" title="Safari (EP)" label="Safari"/>
<link wikidata="Q2491601" start="15754" end="15765" title="Head to Toe (EP)" label="Head to Toe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258428" start="15787" end="15800" title="Fate to Fatal" label="Fate to Fatal"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143165" wikidata="Q225953" url="?curid=143165" title="Rota">
<text>Rota or ROTA may refer to:

==Places==
* Rota, Northern Mariana Islands, an island and municipality
* Rota (volcano), in Nicaragua
* Rota, Andalusia, a town in Andalusia, Spain
* Naval Station Rota, Spain

==People==
* Rota (surname), a surname (including a list of people with the name)
* Rota Waitoa (died 1866), New Zealand Anglican clergyman

==Arts, entertainment, and media==
* &quot;Rota&quot; (poem), once proposed to be the national anthem of Poland
* &quot;Rota&quot;, a collection of poems by A. W. Yrjänä
* Rota, a type of round (music)
* Rota, Rotta, Rotte, Rote, a medieval musical instrument resembling a harp
* Crwth also called Rote, a medieval bowed lyre

==Organizations==
* Rota (formation), an infantry or cavalry unit
* Reach Out To Asia, a non-governmental organization based in Qatar
* Roman Rota, the highest appellate tribunal of the Catholic Church
* Rondas Ostensivas Tobias de Aguiar, a military police force in São Paulo
* Rota Club, a 1659–1660 London debate society
* Royal Rota, the press pool for the British Royal Family

==Other uses==
* Rota (architecture), a rotating cylinder built into a wall, used for exchanging mail and food with cloistered clergy
* &quot;Rota&quot; (genus), an extinct sea cucumber; see List of prehistoric sea cucumbers
* Rota (papal signature), a sign which makes up part of the pope&#x27;s signature
* Róta, a Valkyrie in Norse mythology
* Rota, a term for a schedule (workplace), a list of employees who are working on any given day, week, or month
* Rota, a lion presented to Winston Churchill in 1943
* &quot;Rota&quot;, the feminine form of the Chilean term &quot;roto&quot; (literally &quot;broken&quot;), used to refer contemptuously to poor city-dwellers in Chile
* Return on total assets, a financial ratio; See Return on assets 
* &quot;Rota Fortunae&quot;, a concept in medieval and ancient philosophy
* Rota system, a system of collateral succession
* The Rota, the collection of golf courses that host The Open Championship
* , a Linear B ideogram

==See also==
* Rotary International, a service club
* Rotavirus, the most common cause of severe diarrhoea among infants and young children
* Roster (disambiguation)
* Rotta (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q225953" start="0" end="4" title="Rota" label="Rota"/>
<link wikidata="Q225953" start="8" end="12" title="Rota" label="ROTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q949090" start="41" end="71" title="Rota, Northern Mariana Islands" label="Rota, Northern Mariana Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q919287" start="102" end="116" title="Rota (volcano)" label="Rota (volcano)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15907" start="133" end="148" title="Rota, Andalusia" label="Rota, Andalusia"/>
<link wikidata="Q729530" start="179" end="204" title="Naval Station Rota, Spain" label="Naval Station Rota, Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6633271" start="219" end="233" title="Rota (surname)" label="Rota (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7370207" start="290" end="301" title="Rota Waitoa" label="Rota Waitoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2168022" start="384" end="407" title="Rota (poem)" label="&amp;quot;Rota&amp;quot; (poem)"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="452" end="458" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4605475" start="504" end="516" title="A. W. Yrjänä" label="A. W. Yrjänä"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145381" start="535" end="548" title="round (music)" label="round (music)"/>
<link wikidata="Q31075152" start="564" end="569" title="Rotte (psaltery)" label="Rotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q766461" start="627" end="632" title="Crwth" label="Crwth"/>
<link wikidata="Q11703340" start="694" end="710" title="Rota (formation)" label="Rota (formation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575900" start="742" end="759" title="Reach Out To Asia" label="Reach Out To Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234169" start="810" end="820" title="Roman Rota" label="Roman Rota"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072291" start="878" end="912" title="Rondas Ostensivas Tobias de Aguiar" label="Rondas Ostensivas Tobias de Aguiar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7370204" start="953" end="962" title="Rota Club" label="Rota Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q81746728" start="1000" end="1010" title="Royal Rota" label="Royal Rota"/>
<link wikidata="Q7370202" start="1074" end="1093" title="Rota (architecture)" label="Rota (architecture)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1193" end="1217" title="Rota (genus)" label="&amp;quot;Rota&amp;quot; (genus)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6634768" start="1248" end="1281" title="List of prehistoric sea cucumbers" label="List of prehistoric sea cucumbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q476104" start="1284" end="1306" title="Rota (papal signature)" label="Rota (papal signature)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269279" start="1366" end="1370" title="Róta" label="Róta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7431038" start="1423" end="1443" title="schedule (workplace)" label="schedule (workplace)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="1542" end="1559" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q923531" start="1632" end="1636" title="roto" label="roto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163221" start="1784" end="1800" title="Return on assets" label="Return on assets"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087892" start="1810" end="1823" title="Rota Fortunae" label="Rota Fortunae"/>
<link wikidata="Q11703909" start="1878" end="1889" title="Rota system" label="Rota system"/>
<link wikidata="Q848797" start="1978" end="1999" title="The Open Championship" label="The Open Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q190102" start="2006" end="2014" title="Linear B" label="Linear B"/>
<link wikidata="Q109179" start="2040" end="2060" title="Rotary International" label="Rotary International"/>
<link wikidata="Q164778" start="2079" end="2088" title="Rotavirus" label="Rotavirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167823" start="2167" end="2190" title="Roster (disambiguation)" label="Roster (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q402968" start="2193" end="2215" title="Rotta (disambiguation)" label="Rotta (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143168" wikidata="Q403643" url="?curid=143168" title="Anastasio Somoza">
<text>Anastasio Somoza may refer to:

* Anastasio Somoza García (1896–1956), Nicaraguan dictator 1936–1956
* Anastasio Somoza Debayle (1925–1980), Nicaraguan dictator 1967–1979
* Anastasio Somoza Portocarrero (born 1951), son of Somoza Debayle</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q312622" start="34" end="57" title="Anastasio Somoza García" label="Anastasio Somoza García"/>
<link wikidata="Q218443" start="103" end="127" title="Anastasio Somoza Debayle" label="Anastasio Somoza Debayle"/>
<link wikidata="Q380687" start="173" end="202" title="Anastasio Somoza Portocarrero" label="Anastasio Somoza Portocarrero"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143169" wikidata="Q54372" url="?curid=143169" title="Line 3 Scarborough">
<text>Line 3 Scarborough, originally known as Scarborough RT (the SRT), is a defunct medium-capacity rapid transit line that was part of the Toronto subway system of the Toronto Transit Commission in Toronto, Ontario, Canada. The line ran entirely within the eastern district of Scarborough, encompassing six stations and of mostly elevated track. It was connected with Line 2 Bloor–Danforth at its southwestern terminus, , and terminated in the northeast at . Until its closure in July 2023, the system had a ridership of per year.

The rolling stock of Line 3 consisted of smaller, semi-automated, medium-capacity trains, rather than the larger heavy-rail subway trains used on other lines in the system. Designated by the Toronto Transit Commission (TTC) as the S series, these were Intermediate Capacity Transit System (ICTS) Mark I trains built by the Urban Transportation Development Corporation (UTDC). The trains were powered by linear induction motors and operated on tracks, unlike the heavy-rail subway lines and the Toronto streetcar system, which use the unique .

The line remained mostly unchanged from its opening in 1985 and contained two of the least-used stations in the system. Beginning in the late 2000s, Toronto City Council debated over competing plans to revitalize and expand the line, to convert its right-of-way for use by modern light rail vehicles, or to close the line and extend Line 2 Bloor–Danforth farther into Scarborough along a different route. In 2013, the council decided on a three-station extension of Line 2 to replace Line 3 along a different route. In 2016, in order to free up funds for another transit project, the city reduced the extension to include only one station, which was set to be completed by 2026. In 2019, Progressive Conservative premier Doug Ford reinstated the three-station Scarborough subway extension and committed to completing it by 2030, with all construction costs to be borne by the province.

The TTC planned for Line 3 to cease operations in November 2023, with shuttle buses running in place of Line 3 train service until the Line 2 Bloor–Danforth subway extension to the existing Scarborough Centre station opened for service, which was estimated to be in 2030. However, a train derailment in July 2023 resulted in the line permanently closing four months ahead of schedule. By March 2023, a plan existed to convert a portion of the existing right-of-way between Kennedy and Ellesmere stations into a bus right-of-way, including an additional stop at Mooregate Avenue / Tara Avenue, located near a pedestrian bridge that spans over the former Line 3 and GO Transit&#x27;s Stouffville line between Eglinton Avenue and Lawrence Avenue. In 2023, the busway was targeted for completion by 2025.&lt;ref name=&quot;TheStar-2023/04/28&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;

== Name ==
From when the line opened in 1985 until 2015, it was known as the &quot;Scarborough RT&quot; or &quot;SRT&quot;. The &quot;RT&quot; in Scarborough RT stood for &quot;rapid transit&quot;. The name Scarborough Line was used on the official TTC website and 2014 TTC Ride Guide. In October 2013, the TTC announced plans to give the lines official numbers to help riders and visitors to navigate the system. The line is numbered 3, as it was the third rapid transit line to open in the system. New signage was installed in March 2014. In 2015, the name was simplified to &quot;Line 3 Scarborough.&quot;

== History ==


===Proposal and construction===
In 1972, the Government of Ontario announced the GO-Urban plan to build an intermediate capacity transit system across suburban Toronto, particularly in Scarborough and Etobicoke, using the experimental Krauss-Maffei Transurban. However, KraussMaffei was forced to abandon development when the West German federal government declined further funding. GO-Urban then used some of the technologies from the Transurban to develop a simpler steel-wheeled version, the ICTS system.

During this period, the TTC had been working on plans to extend its own network with a series of streetcar systems using a new and greatly enlarged streetcar design, the Canadian Light Rail Vehicle (CLRV). The Ontario government, in charge of GO Transit, was looking for a test site for the ICTS system and demanded that the TTC use it for one of their planned streetcar projects, selecting the Scarborough extension. The TTC initially refused to make the change, arguing it was both the wrong solution and that since the construction of the line had already commenced this would be a waste of money. However, as the Ontario government was providing 75 percent of the funding for the line, they changed their minds when the government threatened to cut the funding.

At Kennedy station, there are clues revealing that it was originally built for streetcar operation; it is possible to see old low-level streetcar platforms protruding under the current high-level platforms, and the loop to turn streetcars proved too sharp for safe operation of the ICTS cars, which did not have a reason to turn around, so the loop was replaced by a single-track Spanish solution-like crossover. Ontario wanted to develop and promote its new technology, which had been designed for a proposed GO Transit urban service known as GO-ALRT. Changes to federal railway regulations had made the new system unnecessary for GO, so the government hoped to sell it to other transit services in order to recoup its investment.

===Opening and service===

The Scarborough line was formally opened (as the Scarborough RT) to invited guests on March 22, 1985, and began revenue service on March 24, 1985. Three years after it opened, the TTC renovated its southwestern terminus at Kennedy station, because the looped turnaround track, designed for uni-directional streetcars under the earlier plan and not needed for the bi-directional ICTS trains, was causing derailments; it was replaced with a single terminal track and the station was thus quasi-Spanish solution, with one side for boarding and another side for alighting, though the boarding side is also used for alighting during off-peak hours, weekends and holidays.

With the line approaching the end of its useful life, the TTC reduced the frequency of service in mid-September 2012 to reduce wear and tear on both the aging rolling stock and the infrastructure.

In 2015, the TTC started work on the cars to keep them operational until the line is replaced by another mode of rail technology. This included shrink-wrapping the rolling stock with a blue vinyl finish to emphasize the line&#x27;s colour and displaying the number 3, a linear diagram of the Scarborough line, and the TTC logo. The original &quot;RT&quot; logo was no longer featured on the trains, except when the Line 3 shrink wrap is removed but not re-applied yet. These were followed by interior upgrades, such as using coloured velour seating.

On December 13, 2016, Presto fare gates were installed at Lawrence East station, making all stations along this line Presto-enabled.

On April 18, 2017, the TTC awarded a $6.8-million contract to Bombardier to repair corrosion damage under the floors of the S-series cars. If the problem were not rectified, there would be the risk of serious structural damage to the cars. That would have prevented the cars from lasting until 2026 when the Scarborough Subway Extension was originally scheduled to replace Line 3. The repair work required service to be reduced from 6 four-car trains down to 5.

=== Closure ===
On July 24, 2023, the last car of a train on Line 3 Scarborough derailed south of Ellesmere station. There were 45 people on board, with five injuries reported. The TTC closed the line while the cause of the incident was being investigated. Although the investigation and closure was expected to last several weeks, the city accelerated work to support the replacement buses. On August 24, 2023, the TTC announced that the line would not reopen. In late September 2023, the TTC explained that bolts that held the linear induction rail to the roadbed had come loose in the July incident, causing the magnetically attracted induction rail to rise up, strike and derail the last car of the train. 

Immediately following the derailment, replacement bus service was implemented initially by shuttle buses serving the closed stations along Line 3. On September 3, 2023, the TTC replaced the shuttle bus service with route 903 Kennedy–Scarborough Centre Express, running northbound on Kennedy Road and southbound on Midland Avenue in reserved lanes between Kennedy and Scarborough Centre stations. Unlike the shuttle service, route 903 did not serve the closed Lawrence East, Ellesmere, Midland and McCowan stations. On November 19, 2023, the TTC extended eight bus routes from Scarborough Centre to Kennedy station, eliminating the need to transfer to route 903 at Scarborough Centre station. 

On November 30, 2023, the consulting firm Systra submitted a report to the TTC that found that, prior to the derailment, maintenance procedures on Line 3 were weak or non-existent and that track inspection staff lacked experience to understand how various defects could create an operating risk.

On October 4, 2024, EllisDon began work to demolish and remove the Line 3 train tracks between Eglinton Avenue and the north end of Ellesmere station in preparation for constructing a busway.

===Farewell event===
A farewell event for Line 3 was hosted at Scarborough Centre station on September 23, 2023, two months after the line&#x27;s closure. The event featured trains, food and drinks, a photo area, and posters depicting archival photos and trivia. The following are photos from the event:
==Rolling stock==

The 7 four-car trains used exclusively on the Scarborough line were developed by the Urban Transportation Development Corporation (UTDC), then an Ontario Crown corporation but later sold to Bombardier Transportation. The business proposal initially bore little fruit—a proposed pilot project in Hamilton was cancelled after meeting widespread public opposition, and the only other transit systems to use the technology, named the Intermediate Capacity Transit System (ICTS), at the time were Vancouver&#x27;s SkyTrain and the People Mover in Detroit. After Bombardier took over UTDC, it redesigned the technology with newer, longer cars, used to expand the SkyTrain network and also for new installations across the world. ICTS was rebranded as &quot;Advanced Rapid Transit&quot; (ART) and became a success for the company. Later, the technology was again rebranded, this time as Innovia Metro.

One unusual feature of the ICTS cars was that they were driven by linear induction motors: instead of using conventional motors to turn the wheels, they pushed themselves along the route using alternating flat magnets reacting with the distinctive diamagnetic aluminum metal plate that ran down the centre of the tracks. This system required very few moving parts and therefore led to lower maintenance costs. When the car motors were accelerating, they actually lifted the car off the track an extremely small distance, repelling against the aluminum plate. This micro-lifting prevented the truck wheels from making a solid electrical contact with the track. Instead of using the conventional method, in which motive power is supplied by a single third rail, with return current travelling through the running rails, a separate positive- and negative-power rail were provided on one side of the track. Regarding the accelerating trucks and the micro-lifting, the truck wheels had a somewhat larger flange than normal to keep the car inline on the track during the micro-lifting. The linear induction motors also allowed the cars to climb steeper grades than would be possible with traditional subway technology since wheel slip was not an issue.

The trains are also able to be operated exclusively by computers, becoming one of the earliest installations of Standard Elektrik Lorenz&#x27;s &quot;SelTrac IS&quot; system (now owned and delivered by Thales Rail Signalling Solutions), doing away with the need for a human operator. However, due to opposition from the transit workers&#x27; union and public perception, operators were retained; the union has firmly opposed driverless trains. (Other systems took full advantage of the automated operation and Vancouver&#x27;s SkyTrain has been automated since 1985 without incident.) The Line 3 trains had only one operator since inception. In practice, the Scarborough line trains drove themselves; the operator monitored their operations and controlled the doors. One of the features which was not implemented at the time of Scarborough line&#x27;s opening was the automated audible-only next-stop announcement system, which was introduced in January 2008 and meant operators were no longer required to announce stops manually. These announcements feature the voice of Susan Bigioni, a TTC employee, who also voiced the announcements for the T1 series and the retired H4, H5, and H6 trains.

In June 2024, the Detroit People Mover transit system announced the purchase of 12 Mark I trainsets (24 railcars) and equipment from Line 3. Their transportation to and integration with the Detroit People Mover was projected to take over a year and a half. The purchase would replace the system&#x27;s existing train sets with upgraded features, along with providing much-needed parts needed to keep the system functional. Two railcars were sent to the Halton County Radial Railway Museum for preservation. One car would be provided to the Toronto Zoo.

==Track==

Line 3 used 5-rail track, which a TTC document describes as follows:
The two power rails of 300 volts positive DC and the other of 300 volts negative DC together produced 600 volts.

Line 3 tracks used standard gauge rather than the broader Toronto gauge used on Line 2 Bloor–Danforth, as the ICTS design for the line would not allow for the interchange of rail equipment between lines 2 and 3 even if they were both the same gauge.

==Route==

The line followed a roughly inverted L-shaped route when viewed northwards: first from Kennedy station, paralleling the Canadian National Railway / GO Transit&#x27;s Stouffville line tracks, between Kennedy Road and Midland Avenue, to Ellesmere Road; then eastward between Ellesmere Road and Progress Avenue, through Scarborough City Centre to McCowan Road. The north–south section of the route, where it followed the Stouffville line tracks, was at ground level; the shorter east–west section (except for the ground-level yard) was elevated, as was the Kennedy terminus. The line dives briefly underground just north of Ellesmere station to cross under the Stouffville line tracks. After that, it is elevated towards McCowan station. Two stations, Kennedy and Scarborough Centre, were the only stations on the line to have accessible elevators as those two were the busiest stations of Line 3.

From 2 a.m. to 6 a.m. (to 8 a.m. on Sundays), when Line 3 was not operating, the 302 Kingston Rd-McCowan Blue Night bus served the same area. The 302 originates at Bingham Loop, where it connects with the 322 Coxwell bus that travelled to the west, as well as Route 324 Victoria Park that runs north. From the loop, Route 302 travels east along Kingston Road to Brimley Road, then north along Brimley Road to Danforth Road, then north on McCowan Road to Steeles Avenue. With the exception of McCowan station, it does not pass near any of the rapid transit stations, though other night bus services pass near stations. Bus service was extended on Sundays because the rapid transit lines started at 8 a.m. (beginning January 3, 2016) instead of the usual 6 a.m. start. Service frequency was 30 minutes. Route 302 continues to operate after the line&#x27;s closure.

The frequency for this line was 4 to 5 minutes during peak periods and 5 to 6 minutes during off-peak periods.

==Operations==
The TTC operated five to six trains on the line with each train consisting of four cars. There are 28 cars in the Line 3 fleet.

Line 3 trains could switch directions only at the ends of the line as there were no intermediate crossovers between the two termini. Thus, there could be no short turns on Line 3.

In winter, during heavy snow or freezing rain, the TTC previously ran &quot;storm trains&quot; overnight on Line 3 to keep power rails clear of ice, and apply anti-freeze to the power rail once freezing rain starts.&lt;ref name=&quot;TheStar-2022/02/02&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; However, since the winter of 2018–2019, the TTC decided to change its procedures for Line 3. Thus, about two hours before an expected storm, the TTC may have decided to shut down Line 3 and replace it with bus service. Just before the storm of February 2, 2022, the TTC replaced all Line 3 trains with 25 buses.

The Scarborough line&#x27;s S-series ICTS trains were stored and serviced at the small McCowan Yard, located east of McCowan station. Basic maintenance was performed in this yard; for more extensive work, the cars were taken to the subway&#x27;s Greenwood Yard by truck, given the train&#x27;s different track gauge and propulsion system.

==Future==

After studying the revitalization and expansion of Line 3 in 2006, its replacement with alternate transit (light rail versus subway) became a subject of debate in the late 2000s. , there are plans to replace Line 3 with the three-stop Scarborough Subway Extension of Line 2 from Kennedy station to Sheppard Avenue, with intermediate stops at Lawrence Avenue and Scarborough Town Centre. With an estimated completion between 2029 and 2030, the extension would follow a different route than Line 3. The Government of Ontario has committed to fully fund its $5.5-billion cost. In February 2021, the TTC recommended closing Line 3 permanently by 2023 and replacing it with bus service until the Line 2 extension opens. Once Line 3 is closed, portions of its right-of-way could be converted into parkland.

===Revitalization and expansion===

In 2006, a study was completed on the prospects of the Scarborough line. It recommended upgrading the line to handle larger Innovia Metro Mark II vehicles, at a cost of $190million (in 2006 dollars) with an eight-month service suspension for the upgrade and to purchase $170million of new rolling stock. Rebuilding the curve in the tunnel north of Ellesmere station would have been required to accommodate Mark II cars. (According to transit advocate Steve Munro, the need to rebuild the tunnel was discovered after the $190million upgrade estimate was made.) The TTC Board approved the recommended plan for the upgrades on August 30, 2006, but later cancelled the plans. Extending Line 2 Bloor–Danforth, either along the current route or along a different alignment directly to Scarborough Centre station, was not considered cost-effective or justifiable.

In November 2015, transportation consultant and University of Toronto professor emeritus Richard Soberman argued that it would be vastly cheaper and faster to buy new Line 3 vehicles than to replace Line 3 with an extension of Line 2 northeast from Kennedy station. He felt the cost savings would be great enough to overcome difficulties such as the incompatibility of Mark II cars with the existing line geometry and the extra cost of building a fully separated right-of-way to Sheppard Avenue, where Line 3 could connect with either a proposed extension of Line 4 Sheppard or the Sheppard East LRT.

===Replacement with alternate transit===
The TTC and the City of Toronto completed an environmental assessment in 2010 to convert the line to light rail transit and extend it to Malvern from its current eastern terminus, McCowan, with potential new intermediate stations at Bellamy Road, Centennial College&#x27;s Progress Campus and Sheppard Avenue with a possible additional station at Brimley Road between the existing Midland and Scarborough Centre stations.

After initially planning to include the line with the proposed Eglinton Crosstown LRT line and create a single line called the &quot;Eglinton–Scarborough Crosstown line&quot;, Metrolinx proceeded with plans to convert the line to light rail and extend it to Sheppard Avenue with a single new intermediate station at Centennial College. The existing line would have closed after the 2015 Pan American Games and be completed in 2020. In January 2013, Infrastructure Ontario issued a request for qualifications to shortlist companies to construct both this line and the Eglinton Crosstown line. The Eglinton Crosstown line was later renamed Line 5 Eglinton and officially given the colour of orange.

In June 2013, Toronto City Council again debated having the Scarborough line replaced with an extension of Line 2 Bloor–Danforth north to Sheppard Avenue along a different right of way. Metrolinx issued a letter to Toronto City Council indicating it would cease work on the Scarborough portion of the line, because its position strayed from the original LRT agreement. The subway alternative would cost between $500million and $1billion more than converting the Scarborough line to use the same rolling stock as the Eglinton Crosstown line be so it could be a continuation of that line. &quot;The Globe and Mail&quot; reported that Scarborough councillors had argued that providing Scarborough residents with light rail, not heavy rail, treated them as &quot;second-class citizens&quot;.

Two competing subway plans were proposed to replace Line 3. TTC chair Karen Stintz proposed extending Line 2 Bloor–Danforth to the east before turning north, with three new stations at Lawrence Avenue and McCowan Road (primarily to serve the Scarborough Hospital&#x27;s General Campus), at Scarborough Town Centre and then at Sheppard Avenue East and McCowan Road, where it would connect to the Sheppard East LRT. Transportation Minister Glen Murray made an alternative proposal to extend Line 2 along the Line 3 route but have it terminate at Scarborough Town Centre. Under the Murray plan, there would be only two stations and there would be no direct connection with the then-proposed Sheppard East LRT. The Murray plan would have required the relocation of Kennedy station as a new northbound curve from the existing Kennedy station would have been too tight for subway trains. It would also have required the complete shutdown of the line during construction, something that the Stintz plan avoided.

On October 8, 2013, Toronto City Council voted 24–20 to replace the Scarborough line with a three-station extension of the Bloor–Danforth subway line. Council chose the Stintz plan for the extension.

In 2013, the rejected LRT proposal would have provided a line with seven stops serving 47,000 residents within walking distance. The selected 3-stop subway extension would be long, serving 14,000–20,000 residents within walking distance. In 2013, the LRT was estimated to cost $1.48 billion to build versus $3.56 billion for the Line 2 extension; both estimates would subsequently increase.

Converting Line 3 to light rail would require the complete shutdown of the line while extending Line 2 could occur without requiring a Line 3 shutdown. Circa 2013, this was promoted as a major benefit of the Line 2 extension over a conversion to light rail. At the time, the TTC estimated it could keep Line 3 operating until 2026; however, in February 2021, the TTC recommended replacing Line 3 with buses, thus eliminating that benefit. A remaining benefit of the subway option is that it would eliminate the need to change trains at Kennedy station.

In June 2016, city planning staff proposed the elimination of two of the three stops along the planned Scarborough Subway Extension which would have seen Line 2 Bloor–Danforth terminate at Scarborough Town Centre in order to free up funding for a proposed Crosstown East LRT line extension of Line 5 Eglinton. The eliminated intermediate stops were at Lawrence Avenue and Sheppard Avenue. Subsequently, the cost estimate for the one-stop subway extension increased to $3.2billion, leaving the Crosstown East LRT unfunded. Given the rising cost for the subway extension and the loss of funding for the LRT line, a group of city councillors led by Josh Matlow reopened the subway versus LRT debate. Matlow proposed scrapping the one-stop subway extension in order to provide funding for 24 LRT stops on two LRT lines within Scarborough. TTC CEO Andy Byford said the cost of the LRT line following the Line 3 route may have risen to as high as $3billion because of &quot;delays and redesign&quot; since 2013, but Brad Ross, also of the TTC, warned of &quot;caveats around numbers and assumptions&quot; associated with that estimate. After Council&#x27;s vote, Byford admitted that the cost estimates for &quot;delays&quot; was unnecessary, which assumed the LRT&#x27;s completion would be in 2026, the same date as the subway option. However, according to Michael Warren, a former TTC chief general manager, the LRT could have been completed in 2020 at a cost of $1.8billion, an estimate not presented to City Council when it voted. There was also the issue of whether there would be space for both expanded GO service and an LRT north of Kennedy station; however, Metrolinx subsequently denied there would be such a problem. On July 13, Toronto City Council voted down Matlow&#x27;s proposal by a margin of roughly 2 to 1.

Councillor Glenn De Baeremaeker justified the subway extension saying &quot;Scarborough residents need the same access to a subway system that everybody else already has.&quot; Mayor Tory was concerned that switching from subway to LRT would delay transit improvements in Scarborough, and might not get support from senior levels of government. In September 2013, Metrolinx prepared a draft report comparing the subway and LRT options concluding that the subway option was &quot;not a worthwhile use of money.&quot; Metrolinx had declined a TTC request to give an opinion prior to City Council&#x27;s July 2016 vote.

In 2017, the estimated cost of the one-stop Line 2 extension was $3.35billion, which increased to $3.9billion by April 2019. On April 10, 2019, Premier Doug Ford announced that the province would revert the extension back to the three-stop proposal at an estimated cost of $5.5billion with an estimated completion date between 2029 and 2030. Line 2 would also receive new subway trains as part of the extension to replace the existing T1-series trains.

=== Replacement bus service ===
On April 10, 2019, Ontario premier Doug Ford announced that Line 3 Scarborough would be replaced by a three-stop extension of Line 2 Bloor–Danforth to be completed by 2030. However, on December 10, 2020, Toronto mayor John Tory stated that Line 3 was likely to fail and be taken out of service before the Scarborough Subway Extension was completed, with the failure possibly happening several years before completion. At that point, the Line 3 vehicles were 35 years old, a decade past their 25-year life expectancy, and had become unreliable and difficult to maintain, leading to reduced service and frequent service interruptions. The TTC was looking into an alternative solution of replacing Line 3 with bus service.

In February 2021, the TTC recommended shutting down Line 3 permanently in 2023 and replacing it with bus service. The TTC rejected doing a third overhaul of the line because it would cost $522.4million and might not improve its reliability. The TTC offered two bus replacement options: purchase 60 hybrid buses by 2023 for $374.8million or reduce the number of spares for maintenance, deferring the purchase of new buses until 2027 to 2030, at a cost of $357.4million.

In April 2022, the TTC recommended that the Line 3 right-of-way between Kennedy and Ellesmere stations be converted into a dedicated busway after the Line 3 closure. There would be stops along the right-of-way at Mooregate Avenue / Tara Avenue (approximately halfway between Eglinton Avenue and Lawrence Avenue), Lawrence Avenue East and Ellesmere Road. Between the proposed Ellesmere stop and Scarborough Centre station, buses would operate along Ellesmere Road and Brimley Road. Midland and McCowan stations, along with the connecting guideway, would be permanently shut down as they were deemed not usable for a busway. The busway would operate until the opening of the Line 2 Scarborough subway extension, after which its disposition was not known.

By August 2023, newly elected mayor Olivia Chow had promised to build the busway, which was estimated to cost $55million. The project is estimated to take two years to complete.

By the fourth quarter of 2023, the TTC planned to set up dedicated bus lanes via Kennedy Road (northbound) and Midland Avenue (southbound) to run buses express between Kennedy and Scarborough Centre stations. Bus lanes would be painted red and transit signal priority would be implemented. An additional $60million would be required to modify the bus platforms at Kennedy and Scarborough Centre stations.&lt;ref name=&quot;TheStar-2022/04/07&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; With the dedicated lanes, a trip between Kennedy and Scarborough Centre stations would take 17 to 22 minutes versus 15 minutes using the future busway. The duration of the same trip on Line 3 was 10 minutes.

Work on the dedicated bus lanes was expected to be completed by November 19, 2023, when Line 3 had been scheduled to shut down. However, due to the derailment of a Line 3 train on July 24, 2023, the TTC decided to end Line 3 service three months earlier. The dedicated bus lanes began service on August 26, 2023, without the bus lane work having been fully completed. Up to 70 buses per hour will use the dedicated lanes.

By January 2024, the estimated cost of converting the Line 3 right-of-way into a bus roadway had increased by $12million to $67.9million. Planning was 60 percent complete. If approved by city council, work would start in 2025 for completion in 2027.

The TTC is implementing bus replacement service in phases as follows:

===Reuse of infrastructure===
One of the TTC&#x27;s redevelopment proposals for the Line 3 lands was to convert the corridor, including the elevated section between Midland and McCowan stations, into a linear park. This proposed park would be similar to the High Line in the New York City borough of Manhattan.

In May 2024, it was announced that a stretch of the former Line 3 right-of-way, between Kennedy station and the closed Ellesmere station, would be converted into the &quot;Line 3 Busway&quot;. Demolition of original track has started in 2024, and construction was expected to start in 2025, with the busway planned to begin operation in 2027. The busway was planned to remain in service after the Scarborough Subway Extension opened in order to provide extra rapid transit.

==References==
==External links==
* 
* Scarborough Subway Extension (SSE) about three-stop SSE, published by Metrolinx
* Line 2 Subway Scarborough about cancelled plan for one-stop SSE, published by City of Toronto
* The future of TTC&#x27;s Line 3 Scarborough (SRT) about bus replacement for Line 3, published by the TTC</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q54372" start="0" end="18" title="Line 3 Scarborough" label="Line 3 Scarborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q54372" start="40" end="54" title="Line 3 Scarborough" label="Scarborough RT"/>
<link wikidata="Q54372" start="56" end="63" title="Line 3 Scarborough" label="the SRT"/>
<link wikidata="Q207842" start="79" end="108" title="Medium-capacity rail system" label="medium-capacity rapid transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q20379" start="135" end="149" title="Toronto subway" label="Toronto subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="194" end="201" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025401" start="273" end="284" title="Scarborough, Ontario" label="Scarborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q928830" start="303" end="311" title="metro station" label="stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503" start="326" end="340" title="elevated track" label="elevated track"/>
<link wikidata="Q54371" start="364" end="385" title="Line 2 Bloor–Danforth" label="Line 2 Bloor–Danforth"/>
<link wikidata="Q17978" start="719" end="745" title="Toronto Transit Commission" label="Toronto Transit Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969768" start="759" end="767" title="S series (Toronto subway)" label="S series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4940487" start="780" end="816" title="Innovia Metro" label="Intermediate Capacity Transit System"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552199" start="851" end="895" title="Urban Transportation Development Corporation" label="Urban Transportation Development Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16928416" start="931" end="953" title="linear induction motor" label="linear induction motor"/>
<link wikidata="Q249404" start="1022" end="1046" title="Toronto streetcar system" label="Toronto streetcar system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2444341" start="1221" end="1241" title="Toronto City Council" label="Toronto City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q826977" start="1760" end="1784" title="Progressive Conservative Party of Ontario" label="Progressive Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300478" start="1793" end="1802" title="Doug Ford" label="Doug Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q54371" start="1832" end="1860" title="Scarborough subway extension" label="Scarborough subway extension"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239216" start="2641" end="2657" title="Stouffville line" label="Stouffville line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503" start="3278" end="3291" title="rapid transit" label="rapid transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589283" start="3491" end="3512" title="Government of Ontario" label="Government of Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q5514045" start="3527" end="3535" title="GO-Urban" label="GO-Urban"/>
<link wikidata="Q6436447" start="3681" end="3705" title="Krauss-Maffei Transurban" label="Krauss-Maffei Transurban"/>
<link wikidata="Q819150" start="3716" end="3728" title="KraussMaffei" label="KraussMaffei"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="3772" end="3783" title="West Germany" label="West German"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407658" start="4052" end="4061" title="Tram" label="streetcar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865749" start="4125" end="4152" title="Canadian Light Rail Vehicle" label="Canadian Light Rail Vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357727" start="4198" end="4208" title="GO Transit" label="GO Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042126" start="4725" end="4740" title="Kennedy station" label="Kennedy station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342434" start="5102" end="5118" title="Spanish solution" label="Spanish solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5514042" start="5266" end="5273" title="GO-ALRT" label="GO-ALRT"/>
<link wikidata="Q39086411" start="6492" end="6550" title="Vehicle vinyl wrap" label="shrink-wrapping the rolling stock with a blue vinyl finish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2940471" start="6921" end="6927" title="Presto card" label="Presto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042395" start="6957" end="6978" title="Lawrence East station" label="Lawrence East station"/>
<link wikidata="Q688893" start="7095" end="7105" title="Bombardier Transportation" label="Bombardier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969768" start="7157" end="7165" title="S series (Toronto subway)" label="S-series"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7341" end="7369" title="Line 2 Bloor–Danforth#Scarborough Subway Extension" label="Scarborough Subway Extension"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8246" end="8269" title="#Replacement bus service" label="replacement bus service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545216" start="8944" end="8950" title="Systra" label="Systra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5365823" start="9219" end="9227" title="EllisDon" label="EllisDon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042639" start="9455" end="9481" title="Scarborough Centre station" label="Scarborough Centre station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552199" start="9800" end="9844" title="Urban Transportation Development Corporation" label="Urban Transportation Development Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9869" end="9886" title="State-owned enterprise#Commonwealth" label="Crown corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q133116" start="10010" end="10018" title="Hamilton, Ontario" label="Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="10207" end="10216" title="Vancouver" label="Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q876780" start="10224" end="10232" title="SkyTrain (Vancouver)" label="SkyTrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201543" start="10241" end="10253" title="Detroit People Mover" label="People Mover"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="10257" end="10264" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4940487" start="10595" end="10608" title="Innovia Metro" label="Innovia Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164566" start="10677" end="10700" title="linear motor" label="linear induction motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q72313" start="10719" end="10738" title="electric motor" label="conventional motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q11421" start="10821" end="10827" title="magnet" label="magnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="10871" end="10879" title="aluminum" label="aluminum"/>
<link wikidata="Q217421" start="11203" end="11208" title="Bogie" label="truck"/>
<link wikidata="Q748825" start="11359" end="11369" title="third rail" label="third rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q911958" start="11971" end="11995" title="Standard Elektrik Lorenz" label="Standard Elektrik Lorenz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7447372" start="12009" end="12016" title="SelTrac" label="SelTrac"/>
<link wikidata="Q7709617" start="12061" end="12093" title="Thales Rail Signalling Solutions" label="Thales Rail Signalling Solutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="12187" end="12206" title="Trade union" label="workers&amp;#x27; union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2775569" start="12230" end="12239" title="Train driver" label="operators"/>
<link wikidata="Q7092326" start="12471" end="12483" title="One-person operation" label="one operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q787208" start="12542" end="12558" title="Automatic train operation" label="drove themselves"/>
<link wikidata="Q7667928" start="13004" end="13013" title="T series (Toronto subway)" label="T1 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q5627865" start="13022" end="13051" title="H series (Toronto subway)" label="retired H4, H5, and H6 trains"/>
<link wikidata="Q5643644" start="13507" end="13542" title="Halton County Radial Railway Museum" label="Halton County Radial Railway Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q741395" start="13594" end="13605" title="Toronto Zoo" label="Toronto Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q19750831" start="13860" end="13873" title="Toronto gauge" label="Toronto gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q624798" start="14184" end="14209" title="Canadian National Railway" label="Canadian National Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239216" start="14230" end="14246" title="Stouffville line" label="Stouffville line"/>
<link wikidata="Q56705992" start="14263" end="14275" title="Kennedy Road (Toronto)" label="Kennedy Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430271" start="14381" end="14404" title="Scarborough City Centre" label="Scarborough City Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q56879703" start="14408" end="14420" title="McCowan Road" label="McCowan Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042102" start="14685" end="14702" title="Ellesmere station" label="Ellesmere station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907204" start="15065" end="15075" title="Blue Night Network" label="Blue Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q17509938" start="15124" end="15136" title="Bingham Loop" label="Bingham Loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042459" start="15452" end="15467" title="McCowan station" label="McCowan station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7033747" start="15539" end="15557" title="Night service (public transport)" label="night bus services"/>
<link wikidata="Q60749213" start="16551" end="16574" title="2018–19 North American winter" label="the winter of 2018–2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q110832781" start="16767" end="16796" title="February 2022 North American winter storm" label="the storm of February 2, 2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q30625694" start="16936" end="16948" title="McCowan Yard" label="McCowan Yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5605073" start="17095" end="17109" title="Greenwood Yard" label="Greenwood Yard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17220" end="17248" title="#Revitalization and expansion" label="revitalization and expansion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17272" end="17306" title="#Replacement with alternate transit" label="replacement with alternate transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q54371" start="17436" end="17464" title="Scarborough Subway Extension" label="Scarborough Subway Extension"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494532" start="17499" end="17514" title="Sheppard Avenue" label="Sheppard Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503821" start="17543" end="17558" title="Lawrence Avenue" label="Lawrence Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535124" start="17563" end="17586" title="Scarborough Town Centre" label="Scarborough Town Centre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17977" end="18000" title="#Conversion to park" label="converted into parkland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16142922" start="18490" end="18501" title="Steve Munro" label="Steve Munro"/>
<link wikidata="Q180865" start="18945" end="18966" title="University of Toronto" label="University of Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q54371" start="19124" end="19130" title="Line 2 Bloor–Danforth" label="Line 2"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19443" end="19471" title="Line 4 Sheppard#Eastward extension" label="extension of Line 4 Sheppard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494533" start="19479" end="19496" title="Sheppard East LRT" label="Sheppard East LRT"/>
<link wikidata="Q320389" start="19585" end="19609" title="Environmental impact assessment" label="environmental assessment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268865" start="19641" end="19659" title="light rail" label="light rail transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6745045" start="19677" end="19684" title="Malvern, Toronto" label="Malvern"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059128" start="19787" end="19805" title="Centennial College (Canada)" label="Centennial College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968123" start="19887" end="19899" title="Brimley Road" label="Brimley Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042111" start="19921" end="19928" title="Midland station (Toronto)" label="Midland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239105" start="20026" end="20053" title="Line 5 Eglinton" label="Eglinton Crosstown LRT line"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307451" start="20139" end="20148" title="Metrolinx" label="Metrolinx"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185431" start="20345" end="20368" title="2015 Pan American Games" label="2015 Pan American Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q17108014" start="20412" end="20434" title="Ministry of Infrastructure (Ontario)" label="Infrastructure Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20444" end="20470" title="Request for proposal#Other requests" label="request for qualifications"/>
<link wikidata="Q2444341" start="20675" end="20695" title="Toronto City Council" label="Toronto City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q604525" start="21254" end="21272" title="The Globe and Mail" label="The Globe and Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q6370061" start="21520" end="21532" title="Karen Stintz" label="Karen Stintz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7762393" start="21692" end="21719" title="Scarborough Health Network" label="Scarborough Hospital&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q65041687" start="21720" end="21734" title="Scarborough General Hospital (Toronto)" label="General Campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530835" start="21888" end="21899" title="Glen Murray (politician)" label="Glen Murray"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23859" end="23882" title="Line 5 Eglinton#Eglinton East LRT" label="Crosstown East LRT line"/>
<link wikidata="Q6289154" start="24249" end="24260" title="Josh Matlow" label="Josh Matlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4760483" start="24446" end="24457" title="Andy Byford" label="Andy Byford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5568766" start="25436" end="25456" title="Glenn De Baeremaeker" label="Glenn De Baeremaeker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300478" start="26564" end="26573" title="Doug Ford" label="Doug Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q928118" start="26747" end="26756" title="John Tory" label="John Tory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350703" start="28510" end="28521" title="Olivia Chow" label="Olivia Chow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6553474" start="30273" end="30284" title="linear park" label="linear park"/>
<link wikidata="Q843869" start="30329" end="30338" title="High Line" label="High Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="30371" end="30380" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30555" end="30568" title="Toronto Transit Commission bus system#Line 3 Busway" label="Line 3 Busway"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143170" wikidata="Q7239867" url="?curid=143170" title="Preform">
<text>Preform may refer to:

* Preform, a piece of glass used to draw an optical fiber
* Preform, a piece of polyethylene terephthalate test tube shaped form blown into a completed bottle
* Preform, an incomplete and unused basic form of a stone tool in lithic reduction
* Preform, a specially designed shape of solder
* Preform, a high quality, precision metal stamping used for a variety of brazing and joining applications
* PreForm, a a software package from 3D printing technology company Formlabs

== See also ==
* Perform
* Preformationism, a theory that organisms develop from miniature versions of themselves</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7239867" start="0" end="7" title="Preform" label="Preform"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36" end="80" title="optical fiber#Preform" label="piece of glass used to draw an optical fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q145863" start="103" end="129" title="polyethylene terephthalate" label="polyethylene terephthalate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="248" end="264" title="lithic reduction#Blanks and preforms" label="lithic reduction"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="297" end="312" title="Solder#Preform" label="shape of solder"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="387" end="419" title="Brazing#Preform" label="brazing and joining applications"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="433" end="496" title="Formlabs#PreForm" label="a software package from 3D printing technology company Formlabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q35140" start="515" end="522" title="Perform" label="Perform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431492" start="525" end="540" title="Preformationism" label="Preformationism"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143172" wikidata="Q1138639" url="?curid=143172" title="I Am the Walrus">
<text>&quot;I Am the Walrus&quot; is a song by the English rock band the Beatles from their 1967 television film &quot;Magical Mystery Tour&quot;. Written by John Lennon and credited to Lennon–McCartney, it was released as the B-side to the single &quot;Hello, Goodbye&quot; and on the &quot;Magical Mystery Tour&quot; EP and album. In the film, the song underscores a segment in which the band mime to the recording at a deserted airfield.

Lennon wrote the song to confound listeners who had been affording serious scholarly interpretations of the Beatles&#x27; lyrics. He was partly inspired by two LSD trips and Lewis Carroll&#x27;s 1871 poem &quot;The Walrus and the Carpenter&quot;. Producer George Martin arranged and added orchestral accompaniment that included violins, cellos, horns, and clarinet. The Mike Sammes Singers, a 16-voice choir of professional studio vocalists, also joined the recording, variously singing nonsense lines and shrill whooping noises.

Since the &quot;Hello, Goodbye&quot; single and the &quot;Magical Mystery Tour&quot; EP both reached the top two slots on the British singles chart in December, &quot;I Am the Walrus&quot; holds the distinction of reaching numbers one and two simultaneously. Shortly after release, the song was banned by the BBC for the line &quot;Boy, you&#x27;ve been a naughty girl, you let your knickers down&quot;.

==Composition==
According to author Ian MacDonald, the &quot;model&quot; for &quot;I Am the Walrus&quot; was most likely Procol Harum&#x27;s &quot;A Whiter Shade of Pale&quot;, which was a hit single in mid-1967 and Lennon&#x27;s favourite song of the period. The lyric came from three song ideas that Lennon had been working on, the first of which was inspired by hearing a police siren at his home in Weybridge; Lennon wrote the lines &quot;Mis-ter cit-y p&#x27;lice-man&quot; to the rhythm and melody of the siren. The second idea was a short rhyme about Lennon sitting amidst his garden, while the third was a nonsense phrase about sitting on a corn flake. Unable to finish the three different songs, he combined them into one. The lyric also included the phrase &quot;Lucy in the sky&quot;, a reference to the Beatles&#x27; earlier song &quot;Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds&quot;.

The walrus refers to Lewis Carroll&#x27;s poem &quot;The Walrus and the Carpenter&quot; (from the book &quot;Through the Looking-Glass&quot;). Lennon later expressed dismay upon belatedly realising that the walrus was a villain in the poem.

The final piece of the song came together during a visit from Pete Shotton, Lennon&#x27;s friend and former fellow member of the Quarrymen, when Lennon asked him about a playground nursery rhyme they sang as children. Shotton recalled the rhyme as follows:
Lennon borrowed a couple of images from the first two lines. Shotton was also responsible for suggesting that Lennon change the phrase &quot;waiting for the man to come&quot; to &quot;waiting for the van to come&quot;. The Beatles&#x27; official biographer, Hunter Davies, was present while the song was being written and wrote an account in his 1968 book &quot;The Beatles&quot;. According to this biography, Lennon remarked to Shotton, &quot;Let the fuckers work that one out.&quot; While the band were studying Transcendental Meditation in India in early 1968, George Harrison told journalist Lewis Lapham that one of the lines in &quot;I Am the Walrus&quot; incorporated the personal mantra he had received from their meditation teacher, Maharishi Mahesh Yogi. According to Pattie Boyd, Harrison&#x27;s wife at the time, the words &quot;semolina pilchard&quot; refer to Sergeant Pilcher of the London Drug Squad, who waged a campaign against British rock stars and underground figures during the late 1960s.

Lennon claimed he wrote the first two lines on separate acid trips; he explained much of the song to &quot;Playboy&quot; in 1980:
==Musical structure==
The song is in the key of A. Verse 1 begins with a I–III–IV–I rock pattern: &quot;I am he&quot; (A chord)...&quot;you are me&quot; (C chord) &quot;and we are all toge...&quot; (D chord) &quot;...ther&quot; (A chord). Verse 2, however, involves a VI–VII–I Aeolian ascent: &quot;waiting&quot; (F chord) &quot;for the van&quot; (G chord) &quot;to come&quot; (A chord). The chorus uses a III–IV–V pattern: &quot;I am the eggman (C chord) &quot;they are the eggmen (D chord). &quot;I am the walrus (E chord), &quot;goo-goo-g&#x27;joob&quot; hanging as an imperfect cadence until resolved with the I (A chord) on &quot;Mr. City Policeman&quot;. At the line &quot;&quot;Sitting&quot; in an English garden&quot; the D melody note (as in the instrumental introduction) establishes a Lydian mode (sharp 4th note in the scale), and this mode is emphasised more strongly with the addition of a D note to the B chord on &quot;If the sun don&#x27;t &quot;come&quot;&quot;.

The song ends using a Shepard tone, with a chord progression built on ascending and descending lines in the bass and strings, repeated as the song fades. Musicologist Alan W. Pollack analyses: &quot;The chord progression of the outro itself is a harmonic Moebius strip with scales in bassline and top voice that move in contrary motion.&quot; The bassline descends stepwise A, G, F, E, D, C, and B, while the strings part rises A, B, C, D, E, F, G: this sequence repeats as the song fades, with the strings rising higher on each iteration. Pollack also notes that the repeated cell is seven bars long, which means that a different chord begins each four-bar phrase. The fade is described by Walter Everett as a &quot;false ending&quot;, in the form of an &quot;unrelated coda&quot; consisting of the orchestral chord progression, chorus, and sampling of the radio play.

==Recording==
&quot;I Am the Walrus&quot; was the first studio recording made by the Beatles after the death of Brian Epstein, in August 1967. The basic backing track featuring the Beatles was released in 1996 on &quot;Anthology 2&quot;. George Martin arranged and added orchestral accompaniment that included violins, cellos, horns, and clarinet. Paul McCartney said that Lennon gave instructions to Martin as to how he wished the orchestration to be scored, including singing most of the parts as a guide. The Mike Sammes Singers, a 16-voice choir of professional studio vocalists, also took part in the recording, variously singing &quot;Ho-ho-ho, hee-hee-hee, ha-ha-ha&quot;, &quot;oompah, oompah, stick it up your jumper!&quot;, &quot;everybody&#x27;s got one&quot; and making a series of shrill whooping noises.

In 2015, founding Moody Blues member Ray Thomas said in an interview that he and fellow band member Mike Pinder contributed backing vocals to the song, as well as harmonicas to &quot;The Fool on the Hill&quot;.

===Incorporation of text from &quot;King Lear&quot;===
The dramatic reading in the mix is Shakespeare&#x27;s &quot;King Lear&quot; (Act IV, Scene 6), lines 219–222 and 249–262. It was added to the song on 29 September 1967, recorded directly from an AM radio Lennon was fiddling with. Lennon tuned around the dial and settled on the 7:30 pm to 11 pm broadcast of the play on the BBC Third Programme.

The first excerpt (ll. 219–222) moves in and out of the text, containing fragments of lines only. It begins where the disguised Edgar talks to his estranged and maliciously blinded father the Earl of Gloucester (timings given):
In the play, Edgar then kills Oswald, Goneril&#x27;s steward. During the fade of the song, the second main extract (ll. 249–262), this time of continuous text, is heard (timings given):
On the radio broadcast, the roles were read by Mark Dignam (Gloucester), Philip Guard (Edgar), and John Bryning (Oswald).

==Mono vs. stereo versions==
In the original (1967) stereo release, at around two minutes through the song, the mix changes from true stereo to &quot;fake stereo&quot;. This came about because the radio broadcast had been added &quot;live&quot; into the mono mix-down and so was unavailable for inclusion in the stereo mix; hence, fake stereo from the mono mix was created for this portion of the song.

The mono version opens with a four-beat chord, while the stereo mix features six beats on the initial chord. The four-beat-only intro is also included on a different stereo mix (overseen by George Martin) for the previous MPI Home Video version of &quot;Magical Mystery Tour&quot;, especially the US &quot;Magical Mystery Tour&quot; album. The US mono single mix includes an extra bar of music before the words &quot;yellow matter custard&quot;. This is actually the original uncut version of the mono mix called RM23. An early, overdub-free mix of the song released on &quot;Anthology 2&quot; reveals John singing the lyrics &quot;Yellow mat-&quot; too early over this &#x27;extra&#x27; bar of music which was later edited out. A hybrid version prepared for the 1980 US &quot;Rarities&quot; LP combines the six-beat opening with the extra bar of music that precedes the words &quot;yellow matter custard&quot; (from the aforementioned US mono single mix). An entirely new full stereo remix was done in 2012 for Apple&#x27;s DVD and Blu-ray release of the restored version of &quot;Magical Mystery Tour&quot;.

A 5.1 surround sound full stereo remix of the song appeared on the DVD release of &quot;Anthology&quot; in 2003, on disc 4. A full stereo digital remix was also done for the Cirque du Soleil show &quot;Love&quot; and album of the same name, released in 2006. Producers George and Giles Martin were allowed access to early generations of the original master tapes. Musical parts that had previously been mixed were now available as separate elements. Additionally, a copy of the BBC broadcast of &quot;King Lear&quot; was acquired. Now, with all the sound sources used in the original mono mix present, a proper stereo remix could be accomplished. These tracks were transferred digitally and lined up to create a new multi-track master, from which a new mix would be made.

In addition to the stereo remixes prepared for the &quot;Love&quot; show and the 2012 Apple reissue referenced above, the DVDs that were released for those same projects contain a 5.1 surround sound mix of the song, making three distinct 5.1 remixes of the same song.

A new stereo mix was completed in 2023 for the &quot;1967–1970&quot; album.

== Cover versions ==
*Oingo Boingo performed a cover of the song on their final album, &quot;Boingo&quot; (1994). In 2021, frontman Danny Elfman stated that the song, along with the Beatles&#x27; &quot;A Day in the Life&quot;, &quot;stayed with me my whole life, redefining for me what a song could do&quot;, and that Martin&#x27;s &quot;string arrangements really became part of my musical vocabulary.&quot;

*Oasis performed the song many times throughout their history, and a live recording of them performing the song at the Gleneagles Hotel was included as a B-side to their 1994 single &quot;Cigarettes &amp; Alcohol&quot; and was subsequently added to the 25th anniversary edition of &quot;Definitely Maybe&quot; (1994).

*Jim Carrey performed the song on George Martin&#x27;s 1998 Beatles tribute album &quot;In My Life&quot;.

*Spooky Tooth performed a version of I Am the Walrus on their album &quot;The Last Puff&quot;.
*Foetus performed an industrial rock cover of the song in 1996 during a live performance in Hannover.
*The Flaming Lips performed the song live in studio in 2011

==Personnel==
According to Ian MacDonald, except where noted:

The Beatles

*John Lennon – double-tracked vocal, electric piano, Mellotron
*Paul McCartney – backing vocal, bass guitar, tambourine
*George Harrison – backing vocal, lead guitar
*Ringo Starr – drums

Additional musicians and production
*George Martinproduction, orchestration and conducting
*Geoff Emerickengineering
*Sidney Sax, Jack Rothstein, Ralph Elman, Andrew McGee, Jack Greene, Louis Stevens, John Jezzard and Jack Richardsviolins
*Lionel Ross, Eldon Fox, Brian Martin and Terry Weilcellos
*Gordon Lewincontrabass clarinet
*Neill Sanders, Tony Tunstall and Morris Millerhorns
*Mike Sammes Singers (Peggie Allen, Wendy Horan, Pat Whitmore, Jill Utting, June Day, Sylvia King, Irene King, G. Mallen, Fred Lucas, Mike Redway, John O&#x27;Neill, F. Dachtler, Allan Grant, D. Griffiths, J. Smith and J. Fraser)backing vocals
*Mark Dignam, Philip Guard and John Bryning&quot;King Lear&quot; dialogue

==Reception==

Critical reception at the time of the track&#x27;s release was largely positive. Writer Derek Johnson stated: &quot;John growls the nonsense (and sometimes suggestive) lyric, backed by a complex scoring incorporating violins and cellos. You need to hear it a few times before you can absorb it.&quot; Nick Logan wrote: &quot;Into the world of &quot;Alice in Wonderland&quot; now and you can almost visualise John crouching on a deserted shore singing &#x27;I am the walrus&#x27; to some beautiful strings from far away on the horizon and a whole bagful of Beatle sounds, like a ringing doorbell and someone sawing a plank of wood. A fantastic track which you will need to live with for a while to fully appreciate.&quot; In a review for &quot;Melody Maker&quot;, Nick Jones considered the song &quot;not such a complex sound as a lot of previous Beatles stuff but it builds nicely to a chattering, spinning cacophony of electricity and hissing gongs behind a barely audible &quot;conversation&quot;&quot;.

Richard Goldstein of &quot;The New York Times&quot; wrote that the song was &quot;their most realized work since &#x27;A Day In The Life&#x27;&quot; and described it as &quot;a fierce collage&quot; with a &quot;musical structure [that] mirrors this fragmentation&quot;. He said it &quot;suggests a world much like that of &#x27;A Day In The Life,&#x27; where the news is bad and John Lennon (now a Walrus, with a drooping moustache) would like to turn us on. Because he is an artist, he does.&quot;

In a highly unfavourable review of &quot;Magical Mystery Tour&quot;, Rex Reed of &quot;HiFi/Stereo Review&quot; said that &quot;I Am the Walrus&quot; &quot;defies any kind of description known to civilized man. Not only is it ugly to hear, lacking any cohesion of style or technique, but it is utterly silly and pointless.&quot; He stated that the song &quot;begins with an intro sounding suspiciously like one of John Barry&#x27;s James Bond film scores&quot;, then quoted some of the lyrics before saying that &quot;the whole thing fades out to what sounds like people being fried on electric fences and pigs rooting in a bucket of swill.&quot;

The song was banned by the BBC for the use of the word &quot;knickers&quot; in the line &quot;Boy, you&#x27;ve been a naughty girl, you&#x27;ve let your knickers down&quot;.

===Chart history===
The single achieved sales of over 50,000 copies in Australia, being eligible for the award of a Gold Disc.

==Certifications==


==Interpretation==
After receiving a letter from a student at his former school, Quarry Bank High School for Boys, about how their literature classes were analysing the Beatles&#x27; songs, Lennon wrote &quot;I Am the Walrus&quot; to confuse those who tried to interpret it. There have nevertheless been many attempts to understand the meaning of the lyrics.

Lennon returned to the subject in the lyrics of three of his subsequent songs: in the 1968 Beatles song &quot;Glass Onion&quot; he sings, &quot;I told you &#x27;bout the walrus and me, man / You know that we&#x27;re as close as can be, man / Well here&#x27;s another clue for you all / The walrus was Paul&quot;.

Eric Burdon, lead singer of the Animals, claimed to be the &quot;Eggman&quot; mentioned in the song&#x27;s lyric.

==References==
===Bibliography===
*
*
* 
*
*
*
*
*
*
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1138639" start="6" end="21" title="I Am the Walrus" label="I Am the Walrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="63" end="74" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q901203" start="113" end="133" title="Magical Mystery Tour (film)" label="Magical Mystery Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="152" end="163" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q239177" start="180" end="196" title="Lennon–McCartney" label="Lennon–McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q215233" start="221" end="227" title="B-side" label="B-side"/>
<link wikidata="Q281911" start="248" end="262" title="Hello, Goodbye" label="Hello, Goodbye"/>
<link wikidata="Q60676411" start="286" end="306" title="Magical Mystery Tour" label="Magical Mystery Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q6556133" start="389" end="393" title="lip sync" label="mime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076521" start="596" end="605" title="Psychedelic experience" label="LSD trips"/>
<link wikidata="Q38082" start="610" end="623" title="Lewis Carroll" label="Lewis Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290846" start="647" end="675" title="The Walrus and the Carpenter" label="The Walrus and the Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q191819" start="692" end="705" title="George Martin" label="George Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3313533" start="802" end="825" title="The Mike Sammes Singers" label="The Mike Sammes Singers"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="1276" end="1279" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5502280" start="1350" end="1358" title="French knickers" label="knickers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630321" start="1408" end="1421" title="Ian MacDonald" label="Ian MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q214486" start="1493" end="1505" title="Procol Harum" label="Procol Harum"/>
<link wikidata="Q300620" start="1519" end="1541" title="A Whiter Shade of Pale" label="A Whiter Shade of Pale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754096" start="1775" end="1784" title="Weybridge" label="Weybridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q723178" start="2220" end="2249" title="Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds" label="Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q38082" start="2279" end="2292" title="Lewis Carroll" label="Lewis Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290846" start="2311" end="2339" title="The Walrus and the Carpenter" label="The Walrus and the Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q220331" start="2367" end="2392" title="Through the Looking-Glass" label="Through the Looking-Glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178697" start="2562" end="2574" title="Pete Shotton" label="Pete Shotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q384664" start="2625" end="2638" title="the Quarrymen" label="the Quarrymen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333094" start="3015" end="3028" title="Hunter Davies" label="Hunter Davies"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3119" end="3130" title="The Beatles: The Authorised Biography" label="The Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q379208" start="3262" end="3305" title="The Beatles in India" label="studying Transcendental Meditation in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643" start="3321" end="3336" title="George Harrison" label="George Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q6536635" start="3353" end="3365" title="Lewis H. Lapham" label="Lewis Lapham"/>
<link wikidata="Q131510" start="3445" end="3451" title="mantra" label="mantra"/>
<link wikidata="Q244968" start="3499" end="3520" title="Maharishi Mahesh Yogi" label="Maharishi Mahesh Yogi"/>
<link wikidata="Q234074" start="3535" end="3546" title="Pattie Boyd" label="Pattie Boyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q7052694" start="3631" end="3647" title="Norman Pilcher" label="Sergeant Pilcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883606" start="3726" end="3737" title="UK underground" label="underground"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3826" end="3836" title="lysergic acid diethylamide#Psychological" label="acid trips"/>
<link wikidata="Q150820" start="3877" end="3884" title="Playboy" label="Playboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191396" start="4904" end="4916" title="Shepard tone" label="Shepard tone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4707967" start="5049" end="5064" title="Alan W. Pollack" label="Alan W. Pollack"/>
<link wikidata="Q226843" start="5137" end="5150" title="Moebius strip" label="Moebius strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q16210942" start="5573" end="5587" title="Walter Everett (musicologist)" label="Walter Everett"/>
<link wikidata="Q852466" start="5653" end="5657" title="Coda (music)" label="coda"/>
<link wikidata="Q203690" start="5865" end="5878" title="Brian Epstein" label="Brian Epstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753625" start="5972" end="5983" title="Anthology 2" label="Anthology 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q3313533" start="6261" end="6284" title="The Mike Sammes Singers" label="The Mike Sammes Singers"/>
<link wikidata="Q211965" start="6590" end="6601" title="Moody Blues" label="Moody Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398746" start="6609" end="6619" title="Ray Thomas" label="Ray Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398834" start="6672" end="6683" title="Mike Pinder" label="Mike Pinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920202" start="6755" end="6775" title="The Fool on the Hill" label="The Fool on the Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="6874" end="6885" title="Shakespeare" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q181598" start="6899" end="6908" title="King Lear" label="King Lear"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834990" start="7163" end="7182" title="BBC Third Programme" label="BBC Third Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900020" start="7646" end="7657" title="Mark Dignam" label="Mark Dignam"/>
<link wikidata="Q16090811" start="7672" end="7684" title="Philip Guard" label="Philip Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q34678" start="7774" end="7780" title="stereo" label="stereo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5315894" start="7872" end="7883" title="fake stereo" label="fake stereo"/>
<link wikidata="Q654693" start="8207" end="8212" title="Beat_(music)" label="beats"/>
<link wikidata="Q191819" start="8316" end="8329" title="George Martin" label="George Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6717298" start="8348" end="8362" title="MPI Home Video" label="MPI Home Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q60676411" start="8432" end="8452" title="Magical Mystery Tour" label="Magical Mystery Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753625" start="8702" end="8713" title="Anthology 2" label="Anthology 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q106824416" start="8903" end="8911" title="Rarities (1980 The Beatles album)" label="Rarities"/>
<link wikidata="Q47770" start="9159" end="9166" title="Blu-ray" label="Blu-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q238612" start="9239" end="9257" title="5.1 surround sound" label="5.1 surround sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q7716124" start="9325" end="9334" title="The Beatles Anthology (documentary)" label="Anthology"/>
<link wikidata="Q504715" start="9411" end="9427" title="Cirque du Soleil" label="Cirque du Soleil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2511457" start="9439" end="9443" title="Love (Cirque du Soleil)" label="Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324743" start="9454" end="9476" title="Love (The Beatles album)" label="album of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950377" start="10332" end="10341" title="1967–1970" label="1967–1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887278" start="10378" end="10390" title="Oingo Boingo" label="Oingo Boingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4938394" start="10449" end="10455" title="Boingo (album)" label="Boingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q193338" start="10488" end="10500" title="Danny Elfman" label="Danny Elfman"/>
<link wikidata="Q300385" start="10558" end="10575" title="A Day in the Life" label="A Day in the Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q382890" start="10767" end="10772" title="Oasis (band)" label="Oasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530960" start="10885" end="10901" title="Gleneagles Hotel" label="Gleneagles Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q215233" start="10920" end="10926" title="B-side" label="B-side"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208786" start="10954" end="10978" title="Cigarettes &amp;amp; Alcohol" label="Cigarettes &amp;amp; Alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q328993" start="11053" end="11069" title="Definitely Maybe" label="Definitely Maybe"/>
<link wikidata="Q40504" start="11086" end="11096" title="Jim Carrey" label="Jim Carrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556792" start="11173" end="11183" title="In My Life (George Martin album)" label="In My Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455057" start="11193" end="11205" title="Spooky Tooth" label="Spooky Tooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q935068" start="11288" end="11294" title="Foetus (band)" label="Foetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q523184" start="11390" end="11406" title="The Flaming Lips" label="The Flaming Lips"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630321" start="11477" end="11490" title="Ian MacDonald" label="Ian MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="11527" end="11538" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300113" start="11541" end="11555" title="double-tracked" label="double-tracked"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136507" start="11563" end="11577" title="electric piano" label="electric piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q212483" start="11579" end="11588" title="Mellotron" label="Mellotron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="11590" end="11604" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643" start="11647" end="11662" title="George Harrison" label="George Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632" start="11693" end="11704" title="Ringo Starr" label="Ringo Starr"/>
<link wikidata="Q191819" start="11751" end="11764" title="George Martin" label="George Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q468612" start="11806" end="11819" title="Geoff Emerick" label="Geoff Emerick"/>
<link wikidata="Q128124" start="11819" end="11830" title="Audio engineer" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q7509328" start="11832" end="11842" title="Sidney Sax" label="Sidney Sax"/>
<link wikidata="Q68817568" start="11844" end="11858" title="Jack Rothstein" label="Jack Rothstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7702026" start="11995" end="12005" title="Terence Weil" label="Terry Weil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2731509" start="12025" end="12044" title="contrabass clarinet" label="contrabass clarinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6989582" start="12046" end="12059" title="Neill Sanders" label="Neill Sanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q3313533" start="12099" end="12118" title="Mike Sammes Singers" label="Mike Sammes Singers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6250997" start="12245" end="12262" title="John O&amp;#x27;Neill (musician, born 1926)" label="John O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900020" start="12343" end="12354" title="Mark Dignam" label="Mark Dignam"/>
<link wikidata="Q16090811" start="12356" end="12368" title="Philip Guard" label="Philip Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q181598" start="12391" end="12400" title="King Lear" label="King Lear"/>
<link wikidata="Q92640" start="12781" end="12800" title="Alice in Wonderland" label="Alice in Wonderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q580896" start="13175" end="13187" title="Melody Maker" label="Melody Maker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325975" start="13439" end="13456" title="Richard Goldstein (writer born 1944)" label="Richard Goldstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="13466" end="13484" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q300385" start="13558" end="13575" title="A Day In The Life" label="A Day In The Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352005" start="14008" end="14016" title="Rex Reed" label="Rex Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q610609" start="14026" end="14044" title="HiFi/Stereo Review" label="HiFi/Stereo Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q111074" start="14353" end="14363" title="John Barry (composer)" label="John Barry"/>
<link wikidata="Q844" start="14371" end="14381" title="James Bond" label="James Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q95686467" start="14382" end="14393" title="Production of the James Bond films" label="film scores"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="14614" end="14617" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q49223" start="14648" end="14656" title="knickers" label="knickers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019068" start="14992" end="15024" title="Calderstones School" label="Quarry Bank High School for Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418994" start="15381" end="15392" title="Glass Onion (song)" label="Glass Onion"/>
<link wikidata="Q44648" start="15585" end="15596" title="Eric Burdon" label="Eric Burdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q131422" start="15613" end="15624" title="the Animals" label="the Animals"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143173" wikidata="Q5451261" url="?curid=143173" title="Fire-cracked rock">
<text>In archaeology, fire-cracked rock (FCR) or fire-affected rock (FAR), is rock of any type that has been altered and split as the result of deliberate heating. It is a feature of many archaeological sites. In many cases, fire-cracked rock results when stones were used to line hearths and earth ovens or were heated to provide a longer-lasting heat-source (similar to a modern hot water bottle).

In other cases, fire-cracked rock results from stone being used to heat or boil water. The stones were heated and dropped directly into water held in containers made of skin or baskets and pottery. This use has led fire-cracked rocks to be called &quot;pot-boilers&quot; in Britain.

Central Texas in the United States in particular is well-known archaeologically for its burned rock middens, which are piles of fire-cracked rock—often exceeding several tons of material. These represent the remains of earth ovens used in cooking sotol bulbs and other plants during prehistoric times. In Britain, these features are referred to as &quot;burnt mounds&quot;.

A fire-cracked rock bibliography has been compiled by William Doleman and published on the Tennessee Archaeology Net bibliography page 

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="3" end="14" title="archaeology" label="archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451261" start="16" end="33" title="Fire-cracked rock" label="fire-cracked rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451261" start="43" end="61" title="Fire-cracked rock" label="fire-affected rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q839954" start="182" end="201" title="archaeological site" label="archaeological site"/>
<link wikidata="Q585473" start="275" end="281" title="hearth" label="hearth"/>
<link wikidata="Q473594" start="287" end="297" title="earth oven" label="earth oven"/>
<link wikidata="Q11642" start="584" end="591" title="pottery" label="pottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="687" end="692" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="700" end="713" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152199" start="779" end="785" title="midden" label="midden"/>
<link wikidata="Q932877" start="926" end="931" title="sotol" label="sotol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016853" start="1033" end="1044" title="burnt mound" label="burnt mound"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143174" wikidata="Q213718" url="?curid=143174" title="Strawberry Fields Forever">
<text>&quot;Strawberry Fields Forever&quot; is a song by the English rock band the Beatles, written by John Lennon and credited to Lennon–McCartney. It was released on 13 February 1967 as a double A-side single with &quot;Penny Lane&quot;. It represented a departure from the group&#x27;s previous singles and a novel listening experience for the contemporary pop audience. While the song initially divided and confused music critics and the group&#x27;s fans, it proved highly influential on the emerging psychedelic genre. Its accompanying promotional film is similarly recognised as a pioneering work in the medium of music video.

Lennon based the song on his childhood memories of playing in the garden of Strawberry Field, a Salvation Army children&#x27;s home in Liverpool. Starting in November 1966, the band spent 45 hours in the studio, spread over five weeks, creating three versions of the track. The final recording combined two of those versions, which were entirely different in tempo, mood and musical key. It features reverse-recorded instrumentation, Mellotron flute sounds, an Indian swarmandal, and a fade-out/fade-in coda, as well as a cello and brass arrangement by producer George Martin. For the promotional film, the band used experimental techniques such as reverse effects, jump-cuts and superimposition.

The song was the first track the Beatles recorded after completing &quot;Revolver&quot; and was intended for inclusion on their forthcoming (as yet untitled) &quot;Sgt. Pepper&#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band&quot;. Instead, under pressure from their record company and management for new product, the group were forced to issue it as a single and they followed their usual practice of not including previously released singles on their albums. The double A-side peaked at number 2 on the &quot;Record Retailer&quot; chart, breaking the band&#x27;s four-year run of chart-topping singles in the UK. In the United States, &quot;Strawberry Fields Forever&quot; peaked at number 8 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100. To the band&#x27;s displeasure, the song was later included on the US &quot;Magical Mystery Tour&quot; LP.

Lennon viewed &quot;Strawberry Fields Forever&quot; as his finest work with the Beatles. After Lennon&#x27;s murder in New York City, a section of Central Park was named after the song. In 1996, the discarded first version of the song was issued on the outtakes compilation &quot;Anthology 2&quot;; in 2006, a new version was created for the remix album &quot;Love&quot;. Artists who have covered the song include Richie Havens, Todd Rundgren, Peter Gabriel, Ben Harper, and Los Fabulosos Cadillacs featuring Debbie Harry. In 1990, a version by the Madchester group Candy Flip became a top-ten hit in the UK and Ireland. The song was ranked number 7 on &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;″s updated 2021 list of &quot;The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time&quot;.

==Background and writing==

Strawberry Field was the name of a Salvation Army children&#x27;s home close to John Lennon&#x27;s childhood home in Woolton, a suburb of Liverpool. Lennon and his friends Pete Shotton, Nigel Walley and Ivan Vaughan used to play in the wooded garden behind the home. One of Lennon&#x27;s childhood treats was the garden party held each summer in Calderstones Park, near the home, where a Salvation Army brass band played. Lennon&#x27;s aunt Mimi Smith recalled: &quot;There was something about the place that always fascinated John. He could see it from his window … He used to hear the Salvation Army band [playing at the garden party], and he would pull me along, saying, &#x27;Hurry up, Mimi – we&#x27;re going to be late.&#x27;&quot;

Lennon began writing &quot;Strawberry Fields Forever&quot; in Almería, Spain, during the filming of Richard Lester&#x27;s &quot;How I Won the War&quot; in September–October 1966. The Beatles had just retired from touring after one of their most difficult periods, which included the &quot;more popular than Jesus&quot; controversy and being the target of mob violence in reaction to their unintentional snubbing of Philippines First Lady Imelda Marcos. Working on Lester&#x27;s film without his bandmates left Lennon feeling vulnerable; according to his wife Cynthia, he was also distraught to learn in late October that Alma Cogan, the English singer whom &quot;he&#x27;d earmarked to replace Aunt Mimi in his affections&quot;, had died in London at the age of 34. In the first versions that Lennon committed to tape, in September, there was no reference to Strawberry Field. Author Steve Turner says that at this stage, Lennon most likely drew inspiration from Nikos Kazantzakis&#x27;s autobiographical novel &quot;Report to Greco&quot;, which he was reading in Almería and &quot;tells of a writer searching for spiritual meaning&quot;.
Like &quot;Penny Lane&quot;, which Paul McCartney wrote in late 1966 in response to Lennon&#x27;s new song, &quot;Strawberry Fields Forever&quot; conveys nostalgia for the Beatles&#x27; early years in Liverpool. While both songs refer to actual locations, McCartney said that the two pieces also had strong surrealistic and psychedelic overtones. George Martin, the Beatles&#x27; producer, recalled that when he first heard &quot;Strawberry Fields Forever&quot;, he thought it conjured up a &quot;hazy, impressionistic dreamworld&quot;.

As with his &quot;Revolver&quot; compositions &quot;Tomorrow Never Knows&quot; and &quot;She Said She Said&quot;, &quot;Strawberry Fields Forever&quot; was informed by Lennon&#x27;s experiences with the hallucinogenic drug LSD, which caused him to question his identity and seek to dissolve his ego. In Turner&#x27;s description, the song&#x27;s opening line, &quot;Let me take you down&quot;, establishes Lennon as a &quot;spiritual leader&quot; in keeping with his statements in &quot;The Word&quot;, &quot;Rain&quot; and &quot;Tomorrow Never Knows&quot;, while Lennon&#x27;s contention that in Strawberry Field &quot;Nothing is real&quot; reflects the concept of maya (or &quot;illusion&quot;) as conveyed in the Hindu teachings that Lennon was also reading during his weeks on the film set. Lennon said the song reflected how he had felt &quot;different all my life&quot;; he called it &quot;psychoanalysis set to music&quot; and one of his most honest songs. In McCartney&#x27;s view, the lyrics reflect Lennon&#x27;s admiration of the nineteenth-century English writer Lewis Carroll, particularly his poem &quot;Jabberwocky&quot;.

The earliest demo of the song was recorded in Almería, and Lennon subsequently developed the melody and lyrics in England throughout November. Demos taped at his home, Kenwood, demonstrate his progress with the song and include parts played on a Mellotron, a tape-replay keyboard instrument he had purchased in August 1965. On the first Almería recording, the song had no refrain and only one verse, beginning: &quot;There&#x27;s no one on my wavelength / I mean, it&#x27;s either too high or too low&quot;. Lennon revised these words to make them more obscure, then wrote the melody and part of the lyrics to the chorus (which functioned as a bridge and did not yet include a reference to Strawberry Fields). After returning to England in early November, he added another verse and the mention of Strawberry Fields. The first verse on the released version was the last to be written, close to the time of the song&#x27;s recording. For the chorus, Lennon was again inspired by his childhood memories: the words &quot;nothing to get hung about&quot; were inspired by Aunt Mimi&#x27;s strict order not to play in the grounds of Strawberry Field, to which Lennon replied, &quot;They can&#x27;t hang you for it.&quot; The first verse Lennon wrote became the second one in the released version of the song, and the second verse he wrote became the last.

==Composition==

&quot;Strawberry Fields Forever&quot; was originally written on acoustic guitar in the key of C major. The recorded version was not in standard pitch after the tape speed was manipulated and the key is approximately B major. Among musicologists, Walter Everett describes it as &quot;midway between&quot; A and B over the opening minute and subsequently &quot;closer to B&quot;, while Dominic Pedler says that some consider it to be closer to A major.

The song begins with a flute-like introduction played on Mellotron, and involves a I–ii–I–VII–IV progression (in Roman numeral analysis). The vocals enter with the chorus instead of a verse. In Pedler&#x27;s description, it has &quot;non-diatonic chords and secondary dominants&quot; combining with &quot;chromatic melodic tension intensified through outrageous harmonisation and root movement&quot;. The phrase &quot;to Strawberry&quot; begins with a slightly dissonant G melody note against a prevailing F minor key, then uses the semitone dissonance B and B notes (the natural and sharpened 11th degrees against the Fm chord) until the consonant F note is reached on &quot;Fields&quot;. The same series of mostly dissonant melody notes covers the phrase &quot;nothing is real&quot; against the prevailing G7 chord (F7 in the key of A).

A half-bar complicates the metre of the choruses, as does the fact that the vocals begin in the middle of the first bar. The first verse follows the chorus and is eight bars long. The verse starts with an F major chord, which progresses to G minor, the submediant, serving as a deceptive cadence. According to musicologist Alan Pollack, the deceptive cadence is encountered in the verse, as the leading-tone never resolves into a I chord directly as expected. Instead, the leading note, harmonised as part of the dominant chord, resolves to the prevailing tonic (B) at the end of the verse, after tonicising the subdominant (IV) E chord, on &quot;dis&quot;agree&quot;&quot;. On the released recording, the second and third verses are introduced by a descending, raga-esque melody played on an Indian board-mounted zither, known as a swarmandal.

In the middle of the second chorus, brass is introduced, emphasising an ominous quality in the lyrics. After three verses and four choruses, the line &quot;Strawberry Fields Forever&quot; is repeated three times, and the song fades out, with interplay between electric guitar, cello and swarmandal. The song fades back in after a few seconds for what Everett terms a &quot;free-form coda&quot;. This avant-garde-style section features the Mellotron playing in a haunting tone – one achieved by recording the instrument&#x27;s &quot;Swinging Flutes&quot; setting in reverse – scattered drumming, discordant brass, and murmuring, after which the song fades for a second time.

==Recording==
===Overview===

The Beatles began recording &quot;Strawberry Fields Forever&quot; on 24 November 1966. It was the band&#x27;s first recording session since completing &quot;Revolver&quot;, in June, and marked the start of recording for what became the 1967 album &quot;Sgt. Pepper&#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band&quot;. It was also the Beatles&#x27; first group activity since the end of their final US tour, on 29 August. Recording took place in Studio 2 at EMI Studios (now Abbey Road Studios) in London, using a four-track machine.

Before the session, in October, Brian Epstein, the Beatles&#x27; manager, had informed EMI that the band would not be releasing any new music for the Christmas market. On 10 November, newspapers reported that there would be no further concert tours by the Beatles. The band&#x27;s lack of activity and their highly publicised individual pursuits since September were interpreted by the press as a sign that the band were on the verge of splitting up. Their return to the recording studio was given front-page coverage in some newspapers.

George Harrison, who had been travelling in India during the Beatles&#x27; lay-off, recalled there being a &quot;more profound ambience&quot; in the band when they reunited to record &quot;Strawberry Fields Forever&quot;. Lennon said that, having failed to connect with anyone on Lester&#x27;s film set, &quot;I was never so glad to see the others. Seeing them made me feel normal again.&quot; The song&#x27;s working title was &quot;It&#x27;s Not Too Bad&quot;.&lt;ref name=&quot;Fontenot/About&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; The song took 45 hours to record, spread over five weeks. It was the most complex recording the Beatles had attempted up to this point, and involved three distinct versions of the song; each one was different in structure, key and tempo, yet the released recording was created through a combination of the final two versions.

Together with &quot;Penny Lane&quot; and &quot;When I&#x27;m Sixty-Four&quot;,&lt;ref name=&quot;Irvin/Mojo&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; &quot;Strawberry Fields Forever&quot; established the theme for the early part of the &quot;Sgt. Pepper&quot; project – namely, a nostalgic look back at the band members&#x27; childhoods in northern England. McCartney has said that this was never planned or formalised as an album-wide concept, but acknowledged that it served as a &quot;device&quot; or underlying theme throughout the project.

===Take 1===

After Lennon played the song for the other Beatles on his acoustic guitar, on 24 November, he changed to his Epiphone Casino electric guitar for the recordings. McCartney played Mellotron, which, following Lennon&#x27;s lead, the other three Beatles had acquired their own examples of, through Moody Blues keyboardist Mike Pinder. Harrison also played electric guitar, emphasising a bass line beside Lennon&#x27;s rhythm, and Ringo Starr played drums. McCartney wrote the melody for the Mellotron introduction, although on the first take the instrument appears more in the role of backing accompaniment, relative to its prominence on the officially released recording.

Take 1 opened with a verse, starting &quot;Living is easy with eyes closed&quot;, instead of the chorus, which starts the released version. The first verse also led directly to the second, with no chorus between. Lennon&#x27;s vocals were automatically double-tracked from the words &quot;Strawberry Fields Forever&quot; through the end of the last verse. The last verse, beginning &quot;Always, no sometimes&quot;, has three-part harmonies, with McCartney and Harrison singing &quot;dreamy background vocals&quot;. Onto this take 1, Harrison also overdubbed slide guitar parts over the choruses, played on the Mellotron&#x27;s guitar setting and using the instrument&#x27;s pitch control to achieve the slide effect. This version was soon abandoned; it went unreleased until a new mix was included on the &quot;Anthology 2&quot; outtakes compilation in 1996, although the harmony vocals were cut from the track.

===Take 7===

On 28 November, the band reassembled to try a different arrangement. The second version of the song featured McCartney&#x27;s Mellotron introduction followed by the chorus. The instrumentation on the basic track was similar to that for take 1, but with the inclusion of maracas. Take 4 was considered sufficient for mix down and overdubs, which included a lead vocal by Lennon, McCartney&#x27;s bass guitar, and Harrison again playing the slide parts, including what author John Winn terms &quot;Morse code blips&quot;, on Mellotron.

Having taken acetates home overnight, the band decided to redo the song again on 29 November, using the same arrangement. The second take that day was chosen as best and subjected to overdubs, such as vocal and bass guitar. In his lead guitar part, Harrison plays arpeggio chord patterns, after Lennon had struggled to master the picking technique. Lennon&#x27;s vocal was recorded with the tape running fast so that when played back at normal speed the tonality would be altered, giving his voice a slurred sound.

During the subsequent mix-down process, creating what became take 7, Lennon added a second vocal over the choruses. The other final overdubs were piano and further bass. This version would be used only for the first minute of the released recording.

===Take 26===
After recording the second version of the song, Lennon wanted to do something different with it. Martin recalled: &quot;He&#x27;d wanted it as a gentle dreaming song, but he said it had come out too raucous. He asked me if I could write him a new line-up with the strings. So I wrote a new score (with four trumpets and three cellos) ...&quot; For this purpose, another basic track was recorded on 8 and 9 December, with the group attempting the song at a faster tempo than before. At the start of the first session, recording was overseen by Dave Harries, an EMI technical engineer, in the temporary absence of Martin and Geoff Emerick, the Beatles&#x27; usual recording engineer. The band focused on achieving a percussion-heavy rhythm track, which included Starr&#x27;s drums, and backwards-recorded hi-hat and cymbals. The latter process involved writing down the parts before Starr played them, as Harrison had done for his backwards guitar solo on &quot;I&#x27;m Only Sleeping&quot;. Described by Winn as a &quot;cacophony of noise&quot;, the 8 December tape also included timpani and bongos, played by McCartney and Harrison, and other percussion, which, in Harries&#x27; account, was provided by Beatles associates Mal Evans, Neil Aspinall and Terry Doran.

At the start of the 9 December session, parts of two of the fifteen new takes were edited together into one performance, which was then mixed down to a single track on the four-track master. The second of those takes (numbered take 24) consisted of the heavy drum break and accompanying percussion used over the song&#x27;s coda, and included Lennon&#x27;s spoken comments &quot;Calm down, Ringo&quot; and &quot;Cranberry sauce&quot;. In Lewisohn&#x27;s description, further percussion, including a pounding drum part by Starr, and Harrison&#x27;s swarmandal were recorded onto one of the available tracks at this time. Other overdubs, which appear towards the end of the track, included lead guitar (played by McCartney), piano and the coda&#x27;s reversed Mellotron flutes. Based on the evidence of bootlegs available by 2009, Winn dates the addition of swarmandal to after Martin&#x27;s orchestral overdubs. With regard to the main piano part, he describes it as the Mellotron&#x27;s &quot;&#x27;piano riff&#x27; tape&quot;, rather than a genuine instrumental contribution.

The session for Martin&#x27;s brass and cello arrangement took place on 15 December. The group included cellist Joy Hall - sometimes mistakenly credited as &#x27;John&#x27; Hall. Her performance made her the first woman to appear on a Beatles song. The second was Sheila Bromberg who played harp on &quot;She&#x27;s Leaving Home&quot; a number of weeks later. The parts were performed in the key of C major but taped so that on playback they sounded in B major. Another mix down was then carried out, reducing all the contributions to two tape tracks. Author Ian MacDonald comments that Martin&#x27;s contribution heightens the song&#x27;s Indian qualities, as represented first by the swarmandal, through his scoring of the cellos to &quot;[weave] exotically&quot; around McCartney&#x27;s &quot;sitar-like&quot; guitar figures before the coda. Further overdubs, on what was now named take 26, were two vocal parts by Lennon, the second one doubling the main vocal over the choruses. Lennon re-recorded one of his vocals on 21 December, singing a harmony over the final chorus. Some piano was also added at this time, along with a snare drum part.

===Final edit===
After reviewing the acetates of the new remake and the previous version, Lennon told Martin that he liked both the &quot;original, lighter&quot; take 7 and &quot;the intense, scored version&quot;, and wanted to combine the two. Martin had to tell Lennon that the orchestral score was at a faster tempo and in a higher key than the earlier recording. Lennon assured him: &quot;You can fix it, George.&quot;

On 22 December, Martin and Emerick carried out the difficult task of joining takes 7 and 26 together. With only a pair of editing scissors, two tape machines and a vari-speed control, Emerick compensated for the differences in key and speed by increasing the speed of the first version and decreasing the speed of the second. He then spliced the versions, starting the orchestral score in the middle of the second chorus. Since take 7 did not include a chorus after the first verse, he also spliced in the first seven words of the second chorus from that take. The pitch-shifting in joining the versions gave Lennon&#x27;s lead vocal an otherworldly, &quot;swimming&quot; quality.

During the editing process, the portion towards the end of take 26, before the arrival of the reversed Mellotron flutes and siren-like trumpet blasts, was faded out temporarily, creating a false ending. On the completed take from 15 December, however, the swarmandal and other sounds were interrupted by the abrupt entrance of the coda&#x27;s heavy drum and percussion piece. Martin said that the premature fadeout was his idea, to hide some errors in the busy percussion track. Among the faintly audible comments over the coda, &quot;Cranberry sauce&quot; was taken to be Lennon intoning &quot;I buried Paul&quot; by proponents of the &quot;Paul is Dead&quot; hoax, a theory that contended that McCartney had died in November 1966 and been replaced in the Beatles by a lookalike.

Shortly before his death in 1980, Lennon expressed dissatisfaction with the final version of the song, saying it was &quot;badly recorded&quot; and accusing McCartney of subconsciously sabotaging the recording. Martin remained proud of the track; he described it as &quot;a complete tone poem – like a modern Debussy&quot;.

==Promotional film==

By January 1967, Epstein was under pressure from the Beatles&#x27; record company to release a new single by the group. Martin told him that they had recorded &quot;Strawberry Fields Forever&quot; and &quot;Penny Lane&quot;, which, in his opinion, were &quot;two all-time great songs&quot;. The decision was made to issue them as a double A-side single, a format the Beatles had used for their previous single, &quot;Eleanor Rigby&quot; / &quot;Yellow Submarine&quot;, in August 1966. The Beatles produced a film clip for &quot;Strawberry Fields Forever&quot;, in a continuation of their policy since 1965 of avoiding the need to promote a single with numerous personal appearances on television. It was filmed on 30 and 31 January 1967 at Knole Park in Sevenoaks, Kent. The following week, the band shot part of the promotional film for &quot;Penny Lane&quot; at the same location.

The clip was directed by Peter Goldmann, a Swedish television director who had drawn inspiration in his work from Lester&#x27;s style in the Beatles&#x27; 1964 film &quot;A Hard Day&#x27;s Night&quot;. Goldmann was recommended to the Beatles by their mutual friend Klaus Voormann. One of the band&#x27;s assistants, Tony Bramwell, served as producer. Bramwell recalls that, inspired by Voormann&#x27;s comment on hearing &quot;Strawberry Fields Forever&quot; – that &quot;the whole thing sounded like it was played on a strange instrument&quot; – he spent two days dressing up a large tree in the park to resemble &quot;a piano and harp combined, with strings&quot;. Writing in 2007, music critic John Harris remarked that Bramwell&#x27;s set design reflected the &quot;collision of serenity and almost gothic eeriness&quot; evident in the finished song.&lt;ref name=&quot;Harris/Mojo&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;
The clip presented the Beatles&#x27; new group image, since all four now sported moustaches, following Harrison&#x27;s lead when he left for India in September 1966. In addition to a horseshoe moustache, Lennon wore his round &quot;granny&quot; glasses for the first time as a member of the Beatles, in keeping with his look as Private Gripweed in &quot;How I Won the War&quot;, for which he had also shorn off his long hair. Combined with their psychedelic clothing, the band&#x27;s appearance contrasted sharply with the youthful &quot;moptop&quot; image of their touring years; this former image and identity had instead been adopted by the Monkees, an American television and recording act based on the Beatles as they had appeared in &quot;A Hard Day&#x27;s Night&quot; and &quot;Help!&quot; In author Kevin Courrier&#x27;s description, Lennon now resembled a character from an Arthur Conan Doyle mystery, while Harrison looked equally austere, with his beard and heavy balaclava.
Instead of a performance of the song, the clip relies on abstract imagery and features reverse film effects, long dissolves, jump-cuts including from day- to night-time, superimposition and extreme close-up shots. The Beatles are shown playing and later pouring paint over the upright piano; at one point, McCartney appears to leap from the ground onto a branch of the tree.&lt;ref name=&quot;Wawzenek/UCR&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; In his commentary on the promo clip, music critic Chris Ingham writes:
Beautifully and spookily lit ... much attention is given to close-ups of The Beatles&#x27; faces and facial hair, as if the viewer is invited to contemplate the significance of the newly furry Fabs. There&#x27;s an appropriately surreal air about the film ... which, when experienced simultaneously with The Beatles&#x27; extraordinary new music, is deliciously disorientating. The final scene of The Beatles pouring pots of coloured paint onto the &quot;piano&quot; is oddly shocking, but brilliantly memorable as a statement of iconoclastic artistic intent.

==Release==

The double A-side single was issued by Capitol Records in the US on 13 February 1967 (as Capitol 5810), and by EMI&#x27;s Parlophone label in the United Kingdom on 17 February (as Parlophone R 5570). Aside from the compilation album &quot;A Collection of Beatles Oldies&quot;, issued in the UK but not the US, it was the first release by the Beatles since &quot;Revolver&quot; and their August 1966 single. It was also the first Beatles single in the UK to be presented in a picture sleeve. The front of the sleeve contained a studio photo that again demonstrated the band&#x27;s adoption of facial hair; on the back cover were individual pictures of the four Beatles as infants, which heightened the connection to a Liverpool childhood. Recalling the reaction to the new single and the expectations it created for &quot;Sgt. Pepper&quot;, music critic Greil Marcus later wrote: &quot;If this extraordinary music was merely a taste of what The Beatles were up to, what would the album be like?&quot; Comparing the two sides in his book &quot;Electric Shock&quot;, Peter Doggett likens &quot;Penny Lane&quot; to pop art in its evoking &quot;multifaceted substance out of the everyday&quot;, and describes &quot;Strawberry Fields Forever&quot; as art pop, &quot;self-consciously excluding the mass audience&quot;.

The promotional film for &quot;Strawberry Fields Forever&quot; was the more experimental of Goldmann&#x27;s clips and underlined the Beatles&#x27; ties to the avant-garde scene. The band&#x27;s new look was the focus of much scrutiny, as promotion for the single and its musical content left many listeners unable to recognise the act as the Beatles. The films were first broadcast in America on &quot;The Ed Sullivan Show&quot; and in Britain on &quot;Top of the Pops&quot;, a day before the respective release dates in those two countries. On 25 February, they aired on &quot;The Hollywood Palace&quot;, a traditional US variety program hosted by actor Van Johnson. Amid screams from female members of the studio audience, Johnson bemusedly introduced &quot;Strawberry Fields Forever&quot; with the comment: &quot;It&#x27;s a musical romp through an open field with psychedelic overtones and a feeling of expanded consciousness … If you know what that means, let me know …&quot; The films attracted a similar level of confusion on the more youth-focused &quot;American Bandstand&quot;, on 11 March, where Dick Clark invited comments from his studio audience. In the description of author Doyle Greene, the varied opinions towards the &quot;rebranded &#x27;counterculture Beatles&#x27;&quot; and their new music demonstrated a &quot;gendering&quot; of popular culture: male reaction was marginally more favourable than female, and women variously focused on the &quot;weird&quot;, &quot;ugly&quot; or &quot;grandfather&quot;-like appearance of the band members. Courrier says the hostility towards &quot;Strawberry Fields Forever&quot; was reflective of how pop fans felt abandoned by the Beatles, with one teenager commenting that the group had turned &quot;deliberately weird&quot; and &quot;ought to stop being so clever and give us tunes we can enjoy&quot;.

In Britain, &quot;Strawberry Fields Forever&quot; / &quot;Penny Lane&quot; was the first Beatles single since &quot;Please Please Me&quot; in 1963 to fail to reach number 1 on &quot;Record Retailer&quot;″s chart (later the UK Singles Chart). It was held at number 2 behind Engelbert Humperdinck&#x27;s &quot;Release Me&quot;, the year&#x27;s biggest-selling single. (In George Martin&#x27;s book &quot;Summer of Love&quot; he claims the two songs were counted as two separate singles on the chart, severely hampering the record&#x27;s chances of reaching the top - but none of the UK&#x27;s charts listed the two sides separately, including the &quot;Record Retailer&quot; chart, and so being defined as a double A-side cannot have affected the single&#x27;s chart position.) Following the speculation that the Beatles were due to disband, their failure to secure the number 1 spot was trumpeted in the UK press as a sign that the group&#x27;s popularity was declining. At the time, McCartney said he was not upset because Humperdinck&#x27;s song was a &quot;completely different type of thing&quot;, while Harrison acknowledged that &quot;Strawberry Fields Forever&quot;, like all of the Beatles&#x27; latest music, was bound to alienate much of their audience but would also win them new fans. On the national chart compiled by &quot;Melody Maker&quot; magazine, however, the combination topped the singles list for three weeks.

On the US &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 the two sides of a single were counted separately whether defined as a double A-side or not (for example, &quot;She&#x27;s a Woman&quot; reached number 4 in 1964 despite being a B-side). &quot;Penny Lane&quot; topped the chart for one week, while &quot;Strawberry Fields Forever&quot; peaked at number 8. &quot;Penny Lane&quot; was the side favoured by chart compilers in Australia, where the single was number 1 for five weeks. The single was also number 1 in Canada and Norway, and peaked at number 4 in France.

==Critical reception==
Among contemporary reviews of the single, &quot;Melody Maker&quot; said that the combination of musical instruments, studio techniques and vocal effect on &quot;Strawberry Fields Forever&quot; created a &quot;swooping, deep, mystic kaleidoscope of sound&quot;, and concluded, &quot;The whole concept shows the Beatles in a new, far-out light.&quot; The &quot;NME&quot;″s Derek Johnson confessed to being both fascinated and confused by the track, writing: &quot;Certainly the most unusual and way-out single The Beatles have yet produced – both in lyrical content and scoring. Quite honestly, I don&#x27;t really know what to make of it.&quot; According to Beatles biographer Robert Rodriguez, Johnson&#x27;s comments typified the &quot;bewilderment&quot; and &quot;mood of disquiet&quot; that the song initially aroused in the music press. &quot;The Daily Mail&quot;″s entertainment reporter wrote: &quot;What&#x27;s happening to the Beatles? They have become contemplative, secretive, exclusive and excluded – four mystics with moustaches.&quot;&lt;ref name=&quot;O&#x27;Gorman/MojoSpecial&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;

In the United States, the single&#x27;s experimental qualities initiated an upsurge in the ongoing critical discourse on the aesthetics and artistry of pop music, as, centring on the Beatles&#x27; work, writers sought to elevate pop in the cultural landscape for the first time. Among these laudatory appraisals, &quot;Time&quot; magazine hailed the song as &quot;the latest sample of the Beatles&#x27; astonishing inventiveness&quot;. The writer said that, since 1963:
[The] Beatles have developed into the single most creative force in pop music. Wherever they go, the pack follows. And where they have gone in recent months, not even their most ardent supporters would ever have dreamed of. They have bridged the heretofore impassable gap between rock and classical, mixing elements of Bach, Oriental and electronic music with vintage twang to achieve the most compellingly original sounds ever heard in pop music.

&quot;Time&quot; concluded by saying that the multitude of &quot;dissonances and eerie space-age sounds&quot; on the track were partly the product of altered tape speed and direction, and commented: &quot;This is nothing new to electronic composers, but employing such methods in a pop song is electrifying.&quot; In his review of &quot;Sgt. Pepper&quot; in June 1967, William Mann of &quot;The Times&quot; recognised the Beatles as the originators of the vogue for &quot;electronically-manipulated clusters of sound&quot;, and he added: &quot;In some records, it&#x27;s just a generalised effect. But in &#x27;Strawberry Fields&#x27;, it was poetically and precisely applied.&quot;

Richie Unterberger of AllMusic describes &quot;Strawberry Fields Forever&quot; as &quot;one of The Beatles&#x27; peak achievements and one of the finest Lennon–McCartney songs&quot;. Ian MacDonald wrote in his book &quot;Revolution in the Head&quot; that it &quot;shows expression of a high order … few if any [contemporary composers] are capable of displaying feeling and fantasy so direct, spontaneous, and original.&quot; According to music critic Tim Riley, the song &quot;transformed Lennon&#x27;s creative arc&quot; by &quot;expand[ing] the hallucinogenic drone of &#x27;Rain&#x27; into layered colours that shifted when lit by his vocal inflections&quot; and by inaugurating his use of free-form verse as a lyrical device. Riley adds that while it represented Lennon&#x27;s &quot;first glimpse of life&quot; outside the Beatles, &quot;part of the recording&#x27;s ironic pull lies in how the Beatles drape a group sensibility around Lennon&#x27;s abstract psyche, something only the most intimate of musical friends could do.&quot; In his commentary on the track in &quot;The Beatles&#x27; Diary&quot;, Peter Doggett describes the song as &quot;the greatest pop record ever made&quot; and &quot;a record that never dates, because it lives outside time&quot;. He rues the single&#x27;s failure to top the now-official UK chart as &quot;arguably the most disgraceful statistic in chart history&quot;.

==Cultural influence and legacy==
===Reactions from contemporaries===

Upon its release, The Who&#x27;s Pete Townshend, a regular on London&#x27;s psychedelic club scene, described &quot;Strawberry Fields Forever&quot; as &quot;utterly bizarre, creative, strange and different&quot;. Mark Lindsay of the US band Paul Revere &amp; the Raiders listened to the single at home with his producer, Terry Melcher; as &quot;the song ended we both just looked at each other. I said, ″&quot;Now&quot; what the fuck are we gonna do?&#x27; With that single, the Beatles raised the ante as to what a pop record should be.&quot; Lindsay said he then ensured that the clips for both songs were broadcast on the Raiders&#x27; television show, &quot;Where the Action Is&quot;.

In a famous anecdote, Brian Wilson, who had been struggling to complete the Beach Boys&#x27; &quot;Smile&quot; album, first heard &quot;Strawberry Fields Forever&quot; on his car radio while under the influence of barbiturates.&lt;ref name=&quot;Leaf/BeautifulDreamer&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; In the recollection of his passenger at the time, Michael Vosse, &quot;[Wilson] just shook his head and said, &#x27;They did it already – what I wanted to do with &quot;Smile&quot;. Maybe it&#x27;s too late.&#x27;&quot;&lt;ref name=&quot;Kiehl/BaltimoreSun&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Vosse recalled that they then exchanged laughter, although &quot;at the moment he said it, he sounded very serious.&quot; According to author Steven Gaines, the &quot;wondrous and different-sounding&quot; quality of the Beatles&#x27; single was one of several factors that accelerated Wilson&#x27;s emotional descent and led to him abandoning &quot;Smile&quot;. In response to a fan&#x27;s question on his website in 2014, Wilson denied that hearing the song had &quot;weakened&quot; him and called it a &quot;very weird record&quot; that he enjoyed.

&quot;Strawberry Fields Forever&quot; is featured in its near-entirety in Canadian structural film director Michael Snow&#x27;s 1967 film &quot;Wavelength&quot;, playing on a radio in a room that is gradually zoomed in on through the course of the film. It was filmed in December 1966, but Snow began editing it in early 1967 and was significantly drawn to the song when it was released, choosing to overdub it over a song playing in the original footage.

===Psychedelia, recording and music videos===
The song was influential on psychedelic rock and, in Chris Ingham&#x27;s description, it established &quot;the standard and style for the entire psychedelic pop movement that would follow&quot;. Ian MacDonald recognises the track as having &quot;extended the range of studio techniques developed on &quot;Revolver&quot;, opening up possibilities for pop which, given sufficient invention, could result in unprecedented sound images&quot;. He views it as having launched both the &quot;English pop-pastoral mood&quot; typified by bands such as Pink Floyd, Family, Traffic and Fairport Convention, and English psychedelia&#x27;s LSD-inspired preoccupation with &quot;nostalgia for the innocent vision of a child&quot;. Among other music historians, Simon Philo describes much of Pink Floyd&#x27;s first album, &quot;The Piper at the Gates of Dawn&quot; (1967), as being in the style of the &quot;patented British psychedelia&quot; introduced by &quot;Strawberry Fields Forever&quot;. David Howard says the production was a &quot;direct touchstone&quot; for Pink Floyd, the Move, the Smoke and other bands in London&#x27;s upcoming psychedelic scene.

Although the Mellotron had been a feature of Manfred Mann&#x27;s late 1966 hit single &quot;Semi-Detached Suburban Mr James&quot;, its appearance on &quot;Strawberry Fields Forever&quot; remains the most celebrated use of the instrument on a pop or rock recording. Mike Pinder, whose band the Moody Blues went on to make extensive use of Mellotron and swarmandal in their work, said he was &quot;in bliss&quot; when he heard the keyboard&#x27;s flute sound on the Beatles&#x27; single. Together with the resonant tone of Starr&#x27;s drums, the cello arrangement on &quot;Strawberry Fields Forever&quot;, as with &quot;I Am the Walrus&quot;, was much admired by other musicians and producers, and proved highly influential on 1970s bands such as Electric Light Orchestra and Wizzard.

Walter Everett identifies the song&#x27;s ending as an example of the Beatles&#x27; continued pioneering of the &quot;fade-out–fade-in coda&quot;, further to their use of this device on the 1966 B-side &quot;Rain&quot;. He cites &quot;Helter Skelter&quot; as a later example, as well as Led Zeppelin&#x27;s 1969 track &quot;Thank You&quot; and, as a direct response to the Beatles&#x27; lead, both sides of the Rolling Stones&#x27; August 1967 single, &quot;We Love You&quot; and &quot;Dandelion&quot;. According to historian David Simonelli, further to &quot;Tomorrow Never Knows&quot; in 1966, &quot;Strawberry Fields Forever&quot; and &quot;Penny Lane&quot; &quot;establish[ed] the Beatles as the most avant-garde [pop] composers of the postwar era&quot;. He also says that the single heralded the group&#x27;s brand of Romanticism as a central tenet of psychedelic rock, which ensured that &quot;The Beatles&#x27; vision dominated the entire rock music world.&quot; In his contribution to the book &quot;In Their Lives: Great Writers on Great Beatles Songs&quot;, Adam Gopnik describes the single as the 1960s&#x27; most important work of art and &quot;the one that articulated the era&#x27;s hopes for a crossover of pop art and high intricacy&quot;.

Further to the band&#x27;s pioneering use of promotional films since 1965, the clip for the song served as an early example of what became known as a music video. In 1985, the &quot;Strawberry Fields Forever&quot; and &quot;Penny Lane&quot; clips were the oldest selections included in the New York Museum of Modern Art (MoMA)&#x27;s exhibition of the most influential music videos. The two films occupied a similar place in MoMA&#x27;s 2003 &quot;Golden Oldies of Music Video&quot; exhibition, where they were presented by avant-garde artist Laurie Anderson. The &quot;Strawberry Fields Forever&quot; clip also provided the inspiration for the start of the fan vidding phenomenon in 1975. Kandy Fong, influenced by the Beatles not attempting to perform the music, set images from the &quot;Star Trek&quot; TV series to an apparently unrelated musical soundtrack.

===Strawberry Field, accolades and cultural depictions===
Strawberry Field became a popular visiting place for fans of Lennon and the Beatles as a result of the song. In 1975, the Liverpool Public Relations Office published a tourism media package titled &quot;Nothing to Get Hung About&quot;, which contained Beatles-related postcards and history, and a map of Liverpool. By 2011, the level of graffiti left by visitors at Strawberry Field had forced the Salvation Army to have the entrance gates removed and later relocated to the Beatles Experience centre in Liverpool. In July 2017, the Salvation Army began raising funds – through the sale of T-shirts and mugs emblazoned with &quot;Nothing is real&quot; and other lines from Lennon&#x27;s lyrics – to help finance the construction of a new building at Strawberry Field. The purpose of the building is to help provide job opportunities for young adults with learning difficulties, and to commemorate Lennon, in both an indoor exhibition and a &quot;garden of spiritual reflection&quot;.&lt;ref name=&quot;Arnold/Times&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;

The Strawberry Fields memorial in New York&#x27;s Central Park is named after the song. The memorial and the Strawberry Fields area of the park, spanning 3.5 acres, was officially dedicated by Yoko Ono in Lennon&#x27;s memory in October 1985. In addition to referencing &quot;Strawberry Fields Forever&quot; in its title, the 2013 Spanish film &quot;Living Is Easy with Eyes Closed&quot; is a fictional account based on real-life events when a 41-year-old teacher from Cartagena visited Lennon in Almería when he was writing the song.

&quot;Strawberry Fields Forever&quot; is one of the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame&#x27;s &quot;500 Songs That Shaped Rock and Roll&quot; and in 1999 was inducted into the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences&#x27; Grammy Hall of Fame. In the June 1997 issue of &quot;Mojo&quot; magazine, Jon Savage included &quot;Strawberry Fields Forever&quot; in his list &quot;Psychedelia: The 100 Greatest Classics&quot; and wrote: &quot;When this first came on radio in early 1967, it sounded like nothing else, with its wracked vocal, out-of-tune brass section and queasy strings.&quot; In 2004, &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; ranked the track at number 76 on its list of the &quot;500 Greatest Songs of All Time&quot;, a placing the song retained in the magazine&#x27;s 2011 list, then was re-ranked at number 7 on its 2021 list, the band&#x27;s highest placement. On a similar list compiled by &quot;Q&quot; in 2006, it appeared at number 31. In 2010, &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; placed &quot;Strawberry Fields Forever&quot; at number 3 on its list of the &quot;100 Greatest Beatles Songs&quot;. It was ranked as the second-best Beatles song by &quot;Mojo&quot; in 2006, after &quot;A Day in the Life&quot;.

==Subsequent releases and remixes==
In keeping with the Beatles&#x27; usual philosophy that tracks released on a single should not appear on new albums, both &quot;Strawberry Fields Forever&quot; and &quot;Penny Lane&quot; were left off &quot;Sgt. Pepper&#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band&quot;.&lt;ref name=&quot;Fontenot/About2&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Martin later stated that this was an approach that he had encouraged, and it was a &quot;dreadful mistake&quot;. The Beatles were displeased that Capitol then included the two songs, along with the band&#x27;s other non-album singles tracks from 1967, on the &quot;Magical Mystery Tour&quot; LP, which the company released as a full-length album, in contrast to the six-track double EP released in the UK and many other countries.

The stereo version of the &quot;Magical Mystery Tour&quot; LP contained a 29 December 1966 mix of &quot;Strawberry Fields Forever&quot;, in which the trumpets and cellos pan abruptly from left to right at the point where takes 7 and 26 are joined. By the time the album was released on CD, this mix had been superseded by a stereo remix, originally prepared for a 1971 West German issue of &quot;Magical Mystery Tour&quot;, which omitted the panning effect at the join point, but added a right-to-left panning to the swarmandal scale introducing the second and third verses.

&quot;Strawberry Fields Forever&quot; was sequenced as the opening track of the 1973 compilation album &quot;The Beatles 1967–1970&quot;, and the single charted again in Britain, peaking at number 32, when EMI reissued all 22 of the Beatles&#x27; UK singles in March 1976. In 1996, three previously unreleased versions of the song appeared on &quot;Anthology 2&quot;: one of Lennon&#x27;s home demos from November 1966; an altered version of the first studio take; and the complete take 7, in mono, edited with an extension of the coda&#x27;s drums and percussion track from 9 December. In 2006, a newly mixed version of the song was included on the album &quot;Love&quot;. This mash-up takes sections from an acoustic demo, take 1 and then take 26, and the ending incorporates elements from &quot;Sgt. Pepper&#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band&quot;, &quot;In My Life&quot;, &quot;I&#x27;m Only Sleeping&quot;, &quot;Penny Lane&quot;, &quot;Piggies&quot; and &quot;Hello, Goodbye&quot;. In 2015, the promo film was included in the three-disc versions (titled &quot;1+&quot;) of the Beatles&#x27; &quot;1&quot; compilation. A new stereo mix was created by Giles Martin to accompany the clip. This version appeared on CD in 2017 on the two-disc and six-disc 50th-anniversary editions of &quot;Sgt. Pepper&quot;, together with a selection of outtakes from the &quot;Strawberry Fields Forever&quot; sessions, including a complete take 26.

==Cover versions==
===Candy Flip===
&quot;Strawberry Fields Forever&quot; returned to the charts in 1990 when the duo Candy Flip, one of the British acts associated with the Madchester revival of 1960s psychedelia and fashion, released an electronic version of the track.&lt;ref name=&quot;Sutton/AM&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; It peaked at number three on the UK Singles Chart in March that year, and number seven in Ireland. The recording was also popular on college and indie radio in the US, where it peaked at number 11 on the Modern Rock Tracks chart.

Bill Coleman from &quot;Billboard&quot; commented that the remake was &quot;a stroke of genius&quot;, adding: &quot;It&#x27;s one of those records that make you say to yourself &#x27;how come I didn&#x27;t think of that&#x27; ... An esoteric reading and tasteful production carried by a lazy hip-hop beat. If picked up stateside this could (and deserves to) be massive!&quot; In her contemporary review for &quot;The Network Forty&quot;, Diane Tameecha described the single as &quot;what happens when Liverpool meets Manchester&quot;. She said that the track was an &quot;instantly likable cover&quot; on which &quot;Relatively sparse accompaniment, in the form of Pet Shop Boys&#x27; keyboard sounds mixed with that now &#x27;classic&#x27; house drum sound, lends a cool flavor to the old Fab Four workhorse.&quot; Dele Fadele from &quot;NME&quot; declared it as a &quot;cheeky update&quot;, that &quot;shook &quot;TOTP&quot; to the rafters&quot;. In his review of Candy Flip&#x27;s debut album, &quot;Madstock...&quot;, Tim DiGravina of AllMusic describes &quot;Strawberry Fields Forever&quot; as an &quot;extremely successful&quot; reworking of the Beatles&#x27; original, and admires it as one of the tracks that convey &quot;the joys of perfect, happy places that simply can&#x27;t exist&quot;.

===Other artists===
&quot;Strawberry Fields Forever&quot; has been recorded by many other artists. Tomorrow, a band that, along with Pink Floyd and Soft Machine, spearheaded London&#x27;s psychedelic scene, drew heavily from the Beatles&#x27; work in their February 1968 release &quot;Tomorrow&quot; and included a cover of the song on that album. The self-titled debut album by American rock band Vanilla Fudge, released in August 1967, contained a brief homage to &quot;Strawberry Fields Forever&quot; at the end of their cover of &quot;Eleanor Rigby&quot;. (The homage is entitled &quot;ELDS&quot; on CD versions of the album, and CD versions of the album in fact additionally spell out an acrostic of the song as an homage, with portions of preceding tracks entitled &quot;STRA&quot;, &quot;WBER&quot; and &quot;RYFI&quot;.) In August 1969, Richie Havens performed &quot;Strawberry Fields Forever&quot; as part of his set to open the Woodstock Festival.

In 1976, a version by Todd Rundgren was released on his album &quot;Faithful&quot;, and Peter Gabriel covered the track in the musical documentary &quot;All This and World War II&quot;. Highlighting the line &quot;Living is easy with eyes closed&quot;, Gabriel&#x27;s recording accompanies newsreel footage of British prime minister Neville Chamberlain&#x27;s &quot;Peace for our time&quot; declaration after his meeting with Adolf Hitler in Munich in 1938. A recording by Ben Harper was used in the 2001 film &quot;I Am Sam&quot;, and Jim Sturgess and Joe Anderson covered the track for the 2007 film &quot;Across the Universe&quot;. Los Fabulosos Cadillacs recorded a ska version of the song featuring Debbie Harry for their 1995 album &quot;Rey Azúcar&quot;, which was a hit in Latin America.

The song has also been covered by the Bee Gees, the Bobs, Eugene Chadbourne, Sandy Farina, Laurence Juber, David Lanz, Cyndi Lauper, Me First and the Gimme Gimmes, Mother&#x27;s Finest, Odetta, Andy Partridge, the Shadows, Plastic Penny, the Ventures and Cassandra Wilson. The vocal melody for &quot;Strawberry Fields Forever&quot; provided the piano score of experimental classical composer Alvin Lucier&#x27;s 1990 composition &quot;Nothing Is Real&quot;.

==Personnel==
According to Ian MacDonald, except where noted:

The Beatles
*John Lennon – vocals, rhythm guitar, bongos, Mellotron (end)
*Paul McCartney – Mellotron (take 7 portion), bass guitar, piano, lead guitar (end), timpani, bongos
*George Harrison – lead guitar (take 7 portion), Mellotron (slide guitar sound), swarmandal, timpani, maracas
*Ringo Starr – drums, percussion
*uncredited – tack piano

Additional musicians
==Charts==
===Beatles version===
===Candy Flip version===
==Certifications==

==Notes==
==References==
==Sources==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==External links==

* Full lyrics for the song at the Beatles&#x27; official website
* Portion of the promo clip on the Beatles&#x27; YouTube channel
* Kent Film Office article on &quot;Strawberry Fields Forever&quot; and &quot;Penny Lane&quot; filming 
*Handwritten partial early draft manuscript of &quot;Strawberry Fields Forever&quot; written by John Lennon at the British Library</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q213718" start="6" end="31" title="Strawberry Fields Forever" label="Strawberry Fields Forever"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="63" end="67" title="Rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="73" end="84" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="97" end="108" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q239177" start="125" end="141" title="Lennon–McCartney" label="Lennon–McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q215233" start="184" end="197" title="double A-side" label="double A-side"/>
<link wikidata="Q842168" start="216" end="226" title="Penny Lane" label="Penny Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q846119" start="500" end="511" title="Psychedelic music" label="psychedelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q193977" start="615" end="626" title="music video" label="music video"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320698" start="705" end="721" title="Strawberry Field" label="Strawberry Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q188307" start="725" end="739" title="The Salvation Army" label="Salvation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q9311671" start="740" end="760" title="children&amp;#x27;s home" label="children&amp;#x27;s home"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="764" end="773" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q189214" start="988" end="993" title="tempo" label="tempo"/>
<link wikidata="Q534932" start="1004" end="1015" title="Key (music)" label="musical key"/>
<link wikidata="Q212483" start="1063" end="1072" title="Mellotron" label="Mellotron"/>
<link wikidata="Q627110" start="1097" end="1107" title="swarmandal" label="swarmandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q852466" start="1132" end="1136" title="Coda (music)" label="coda"/>
<link wikidata="Q191819" start="1191" end="1204" title="George Martin" label="George Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7643452" start="1309" end="1324" title="superimposition" label="superimposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q185121" start="1400" end="1408" title="Revolver (Beatles album)" label="Revolver"/>
<link wikidata="Q169226" start="1491" end="1533" title="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band" label="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302843" start="1820" end="1835" title="Record Retailer" label="Record Retailer"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="2010" end="2039" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q60676411" start="2117" end="2137" title="Magical Mystery Tour" label="Magical Mystery Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341090" start="2244" end="2264" title="murder of John Lennon" label="Lennon&amp;#x27;s murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q160409" start="2296" end="2308" title="Central Park" label="Central Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156980" start="2313" end="2333" title="Strawberry Fields (memorial)" label="named after the song"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753625" start="2429" end="2440" title="Anthology 2" label="Anthology 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324743" start="2509" end="2513" title="Love (Beatles album)" label="Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q505285" start="2563" end="2576" title="Richie Havens" label="Richie Havens"/>
<link wikidata="Q364875" start="2578" end="2591" title="Todd Rundgren" label="Todd Rundgren"/>
<link wikidata="Q175195" start="2593" end="2606" title="Peter Gabriel" label="Peter Gabriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q380849" start="2608" end="2618" title="Ben Harper" label="Ben Harper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1870518" start="2624" end="2647" title="Los Fabulosos Cadillacs" label="Los Fabulosos Cadillacs"/>
<link wikidata="Q215026" start="2658" end="2670" title="Debbie Harry" label="Debbie Harry"/>
<link wikidata="Q502886" start="2698" end="2708" title="Madchester" label="Madchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q3655227" start="2715" end="2725" title="Candy Flip" label="Candy Flip"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="2808" end="2821" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q286102" start="2857" end="2891" title="The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time" label="The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320698" start="2928" end="2944" title="Strawberry Field" label="Strawberry Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q188307" start="2963" end="2977" title="Salvation Army" label="Salvation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="3008" end="3019" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5010697" start="3045" end="3052" title="Woolton" label="Woolton"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="3066" end="3075" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178697" start="3100" end="3112" title="Pete Shotton" label="Pete Shotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q16105813" start="3114" end="3126" title="Nigel Walley" label="Nigel Walley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3156201" start="3131" end="3143" title="Ivan Vaughan" label="Ivan Vaughan"/>
<link wikidata="Q200538" start="3241" end="3253" title="garden party" label="garden party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026457" start="3274" end="3291" title="Calderstones Park" label="Calderstones Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7406594" start="3316" end="3341" title="Salvation Army brass band" label="Salvation Army brass band"/>
<link wikidata="Q278766" start="3369" end="3379" title="Mimi Smith" label="Mimi Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q10400" start="3729" end="3736" title="Almería" label="Almería"/>
<link wikidata="Q346508" start="3767" end="3781" title="Richard Lester" label="Richard Lester"/>
<link wikidata="Q117090" start="3795" end="3812" title="How I Won the War" label="How I Won the War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="3846" end="3857" title="The Beatles" label="The Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266028" start="3950" end="3997" title="More popular than Jesus" label="&amp;quot;more popular than Jesus&amp;quot; controversy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4050" end="4078" title="The Beatles&amp;#x27; 1966 tour of Germany, Japan and the Philippines#Philippines" label="their unintentional snubbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q285536" start="4105" end="4118" title="Imelda Marcos" label="Imelda Marcos"/>
<link wikidata="Q253192" start="4226" end="4233" title="Cynthia Lennon" label="Cynthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q466250" start="4288" end="4298" title="Alma Cogan" label="Alma Cogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7614176" start="4551" end="4563" title="Steve Turner (writer)" label="Steve Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q214622" start="4630" end="4647" title="Nikos Kazantzakis" label="Nikos Kazantzakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q842168" start="4817" end="4827" title="Penny Lane" label="Penny Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="4841" end="4855" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q12151852" start="4960" end="4969" title="nostalgia" label="nostalgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q191819" start="5153" end="5166" title="George Martin" label="George Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q40415" start="5309" end="5324" title="Impressionism" label="impressionistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q185121" start="5362" end="5370" title="Revolver (Beatles album)" label="Revolver"/>
<link wikidata="Q630338" start="5396" end="5416" title="Tomorrow Never Knows" label="Tomorrow Never Knows"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302341" start="5433" end="5450" title="She Said She Said" label="She Said She Said"/>
<link wikidata="Q23118" start="5567" end="5570" title="LSD" label="LSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q486893" start="5639" end="5642" title="Ego (Freudian)" label="ego"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445811" start="5831" end="5839" title="The Word (song)" label="The Word"/>
<link wikidata="Q600839" start="5853" end="5857" title="Rain (Beatles song)" label="Rain"/>
<link wikidata="Q223890" start="6010" end="6014" title="Maya (religion)" label="maya"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="6060" end="6065" title="Hinduism" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q38082" start="6419" end="6432" title="Lewis Carroll" label="Lewis Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q250371" start="6462" end="6473" title="Jabberwocky" label="Jabberwocky"/>
<link wikidata="Q6392501" start="6650" end="6657" title="Kenwood, St. George&amp;#x27;s Hill" label="Kenwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q212483" start="6728" end="6737" title="Mellotron" label="Mellotron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109478" start="7126" end="7132" title="bridge (music)" label="bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q534932" start="7937" end="7940" title="key (music)" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022293" start="7944" end="7951" title="C major" label="C major"/>
<link wikidata="Q795134" start="8066" end="8073" title="B-flat major" label="B major"/>
<link wikidata="Q16210942" start="8096" end="8110" title="Walter Everett (musicologist)" label="Walter Everett"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358919" start="8415" end="8437" title="Roman numeral analysis" label="Roman numeral analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411564" start="8560" end="8579" title="secondary dominant" label="secondary dominants"/>
<link wikidata="Q738785" start="8835" end="8843" title="semitone" label="semitone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240892" start="9149" end="9152" title="Bar (music)" label="bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2482085" start="9395" end="9405" title="submediant" label="submediant"/>
<link wikidata="Q14088448" start="9420" end="9437" title="Surprise cadence" label="deceptive cadence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4707967" start="9465" end="9477" title="Alan W. Pollack" label="Alan Pollack"/>
<link wikidata="Q979988" start="9537" end="9549" title="leading-tone" label="leading-tone"/>
<link wikidata="Q899391" start="9655" end="9663" title="dominant (music)" label="dominant"/>
<link wikidata="Q210411" start="9739" end="9749" title="Tonic (music)" label="tonicising"/>
<link wikidata="Q536541" start="9754" end="9765" title="subdominant" label="subdominant"/>
<link wikidata="Q216926" start="9904" end="9908" title="raga" label="raga"/>
<link wikidata="Q76239" start="9956" end="9962" title="zither" label="zither"/>
<link wikidata="Q627110" start="9975" end="9985" title="swarmandal" label="swarmandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q852466" start="10371" end="10375" title="Coda (music)" label="coda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2332751" start="10388" end="10399" title="Avant-garde music" label="avant-garde"/>
<link wikidata="Q169226" start="10946" end="10988" title="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band" label="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q7716113" start="11070" end="11083" title="The Beatles&amp;#x27; 1966 US tour" label="final US tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q209651" start="11152" end="11170" title="Abbey Road Studios" label="Abbey Road Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552913" start="11191" end="11201" title="Multitrack recording" label="four-track"/>
<link wikidata="Q203690" start="11244" end="11257" title="Brian Epstein" label="Brian Epstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q183412" start="11299" end="11302" title="EMI" label="EMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643" start="11751" end="11766" title="George Harrison" label="George Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141022" start="12643" end="12667" title="When I&amp;#x27;m Sixty-Four" label="When I&amp;#x27;m Sixty-Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347244" start="13245" end="13260" title="Epiphone Casino" label="Epiphone Casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q211965" start="13430" end="13441" title="The Moody Blues" label="Moody Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398834" start="13454" end="13465" title="Mike Pinder" label="Mike Pinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632" start="13562" end="13573" title="Ringo Starr" label="Ringo Starr"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300113" start="14059" end="14073" title="doubletracking" label="double-tracked"/>
<link wikidata="Q428152" start="14365" end="14377" title="slide guitar" label="slide guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753625" start="14618" end="14629" title="Anthology 2" label="Anthology 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q39777" start="15004" end="15010" title="maraca" label="maraca"/>
<link wikidata="Q506986" start="15533" end="15541" title="arpeggio" label="arpeggio"/>
<link wikidata="Q468612" start="16673" end="16686" title="Geoff Emerick" label="Geoff Emerick"/>
<link wikidata="Q963334" start="16853" end="16859" title="hi-hat" label="hi-hat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035545" start="17010" end="17032" title="I&amp;#x27;m Only Sleeping" label="I&amp;#x27;m Only Sleeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q189737" start="17129" end="17136" title="timpani" label="timpani"/>
<link wikidata="Q968026" start="17273" end="17282" title="Mal Evans" label="Mal Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q380912" start="17284" end="17297" title="Neil Aspinall" label="Neil Aspinall"/>
<link wikidata="Q18811939" start="17302" end="17313" title="Terry Doran" label="Terry Doran"/>
<link wikidata="Q108601409" start="18658" end="18673" title="Sheila Bromberg" label="Sheila Bromberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q513179" start="18699" end="18722" title="She&amp;#x27;s Leaving Home" label="She&amp;#x27;s Leaving Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630321" start="18953" end="18966" title="Ian MacDonald" label="Ian MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q229205" start="19190" end="19195" title="sitar" label="sitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q208421" start="19525" end="19535" title="snare drum" label="snare drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027065" start="20131" end="20141" title="vari-speed" label="vari-speed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5432700" start="20838" end="20850" title="false ending" label="false ending"/>
<link wikidata="Q741229" start="21285" end="21309" title="Paul is dead" label="&amp;quot;Paul is Dead&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341090" start="21446" end="21463" title="Death of John Lennon" label="his death in 1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q4700" start="21740" end="21747" title="Debussy" label="Debussy"/>
<link wikidata="Q215233" start="22110" end="22123" title="double A-side" label="double A-side"/>
<link wikidata="Q200799" start="22195" end="22208" title="Eleanor Rigby" label="Eleanor Rigby"/>
<link wikidata="Q832799" start="22223" end="22239" title="Yellow Submarine (song)" label="Yellow Submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q18160916" start="22518" end="22528" title="Knole Park" label="Knole Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q939838" start="22532" end="22541" title="Sevenoaks" label="Sevenoaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q913311" start="22833" end="22856" title="A Hard Day&amp;#x27;s Night (film)" label="A Hard Day&amp;#x27;s Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q366700" start="22927" end="22941" title="Klaus Voormann" label="Klaus Voormann"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809316" start="23359" end="23370" title="John Harris (critic)" label="John Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q5906082" start="23752" end="23771" title="horseshoe moustache" label="horseshoe moustache"/>
<link wikidata="Q464036" start="24209" end="24220" title="the Monkees" label="the Monkees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131815" start="24354" end="24359" title="Help! (film)" label="Help!"/>
<link wikidata="Q123497234" start="24376" end="24390" title="Kevin Courrier" label="Kevin Courrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q35610" start="24452" end="24470" title="Arthur Conan Doyle" label="Arthur Conan Doyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q331408" start="24669" end="24678" title="Dissolve (filmmaking)" label="dissolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q7643452" start="24725" end="24740" title="superimposition" label="superimposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q296001" start="24753" end="24761" title="close-up" label="close-up"/>
<link wikidata="Q193023" start="25667" end="25682" title="Capitol Records" label="Capitol Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q208909" start="25750" end="25760" title="Parlophone" label="Parlophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q300373" start="25867" end="25897" title="A Collection of Beatles Oldies" label="A Collection of Beatles Oldies"/>
<link wikidata="Q321153" start="26481" end="26493" title="Greil Marcus" label="Greil Marcus"/>
<link wikidata="Q22007392" start="26692" end="26705" title="Peter Doggett" label="Peter Doggett"/>
<link wikidata="Q134147" start="26739" end="26746" title="pop art" label="pop art"/>
<link wikidata="Q25094849" start="26873" end="26880" title="art pop" label="art pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081494" start="27343" end="27363" title="The Ed Sullivan Show" label="The Ed Sullivan Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q930414" start="27394" end="27409" title="Top of the Pops" label="Top of the Pops"/>
<link wikidata="Q7740000" start="27519" end="27539" title="The Hollywood Palace" label="The Hollywood Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q436638" start="27596" end="27607" title="Van Johnson" label="Van Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q463447" start="28003" end="28021" title="American Bandstand" label="American Bandstand"/>
<link wikidata="Q366563" start="28048" end="28058" title="Dick Clark" label="Dick Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q736799" start="28921" end="28937" title="Please Please Me (song)" label="Please Please Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302843" start="28987" end="29002" title="Record Retailer" label="Record Retailer"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="29028" end="29044" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q221289" start="29078" end="29099" title="Engelbert Humperdinck (singer)" label="Engelbert Humperdinck"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181412" start="29113" end="29123" title="Release Me (1946 song)" label="Release Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q580896" start="30141" end="30153" title="Melody Maker" label="Melody Maker"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="30247" end="30276" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087118" start="30389" end="30407" title="She&amp;#x27;s a Woman" label="She&amp;#x27;s a Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="31174" end="31177" title="NME" label="NME"/>
<link wikidata="Q210534" start="31662" end="31676" title="The Daily Mail" label="The Daily Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="32249" end="32253" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q8015092" start="33218" end="33230" title="William Mann (critic)" label="William Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="33240" end="33249" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q7330590" start="33533" end="33551" title="Richie Unterberger" label="Richie Unterberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="33555" end="33563" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318709" start="33754" end="33776" title="Revolution in the Head" label="Revolution in the Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804171" start="33984" end="33993" title="Tim Riley (music critic)" label="Tim Riley"/>
<link wikidata="Q93346" start="35029" end="35036" title="The Who" label="The Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q26933" start="35044" end="35058" title="Pete Townshend" label="Pete Townshend"/>
<link wikidata="Q5957990" start="35224" end="35236" title="Mark Lindsay" label="Mark Lindsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026810" start="35252" end="35281" title="Paul Revere &amp;amp; the Raiders" label="Paul Revere &amp;amp; the Raiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545284" start="35332" end="35345" title="Terry Melcher" label="Terry Melcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q7993414" start="35673" end="35692" title="Where the Action Is" label="Where the Action Is"/>
<link wikidata="Q313013" start="35723" end="35735" title="Brian Wilson" label="Brian Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q183048" start="35773" end="35787" title="the Beach Boys" label="the Beach Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q9326242" start="35800" end="35805" title="Smile (Beach Boys album)" label="Smile"/>
<link wikidata="Q206348" start="35915" end="35926" title="barbiturate" label="barbiturate"/>
<link wikidata="Q18575890" start="36041" end="36054" title="Michael Vosse" label="Michael Vosse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7614732" start="36412" end="36425" title="Steven Gaines" label="Steven Gaines"/>
<link wikidata="Q9326242" start="36602" end="36630" title="Collapse of Smile" label="abandoning &amp;quot;Smile&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973217" start="36905" end="36920" title="structural film" label="structural film"/>
<link wikidata="Q558332" start="36930" end="36942" title="Michael Snow" label="Michael Snow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423867" start="36966" end="36976" title="Wavelength (1967 film)" label="Wavelength"/>
<link wikidata="Q206159" start="37353" end="37369" title="psychedelic rock" label="psychedelic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q383982" start="37470" end="37485" title="psychedelic pop" label="psychedelic pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306" start="37868" end="37878" title="Pink Floyd" label="Pink Floyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395369" start="37880" end="37886" title="Family (band)" label="Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048439" start="37888" end="37895" title="Traffic (band)" label="Traffic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145652" start="37900" end="37919" title="Fairport Convention" label="Fairport Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q202714" start="38139" end="38169" title="The Piper at the Gates of Dawn" label="The Piper at the Gates of Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133828" start="38392" end="38400" title="the Move" label="the Move"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331669" start="38402" end="38411" title="the Smoke" label="the Smoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q319265" start="38519" end="38531" title="Manfred Mann" label="Manfred Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q113661541" start="38566" end="38597" title="Semi-Detached, Suburban Mr. James" label="Semi-Detached Suburban Mr James"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138639" start="39093" end="39108" title="I Am the Walrus" label="I Am the Walrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q218255" start="39220" end="39244" title="Electric Light Orchestra" label="Electric Light Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q426015" start="39249" end="39256" title="Wizzard" label="Wizzard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057533" start="39494" end="39508" title="Helter Skelter (song)" label="Helter Skelter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331" start="39546" end="39558" title="Led Zeppelin" label="Led Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q392555" start="39583" end="39592" title="Thank You (Led Zeppelin song)" label="Thank You"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036" start="39666" end="39684" title="the Rolling Stones" label="the Rolling Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643590" start="39717" end="39728" title="We Love You" label="We Love You"/>
<link wikidata="Q3013418" start="39745" end="39754" title="Dandelion (Rolling Stones song)" label="Dandelion"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="40082" end="40093" title="Romanticism" label="Romanticism"/>
<link wikidata="" start="40267" end="40319" title="In Their Lives: Great Writers on Great Beatles Songs" label="In Their Lives: Great Writers on Great Beatles Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275728" start="40327" end="40338" title="Adam Gopnik" label="Adam Gopnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q193977" start="40666" end="40677" title="music video" label="music video"/>
<link wikidata="Q188740" start="40815" end="40835" title="Museum of Modern Art" label="Museum of Modern Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q235066" start="41059" end="41074" title="Laurie Anderson" label="Laurie Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927754" start="41178" end="41185" title="vidding" label="vidding"/>
<link wikidata="Q19957794" start="41206" end="41216" title="Kandy Fong" label="Kandy Fong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092" start="41307" end="41316" title="Star Trek" label="Star Trek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156980" start="42481" end="42507" title="Strawberry Fields (memorial)" label="Strawberry Fields memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q160409" start="42527" end="42539" title="Central Park" label="Central Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q117012" start="42670" end="42678" title="Yoko Ono" label="Yoko Ono"/>
<link wikidata="Q15873488" start="42827" end="42858" title="Living Is Easy with Eyes Closed" label="Living Is Easy with Eyes Closed"/>
<link wikidata="Q162615" start="42946" end="42955" title="Cartagena, Spain" label="Cartagena"/>
<link wikidata="Q179191" start="43065" end="43091" title="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame" label="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351100" start="43181" end="43228" title="The Recording Academy" label="National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q81180" start="43235" end="43254" title="Grammy Hall of Fame" label="Grammy Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q261633" start="43288" end="43292" title="Mojo (magazine)" label="Mojo"/>
<link wikidata="Q117379" start="43309" end="43319" title="Jon Savage" label="Jon Savage"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="43613" end="43626" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q286102" start="43688" end="43718" title="Rolling Stone&amp;#x27;s 500 Greatest Songs of All Time" label="500 Greatest Songs of All Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q217629" start="43908" end="43909" title="Q (magazine)" label="Q"/>
<link wikidata="Q300385" start="44189" end="44206" title="A Day in the Life" label="A Day in the Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q60676411" start="44829" end="44849" title="Magical Mystery Tour" label="Magical Mystery Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950377" start="45681" end="45702" title="1967–1970" label="The Beatles 1967–1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q46996588" start="45782" end="45829" title="The Singles Collection 1962–1970" label="reissued all 22 of the Beatles&amp;#x27; UK singles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324743" start="46234" end="46238" title="Love (Beatles album)" label="Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q48445" start="46251" end="46258" title="mashup (music)" label="mash-up"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326986" start="46370" end="46412" title="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band (song)" label="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324384" start="46426" end="46436" title="In My Life" label="In My Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331523" start="46510" end="46517" title="Piggies" label="Piggies"/>
<link wikidata="Q281911" start="46534" end="46548" title="Hello, Goodbye" label="Hello, Goodbye"/>
<link wikidata="Q208994" start="46671" end="46672" title="1 (Beatles album)" label="1"/>
<link wikidata="Q723009" start="46724" end="46736" title="Giles Martin" label="Giles Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3655227" start="47123" end="47133" title="Candy Flip" label="Candy Flip"/>
<link wikidata="Q502886" start="47179" end="47189" title="Madchester" label="Madchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q217597" start="47244" end="47251" title="Electro (music)" label="electro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025849" start="47531" end="47549" title="Modern Rock Tracks" label="Modern Rock Tracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="47582" end="47591" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q485625" start="48223" end="48236" title="Pet Shop Boys" label="Pet Shop Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="48348" end="48356" title="The Beatles" label="Fab Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="48397" end="48400" title="New Musical Express" label="NME"/>
<link wikidata="Q930414" start="48474" end="48478" title="Top of the Pops" label="TOTP"/>
<link wikidata="Q6728742" start="48561" end="48572" title="Madstock..." label="Madstock..."/>
<link wikidata="Q541092" start="48958" end="48966" title="Tomorrow (band)" label="Tomorrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q729505" start="49007" end="49019" title="Soft Machine" label="Soft Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7820243" start="49144" end="49152" title="Tomorrow (Tomorrow album)" label="Tomorrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018892" start="49211" end="49234" title="Vanilla Fudge (album)" label="self-titled debut album"/>
<link wikidata="Q765243" start="49257" end="49270" title="Vanilla Fudge" label="Vanilla Fudge"/>
<link wikidata="Q505285" start="49704" end="49717" title="Richie Havens" label="Richie Havens"/>
<link wikidata="Q164815" start="49797" end="49815" title="Woodstock Festival" label="Woodstock Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q364875" start="49840" end="49853" title="Todd Rundgren" label="Todd Rundgren"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064658" start="49886" end="49894" title="Faithful (Todd Rundgren album)" label="Faithful"/>
<link wikidata="Q175195" start="49906" end="49919" title="Peter Gabriel" label="Peter Gabriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q654160" start="49971" end="49996" title="All This and World War II" label="All This and World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q10664" start="50151" end="50170" title="Neville Chamberlain" label="Neville Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945549" start="50184" end="50202" title="Peace for our time" label="Peace for our time"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="50244" end="50256" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q380849" start="50291" end="50301" title="Ben Harper" label="Ben Harper"/>
<link wikidata="Q640387" start="50334" end="50342" title="I Am Sam" label="I Am Sam"/>
<link wikidata="Q512577" start="50354" end="50366" title="Jim Sturgess" label="Jim Sturgess"/>
<link wikidata="Q703676" start="50371" end="50383" title="Joe Anderson (actor)" label="Joe Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q342876" start="50426" end="50445" title="Across the Universe (film)" label="Across the Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1870518" start="50453" end="50476" title="Los Fabulosos Cadillacs" label="Los Fabulosos Cadillacs"/>
<link wikidata="Q54365" start="50488" end="50491" title="ska" label="ska"/>
<link wikidata="Q215026" start="50522" end="50534" title="Debbie Harry" label="Debbie Harry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7319396" start="50562" end="50572" title="Rey Azúcar" label="Rey Azúcar"/>
<link wikidata="Q133405" start="50649" end="50661" title="the Bee Gees" label="the Bee Gees"/>
<link wikidata="Q3986036" start="50663" end="50671" title="the Bobs" label="the Bobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q919367" start="50673" end="50690" title="Eugene Chadbourne" label="Eugene Chadbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q24048977" start="50692" end="50704" title="Sandy Farina" label="Sandy Farina"/>
<link wikidata="Q935864" start="50706" end="50720" title="Laurence Juber" label="Laurence Juber"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018266" start="50722" end="50732" title="David Lanz" label="David Lanz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545" start="50734" end="50746" title="Cyndi Lauper" label="Cyndi Lauper"/>
<link wikidata="Q521523" start="50748" end="50777" title="Me First and the Gimme Gimmes" label="Me First and the Gimme Gimmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752769" start="50779" end="50799" title="Mother&amp;#x27;s Finest" label="Mother&amp;#x27;s Finest"/>
<link wikidata="Q237633" start="50801" end="50807" title="Odetta" label="Odetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q526970" start="50809" end="50823" title="Andy Partridge" label="Andy Partridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q212168" start="50825" end="50836" title="the Shadows" label="the Shadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q7202061" start="50838" end="50851" title="Plastic Penny" label="Plastic Penny"/>
<link wikidata="Q770732" start="50853" end="50865" title="the Ventures" label="the Ventures"/>
<link wikidata="Q239860" start="50870" end="50886" title="Cassandra Wilson" label="Cassandra Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q449171" start="51007" end="51019" title="Alvin Lucier" label="Alvin Lucier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="51150" end="51161" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q243998" start="51187" end="51193" title="Bongo drum" label="bongos"/>
<link wikidata="Q212483" start="51195" end="51204" title="Mellotron" label="Mellotron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="51212" end="51226" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q189737" start="51296" end="51303" title="timpani" label="timpani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643" start="51313" end="51328" title="George Harrison" label="George Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q428152" start="51372" end="51384" title="slide guitar" label="slide guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q627110" start="51393" end="51403" title="swarmandal" label="swarmandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q39777" start="51414" end="51420" title="maraca" label="maraca"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632" start="51423" end="51434" title="Ringo Starr" label="Ringo Starr"/>
<link wikidata="Q7673920" start="51469" end="51479" title="tack piano" label="tack piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="52037" end="52048" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q23308" start="52056" end="52071" title="British Library" label="British Library"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143176" wikidata="Q585473" url="?curid=143176" title="Hearth">
<text>A hearth () is the place in a home where a fire is or was traditionally kept for home heating and for cooking, usually constituted by a horizontal hearthstone and often enclosed to varying degrees by any combination of reredos (a low, partial wall behind a hearth), fireplace, oven, smoke hood, or chimney. Hearths are usually composed of masonry such as brick or stone. For millennia, the hearth was such an integral part of a home, usually its central and most important feature, that the concept has been generalized to refer to a homeplace or household, as in the terms &quot;hearth and home&quot; and &quot;keep the home fires burning&quot;. In the modern era, since the advent of central heating, hearths are usually less central to most people&#x27;s daily life because the heating of the home is instead done by a furnace or a heating stove, and cooking is instead done with a kitchen stove/range (combination cooktop and oven) alongside other home appliances; thus many homes built in the 20th and 21st centuries do not have hearths. Nonetheless, many homes still have hearths, which still help serve the purposes of warmth, cooking, and comfort.

Before the industrial era, a common design was to place a hearth in the middle of the room as an open hearth, with the smoke rising through the room to a smoke hole in the roof. In later designs which usually had a more solid and continuous roof, the hearth was instead placed to the side of the room and provided with a chimney.

In fireplace design, the hearth is the part of the fireplace where the fire burns, usually consisting of fire brick masonry at floor level or higher, underneath the fireplace mantel.

==Archaeological features==


The word &quot;hearth&quot; derives from an Indo-European root, &quot;*ker-&quot;, referring to burning, heat, and fire (seen also in the word &quot;carbon&quot;). In archaeology, a hearth is a firepit or other fireplace feature of any period. Hearths are common features of many eras going back to prehistoric campsites and may be either lined with a wide range of materials, such as stone or left unlined. They were used for cooking, heating, and the processing of some stone, wood, faunal, and floral resources. Occasionally site formation processes—e.g., farming or excavation—deform or disperse hearth features, making them difficult to identify without careful study.

Lined hearths are easily identified by the presence of fire-cracked rock, often created when the heat from the fires inside the hearths chemically altered and cracked the stone. Often present are fragmented fish and animal bones, carbonized shell, charcoal, ash, and other waste products, all embedded in a sequence of soil that has been deposited atop the hearth. Unlined hearths, which are less easily identified, may also include these materials. Because of the organic nature of most of these items, they can be used to pinpoint the date the hearth was last used via the process of radiocarbon dating. Although carbon dates can be negatively affected if the users of the hearth burned old wood or coal, the process is typically quite reliable. This was the most common way to cook, and to heat interior spaces in cool seasons.

==Hearth tax==
In the Byzantine Empire a tax on hearths known as &quot;kapnikon&quot; was first explicitly mentioned for the reign of Nikephorus I (802–811) although its context implies that it was already then old and established, and perhaps it should be taken back to the 7th century AD. Kapnikon was a tax raised on households without exceptions for the poor.

In England, a tax on hearths was introduced on 19 May 1662. Householders were required to pay a charge of two shillings per annum for each hearth, with half the payment due at Michaelmas and half at Lady Day. Exemptions to the tax were granted, to those in receipt of poor relief, those whose houses were worth less than 20 shillings a year and those who paid neither church nor poor rates. Also exempt were charitable institutions such as schools and almshouses, and industrial hearths with the exception of smiths&#x27; forges and bakers&#x27; ovens. The returns were lodged with the Clerk of the Peace between 1662 and 1688.

A revision of the Act in 1664 made the tax payable by all who had more than two chimneys.

The tax was abolished by William III in 1689 and the last collection was for Lady Day of that year. It was abolished in Scotland in 1690.

Hearth tax records are important to local historians as they provide an indication of the size of each assessed house at the time. The numbers of hearths are generally proportional to the size of the house. The assessments can be used to indicate the numbers and local distribution of larger and smaller houses. Not every room had a hearth, and not all houses of the same size had exactly the same number of hearths, so they are not an exact measure of house size. Roehampton University has an ongoing project which places hearth tax data in a national framework by providing a series of standard bands of wealth applicable to each county and city.

Published lists are available of many returns and the original documents are in the Public Record Office. The most informative returns, many of which have been published, occur between 1662–1666 and 1669–1674.

==Religion and folklore==
In Greek mythology, Hestia is the goddess of the hearth, while in Roman mythology Vesta has the same role.

In ancient Persia, according to Zoroastrian traditions, every house was expected to have a hearth for offering sacrifices and prayers.

In traditional Albanian folk beliefs, the Vatër, the home hearth, is a spiritual link between past, present, and future generations of the tribe, linking ancestors to the family today and to descendants tomorrow.

Hearth is also a term for a family unit, or local worship group, in the Heathen religion.

==See also==

* Agungi
* Brazier
* Buttumak
* Cook stove
* Firebox (architecture)
* Fireplace
* Firepit
* Forge
* Hall house
* Hibachi
* Inglenook
* Irori
* Kitchen
* Vesta – Goddess of the hearth

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q585473" start="2" end="8" title="Hearth" label="hearth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7743" start="30" end="34" title="home" label="home"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196" start="43" end="47" title="fire" label="fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q38695" start="102" end="109" title="cooking" label="cooking"/>
<link wikidata="Q188669" start="266" end="275" title="fireplace" label="fireplace"/>
<link wikidata="Q36539" start="277" end="281" title="oven" label="oven"/>
<link wikidata="Q170477" start="298" end="305" title="chimney" label="chimney"/>
<link wikidata="Q272999" start="339" end="346" title="masonry" label="masonry"/>
<link wikidata="Q40089" start="355" end="360" title="brick" label="brick"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063" start="364" end="369" title="rock (geology)" label="stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7743" start="428" end="432" title="home" label="home"/>
<link wikidata="Q41966" start="508" end="528" title="metonym" label="generalized to refer"/>
<link wikidata="Q843596" start="686" end="701" title="central heating" label="central heating"/>
<link wikidata="Q10715538" start="822" end="829" title="Furnace (house heating)" label="furnace"/>
<link wikidata="Q203789" start="843" end="848" title="stove" label="stove"/>
<link wikidata="Q182995" start="885" end="898" title="kitchen stove" label="kitchen stove"/>
<link wikidata="Q60738833" start="918" end="925" title="cooktop" label="cooktop"/>
<link wikidata="Q36539" start="930" end="934" title="oven" label="oven"/>
<link wikidata="Q212920" start="952" end="966" title="home appliance" label="home appliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7545899" start="1311" end="1321" title="smoke hole" label="smoke hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q170477" start="1478" end="1485" title="chimney" label="chimney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369000" start="1593" end="1603" title="fire brick" label="fire brick"/>
<link wikidata="Q4327778" start="1653" end="1669" title="fireplace mantel" label="fireplace mantel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142838" start="1746" end="1764" title="Indo-European root" label="Indo-European root"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="1869" end="1880" title="archaeology" label="archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q814254" start="1913" end="1930" title="feature (archaeology)" label="fireplace feature"/>
<link wikidata="Q814254" start="1965" end="1972" title="Feature (archaeology)" label="feature"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2230" end="2244" title="Excavation (archaeology)#Site formation" label="site formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451261" start="2432" end="2449" title="fire-cracked rock" label="fire-cracked rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q152" start="2584" end="2588" title="fish" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q729" start="2593" end="2599" title="animal" label="animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q623" start="2607" end="2613" title="carbon" label="carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q191944" start="2618" end="2623" title="Exoskeleton" label="shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q177463" start="2625" end="2633" title="charcoal" label="charcoal"/>
<link wikidata="Q358095" start="2684" end="2692" title="Sequence (archaeological)" label="sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q36133" start="2696" end="2700" title="soil" label="soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q174211" start="2842" end="2849" title="organic compound" label="organic"/>
<link wikidata="Q173412" start="2963" end="2981" title="radiocarbon dating" label="radiocarbon dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="3231" end="3247" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q208754" start="3343" end="3355" title="Nikephoros I Logothetes" label="Nikephorus I"/>
<link wikidata="Q213142" start="3684" end="3692" title="shilling" label="shilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360565" start="3750" end="3760" title="Michaelmas" label="Michaelmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q17050774" start="3773" end="3781" title="Lady Day" label="Lady Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q7228818" start="3842" end="3853" title="Poor Relief Act 1662" label="poor relief"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3958" end="3963" title="rates (tax)#United Kingdom" label="rates"/>
<link wikidata="Q15548045" start="4026" end="4036" title="almshouses" label="almshouses"/>
<link wikidata="Q48767477" start="4160" end="4178" title="Clerk of the Peace" label="Clerk of the Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q129987" start="4319" end="4330" title="William III of England" label="William III"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378597" start="4469" end="4485" title="English local history" label="local historians"/>
<link wikidata="Q939607" start="4898" end="4919" title="Roehampton University" label="Roehampton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505035" start="5167" end="5187" title="Public Record Office" label="Public Record Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="5323" end="5338" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q41419" start="5340" end="5346" title="Hestia" label="Hestia"/>
<link wikidata="Q178710" start="5402" end="5407" title="Vesta (mythology)" label="Vesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q9601" start="5460" end="5471" title="Zoroastrianism" label="Zoroastrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302318" start="5579" end="5600" title="Albanian folk beliefs" label="Albanian folk beliefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q96413587" start="5606" end="5611" title="Vatër" label="Vatër"/>
<link wikidata="Q133311" start="5703" end="5708" title="tribe" label="tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q402152" start="5718" end="5726" title="ancestor" label="ancestor"/>
<link wikidata="Q171318" start="5755" end="5765" title="kinship" label="descendant"/>
<link wikidata="Q285441" start="5850" end="5866" title="Heathenry (new religious movement)" label="Heathen religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q12605101" start="5885" end="5891" title="Agungi" label="Agungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409660" start="5894" end="5901" title="Brazier" label="Brazier"/>
<link wikidata="Q12605101" start="5904" end="5912" title="Buttumak" label="Buttumak"/>
<link wikidata="Q106936195" start="5915" end="5925" title="Improved cookstove" label="Cook stove"/>
<link wikidata="Q4460685" start="5928" end="5950" title="Firebox (architecture)" label="Firebox (architecture)"/>
<link wikidata="Q188669" start="5953" end="5962" title="Fireplace" label="Fireplace"/>
<link wikidata="Q187317" start="5965" end="5972" title="Firepit" label="Firepit"/>
<link wikidata="Q40558" start="5975" end="5980" title="Forge" label="Forge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923257" start="5983" end="5993" title="Hall house" label="Hall house"/>
<link wikidata="Q3063771" start="5996" end="6003" title="Hibachi" label="Hibachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6032582" start="6006" end="6015" title="Inglenook" label="Inglenook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185514" start="6018" end="6023" title="Irori" label="Irori"/>
<link wikidata="Q43164" start="6026" end="6033" title="Kitchen" label="Kitchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q178710" start="6036" end="6041" title="Vesta (mythology)" label="Vesta"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143177" wikidata="Q321263" url="?curid=143177" title="Sparkling wine">
<text>Sparkling wine is a wine with significant levels of carbon dioxide in it, making it fizzy. While it is common to refer to this as champagne, European Union countries legally reserve that word for products exclusively produced in the Champagne region of France. Sparkling wine is usually either white or rosé, but there are examples of red sparkling wines such as the Italian Brachetto, Bonarda and Lambrusco, and the Australian sparkling Shiraz. The sweetness of sparkling wine can range from very dry &quot;brut&quot; styles to sweeter &quot;doux&quot; varieties (French for &#x27;hard&#x27; and &#x27;soft&#x27;, respectively).

The sparkling quality of these wines comes from its carbon dioxide content and may be the result of natural fermentation, either in a bottle, as with the traditional method, in a large tank designed to withstand the pressures involved (as in the Charmat process), or as a result of simple carbon dioxide injection in some cheaper sparkling wines.

In European Union countries, the word &quot;champagne&quot; is reserved by law only for sparkling wine from the Champagne region of France. The French terms &quot;Mousseux&quot; and &quot;Crémant&quot; refer to sparkling wine not made in the Champagne region, such as Blanquette de Limoux produced in Southern France. Sparkling wines are produced around the world, and are often referred to by their local name or region, such as Prosecco, Franciacorta, Trento DOC, Oltrepò Pavese Metodo Classico and Asti from Italy (the generic Italian term for sparkling wine being &quot;spumante&quot;), Espumante from Portugal, Cava from Spain, and Cap Classique from South Africa. Sparkling wines have been produced in Central and Eastern Europe since the early 19th century. &quot;Champagne&quot; was further popularised in the region, late in the century, when József Törley started production in Hungary using French methods, learned as an apprentice in Reims. Törley has since become one of the largest European producers of sparkling wine. The United States is a significant producer of sparkling wine today, with producers in numerous states. Recently, production of sparkling wine was restarted by United Kingdom winemakers after a long hiatus.

==History==

Effervescence has been observed in wine throughout history and has been noted by Ancient Greek and Roman writers, but the cause of this mysterious appearance of bubbles was not understood. Over time it has been attributed to phases of the moon as well as both good and evil spirits.

The tendency of still wine from the Champagne region to lightly sparkle was noted in the Middle Ages but this was considered a wine fault and was disdained in early Champagne winemaking although it was the pride of other historic sparkling wine production areas like Limoux. Dom Pérignon was originally charged by his superiors at the Abbey of Hautvillers to get rid of the bubbles since the pressure in the bottles caused many of them to burst in the cellar. Later, when deliberate sparkling wine production increased in the early 18th century, cellar workers would still have to wear a heavy iron mask that resembled a baseball catcher&#x27;s mask to prevent injury from spontaneously bursting bottles. The disturbance caused by one bottle&#x27;s disintegration could cause a chain reaction, with it being routine for cellars to lose 20–90% of their bottles to instability. The mysterious circumstance surrounding the then unknown process of fermentation and carbonic gas caused some critics to call the sparkling creations &quot;The Devil&#x27;s Wine&quot;.

The British were the first to see the tendency of wines from Champagne to sparkle as a desirable trait and tried to understand why it produced bubbles. Wine was often transported to England in wooden wine barrels where merchant houses would then bottle the wine for sale. During the 17th century, English glass production used coal-fueled ovens and produced stronger, more durable glass bottles than the wood-fired French glass. The English also rediscovered the use of cork stoppers, once used by the Romans but forgotten for centuries after the fall of the Western Roman Empire. During the cold winters of the Champagne region, temperatures would drop so low that the fermentation process was prematurely halted—leaving some residual sugar and dormant yeast. When the wine was shipped to and bottled in England, the fermentation process would restart when the weather warmed and the cork-stoppered wine would begin to build pressure from carbon dioxide gas. When the wine was opened, it would be bubbly. In 1662, the English scientist Christopher Merret presented a paper detailing how the presence of sugar in a wine led to it eventually sparkling and that by adding sugar to a wine before bottling it, nearly any wine could be made to sparkle. This is one of the first known accounts of understanding the process of sparkling wine and even suggests that British merchants were producing &quot;sparkling Champagne&quot; before the French Champenois were deliberately making it.

==Semi-sparkling wine==
Fully sparkling wines, such as Champagne, are generally sold with of pressure in the bottle. This is more than twice the pressure found in an automobile tire. European Union regulations define a sparkling wine as any wine with an excess of 3 atmospheres in pressure. These include German &quot;Sekt&quot;, Spanish &quot;Espumoso&quot;, Italian &quot;Spumante&quot; and French &quot;Crémant&quot; or &quot;Mousseux&quot; wines. Semi-sparkling wines are defined as those with between 1 and 2.5 atmospheres of pressures and include German &quot;spritzig&quot;, Italian &quot;frizzante&quot; and French &quot;pétillant&quot; wines. The amount of pressure in the wine is determined by the amount of sugar added during the tirage stage at the beginning of the secondary fermentation with more sugar producing an increased amount of carbon dioxide gas and thus pressure in the wine.

==Red sparkling wine==
While the majority of sparkling wines are white or rosé, Australia, Italy and Moldova each have a sizable production of red sparkling wines. Of these, Italy has the longest tradition in red sparkling wine-making, particularly along the Apennine side of the Po Valley. Notable wines include Brachetto and Lambrusco. Also very well known and with rich tradition are Gutturnio, Bonarda and sparkling Barbera; in central Italy, lesser known Red Vernaccia produces semi-sweet sparkling reds. In Australia, red sparkling wines are often made from the Shiraz grape.

==Production==

The viticultural and winemaking practices of making sparkling wine have many similarities to the production of still wine with some noted divergence.&lt;ref name=&quot;winefolly/sparkling-made&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; At the vineyard, grapes are harvested early when there is still high acid levels. In areas like Australia, winemakers aim to harvest the grapes at 17 to 20° brix (the sugar content of a solution). Unlike still wine production, high sugar levels are not ideal and grapes destined for sparkling wine production may be harvested at higher yields. Care is taken to avoid tannins and other phenolic compounds with many premium producers still choosing to harvest by hand rather than risk mechanical harvesting which may split the berries and encourage maceration between the skins and juice. The press house is often close by the vineyard to where the grapes can be quickly pressed and separated from their skins. Red wine grapes like Pinot noir can be used in the production of white sparkling wines because their juice is initially clear and is only later tinted red through exposure to the color pigments in grape skins. While some skin exposure may be desirable in the production of rosé sparkling wines and some &quot;blanc de noirs&quot; (white of blacks), most sparkling wine producers take extended precautions to limit the amount of skin contact.

The primary fermentation of sparkling wine begins like most other wines, though winemakers may choose to use specially cultivated sparkling wine yeasts. The wines may go through malolactic fermentation, though producers wishing to make fruitier, simpler wines will usually forgo this step. After fermentation the base wines are then blended to form a &quot;cuvée&quot;. While there are examples of varietal sparkling wines, such as &quot;blanc de blancs&quot; (white of whites) made from 100% Chardonnay, most sparkling wines are blends of several grape varieties, vineyards and vintages. Producers with wide access to grapes will use wines from several hundred base wines to create a blend that reflect the &quot;house style&quot; of their non-vintage wine. It is through the initiation of a secondary fermentation that distinguishes sparkling wine production and gives the wine its characteristic bubbles. One of the by-products of fermentation is the creation of carbon dioxide gas. While this is able to be released during the first fermentation, efforts are taken during the second fermentation to retain the gas and have it dissolve into the wine. This creates high pressure within the wine bottle (on average around 5 atmospheres) and wine producers take care to package the wine in strong glass bottles. When the wine is opened and poured into a glass, the gas is released and the wine becomes sparkling.

===Secondary fermentation===

There are several methods used to carry out this secondary fermentation. The most well known is the &quot;traditional&quot; or &quot;champagne method&quot; where the base &quot;cuvée&quot; is bottled with a mixture of sugar and yeast. The introduction of a fresh yeast and food source (the sugar) triggers the fermentation process in the bottle that the wine will eventually be sold in. Through the process of riddling and eventually disgorgement, the dead yeast cells (called lees) are removed from the wine while still maintaining the dissolved carbon dioxide gas. A dosage mixture of fresh wine and some sugar syrup is used to adjust the sweetness level of the wine after it has been disgorged.

In the &quot;methode ancestrale&quot; (ancestral method), the disgorgement step is skipped and the wine is sold with the lees still present as sediment in the wine. In the transfer method, after the wines have gone through the traditional method including riddling and disgorgement, the bottles are emptied into a large tank where they are then transferred to small and large format wine bottles such as 3 litre &quot;jeroboam&quot; and small split sizes used on airlines. Numerous quality producers worldwide use the &quot;Traditional&quot; method to make their sparkling wines.

The &quot;Charmat method&quot; takes place in stainless steel fermentation tanks that are pressurized. The fresh yeast and sugar mixture is added to the wine which rapidly stimulates fermentation in the pressurized environment. The wine is then cooled, clarified, and bottled using a counter pressure filler. The process of carbon injection (or carbonation), the method used to make soda pop fizzy, does not involve initiating a secondary fermentation but rather injecting carbon dioxide gas directly into the wine. This method produces large bubbles that quickly dissipate and is generally only used in the cheapest sparkling wines.

===Bubbles===
An initial burst of effervescence occurs when the sparkling wine contacts the dry glass on pouring. These bubbles form on imperfections in the glass that facilitate nucleation.
Nucleations are needed to stimulate the formation of bubbles because carbon dioxide has first to diffuse from the wine solution before it can rise out of the glass and into the air. A poured glass of sparkling wine will lose its bubbliness and carbon dioxide gas much more quickly than an open bottle alone would. The frothiness or &quot;mousse&quot; of the wine, along with the average size and consistency of the bubbles, can vary depending on the quality of the wine and the type of glass used.
According to the wine academic Graham Harding, the average bottle of champagne contains enough carbon dioxide to potentially produce 49 million bubbles. Wine expert Tom Stevenson puts the number at 250 million. The bubbles initially form at 20 micrometers in diameter and expand as they gain buoyancy and rise to the surface. When they reach the surface they are approximately 1 millimeter in size. It is speculated that the bubbles in sparkling wine may speed up alcohol intoxication by helping the alcohol to reach the bloodstream faster. A study conducted at the University of Surrey in the United Kingdom gave subjects equal amounts of flat and sparkling champagne which contained the same levels of alcohol. After 5 minutes following consumption, the group that had the sparkling wine had 54 milligrams of alcohol in their blood while the group that had the same sparkling wine, only flat, had 39 milligrams.

Putting a spoon in an open bottle of sparkling wine to keep it bubbly is a myth. A proper stopper is much more effective.

===Sweetness===
The amount of sugar (dosage) added after the second fermentation and aging varies and will dictate the sweetness level of the sparkling wine. Wines produced within the European Union must include the sweetness level on the wine label. For wines produced outside the EU, the sweetness level is not required but if it is included on the label the terms used must conform to EU guidelines.
* &quot;Brut Natural&quot; or &quot;Brut Zéro&quot; (fewer than 3 grams of sugar per litre)
* &quot;Extra Brut&quot; (fewer than 6 grams of sugar per litre)
* &quot;Brut&quot; (fewer than 12 grams of sugar per litre)

==French sparkling wine==
The most well-known example of sparkling wine is that of Champagne from the Champagne wine region of France. On average, Champagne is responsible for about 8% of worldwide sparkling wine production with many other regions emulating the &quot;Champagne style&quot; in both grapes used (generally Chardonnay, Pinot noir and Pinot Meunier) and production methods—sometimes referred to as the &quot;Champagne method&quot;. French sparkling wines made according to the Champagne method of fermentation in the bottle, but sometimes use different grape varieties, are known as &quot;Crémants&quot; and are governed under their own &quot;Appellation d&#x27;origine contrôlée&quot; (AOC) regulations. Another style of sparkling wine found in France are those made according to the &quot;methode ancestrale&quot; which skips the process of disgorgement and produces wines with slight sweetness and still containing the particles of dead yeast matter in the form of lees in the bottle. The regions of Gaillac, Limoux and Clairette de Die are the most well-known producers of &quot;methode ancestrale&quot; wines.

===Champagne===
Champagne is produced at the far extreme of viticultural circumstances, where the grape struggles to ripen in a long drawn out growing season. Cool climate weather limits the varieties of grape, and the types of wine that can be made, but it is in this region that sparkling wine has found its standard bearer. The limestone–chalk soil produces grapes that have a certain balance of acidity, extract and richness that is difficult to replicate in other parts of the world. The Champenois vigorously defend use of the term &quot;Champagne&quot; to relate the specific wine produced in the Champagne wine region. This includes objection to the term &quot;Champagne style&quot; to refer to sparkling wines produced outside the Champagne region. Since 1985, use of the term &quot;methode champenoise&quot; has been banned in all wines produced or sold in the European Union.

Blending is the hallmark of Champagne wine, with most Champagnes being the assembled product of several vineyards and vintages. In Champagne there are over 19,000 vineyard owners, only 5,000 of which are owned by Champagne producers. The rest sell their grapes to the various Champagne houses, &quot;négociants&quot; and co-operatives. The grapes, most commonly Chardonnay, Pinot noir and Pinot meunier, are used to make several base wines that are assembled together to make Champagne. Each grape adds its own unique imprint to the result. Chardonnay is prized for its finesse and aging ability. Pinot noir adds body and fruit while Pinot meunier contributes substantially to the aroma, adding fruit and floral notes. The majority of Champagnes produced are non-vintage (or rather, multi-vintage) blends. Vintage Champagne, often a house&#x27;s most prestigious and expensive wine, is also produced, but only in years when the producers feel that the grapes have the complexity and richness to warrant it.

===Crémant===

Sparkling wines designated Crémant (&quot;creamy&quot;) were originally named because their lower carbon dioxide pressures were thought to give them a creamy rather than fizzy mouth-feel. Though they may have full pressures today, they are still produced using the traditional method, and have to fulfill strict production criteria. In France, there are eight appellations for sparkling wine which include the designation Crémant in their name:
*Crémant d&#x27;Alsace
*Crémant de Bordeaux
*Crémant de Bourgogne
*Crémant de Die
*Crémant du Jura
*Crémant de Limoux
*Crémant de Loire
*Crémant de Savoie

There are also Crémant designations outside France:
*Crémant de Luxembourg
*Crémant de Wallonie (Belgium)

French appellation laws dictate that a Crémant must be harvested by hand with yields not exceeding a set amount for their AOC. The wines must also be aged for a minimum of one year. The Loire Valley is France&#x27;s largest producer of sparkling wines outside of the Champagne region. The majority of these Crémant de Loire are produced around the city of Saumur and are a blend of the Chardonnay, Chenin blanc and Cabernet franc. AOC laws do allow cuvées with Sauvignon blanc, Cabernet Sauvignon, Pinot noir, Gamay, Côt, Pineau d&#x27;aunis and Grolleau but those grapes are rarely used in a significant amount. In Burgundy, AOC laws require that Crémant de Bourgogne be composed of at least thirty percent Pinot noir, Chardonnay, Pinot blanc or Pinot gris. Aligoté is often used to fill out the remaining parts of the blend. The Languedoc wine Crémant de Limoux is produced in the forty one villages around the village of Limoux in the south of France. The wine is composed primarily of the indigenous grape Mauzac with some Chenin blanc and Chardonnay. The wine must spend a minimum of nine months aging on its lees. The sparkling Blanquette de Limoux is composed predominately of Mauzac and is aged for nine months.

As noted above, the designation Crémant was previously used for sparkling wines from the Champagne region which were produced with slightly less carbon dioxide and somewhat lower bottle pressure (typically 2–3 atmospheres instead of 5–6). These wines were rare in comparison to regular, full-pressure Champagne. The Crémant designation was also used for sparkling wines from the Loire valley, in the form of Crémant de Saumur and Crémant de Vouvray, without being defined as separate appellations. In 1975, Crémant de Loire was given formal recognition as an AOC, and was followed by Crémant de Bourgogne (1975) and Crémant d&#x27;Alsace (1976). When in the late 1980s lobbying by Champagne producers led to being forbidden within the European Union as a designation for the traditional method, the term Crémant was given its present definition. This meant that the use of &quot;Crémant&quot; in the Champagne region was discontinued and additional French Crémant AOCs were created from 1990, starting with Bordeaux and Limoux.

Since the designation Crémant is not reserved exclusively for French use (as a result of it replacing ), it may also be used by producers in other EU countries which fulfill the production criteria. Although such usage is rare, for example in Luxembourg, Crémant de Luxembourg is a designation within the &quot;Moselle Luxembourgeoise&quot; appellation, rather than a separate appellation, but otherwise follows the same rules as French Crémant.

Sula Vineyards produce &quot;Sula Brut Crémant de Nashik&quot; (up To 80% Chenin Blanc, the remainder Riesling and Viognier) and &quot;Sula Brut Tropicale Crémant de Nashik&quot; (60% Chenin Blanc, 40% Shiraz, Viognier) in India, which they differentiate from their &quot;Méthode Classique&quot; and &quot;Méthode Traditionnelle&quot; products.

===Other French sparkling wine===

There are also some other French appellations for sparkling wines, which do not carry the name Crémant. Some of these are exclusively sparkling wine appellations, and some are appellations allowing both still and sparkling wine to be made. The term &quot;Mousseux&quot; is French for &quot;sparkling&quot; and can refer to a sparkling wine made using methods other than the such as the Charmat method, while &quot;Crémant&quot; can only be used for wines that have been made using the .

Sparkling-only are:
*Anjou mousseux AOC
*Blanquette de Limoux AOC
*Blanquette méthode ancestrale AOC
*Bourgogne mousseux AOC
*Clairette de Die AOC
*Saumur mousseux AOC
*Touraine mousseux AOC
Either still or sparkling are:
*Gaillac AOC
*Saint-Péray AOC
*Vouvray AOC
*Montlouis AOC

==Other European sparkling wine==

===Cava===
Cava is the name of a type of Spanish (mostly in Catalonia but also in other regions such as Valencia, La Rioja, Aragon, Extremadura) white or pink sparkling wine produced mainly in the Alto Penedés in Catalonia, 40 km to the south west of Barcelona, with the &quot;méthode champenoise&quot; but grape varieties different from grapes used in Champagne making. Cava is a Greek term that was used to refer to a &quot;high end&quot; table wine or wine cellar, and comes from the Latin word &quot;cava&quot; which means cave in English. Caves were used in the early days of Cava production for the preservation or aging of wine. Today Cavas have become integrated with Catalan and also Spanish family traditions and is often consumed at any kind of celebrations (baptism, marriages, banquets, dinners and parties). The sparkling wine of Cava was created in 1872 by Josep Raventós. The vineyards of Penedés were devastated by the phylloxera plague, and the predominantly red vines were being replaced by large numbers of vines producing white grapes. After seeing the success of the Champagne region, Raventós decided to create the dry sparkling wine that has become the reason for the region&#x27;s continued success. In the past the wine was referred to as &quot;Spanish Champagne&quot; (no longer permitted under EU law), or colloquially as &quot;champaña&quot; in Spanish.

Cava is produced in varying levels of dryness of the wine which are: brut nature, brut (extra dry), seco (dry), semiseco (medium) and dulce (sweet). Under Spanish &quot;denominación de origen&quot; laws, Cava can be produced in six wine regions and must be made according to the &quot;Traditional Method&quot; with second fermentation in the bottle and uses a selection of the grapes Macabeu, Parellada, Xarel·lo, Chardonnay, Pinot noir, and Subirat. Despite being a traditional Champagne grape, Chardonnay was not used in the production of Cava until the 1980s.

===Portuguese sparkling wine===
Espumante () is the Portuguese version of a sparkling wine. Unlike Cava, which is produced solely in northern climates, Espumante is not only produced in the northern wet region of Vinho Verde, but also throughout Portugal all the way to the southern region of the Alentejo, known for its extreme temperatures and arid climate.

While Spain has one regulating body, DOC Cava, spread across several different political regions, quality Espumante is produced solely in DOC Bairrada, located just south of Vinho Verde. In order for a wine to be certified as a quality Espumante from DOC Bairrada, it must be made in the traditional champagne (indicating the year of harvest) and stamped with the VEQPRD (Vinho Espumante de Qualidade Produzido em Região Determinada) certification.

VFQPRD is a regional sparkling wine made in the traditional champagne, charmat or transfer method in one of the following determined regions: Douro, Ribatejo, Minho, Alentejo or Estremadura.

VQPRD is a sparkling wine that can be made by injecting the wine with gas in the traditional champagne, charmat, transfer method anywhere in Portugal.

Espumoso is the cheapest and lowest level of sparkling wine, made by injecting the wine with .

Top-quality Espumantes can be found in Bairrada region and in Távora-Varosa sub region – Murganheira is an example of high-quality Espumante from this region.

===Italian sparkling wine===

 According to etymological sources, the term &quot;spumante&quot; was not used in a wine context until 1908, more than 40 years following the first Italian sparkling wine using the &quot;méthode champenoise&quot; produced by Carlo Gancia which was then sold as &quot;Moscato Champagne&quot;.

Sparkling wines are made throughout Italy but the Italian sparkling wines most widely seen on the world market are the Prosecco from Veneto, Franciacorta from Lombardy, Asti from Piedmont and Lambrusco from Emilia. The Trento DOC is also famous. Though Franciacorta wines are made according to the traditional method, most Italian sparkling wines, in particular Asti and Prosecco, are made with the Charmat method.

Asti is a slightly sweet wine made from the Moscato grape in the province of Asti. The wine is noted for its low alcohol levels around 8% and fresh, grapey flavors. Moscato d&#x27;Asti is a &quot;frizzante&quot; style slightly sparkling version of Asti; it is sweeter and contains even less alcohol, typically around 5.5%.
The Franciacorta region, located northwest of Brescia, is home to the largest segment of Italian sparkling wine production. Made predominately from Chardonnay and Pinot bianco, sparkling wine labeled under the Franciacorta DOCG is permitted to include no more than 15% Pinot nero. Both vintage and non-vintage Franciacorta sparkling wines are made which require 30 and 18 months, respectively, of aging on the lees. Franciacorta Satèn, a &quot;Blanc de blancs&quot;, is produced with the reduced 4.5 atmospheres of pressure instead of 6 for an expression of softness.

Trento DOC is an appellation for white and rosé sparkling wines made according to the méthode traditionnelle. Chardonnay, Pinot noir, Pinot blanc and Pinot Meunier grapes are used. There is a maximum vine yield of 150 q.l. per hectare for all varietals, and a maximum grape yield of 70%. The wines must rest for a minimum of 15 months on their lees for non-vintage, 24 months for vintage, and 36 for riserva. Minimum alcohol content must be of 11.5%, or 12% for riserva. Trento DOC wines are distinguished by their straw-yellow color.

Prosecco is made in both fully sparkling (&quot;spumante&quot;) and lightly sparkling (&quot;frizzante&quot;) styles. The wine is produced in the cool hills around the town of Valdobbiadene and are generally dry but sweeter examples are produced.

v.f.q.p.r.d. (Vini frizzanti di qualità prodotti in regioni determinate): quality &quot;vini frizzanti&quot; made within defined regions are generally labeled as such.

===Sekt===
Sekt is a German term for some sparkling wine. The majority of Sekt produced (around 95%) is made by the Charmat method with the remaining premium Sekt being made according to the &quot;méthode traditionnelle&quot;. Cheap sparkling wine made with injection must not be called Sekt, but rather &quot;Schaumwein&quot; (German for sparkling wine, literally &quot;foam wine&quot;), while semi-sparkling wine is called &quot;Perlwein&quot;. According to CJEU (Court of Justice of the European Union) regulation, Sekt and the Term „Qualitätsschaumwein“ (German for quality sparkling wine) are the same. Quality sparkling wine is defined by means of precise specifications, including at least 10 per cent alcohol content and pressure in the bottle, among other things. For quality sparkling wines PSR (produced in specified regions), additional geographical regions (storage sparkling wine) and vintage specifications (vintage sparkling wine) are permitted. Around 90 percent of Sekt is made at least partially from imported wines from Italy, Spain and France. Sekt labeled as &quot;Deutscher Sekt&quot; is made exclusively from German grapes, and &quot;Sekt b.A.&quot; (&quot;bestimmter Anbaugebiete&quot;, in parallel to &quot;Qualitätswein b.A.&quot;) only from grapes from one of the 13 quality wine regions in Germany.
Some of the premium wines are often made using the Riesling, Pinot blanc, Pinot gris and Pinot noir grapes, with much of it drunk locally rather than exported. These Sekts are usually vintage dated with the village and vineyards that the grapes are from. Premium Sekt b.A. produced in smaller lots is often referred to as &quot;Winzersekt&quot; (winegrower&#x27;s Sekt), since it is typically produced by a producer which has vineyards of his own, rather than by the large Sekt-producing companies (&quot;Sektkellereien&quot;) which buy grapes or base wine on a large scale for their production. In Austria, the corresponding term is &quot;Hauersekt&quot;.

German production of sparkling wines dates back to 1826, when G. C. Kessler &amp; Co. was founded in Esslingen am Neckar by Georg Christian Kessler (1787–1842), who had previously worked at the Champagne house Veuve Clicquot from 1807 to 1826. The names used by the German producers for their sparkling wines in the 19th century were &quot;Mousseux&quot;, &quot;Sect&quot; or &quot;Champagne&quot; (or &quot;Champagner&quot;), although &quot;Sekt&quot; already appears as a term and spelling in 1805 (see Weltsekttag) and from the late 18th century onwards begins to appear in technical manuals published for the use of wine merchants, vintners and oenophiles in general. The 1919 Treaty of Versailles forbade Germany the use of this name, long before European Union regulations prohibited its use outside the Champagne region. Sekt was initially an informal German name for sparkling wine, coined in Berlin 1825, but was in common use by the 1890s. Germany long attempted to have the name Sekt reserved for sparkling wine from countries with German as an official language, but these regulations were annulled by the European Court of Justice in 1975. Another legal decision in the 1970s abolished the large producers&#x27; monopoly on Sekt production, allowing winemaking cooperatives and individual winegrowers to produce and sell their own sparkling wines. Together, these two decision produced the situation of the name Sekt being possible to apply to sparkling wines of varying quality level.

Sekt typically comes with a &quot;muselet&quot; (safety cage) to hold the cork in place despite its considerable pressure. It also comes with a &quot;Schaumwein&quot; tax, which since 2005 has been , corresponding to €1.02 per bottle. This tax was famously introduced by Emperor Wilhelm II in 1902 to fund the expansion of the Imperial Navy.

Germans also call some similar foreign wines &quot;Sekt&quot;, like &quot;&quot; (often red) from Crimea.

In Austria, Sekt is often made in the &quot;méthode champenoise&quot; with the Welschriesling and Grüner Veltliner grapes giving the wine a golden hue color. Sparkling rosé are made from the Blaufränkisch grape. Austria&#x27;s history of producing sparkling wine dates back to the Austro-Hungarian empire. Most Austrian Sekt producers are based in Vienna and source their grapes from the Weinviertel region in Lower Austria. Like its German counterpart, Austrian Sekt can be made trocken (dry) or halbtrocken (medium dry).

The first Austrian producer of sparkling wine was Robert Alwin Schlumberger, who presented his first sparkling wine in 1846 under the name &quot;Vöslauer weißer Schaumwein&quot; (White sparkling wine of Vöslau). It was produced from Blauer Portugieser grapes growing in vineyards in Bad Vöslau which Schlumberger bought in 1843, and the sparkling wine was an immediate success. Stuttgart-born Schlumberger had worked in the Champagne house Ruinart before he moved to Vienna in 1842.

The first facility to produce Sekt following the original French recipe was founded in 1825 in Pressburg (Bratislava) by Johann Fischer and Michael Schönbauer, both local burghers. The company, later renamed &quot;Hubert J.E.&quot; after J.E. Hubert of the Hubert family, which bought the company from Johann Fischer in 1877, continues to produce sekt until today.

===Pezsgő===
The Hungarian equivalent for sparkling wine is . The beginning of significant sparkling wine production in Hungary is dated back to the first half of the 19th century. The first wineries of sparkling wine were founded near Pozsony (today Bratislava, Slovakia) by Johann Fischer and Dr. Michael Schönbauer in 1825 (the first in Central-Europe) and Esch és Társa in 1835. A couple of decades later the main producers moved to the Buda Hills and Budafok nearby the capital creating a new center of production, the so-called &quot;Hungarian Champagne&quot; still existing nowadays. At the end of the 19th century the two most important wineries were József Törley és Társa moving from Reims, France to Budafok in 1882 and Louis és César-François founded in 1886. After the Soviet era the Hungarian wine sector was reborn. New and old wineries are seeking for the forgotten roots. Most of the Hungarian sparkling wines are made by the charmat and transvasée methods and a small but steadily growing amount by the traditional, method. The sorts of grape used during production can be international like Chardonnay, Pinot noir, Riesling, Muscat Ottonel, Muscat Lunel or natives like Olaszrizling, Kékfrankos, Furmint, Királyleányka, Hárslevelű, Kéknyelű and Juhfark.

===Sovetskoye Shampanskoye===

In the Soviet Union, sparkling wine was produced under the name Soviet Champagne, or Sovetskoye Shampanskoye. Most of this variety is sweet. This designation continued to be used for sparkling wine produced in several countries formerly part of the Soviet Union, including Georgia, Armenia, Belarus, Moldova, Russia and Ukraine. Most likely, the name has stuck since Sovetskoye Shampanskoye was one of the few products or brands of the Soviet era which were seen as luxurious. Often the names have been altered to fit the exact country, e.g. Georgian Champagne. Nowadays, it is more common to encounter Sovetskoye Shampanskoye produced in a dry or semi-dry style. The products have some international popularity, thus Russian made dry and semi-dry versions can be found in the European markets and Moldovan made semi-sweet version from Muscat grapes has been regularly available in the United States.

===Romanian sparkling wine===

In Romania, sparkling wine is mostly made in Panciu. The same traditional method is used in Azuga, where the mountain climate is perfect for the second fermentation of white and rose sparkling wines in passively cooled above-ground cellars. Grapes used (obviously not grown in this climate) are Chardonnay and a mix of Chardonnay and a Romanian variety called Fetească Regală. Rhein Azuga Cellars, now owned by Domeniile Alexandrion Rhein 1892, was established in 1892 and still uses the same methods and even tools from that era. In 2006, they have become once again official supplier to the Royal House of Romania, after having this honor between 1920 and 1947. Their Rhein Extra, still produced in the same building, was served at the coronation of King Ferdinand I at Alba Iulia in October 1922. Another well known producer of sparkling wine is Carastelec; their brand is called Carassia, they use traditional method and they make Blanc de Blanc Classic Brut, Rose Classic Brut (from Chardonnay, Pinot Noir &amp; Meunier), a Classic Brut (from Chardonnay, Pinot Noir &amp; Meunier) and Carassia Vintage 773 Brut. All their sparkling wines received numerous medals.

===English sparkling wine===

Commercial production of bottle fermented sparkling wines from grapes grown in England started in the 1960s, although there has been a longer history of sparkling wines made in the UK from imported grapes. In the 1980s, some English winemakers started to grow the grape varieties as used in Champagne – Chardonnay, Pinot noir and Pinot Meunier – and in the ensuing decades availability of English sparkling wines made from these varieties increased. Today, there are over 100 vineyards in England producing sparkling wines with Nyetimber, Ridgeview and Chapel Down being some of the largest producers. In 2010, Chardonnay and Pinot noir were the two most commonly planted grape varieties in English vineyards. Along with Pinot Meunier, the three varieties combined accounted for around 40% of vines planted, which appears to reflect a significant growth in interest in English sparkling wines. Other varietals used are Auxerrois, Seyval blanc, Müller-Thurgau, Reichensteiner, and Bacchus. To put that in context, the current yield for all types of English wine averages to around 2 million bottles annually.

===Ukrainian sparkling wine===

In Ukraine, sparkling wine (, ) is mostly being produced in the south of the country, particularly in Bessarabia, Prychornomoria and Crimea. Those regions are located around the 46th parallel north, just as Champagne in France, which allows the production of the highest quality wine. Transcarpathia is also an important wine-making region in Ukraine. The varietal diversity of grapes in Ukraine is represented by the international and autochthonous varieties. The most renowned autochthonous variety is Telti Kuruk, cultivated on the Shabo terroir. The most widely planted selected variety is Odeskyi Chornyi (Alibernet) and Sukholymanskyi Bilyi, while Saperavi, Aligote, Rkatsiteli, Cabernet Sauvignon, Chardonnay, and Riesling are the most popular international varieties. One of the most popular Ukrainian sparkling wine manufacturers is Artwinery, which is the largest manufacturer in Eastern Europe of sparkling wines created according to the traditional (Champenoise) method. Another famous Ukrainian winery, Shabo, has a sparkling wine house near its terroir that covers a total area of 1.4 hectares and ensures quality at all stages of production.

==New World sparkling wine==

===American sparkling wine===
Sparkling wines produced in the United States can be made in both the méthode traditionnelle and the charmat method. Lower cost sparkling wines, such as André, often employ the latter method with more premium sparkling wines utilizing the former. The history of producing quality sparkling wine in California can be traced to the Russian River Valley of Sonoma County where, in 1892, the Korbel brothers (emigrated from Bohemia in 1852) began producing sparkling wine according to the méthode champenoise. The first wines produced were made from Riesling, Muscatel, Traminer and Chasselas grapes. Partly aided by foreign influence, the overall quality of Californian sparkling wine increased with the introduction of the more traditional sparkling wine grapes of Chardonnay, Pinot noir, Pinot Meunier and Pinot blanc into production. US AVA requirements and wine laws do not regulate sugar levels and sweetness of wine though most producers tend to follow European standards with Brut wine having less than 1.5% sugar up to Doux having more than 5%. As the sparkling wine industry in California grew, foreign investments from some of the Champagne region&#x27;s most noted champagne houses came to set up wineries in the area. These include Moët et Chandon&#x27;s Domaine Chandon, Louis Roederer&#x27;s Roederer Estate, and Taittinger&#x27;s Domaine Carneros.

While many top American sparkling wine producers utilize the traditional methods of production, there are distinct differences in their wine making techniques that have a considerable effect on the taste of the wines. In Champagne, the cuvée blend will rarely have less than 30 wines and sometimes as many as 60 that are taken from grapes spanning 4–6 years of different vintages. In California, cuvees are typically derived from around 20 wines taken from 1 to 2 years worth of vintages. Champagne laws require that the wine spend a minimum of 15 months on the lees for non-vintage and minimum 3 years for vintage Champagne. It is not uncommon for a premium Champagne to age for 7 years or more prior to release. In the US, there are no minimum requirements, and aging length can vary from 8 months to 6 years. Another distinct difference for Californian sparkling wines is the favorable Californian climate which allows a vintage wine to be produced nearly every year.

Current US regulations ban the use of the term &quot;champagne&quot; on any wines not produced in Champagne except if the label was in use before 2006. No new labels including the term &quot;champagne&quot; will be approved by the US Government for wines produced outside of the Champagne region of France after 2006. Those &quot;grandfathered labels&quot; can only use the term on a wine label if there appears next to that name the appellation of &quot;the actual place of origin&quot;.

The growth of the Finger Lakes wine industry in New York (state) and the success of Riesling wines from the region has resulted in an increasing number of producers making sparkling wines from primarily or 100% Riesling. Finger Lakes producers such as Glenora and Casa Larga are also producing sparkling wine from other grapes such as the traditional Chardonnay and Pinot noir.

===Canada===
Canada&#x27;s sparkling wine producers are found in Southern Ontario, British Columbia, Quebec and Nova Scotia, where growing conditions mirror that of Champagne, Provence and Languedoc of France. In particular, Ontario&#x27;s appellations are emerging as strong producers of dry sparkling wines as their cooler climate conditions are very conducive to producing excellent, flavourful and not-too-ripe grapes.

While traditionally aimed at the domestic market, Canadian sparkling wines have recently gained prominence internationally. In 2011, L&#x27;Acadie Vineyards won a silver medal at an international competition for sparkling wines in France and in 2012, Benjamin Bridge winery&#x27;s 2004 Brut Reserve placed higher than a Louis Roederer 2004 Cristal (wine) champagne at a blind tasting held with noted critics, bringing attention to the country&#x27;s wine industry. In Ontario, wineries recognized for their sparkling wines include Henry of Pelham Winery, Jackson-Triggs and Inniskillin.

Ontario, and in particular the Niagara Peninsula, is the largest wine growing region in Canada. Approximately 26 of the Niagara Peninsula wineries produce some sparkling wine, where annual production averages about 55,000 cases (500,000 litres). Sparkling wine is largely produced in the Traditional Method (65%), and a smaller proportion is produced in the Charmat method (35%). The Niagara Peninsula region&#x27;s micro-climate is well suited for the growth of Chardonnay, Riesling, Vidal Blanc, Pinot Noir and Gamay grapes, which are the prominent varietals for Ontario sparkling wine. Ontario sparkling wines are often noted for having a character and aroma comparable to that of traditional Champagne, including biscuit, subtle yeast and palate cleansing bubbles.

An emerging sparkling wine-focused region in Ontario is Prince Edward County, Ontario. The county is noted for its Prince Edward County Wine and is the fourth and newest Designated Viticultural Area (DVA) in the Province. Like the Niagara Peninsula, Prince Edward County&#x27;s terroir and micro-climate are well suited for cool climate grapes where wineries, such as The Hinterland Wine Company, specialize in the production of sparkling wines.

Sparkling icewine in Ontario was first crafted by Canadian wine writer Konrad Ejbich in his home cellar in Toronto. Unique to Ontario and generally referred to as Icewine Dosage, this sparkling wine is produced by topping a Traditional Method dry sparkling wine with a dosage of Icewine, which is slightly off-dry with a hint of Icewine.

===Australia===

Australian sparkling wine production has come a long way in a very short period of time, according to Wine Australia&#x27;s 2014–2015 annual report with several notable French Champagne houses investing in production.

Tasmania is a centre of Australian sparkling wine production. Wine commentator James Halliday states &quot;the clear majority of the best sparkling wines are now solely sourced from Tasmania&quot;, and Tyson Stelzer says &quot;Tasmania confidently holds its place as Australia&#x27;s sparkling capital&quot; with both the traditional grape varieties and method of secondary fermentation being employed.

Whilst most sparkling wine is produced from Chardonnay, Pinot noir and possibly Pinot Meuniere, an Australian speciality is sparkling Shiraz, a red sparkling wine produced from Shiraz grapes. Most sparkling Shiraz is traditionally somewhat sweet, but some producers make it dry, full-bodied and tannic.

===Chile===
Chile produces around 12 million bottles of sparkling wine per year of which only around 1.6 million bottles are exported to overseas markets. Although sparkling wines have been made since 1879, they have not yet established a significant place in Chile&#x27;s wine portfolio. In recent years, the Pais grape variety has been creatively employed on its own or in blends, to make modern wines that have received favorable reviews. A rise in consumer demand and an ever-broadening selection of cool climate grapes has led to an increase in fresh and delightful sparkling wines ranging from bone dry extra brut to off-dry demi-secs, from blanc de blanc to blanc de noir to sparkling rosé. Valdivieso produce 60% of all sparkling wine in Chile. Most is inexpensive tank method fizz, but 20% is very good quality Champagne method from Pinot and Chardonnay. There is also a product made from a blend of sparkling Pinot wine and fresh handpicked strawberry pulp.

===South Africa===
Méthode Cap Classique or MCC is any sparkling wine made by the classic method of undergoing second fermentation in the bottle. There are quality standards that all producers adhere to voluntarily, apart from the minimum time on the lees (nine months) and the bars of pressure, which are mandatory in order to use MCC on the label. Traditional Champagne varieties such as Chardonnay and Pinot noir are mostly used for MCC production, however the use of other varieties are becoming increasingly popular and local MCC labels are seen with the likes of Sauvignon blanc and Chenin blanc. Sparkling wine is also made according to the Charmat method and red sparkling Pinotage can also be found. Methode Cap Classique tends to be very fruity due to the high temperatures of the South African Wine lands. The quality of MCC in South Africa can be compared to the wines produced in Champagne.

==See also==
* Muselet

==References==
== External links ==

* &quot;De salubri potu dissertatio&quot; free Google ebook</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q321263" start="0" end="14" title="Sparkling wine" label="Sparkling wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q282" start="20" end="24" title="wine" label="wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="52" end="66" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q134862" start="130" end="139" title="champagne" label="champagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="141" end="155" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428809" start="233" end="249" title="Champagne (wine region)" label="Champagne region"/>
<link wikidata="Q12979" start="303" end="307" title="rosé" label="rosé"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125341" start="367" end="374" title="Italian wine" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q896583" start="375" end="384" title="Brachetto" label="Brachetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146204" start="398" end="407" title="Lambrusco" label="Lambrusco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2129654" start="417" end="427" title="Australian wine" label="Australian"/>
<link wikidata="Q332720" start="438" end="444" title="Shiraz grape" label="Shiraz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517946" start="450" end="459" title="Sweetness of wine" label="sweetness"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007963" start="739" end="751" title="Fermentation in winemaking" label="fermentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141675" start="785" end="803" title="Champagne Method" label="traditional method"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141675" start="877" end="892" title="Charmat process" label="Charmat process"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139722" start="920" end="944" title="carbonation" label="carbon dioxide injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="982" end="996" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q321263" start="1167" end="1174" title="Crémant" label="Crémant"/>
<link wikidata="Q20724665" start="1247" end="1267" title="Blanquette de Limoux" label="Blanquette de Limoux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069954" start="1409" end="1417" title="Prosecco" label="Prosecco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3750896" start="1419" end="1431" title="Franciacorta (wine)" label="Franciacorta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838522" start="1433" end="1443" title="Trento DOC" label="Trento DOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4013669" start="1445" end="1475" title="Oltrepò Pavese Metodo Classico (wine)" label="Oltrepò Pavese Metodo Classico"/>
<link wikidata="Q522420" start="1480" end="1484" title="Asti (wine)" label="Asti"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1547" end="1567" title="#Italian sparkling wine" label="&amp;quot;spumante&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051699" start="1595" end="1599" title="Cava (Spanish wine)" label="Cava"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327759" start="1831" end="1844" title="József Törley" label="József Törley"/>
<link wikidata="Q41876" start="1925" end="1930" title="Reims" label="Reims"/>
<link wikidata="Q268304" start="1932" end="1938" title="Törley" label="Törley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467810" start="2173" end="2198" title="wine from the United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom winemakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2797526" start="2234" end="2247" title="Effervescence" label="Effervescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647494" start="2274" end="2292" title="history (wine)" label="throughout history"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517569" start="2315" end="2328" title="Ancient Greek (wine)" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q4111647" start="2333" end="2338" title="Roman (wine)" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q26388" start="2459" end="2477" title="phases of the moon" label="phases of the moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q177413" start="2503" end="2515" title="evil spirits" label="evil spirits"/>
<link wikidata="Q831320" start="2645" end="2655" title="wine fault" label="wine fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q192744" start="2785" end="2791" title="Limoux" label="Limoux"/>
<link wikidata="Q348666" start="2793" end="2805" title="Dom Pérignon (monk)" label="Dom Pérignon"/>
<link wikidata="Q160742" start="2853" end="2873" title="Abbey" label="Abbey of Hautvillers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050571" start="3148" end="3167" title="Catcher gear" label="catcher&amp;#x27;s mask"/>
<link wikidata="Q808963" start="3773" end="3792" title="oak (wine)" label="wooden wine barrels"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326881" start="3877" end="3901" title="Early modern glass in England" label="English glass production"/>
<link wikidata="Q49444" start="4050" end="4054" title="cork (material)" label="cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q608613" start="4127" end="4159" title="fall of the Western Roman Empire" label="fall of the Western Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007963" start="4250" end="4262" title="fermentation (wine)" label="fermentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517946" start="4307" end="4321" title="residual sugar" label="residual sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237250" start="4334" end="4339" title="yeast (wine)" label="yeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q55067441" start="4617" end="4635" title="Christopher Merret" label="Christopher Merret"/>
<link wikidata="Q169545" start="5228" end="5243" title="automobile tire" label="automobile tire"/>
<link wikidata="Q321263" start="5380" end="5384" title="Sekt" label="Sekt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141675" start="5803" end="5809" title="tirage" label="tirage"/>
<link wikidata="Q12979" start="6037" end="6041" title="rosé" label="rosé"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759568" start="6064" end="6071" title="Moldova wine" label="Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q896583" start="6276" end="6285" title="Brachetto" label="Brachetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146204" start="6290" end="6299" title="Lambrusco" label="Lambrusco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983286" start="6350" end="6359" title="Colli Piacentini" label="Gutturnio"/>
<link wikidata="Q651088" start="6361" end="6368" title="Bonarda Piemontese" label="Bonarda"/>
<link wikidata="Q807812" start="6383" end="6390" title="Barbera" label="Barbera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2129654" start="6476" end="6485" title="Australia wine" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q332720" start="6531" end="6537" title="Shiraz (grape)" label="Shiraz"/>
<link wikidata="Q253140" start="6566" end="6578" title="viticultural" label="viticultural"/>
<link wikidata="Q213376" start="6583" end="6593" title="winemaking" label="winemaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307297" start="6805" end="6814" title="harvested (wine)" label="harvested"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564911" start="6846" end="6857" title="acid levels (wine)" label="acid levels"/>
<link wikidata="Q836941" start="6934" end="6938" title="brix" label="brix"/>
<link wikidata="Q7635047" start="7009" end="7021" title="sugar levels (wine)" label="sugar levels"/>
<link wikidata="Q3425216" start="7113" end="7119" title="yields (wine)" label="yields"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669761" start="7162" end="7180" title="phenolic compounds (wine)" label="phenolic compounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q5256707" start="7324" end="7334" title="maceration (wine)" label="maceration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3816735" start="7446" end="7453" title="pressed (wine)" label="pressed"/>
<link wikidata="Q223701" start="7507" end="7517" title="Pinot noir" label="Pinot noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q8024923" start="7630" end="7640" title="color (wine)" label="tinted red"/>
<link wikidata="Q12979" start="7759" end="7763" title="rosé" label="rosé"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007963" start="7941" end="7953" title="fermentation (wine)" label="fermentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q45422" start="8074" end="8079" title="yeast" label="yeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q654005" start="8107" end="8130" title="malolactic fermentation" label="malolactic fermentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q249099" start="8286" end="8291" title="cuvée" label="cuvée"/>
<link wikidata="Q65122120" start="8327" end="8335" title="varietal" label="varietal"/>
<link wikidata="Q213332" start="8422" end="8432" title="Chardonnay" label="Chardonnay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975981" start="8508" end="8515" title="vintage" label="vintage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443845" start="8722" end="8744" title="Secondary fermentation (wine)" label="secondary fermentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q177974" start="9154" end="9165" title="Atmosphere (unit)" label="atmospheres"/>
<link wikidata="Q25326506" start="9479" end="9490" title="Traditional method" label="traditional"/>
<link wikidata="Q25326506" start="9783" end="9791" title="riddling" label="riddling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141675" start="9807" end="9819" title="Disgorging" label="disgorgement"/>
<link wikidata="Q162441" start="9850" end="9854" title="lees (wine)" label="lees"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141675" start="9942" end="9948" title="sparkling wine production" label="dosage"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10085" end="10103" title="Sparkling wine production#ancestral method" label="methode ancestrale"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10244" end="10259" title="Sparkling wine production#transfer method" label="transfer method"/>
<link wikidata="Q23490" start="10455" end="10466" title="wine bottle" label="wine bottle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10663" end="10677" title="Sparkling wine production#charmat method" label="Charmat method"/>
<link wikidata="Q5126958" start="10906" end="10915" title="clarified (wine)" label="clarified"/>
<link wikidata="Q147538" start="11036" end="11044" title="soda pop" label="soda pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q909022" start="11467" end="11477" title="nucleation" label="nucleation"/>
<link wikidata="Q215414" start="11797" end="11807" title="frothiness" label="frothiness"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817689" start="12142" end="12155" title="Tom Stevenson" label="Tom Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q175821" start="12221" end="12231" title="micrometre" label="micrometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q205972" start="12441" end="12461" title="alcohol intoxication" label="alcohol intoxication"/>
<link wikidata="Q546976" start="12543" end="12563" title="University of Surrey" label="University of Surrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q721237" start="12671" end="12688" title="alcohol level" label="levels of alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420576" start="13254" end="13264" title="wine label" label="wine label"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428809" start="13738" end="13759" title="Champagne wine region" label="Champagne wine region"/>
<link wikidata="Q213332" start="13957" end="13967" title="Chardonnay" label="Chardonnay"/>
<link wikidata="Q223701" start="13969" end="13979" title="Pinot noir" label="Pinot noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q947208" start="13984" end="13997" title="Pinot Meunier" label="Pinot Meunier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565828" start="14292" end="14328" title="Appellation d&amp;#x27;origine contrôlée" label="Appellation d&amp;#x27;origine contrôlée"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14440" end="14458" title="Sparkling wine production#ancestral method" label="methode ancestrale"/>
<link wikidata="Q343613" start="14652" end="14659" title="Gaillac" label="Gaillac"/>
<link wikidata="Q20724665" start="14661" end="14667" title="Limoux (wine)" label="Limoux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094848" start="14672" end="14688" title="Clairette de Die" label="Clairette de Die"/>
<link wikidata="Q7335587" start="14863" end="14887" title="grape struggles to ripen" label="grape struggles to ripen"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="15096" end="15105" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q183670" start="15106" end="15111" title="chalk" label="chalk"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15173" end="15180" title="extract (wine)" label="extract"/>
<link wikidata="Q897317" start="15953" end="15963" title="négociants" label="négociants"/>
<link wikidata="Q439086" start="16235" end="16248" title="aging ability (wine)" label="aging ability"/>
<link wikidata="Q895170" start="16266" end="16270" title="body (wine)" label="body"/>
<link wikidata="Q698044" start="16334" end="16339" title="aroma (wine)" label="aroma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="16774" end="16788" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q25326506" start="16941" end="16959" title="traditional method" label="traditional method"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565828" start="17036" end="17048" title="Appellation d&amp;#x27;origine contrôlée" label="appellations"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17122" end="17143" title="Alsace wine region#Crémant d&amp;#x27;Alsace AOC" label="Crémant d&amp;#x27;Alsace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094848" start="17188" end="17202" title="Clairette de Die AOC" label="Crémant de Die"/>
<link wikidata="Q1713793" start="17204" end="17219" title="Jura wine regions" label="Crémant du Jura"/>
<link wikidata="Q20724665" start="17221" end="17238" title="Limoux wine" label="Crémant de Limoux"/>
<link wikidata="Q5191477" start="17330" end="17351" title="Crémant de Luxembourg" label="Crémant de Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307297" start="17439" end="17448" title="harvest (wine)" label="harvested"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565828" start="17506" end="17509" title="Appellation d&amp;#x27;origine contrôlée" label="AOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050483" start="17570" end="17582" title="Loire Valley" label="Loire Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q193821" start="17740" end="17746" title="Saumur" label="Saumur"/>
<link wikidata="Q213332" start="17770" end="17780" title="Chardonnay" label="Chardonnay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070101" start="17782" end="17794" title="Chenin blanc" label="Chenin blanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q63591" start="17799" end="17813" title="Cabernet franc" label="Cabernet franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q249099" start="17833" end="17838" title="cuvée" label="cuvée"/>
<link wikidata="Q44542" start="17845" end="17860" title="Sauvignon blanc" label="Sauvignon blanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q207310" start="17862" end="17880" title="Cabernet Sauvignon" label="Cabernet Sauvignon"/>
<link wikidata="Q223701" start="17882" end="17892" title="Pinot noir" label="Pinot noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q12982" start="17894" end="17899" title="Gamay" label="Gamay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414045" start="17901" end="17904" title="Côt" label="Côt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095561" start="17906" end="17925" title="Pineau d&amp;#x27;aunis" label="Pineau d&amp;#x27;aunis"/>
<link wikidata="Q268579" start="17930" end="17938" title="Grolleau (grape)" label="Grolleau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173" start="18000" end="18008" title="Burgundy (region)" label="Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q950514" start="18116" end="18127" title="Pinot blanc" label="Pinot blanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q778601" start="18131" end="18141" title="Pinot gris" label="Pinot gris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514198" start="18143" end="18150" title="Aligoté" label="Aligoté"/>
<link wikidata="Q1805438" start="18215" end="18229" title="Languedoc wine" label="Languedoc wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q440964" start="18394" end="18400" title="Mauzac (grape)" label="Mauzac"/>
<link wikidata="Q439086" start="18485" end="18490" title="aging (wine)" label="aging"/>
<link wikidata="Q20724665" start="18518" end="18538" title="Blanquette de Limoux" label="Blanquette de Limoux"/>
<link wikidata="Q13420363" start="19046" end="19053" title="Vouvray wine" label="Vouvray"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="19340" end="19354" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759014" start="19877" end="19887" title="Luxembourg wine" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q17069969" start="20081" end="20095" title="Sula Vineyards" label="Sula Vineyards"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20971" end="20989" title="Anjou mousseux AOC" label="Anjou mousseux AOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q20724665" start="20991" end="21015" title="Blanquette de Limoux AOC" label="Blanquette de Limoux AOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q20724665" start="21017" end="21050" title="Blanquette méthode ancestrale AOC" label="Blanquette méthode ancestrale AOC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21052" end="21074" title="Bourgogne mousseux AOC" label="Bourgogne mousseux AOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094848" start="21076" end="21096" title="Clairette de Die AOC" label="Clairette de Die AOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3474241" start="21098" end="21117" title="Saumur mousseux AOC" label="Saumur mousseux AOC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21119" end="21140" title="Touraine mousseux AOC" label="Touraine mousseux AOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q392242" start="21173" end="21184" title="Gaillac AOC" label="Gaillac AOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3463557" start="21186" end="21201" title="Saint-Péray AOC" label="Saint-Péray AOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q13420363" start="21203" end="21214" title="Vouvray AOC" label="Vouvray AOC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21216" end="21229" title="Montlouis AOC#Montlouis" label="Montlouis AOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5705" start="21326" end="21335" title="Catalonia" label="Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8818" start="21370" end="21378" title="Valencia" label="Valencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5727" start="21380" end="21388" title="La Rioja (Spain)" label="La Rioja"/>
<link wikidata="Q4040" start="21390" end="21396" title="Aragon" label="Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5777" start="21398" end="21409" title="Extremadura" label="Extremadura"/>
<link wikidata="Q15355" start="21463" end="21475" title="Alt Penedès" label="Alto Penedés"/>
<link wikidata="Q25326506" start="21543" end="21562" title="méthode champenoise" label="méthode champenoise"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22138" end="22152" title="Josep Raventós" label="Josep Raventós"/>
<link wikidata="Q367315" start="22202" end="22212" title="phylloxera" label="phylloxera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517946" start="22688" end="22707" title="sweetness of wine" label="dryness of the wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139487" start="22819" end="22841" title="denominación de origen" label="denominación de origen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756570" start="23034" end="23041" title="Macabeu" label="Macabeu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751915" start="23043" end="23052" title="Parellada" label="Parellada"/>
<link wikidata="Q127174" start="23054" end="23062" title="Xarel·lo" label="Xarel·lo"/>
<link wikidata="Q213332" start="23064" end="23074" title="Chardonnay" label="Chardonnay"/>
<link wikidata="Q223701" start="23076" end="23086" title="Pinot noir" label="Pinot noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165349" start="23092" end="23099" title="Subirat" label="Subirat"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23246" end="23255" title="Espumante" label="Espumante"/>
<link wikidata="Q14299" start="24167" end="24172" title="Douro" label="Douro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430102" start="24174" end="24182" title="Tejo VR" label="Ribatejo"/>
<link wikidata="Q374743" start="24184" end="24189" title="Rios do Minho VR" label="Minho"/>
<link wikidata="Q20963720" start="24191" end="24199" title="Alentejo" label="Alentejo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242467" start="24203" end="24214" title="Lisboa VR" label="Estremadura"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24217" end="24222" title="VQPRD" label="VQPRD"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879982" start="24504" end="24512" title="Bairrada" label="Bairrada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3546429" start="24527" end="24540" title="Távora-Varosa DOC" label="Távora-Varosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069954" start="25067" end="25075" title="Prosecco" label="Prosecco"/>
<link wikidata="Q4013663" start="25081" end="25087" title="Venetian wine" label="Veneto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3750896" start="25089" end="25101" title="Franciacorta DOCG" label="Franciacorta"/>
<link wikidata="Q4013669" start="25107" end="25115" title="Lombardia (wine)" label="Lombardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q522420" start="25117" end="25121" title="Asti wine" label="Asti"/>
<link wikidata="Q16590178" start="25127" end="25135" title="Piemonte (wine)" label="Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146204" start="25140" end="25149" title="Lambrusco" label="Lambrusco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135779" start="25155" end="25161" title="Emilia (region)" label="Emilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838522" start="25167" end="25177" title="Trento DOC" label="Trento DOC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25347" end="25361" title="Sparkling wine production#Charmat method" label="Charmat method"/>
<link wikidata="Q181486" start="25408" end="25415" title="Muscat (grape)" label="Moscato"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122" start="25441" end="25445" title="Asti" label="Asti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198126" start="25529" end="25548" title="Moscato d&amp;#x27;Asti" label="Moscato d&amp;#x27;Asti"/>
<link wikidata="Q6221" start="25733" end="25740" title="Brescia" label="Brescia"/>
<link wikidata="Q950514" start="25850" end="25862" title="Pinot blanc" label="Pinot bianco"/>
<link wikidata="Q177974" start="26187" end="26198" title="Standard atmosphere (unit)" label="atmospheres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069954" start="26792" end="26800" title="Prosecco" label="Prosecco"/>
<link wikidata="Q47428" start="26968" end="26981" title="Valdobbiadene" label="Valdobbiadene"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517039" start="27114" end="27176" title="Quality wines produced in specified regions" label="quality &amp;quot;vini frizzanti&amp;quot; made within defined regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125341" start="28249" end="28254" title="Italy (wine)" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432594" start="28256" end="28261" title="Spain (wine)" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q630531" start="28266" end="28272" title="France (wine)" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q353275" start="28442" end="28460" title="QbA" label="Qualitätswein b.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q456471" start="28588" end="28596" title="Riesling" label="Riesling"/>
<link wikidata="Q950514" start="28598" end="28609" title="Pinot blanc" label="Pinot blanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q778601" start="28611" end="28621" title="Pinot gris" label="Pinot gris"/>
<link wikidata="Q223701" start="28626" end="28636" title="Pinot noir" label="Pinot noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q3786" start="29296" end="29315" title="Esslingen am Neckar" label="Esslingen am Neckar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29319" end="29342" title="Georg Christian Kessler" label="Georg Christian Kessler"/>
<link wikidata="Q610350" start="29405" end="29419" title="Veuve Clicquot" label="Veuve Clicquot"/>
<link wikidata="Q17035417" start="29700" end="29711" title="Weltsekttag" label="Weltsekttag"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076783" start="29844" end="29854" title="Oenophilia" label="oenophiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="29876" end="29896" title="Treaty of Versailles" label="Treaty of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518827" start="30313" end="30338" title="European Court of Justice" label="European Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q823196" start="30458" end="30480" title="winemaking cooperative" label="winemaking cooperative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061121" start="30729" end="30736" title="muselet" label="muselet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677" start="30966" end="30984" title="Wilhelm II, German Emperor" label="Emperor Wilhelm II"/>
<link wikidata="Q156649" start="31022" end="31035" title="Kaiserliche Marine" label="Imperial Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835" start="31136" end="31142" title="Crimea" label="Crimea"/>
<link wikidata="Q644796" start="31224" end="31238" title="Welschriesling" label="Welschriesling"/>
<link wikidata="Q180175" start="31243" end="31259" title="Grüner Veltliner" label="Grüner Veltliner"/>
<link wikidata="Q12979" start="31313" end="31317" title="rosé" label="rosé"/>
<link wikidata="Q882859" start="31336" end="31349" title="Blaufränkisch" label="Blaufränkisch"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="31426" end="31449" title="Austro-Hungarian empire" label="Austro-Hungarian empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="31493" end="31499" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q701613" start="31533" end="31544" title="Weinviertel" label="Weinviertel"/>
<link wikidata="Q42497" start="31555" end="31568" title="Lower Austria" label="Lower Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7844921" start="31625" end="31632" title="trocken" label="trocken"/>
<link wikidata="Q353275" start="31642" end="31653" title="halbtrocken" label="halbtrocken"/>
<link wikidata="Q88399" start="31719" end="31744" title="Robert Alwin Schlumberger" label="Robert Alwin Schlumberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q646799" start="31902" end="31920" title="Blauer Portugieser" label="Blauer Portugieser"/>
<link wikidata="Q798800" start="31952" end="31962" title="Bad Vöslau" label="Bad Vöslau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022" start="32047" end="32056" title="Stuttgart" label="Stuttgart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806967" start="32109" end="32116" title="Ruinart (champagne)" label="Ruinart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="32136" end="32142" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780" start="32248" end="32257" title="Pressburg" label="Pressburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780" start="32259" end="32269" title="Bratislava" label="Bratislava"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054023" start="32536" end="32545" title="Hungarian (wine)" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780" start="32755" end="32762" title="Pozsony" label="Pozsony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780" start="32770" end="32780" title="Bratislava" label="Bratislava"/>
<link wikidata="Q850815" start="32960" end="32970" title="Buda Hills" label="Buda Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q525100" start="32975" end="32982" title="Budafok" label="Budafok"/>
<link wikidata="Q268304" start="33178" end="33200" title="Törley" label="József Törley és Társa"/>
<link wikidata="Q41876" start="33213" end="33218" title="Reims" label="Reims"/>
<link wikidata="Q16410" start="33301" end="33311" title="Hungarian People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="Soviet era"/>
<link wikidata="Q269102" start="33663" end="33677" title="Muscat Ottonel" label="Muscat Ottonel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33679" end="33691" title="Muscat Lunel" label="Muscat Lunel"/>
<link wikidata="Q644796" start="33708" end="33720" title="Olaszrizling" label="Olaszrizling"/>
<link wikidata="Q882859" start="33722" end="33732" title="Kékfrankos" label="Kékfrankos"/>
<link wikidata="Q940015" start="33734" end="33741" title="Furmint" label="Furmint"/>
<link wikidata="Q761378" start="33743" end="33756" title="Királyleányka" label="Királyleányka"/>
<link wikidata="Q979351" start="33758" end="33768" title="Hárslevelű" label="Hárslevelű"/>
<link wikidata="Q836402" start="33770" end="33778" title="Kéknyelű" label="Kéknyelű"/>
<link wikidata="Q600151" start="33783" end="33790" title="Juhfark" label="Juhfark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789031" start="33909" end="33932" title="Sovetskoye Shampanskoye" label="Sovetskoye Shampanskoye"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="34097" end="34104" title="Georgia (country)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q399" start="34106" end="34113" title="Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q184" start="34115" end="34122" title="Belarus" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q217" start="34124" end="34131" title="Moldova" label="Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="34144" end="34151" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q181486" start="34660" end="34673" title="Muscat (grape)" label="Muscat grapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q899454" start="34802" end="34808" title="Panciu" label="Panciu"/>
<link wikidata="Q535516" start="34849" end="34854" title="Azuga" label="Azuga"/>
<link wikidata="Q213332" start="35052" end="35062" title="Chardonnay" label="Chardonnay"/>
<link wikidata="Q213332" start="35076" end="35086" title="Chardonnay" label="Chardonnay"/>
<link wikidata="Q761378" start="35117" end="35132" title="Fetească Regală" label="Fetească Regală"/>
<link wikidata="Q48889939" start="35350" end="35372" title="Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen of Romania" label="Royal House of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q57165" start="35509" end="35525" title="Ferdinand I of Romania" label="King Ferdinand I"/>
<link wikidata="Q174665" start="35529" end="35539" title="Alba Iulia" label="Alba Iulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q789677" start="36876" end="36885" title="Auxerrois blanc" label="Auxerrois"/>
<link wikidata="Q458232" start="36887" end="36899" title="Seyval blanc" label="Seyval blanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q681670" start="36901" end="36915" title="Müller-Thurgau" label="Müller-Thurgau"/>
<link wikidata="Q877422" start="36917" end="36931" title="Reichensteiner" label="Reichensteiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q266752" start="36937" end="36944" title="Bacchus (grape)" label="Bacchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641546" start="37162" end="37167" title="Southern Ukraine" label="south"/>
<link wikidata="Q174994" start="37200" end="37210" title="Bessarabia" label="Bessarabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835" start="37231" end="37237" title="Crimea" label="Crimea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256544" start="37276" end="37295" title="46th parallel north" label="46th parallel north"/>
<link wikidata="Q170213" start="37383" end="37397" title="Transcarpathian Oblast" label="Transcarpathia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120815" start="37633" end="37638" title="Shabo, Odessa Oblast" label="Shabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5324773" start="38469" end="38474" title="André (wine)" label="André"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030974" start="38646" end="38666" title="Russian River Valley" label="Russian River Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q108067" start="38670" end="38683" title="Sonoma County" label="Sonoma County"/>
<link wikidata="Q6431472" start="38704" end="38719" title="Korbel Champagne Cellars" label="Korbel brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q39193" start="38736" end="38743" title="Bohemia" label="Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275508" start="38872" end="38880" title="Muscatel" label="Muscatel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760900" start="38882" end="38890" title="Traminer" label="Traminer"/>
<link wikidata="Q939724" start="38895" end="38904" title="Chasselas" label="Chasselas"/>
<link wikidata="Q166247" start="39153" end="39156" title="American Viticultural Area" label="AVA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517946" start="39217" end="39234" title="sweetness of wine" label="sweetness of wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336387" start="39489" end="39505" title="List of champagne producers" label="champagne houses"/>
<link wikidata="Q699529" start="39557" end="39572" title="Moët et Chandon" label="Moët et Chandon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370018" start="39597" end="39611" title="Louis Roederer" label="Louis Roederer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7357565" start="39619" end="39634" title="Roederer Estate" label="Roederer Estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q204901" start="39640" end="39650" title="Taittinger" label="Taittinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q213376" start="39813" end="39824" title="wine making" label="wine making"/>
<link wikidata="Q249099" start="39913" end="39918" title="cuvée" label="cuvée"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975981" start="40048" end="40055" title="vintage" label="vintage"/>
<link wikidata="Q162441" start="40239" end="40243" title="lees (fermentation)" label="lees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416994" start="41157" end="41169" title="Finger Lakes" label="Finger Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="41187" end="41203" title="New York (state)" label="New York (state)"/>
<link wikidata="Q456471" start="41223" end="41231" title="Riesling" label="Riesling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416994" start="41360" end="41372" title="Finger Lakes" label="Finger Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="41592" end="41599" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="41601" end="41617" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="41619" end="41625" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="41630" end="41641" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q134862" start="41683" end="41692" title="Champagne" label="Champagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q101081" start="41694" end="41702" title="Provence" label="Provence"/>
<link wikidata="Q206221" start="41707" end="41716" title="Languedoc" label="Languedoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="41720" end="41726" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="42173" end="42179" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q4888330" start="42193" end="42208" title="Benjamin Bridge" label="Benjamin Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370018" start="42262" end="42276" title="Louis Roederer" label="Louis Roederer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422815" start="42282" end="42296" title="Cristal (wine)" label="Cristal (wine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5730894" start="42473" end="42495" title="Henry of Pelham Winery" label="Henry of Pelham Winery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6116925" start="42497" end="42511" title="Jackson-Triggs" label="Jackson-Triggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q12981725" start="42516" end="42527" title="Inniskillin" label="Inniskillin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="42530" end="42537" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147919" start="42561" end="42578" title="Niagara Peninsula" label="Niagara Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="42618" end="42624" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147919" start="42650" end="42676" title="Niagara Peninsula wineries" label="Niagara Peninsula wineries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141675" start="42888" end="42895" title="Charmat" label="Charmat"/>
<link wikidata="Q213332" start="42993" end="43003" title="Chardonnay" label="Chardonnay"/>
<link wikidata="Q456471" start="43005" end="43013" title="Riesling" label="Riesling"/>
<link wikidata="Q304235" start="43015" end="43026" title="Vidal Blanc" label="Vidal Blanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q223701" start="43028" end="43038" title="Pinot Noir" label="Pinot Noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q12982" start="43043" end="43048" title="Gamay" label="Gamay"/>
<link wikidata="Q134862" start="43226" end="43235" title="Champagne" label="Champagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q385085" start="43356" end="43385" title="Prince Edward County, Ontario" label="Prince Edward County, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243893" start="43415" end="43440" title="Prince Edward County Wine" label="Prince Edward County Wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147919" start="43531" end="43548" title="Niagara Peninsula" label="Niagara Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q627003" start="43578" end="43585" title="terroir" label="terroir"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43668" end="43695" title="The Hinterland Wine Company" label="The Hinterland Wine Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="43768" end="43775" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q473420" start="44016" end="44022" title="dose (biochemistry)" label="dosage"/>
<link wikidata="Q17055472" start="44850" end="44866" title="sparkling Shiraz" label="sparkling Shiraz"/>
<link wikidata="Q332720" start="44903" end="44909" title="Shiraz (grape)" label="Shiraz"/>
<link wikidata="Q498598" start="45340" end="45344" title="Pais (grape)" label="Pais"/>
<link wikidata="Q213332" start="46389" end="46399" title="Chardonnay" label="Chardonnay"/>
<link wikidata="Q223701" start="46404" end="46414" title="Pinot noir" label="Pinot noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q44542" start="46568" end="46583" title="Sauvignon blanc" label="Sauvignon blanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070101" start="46588" end="46600" title="Chenin blanc" label="Chenin blanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141675" start="46647" end="46654" title="Charmat" label="Charmat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504214" start="46680" end="46688" title="Pinotage" label="Pinotage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061121" start="46919" end="46926" title="Muselet" label="Muselet"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143178" wikidata="Q723178" url="?curid=143178" title="Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds">
<text>&quot;Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds&quot; is a song by the English rock band the Beatles from their 1967 album &quot;Sgt. Pepper&#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band&quot;. It was written primarily by John Lennon with assistance from Paul McCartney, and credited to the Lennon–McCartney songwriting partnership. Lennon&#x27;s son Julian inspired the song with a nursery school drawing that he called &quot;Lucy – in the sky with diamonds&quot;. Shortly before the album&#x27;s release, speculation arose that the first letter of each of the nouns in the title intentionally spelled &quot;LSD&quot;, the initialism commonly used for the hallucinogenic drug lysergic acid diethylamide. Lennon repeatedly denied that he had intended it as a drug song, and attributed the song&#x27;s fantastical imagery to his reading of Lewis Carroll&#x27;s &quot;Alice in Wonderland&quot; books.

The Beatles recorded &quot;Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds&quot; in March 1967. Adding to the song&#x27;s ethereal qualities, the musical arrangement includes a Lowrey organ part heavily treated with studio effects, and a drone provided by an Indian tambura. The song has been recognised as a key work in the psychedelic genre. Among its many cover versions, a 1974 recording by Elton John – with a guest appearance by Lennon – was a number 1 hit in the US and Canada.

==Background and inspiration==
John Lennon said that his inspiration for the song came when his three-year-old son Julian showed him a nursery school drawing that he called &quot;Lucy – in the Sky with Diamonds&quot;, depicting his classmate Lucy O&#x27;Donnell. Julian later recalled: &quot;I don&#x27;t know why I called it that or why it stood out from all my other drawings, but I obviously had an affection for Lucy at that age. I used to show Dad everything I&#x27;d built or painted at school, and this one sparked off the idea.&quot; Ringo Starr witnessed the moment and said that Julian first spoke the song&#x27;s title on returning home from nursery school. Lennon later said, &quot;I thought that&#x27;s beautiful. I immediately wrote a song about it.&quot;

According to Lennon, the lyrics were largely derived from the literary style of Lewis Carroll&#x27;s novel &quot;Alice in Wonderland&quot;. Lennon had read and admired Carroll&#x27;s works, and the title of Julian&#x27;s drawing reminded him of the &quot;Which Dreamed It?&quot; chapter of &quot;Through the Looking Glass&quot;, in which Alice floats in a &quot;boat beneath a sunny sky&quot;. Lennon recalled in a 1980 interview:

It was Alice in the boat. She is buying an egg and it turns into Humpty-Dumpty. The woman serving in the shop turns into a sheep and the next minute they are rowing in a rowing boat somewhere and I was visualizing that.

Paul McCartney remembered of the song&#x27;s composition, &quot;We did the whole thing like an &quot;Alice in Wonderland&quot; idea, being in a boat on the river ... Every so often it broke off and you saw Lucy in the sky with diamonds all over the sky. This Lucy was God, the Big Figure, the White Rabbit.&quot; He later recalled helping Lennon finish the song at Lennon&#x27;s Kenwood home, specifically claiming he contributed the &quot;newspaper taxis&quot; and &quot;cellophane flowers&quot; lyrics. Lennon&#x27;s 1968 interview with &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; magazine confirmed McCartney&#x27;s contribution.

Lucy O&#x27;Donnell Vodden, who lived in Surbiton, Surrey, died 28 September 2009 of complications of lupus at the age of 46. Julian had been informed of her illness and renewed their friendship before her death.

==Composition==
Most of &quot;Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds&quot; is in simple triple metre ( time), but the chorus is in time. In the song, the structure modulates between musical keys, using the key of A major for verses, B-flat major for the pre-chorus, and G major for the chorus. It is sung by Lennon over an increasingly complicated underlying arrangement which features a tambura, played by George Harrison; lead electric guitar put through a Leslie speaker, played by Harrison; and a counter melody on Lowrey organ played by McCartney and taped with a special organ stop sounding &quot;not unlike a celeste&quot;. Session tapes from the initial 1 March 1967 recording of this song reveal Lennon originally sang the line &quot;Cellophane flowers of yellow and green&quot; as a broken phrase, but McCartney suggested that he sing it more fluidly to improve the song.

==Recording==
The recording of &quot;Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds&quot; began with rehearsals in Studio 2 at Abbey Road on 28 February 1967. The instrumental backing was finished the following evening. On the first take, track one of the four-track tape contained acoustic guitar and piano, track two McCartney&#x27;s Lowrey organ, track three Ringo Starr&#x27;s drums, and track four a guide vocal by Lennon during the verses. Take eight replaced the guide vocal with Harrison&#x27;s tambura. The four tracks of this take were then mixed together and recorded on the first track of a second four-track tape. On 2 March, Lennon&#x27;s double-tracked vocals, accompanied by McCartney on the choruses, were recorded to tracks two and three. McCartney&#x27;s bass and Harrison&#x27;s lead guitar occupied track four. The lead guitar part varies between sections of the song: over the bridges, Harrison duplicates Lennon&#x27;s melody and intonation in the style of a sarangi accompanying an Indian khyal vocalist; over the choruses, he plays an ascending riff on his Fender Stratocaster (mirrored by McCartney&#x27;s bass), with heavy Leslie treatment given to the part. Eleven mono mixes of the song were made at the 2 March session, but they were rejected in favour of the final mono mix created on 3 March. A stereo mix was made on 7 April.

Outtakes from the recording sessions have been officially released. The Beatles&#x27; &quot;Anthology 2&quot;, released in 1996, contained a composite remix, with ingredients from takes six, seven and eight, while the first take of the song was featured on the two-disc and six-disc versions of the 50th-anniversary edition of &quot;Sgt. Pepper&quot; in 2017. The six-disc collection also included take five and the last of the eleven mono mixes made on 2 March 1967.

==LSD rumours==
Rumours of the connection between the title of &quot;Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds&quot; and the initialism &quot;LSD&quot; began circulating shortly after the release of the &quot;Sgt. Pepper&#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band&quot; LP in June 1967. McCartney gave two interviews in June admitting to having taken the drug. Lennon later said he was surprised at the idea the title was a hidden reference to LSD, countering that the song &quot;wasn&#x27;t about that at all,&quot; and it &quot;was purely unconscious that it came out to be LSD. Until someone pointed it out, I never even thought of it. I mean, who would ever bother to look at initials of a title? ... It&#x27;s &quot;not&quot; an acid song.&quot;

McCartney confirmed Lennon&#x27;s claim on several occasions. In 1968 he said:

When you write a song and you mean it one way, and someone comes up and says something about it that you didn&#x27;t think of – you can&#x27;t deny it. Like &quot;Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds,&quot; people came up and said, cunningly, &quot;Right, I get it. L-S-D,&quot; and it was when [news]papers were talking about LSD, but we never thought about it.

In a 2004 interview with &quot;Uncut&quot; magazine, McCartney confirmed it was &quot;pretty obvious&quot; drugs did influence some of the group&#x27;s compositions at that time, including &quot;Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds&quot;, though he tempered this statement by adding, &quot;[I]t&#x27;s easy to overestimate the influence of drugs on the Beatles&#x27; music.&quot;

Claims have circulated that the BBC banned the song at the time of its release in 1967 for its alleged references to drugs. Among other sources, the claim has been recited in &quot;The Routledge Concise History of Twentieth-Century British Literature&quot;. This claim has been disputed by authors Alan Clayson and Spencer Leigh, who wrote in &quot;The Walrus Was Ringo: 101 Beatles Myths Debunked&quot; that the BBC never officially banned the song, despite the corporation&#x27;s doubts about the subject matter. &quot;The Oxford Handbook of Music Censorship&quot; consulted with the BBC&#x27;s surviving internal correspondence and memos from 1967, and mentioned no ban on any &quot;Sgt. Pepper&quot; song aside from the one on &quot;A Day in the Life&quot;, stating the BBC banned &quot;this one track [A Day in the Life] from the album &quot;Sgt. Pepper&#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band&quot;&quot;. A 2014 documentary film produced and broadcast by BBC television entitled &quot;Britain&#x27;s Most Dangerous Songs: Listen to the Banned&quot; also claimed that the BBC never banned the song:

The song was played at least once on BBC Radio at the time of the &quot;Sgt. Pepper&quot; album&#x27;s release, on the 20 May 1967 broadcast of &quot;Where It&#x27;s At&quot; hosted by Kenny Everett and Chris Denning. The song was also played as part of the 1972 BBC Radio documentary &quot;The Beatles Story&quot;, hosted by Brian Matthew.

==Reception==
Upon the release of the &quot;Sgt. Pepper&quot; album, &quot;Disc and Music Echo&quot; magazine wrote that &quot;Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds&quot; was &quot;easily remembered&quot;, that the song spotlighted John Lennon&#x27;s &quot;peculiarly insinuating&quot; vocals, and that it &quot;jumps along on a crashing clavicord-type sound.&quot; Richard Goldstein wrote in a review for &quot;The New York Times&quot; that the song was &quot;an engaging curio, nothing more.&quot; Ernie Santosuosso wrote in a review for &quot;The Boston Globe&quot; that the song&#x27;s imagery was &quot;wild&quot;.

Discussing the impact of the &quot;Sgt. Pepper&quot; album, author Nicholas Schaffner cited the song as an example of how the Beatles successfully captured the way &quot;young people were trying to transcend, transform, or escape from straight society&quot; in 1967. He said that just as Harrison&#x27;s &quot;Within You Without You&quot; represented the exoticism of Hermann Hesse&#x27;s &quot;Siddartha&quot;, &quot;Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds&quot; was a &quot;miniature pop version&quot; of Tolkien&#x27;s &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot; in terms of conveying the sense of wonder the book evoked. According to musicologist Walter Everett, the song&#x27;s lyrics inspired &quot;derivative texts&quot; throughout the late 1960s, namely John Fred &amp; His Playboy Band&#x27;s &quot;Judy in Disguise (With Glasses)&quot;, the Lemon Pipers&#x27; &quot;Jelly Jungle (of Orange Marmalade)&quot;, Pink Floyd&#x27;s &quot;Let There Be More Light&quot;, and the Scaffold&#x27;s &quot;Jelly Covered Cloud&quot;.

&quot;Rolling Stone&quot; magazine described &quot;Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds&quot; as &quot;Lennon&#x27;s lavish daydream.&quot; In their respective reviews for AllMusic, Stephen Thomas Erlewine identifies it as &quot;one of the touchstones of British psychedelia,&quot; while Richie Unterberger views it as &quot;one of the best songs on the Beatles&#x27; famous &quot;Sgt. Pepper&quot; album, and one of the classic songs of psychedelia as a whole.&quot; Unterberger adds: &quot;There are few other songs that so successfully evoke a dream world, in both the sonic textures and words.&quot; In his book on the history of ambient music, Mark Prendergast highlights the track as one of the album&#x27;s &quot;three outstanding cuts&quot;, along with &quot;A Day in the Life&quot; and &quot;Within You Without You&quot;. He describes it as &quot;incredible&quot; and &quot;a gossamer-like evocation of childlike psychedelia.&quot; For BBC Culture, Greg Kot called the song an &quot;acid-rock fantasia&quot; and a high point of the album.

In a review for the BBC Music website, Chris Jones described the track as &quot;nursery rhyme surrealism&quot; that contributed to &quot;Sgt. Pepper&quot;″s &quot;revolutionary ... sonic carpet that enveloped the ears and sent the listener spinning into other realms.&quot; Writing for &quot;Paste&quot; in 2015, Hilary Saunders called the song &quot;a perfectly indulgent introduction to psych-rock.&quot; In 2013, Dave Swanson of &quot;Ultimate Classic Rock&quot; ranked &quot;Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds&quot; fourth on his list of the &quot;Top 10 Beatles Psychedelic Songs&quot; saying that, despite Lennon&#x27;s insistence about the inspiration for its title, the track is &quot;Three-and-a-half minutes of pure lysergic bliss, full of picturesque and surreal lyrics set to one of the Beatles&#x27; most trippy songs.&quot;

Harrison later identified &quot;Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds&quot; as one of the few songs he liked from &quot;Sgt. Pepper&quot; and expressed satisfaction with his Indian music-inspired contributions. For his part, Lennon expressed disappointment with the Beatles&#x27; arrangement of the recording, complaining that inadequate time was taken to fully develop his initial idea for the song. He also said he had not sung it very well. &quot;I was so nervous I couldn&#x27;t sing,&quot; he told journalist Ray Connolly, &quot;but I like the lyrics.&quot; According to author Ian MacDonald, in a scenario similar to Lennon&#x27;s disappointment with &quot;Strawberry Fields Forever&quot;, Lennon most likely rued the loss of &quot;sentimental gentleness&quot; he had envisaged for the piece, and, overly passive to his songwriting partner&#x27;s suggestions, allowed the arrangement to become dominated by McCartney&#x27;s &quot;glittering countermelody&quot;. MacDonald views the bridge portions as the &quot;most effective&quot; sections, through their subtle use of harmonised drone and &quot;featherweight bass&quot;, and bemoans the reversion to &quot;clodhopping ... three-chord 4/4 rock&quot; over the choruses. He concludes by saying that the track &quot;succeed[s] more as a glamorous production (voice and guitar through the Leslie cabinet; echo and varispeed on everything) than as an integrated song.&quot;

==Personnel==
According to authors Kevin Ryan and Brian Kehew, and John Winn:

The Beatles
* John Lennon – double-tracked lead vocals, maracas, guitar
* Paul McCartney – backing vocals, Lowrey organ, bass
* George Harrison – backing vocals, acoustic guitar, tambura, lead guitar
* Ringo Starr – drums

Additional musician
* George Martin – piano

==Certifications==


==Legacy==

Lennon mentioned &quot;Lucy in the Sky&quot; in the Beatles&#x27; song &quot;I Am the Walrus&quot;.

A 3.2-million-year-old, 40% complete fossil skeleton of an &quot;Australopithecus afarensis&quot; specimen, discovered in 1974 by Donald Johanson, Yves Coppens, Maurice Taieb and Tom Gray, was named &quot;Lucy&quot; because the Beatles song was being played loudly and repeatedly on a tape recorder in the camp. The phrase &quot;Lucy in the sky&quot; became &quot;Lucy in disguise&quot; to the anthropologists, because they initially did not understand the impact of their discovery. The NASA mission Lucy has, in turn, been named after the fossil. It is due to arrive at its first target, asteroid 52246 Donaldjohanson, in April 2025.

In 2009 Julian with James Scott Cook and Todd Meagher released &quot;Lucy&quot;, a song that is a quasi-follow-up to the Beatles song. The cover of the EP showed four-year-old Julian&#x27;s original drawing, that now is owned by David Gilmour from Pink Floyd.&lt;ref name=&quot;CBS 12/15&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;

Lennon&#x27;s original handwritten lyrics sold at auction in 2011 for $230,000.

==Elton John version==

English musician Elton John released a cover version of &quot;Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds&quot; as a single on 15 November 1974. Recorded at the Caribou Ranch, it featured backing vocals and guitar by John Lennon under the pseudonym Dr. Winston O&#x27;Boogie (Winston being Lennon&#x27;s middle name). The single topped the US &quot;Billboard&quot; pop chart for two weeks in January 1975 as well as the Canadian &quot;RPM&quot; national singles chart for four weeks spanning January and February. The B-side of the single was also a John Lennon composition, &quot;One Day (At a Time)&quot;, from Lennon&#x27;s 1973 album &quot;Mind Games&quot;.

===Development and release===
In the US it was certified Gold on 29 January 1975 by the RIAA. During their collaboration, Elton John appeared on John Lennon&#x27;s song &quot;Whatever Gets You Thru the Night&quot;. Lennon promised to appear live with Elton at Madison Square Garden if &quot;Whatever Gets You Thru the Night&quot; became a number-one single. It did, and on Thanksgiving night, 28 November 1974, Lennon kept his promise. They performed &quot;Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds&quot;, &quot;Whatever Gets You thru the Night&quot;, and &quot;I Saw Her Standing There&quot; (which was written primarily by Paul McCartney). It is one of two songs written by Lennon–McCartney to reach number one in the US by an artist other than the Beatles. The other is &quot;A World Without Love&quot; recorded by Peter and Gordon in 1964.

In introducing &quot;Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds&quot;, Elton John said he believed it to be &quot;one of the best songs ever written.&quot; The Lennon-sung &quot;I Saw Her Standing There&quot; (credited to the Elton John Band featuring John Lennon) was originally released in 1975 on the B-side of Elton John&#x27;s &quot;Philadelphia Freedom&quot; single. In 1981, all three live songs were issued on &quot;28 November 1974&quot;, an Elton John EP. In 1990, the three songs were made available on the &quot;Lennon&quot; box set. In 1996, they were also included on the remastered edition of Elton John&#x27;s &quot;Here and There&quot; album. Elton John once stated that &quot;&#x27;Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds&#x27; is a song that I never do in a set at a concert simply because it reminds me too much of John Lennon. This is the same with &#x27;Empty Garden&#x27;.&quot; It was a part of his standard repertoire from 1974 until 1976, and sporadically until 1998. It also appeared in the 1976 musical documentary &quot;All This and World War II&quot; as well as the 1995 remaster of &quot;Captain Fantastic and the Brown Dirt Cowboy.&quot;

===Personnel===
*Elton John – lead and backing vocals, piano, mellotron, harpsichord
*John Lennon (as Dr. Winston O&#x27;Boogie) – backing vocals, guitars
*Davey Johnstone – backing vocals, electric guitar, sitar
*Dee Murray – bass guitar, backing vocals
*Nigel Olsson – drums, backing vocals
*Ray Cooper – tambourine, tubular bells, gong, maracas, mark tree, congas

===Charts===

====Weekly charts====

====Year-end charts====

===Certifications===


==The Flaming Lips version==

A cover version by the Flaming Lips was included on their album &quot;With a Little Help from My Fwends&quot;, released on Warner Bros. The song, featuring vocals from Miley Cyrus and Moby, was released as official single on 18 May 2014. All proceeds from record sales go to the Bella Foundation, an organisation in Oklahoma City that helps provide veterinary care to needy pet owners.
==References==

===Notes===
===Bibliography===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q723178" start="6" end="35" title="Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds" label="Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="77" end="88" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q169226" start="117" end="159" title="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band" label="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="195" end="206" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="228" end="242" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q239177" start="264" end="280" title="Lennon–McCartney" label="Lennon–McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q357974" start="324" end="330" title="Julian Lennon" label="Julian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076052" start="356" end="370" title="preschool" label="nursery school"/>
<link wikidata="Q23118" start="650" end="676" title="lysergic acid diethylamide" label="lysergic acid diethylamide"/>
<link wikidata="Q38082" start="812" end="825" title="Lewis Carroll" label="Lewis Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q92640" start="839" end="858" title="Alice&amp;#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland" label="Alice in Wonderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6694136" start="1032" end="1044" title="Lowrey organ" label="Lowrey organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q893474" start="1093" end="1098" title="Drone (music)" label="drone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164636" start="1121" end="1128" title="Tanpura" label="tambura"/>
<link wikidata="Q846119" start="1180" end="1191" title="Psychedelic music" label="psychedelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2808" start="1250" end="1260" title="Elton John" label="Elton John"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="1372" end="1383" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q357974" start="1456" end="1462" title="Julian Lennon" label="Julian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632" start="1883" end="1894" title="Ringo Starr" label="Ringo Starr"/>
<link wikidata="Q38082" start="2192" end="2205" title="Lewis Carroll" label="Lewis Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q92640" start="2225" end="2244" title="Alice in Wonderland" label="Alice in Wonderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q220331" start="2408" end="2433" title="Through the Looking Glass" label="Through the Looking Glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q783947" start="2609" end="2622" title="Humpty-Dumpty" label="Humpty-Dumpty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="2765" end="2779" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q6392501" start="3144" end="3151" title="Kenwood, St. George&amp;#x27;s Hill" label="Kenwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="3310" end="3323" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453259" start="3422" end="3438" title="Surbiton, Surrey" label="Surbiton, Surrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485" start="3483" end="3488" title="lupus" label="lupus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7843523" start="3667" end="3686" title="simple triple metre" label="simple triple metre"/>
<link wikidata="Q191609" start="3704" end="3710" title="refrain" label="chorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q534932" start="3768" end="3780" title="key (music)" label="musical keys"/>
<link wikidata="Q277793" start="3799" end="3806" title="A major" label="A major"/>
<link wikidata="Q795134" start="3819" end="3831" title="B-flat major" label="B-flat major"/>
<link wikidata="Q5728362" start="3856" end="3863" title="G major" label="G major"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164636" start="3974" end="3981" title="Tanpura" label="tambura"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643" start="3993" end="4008" title="George Harrison" label="George Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820781" start="4045" end="4059" title="Leslie speaker" label="Leslie speaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995870" start="4087" end="4101" title="counter melody" label="counter melody"/>
<link wikidata="Q6694136" start="4105" end="4117" title="Lowrey organ" label="Lowrey organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q320341" start="4202" end="4209" title="Celesta" label="celeste"/>
<link wikidata="Q193841" start="4329" end="4339" title="Cellophane" label="Cellophane"/>
<link wikidata="Q209651" start="4579" end="4589" title="Abbey Road Studios" label="Abbey Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632" start="4814" end="4825" title="Ringo Starr" label="Ringo Starr"/>
<link wikidata="Q608650" start="5434" end="5441" title="sarangi" label="sarangi"/>
<link wikidata="Q62128" start="5465" end="5470" title="khyal" label="khyal"/>
<link wikidata="Q460730" start="5522" end="5526" title="riff" label="riff"/>
<link wikidata="Q208173" start="5534" end="5553" title="Fender Stratocaster" label="Fender Stratocaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753625" start="5904" end="5915" title="Anthology 2" label="Anthology 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q23118" start="6411" end="6414" title="Lysergic acid diethylamide" label="LSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="7852" end="7855" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4706381" start="8118" end="8130" title="Alan Clayson" label="Alan Clayson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7576117" start="8135" end="8148" title="Spencer Leigh (radio presenter)" label="Spencer Leigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q927532" start="9102" end="9115" title="Kenny Everett" label="Kenny Everett"/>
<link wikidata="Q5106385" start="9120" end="9133" title="Chris Denning" label="Chris Denning"/>
<link wikidata="Q3282454" start="9334" end="9353" title="Disc and Music Echo" label="Disc and Music Echo"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="9663" end="9681" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q824451" start="9797" end="9813" title="The Boston Globe" label="The Boston Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q15059588" start="9939" end="9957" title="Nicholas Schaffner" label="Nicholas Schaffner"/>
<link wikidata="Q541835" start="10182" end="10204" title="Within You Without You" label="Within You Without You"/>
<link wikidata="Q25973" start="10240" end="10253" title="Hermann Hesse" label="Hermann Hesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q457289" start="10267" end="10276" title="Siddhartha (novel)" label="Siddartha"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="10348" end="10351" title="pop music" label="pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q892" start="10369" end="10376" title="J. R. R. Tolkien" label="Tolkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q15228" start="10390" end="10411" title="The Lord of the Rings" label="The Lord of the Rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q16210942" start="10503" end="10517" title="Walter Everett (musicologist)" label="Walter Everett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700124" start="10614" end="10646" title="John Fred" label="John Fred &amp;amp; His Playboy Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q6304661" start="10660" end="10691" title="Judy in Disguise (With Glasses)" label="Judy in Disguise (With Glasses)"/>
<link wikidata="Q466992" start="10699" end="10715" title="the Lemon Pipers" label="the Lemon Pipers"/>
<link wikidata="Q28135214" start="10728" end="10762" title="Jelly Jungle (of Orange Marmalade)" label="Jelly Jungle (of Orange Marmalade)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306" start="10770" end="10780" title="Pink Floyd" label="Pink Floyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q912930" start="10794" end="10817" title="Let There Be More Light" label="Let There Be More Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q462943" start="10829" end="10841" title="the Scaffold" label="the Scaffold"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="10889" end="10902" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="11048" end="11056" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q976031" start="11058" end="11081" title="Stephen Thomas Erlewine" label="Stephen Thomas Erlewine"/>
<link wikidata="Q846119" start="11139" end="11150" title="Psychedelic music" label="psychedelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7330590" start="11164" end="11182" title="Richie Unterberger" label="Richie Unterberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q193207" start="11510" end="11523" title="ambient music" label="ambient music"/>
<link wikidata="Q300385" start="11643" end="11660" title="A Day in the Life" label="A Day in the Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q747860" start="11821" end="11832" title="BBC Culture" label="BBC Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028115" start="11834" end="11842" title="Greg Kot" label="Greg Kot"/>
<link wikidata="Q236932" start="11868" end="11877" title="acid-rock" label="acid-rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q12811336" start="12217" end="12222" title="Paste (magazine)" label="Paste"/>
<link wikidata="Q206159" start="12314" end="12324" title="psychedelic rock" label="psych-rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472033" start="12341" end="12353" title="Dave Swanson" label="Dave Swanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830269" start="12363" end="12384" title="Ultimate Classic Rock" label="Ultimate Classic Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7297349" start="13265" end="13277" title="Ray Connolly" label="Ray Connolly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630321" start="13334" end="13347" title="Ian MacDonald" label="Ian MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q213718" start="13414" end="13439" title="Strawberry Fields Forever" label="Strawberry Fields Forever"/>
<link wikidata="Q2020027" start="14228" end="14239" title="Brian Kehew" label="Brian Kehew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="14271" end="14282" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300113" start="14285" end="14299" title="double tracking" label="double-tracked"/>
<link wikidata="Q39777" start="14313" end="14319" title="maraca" label="maraca"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="14331" end="14345" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q6694136" start="14364" end="14376" title="Lowrey organ" label="Lowrey organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643" start="14385" end="14400" title="George Harrison" label="George Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164636" start="14436" end="14443" title="tanpura" label="tambura"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632" start="14459" end="14470" title="Ringo Starr" label="Ringo Starr"/>
<link wikidata="Q191819" start="14502" end="14515" title="George Martin" label="George Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138639" start="14635" end="14650" title="I Am the Walrus" label="I Am the Walrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q245388" start="14661" end="14711" title="Lucy (Australopithecus)" label="3.2-million-year-old, 40% complete fossil skeleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q107685" start="14724" end="14750" title="Australopithecus afarensis" label="Australopithecus afarensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q503293" start="14789" end="14804" title="Donald Johanson" label="Donald Johanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382212" start="14806" end="14818" title="Yves Coppens" label="Yves Coppens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341470" start="14820" end="14833" title="Maurice Taieb" label="Maurice Taieb"/>
<link wikidata="Q21076293" start="15160" end="15164" title="Lucy (spacecraft)" label="Lucy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15163754" start="15258" end="15278" title="52246 Donaldjohanson" label="52246 Donaldjohanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q26899387" start="15337" end="15349" title="Todd Meagher (entrepreneur)" label="Todd Meagher"/>
<link wikidata="Q6698147" start="15365" end="15369" title="Lucy (Julian Lennon and James Scott Cook song)" label="Lucy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="15413" end="15424" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q178517" start="15525" end="15538" title="David Gilmour" label="David Gilmour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306" start="15544" end="15554" title="Pink Floyd" label="Pink Floyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q2808" start="15729" end="15739" title="Elton John" label="Elton John"/>
<link wikidata="Q5039514" start="15859" end="15872" title="Caribou Ranch" label="Caribou Ranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="15915" end="15926" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q245025" start="16002" end="16013" title="middle name" label="middle name"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="16047" end="16056" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="16063" end="16072" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="pop chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344164" start="16127" end="16142" title="RPM (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;RPM&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q215233" start="16216" end="16222" title="B-side" label="B-side"/>
<link wikidata="Q920535" start="16342" end="16352" title="Mind Games (John Lennon album)" label="Mind Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="16449" end="16453" title="Recording Industry Association of America" label="RIAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2540465" start="16536" end="16568" title="Whatever Gets You Thru the Night" label="Whatever Gets You Thru the Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q186125" start="16621" end="16642" title="Madison Square Garden" label="Madison Square Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2540465" start="16861" end="16893" title="Whatever Gets You thru the Night" label="Whatever Gets You thru the Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623037" start="16911" end="16935" title="I Saw Her Standing There" label="I Saw Her Standing There"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="16974" end="16988" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443654" start="17128" end="17148" title="A World Without Love" label="A World Without Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256943" start="17167" end="17183" title="Peter and Gordon" label="Peter and Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2808" start="17252" end="17262" title="Elton John" label="Elton John"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575429" start="17519" end="17539" title="Philadelphia Freedom (song)" label="Philadelphia Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818104" start="17705" end="17711" title="Lennon (album)" label="Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753993" start="17813" end="17827" title="Here and There (Elton John album)" label="Here and There"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633696" start="18047" end="18059" title="Empty Garden (Hey Hey Johnny)" label="Empty Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q654160" start="18220" end="18245" title="All This and World War II" label="All This and World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754335" start="18290" end="18333" title="Captain Fantastic and the Brown Dirt Cowboy" label="Captain Fantastic and the Brown Dirt Cowboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2808" start="18359" end="18369" title="Elton John" label="Elton John"/>
<link wikidata="Q212483" start="18404" end="18413" title="mellotron" label="mellotron"/>
<link wikidata="Q81982" start="18415" end="18426" title="harpsichord" label="harpsichord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="18428" end="18439" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q665318" start="18498" end="18513" title="Davey Johnstone" label="Davey Johnstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q229205" start="18549" end="18554" title="sitar" label="sitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182288" start="18556" end="18566" title="Dee Murray" label="Dee Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343897" start="18598" end="18610" title="Nigel Olsson" label="Nigel Olsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385135" start="18636" end="18646" title="Ray Cooper" label="Ray Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q178812" start="18661" end="18674" title="tubular bells" label="tubular bells"/>
<link wikidata="Q208320" start="18676" end="18680" title="gong" label="gong"/>
<link wikidata="Q39777" start="18682" end="18688" title="maraca" label="maraca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073120" start="18691" end="18700" title="mark tree" label="mark tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q270200" start="18702" end="18707" title="conga" label="conga"/>
<link wikidata="Q523184" start="18844" end="18860" title="the Flaming Lips" label="the Flaming Lips"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017164" start="18895" end="18928" title="With a Little Help from My Fwends" label="With a Little Help from My Fwends"/>
<link wikidata="Q67030918" start="18948" end="18960" title="Warner Bros. Records" label="Warner Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q4235" start="18993" end="19004" title="Miley Cyrus" label="Miley Cyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q14045" start="19009" end="19013" title="Moby" label="Moby"/>
<link wikidata="Q34863" start="19141" end="19154" title="Oklahoma City" label="Oklahoma City"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143181" wikidata="Q734244" url="?curid=143181" title="Gerry Cooney">
<text>Gerald Arthur Cooney (born August 24, 1956) is an American former professional boxer who competed from 1977 to 1990. He challenged twice for world heavyweight titles in 1982 and 1987. He is widely regarded as one of the hardest punchers in heavyweight history. He beat Ken Norton and S. T. Gordon and Ron Lyle and Jimmy Young late in their careers. He boasts an 85.7% knockout to win percentage.

==Early life==
Born into a blue collar Irish-Catholic family on Long Island, Cooney was encouraged to become a professional fighter by his father. His brother Tommy Cooney was also a boxer, and reached the finals of the New York Golden Gloves Sub-Novice Heavyweight division. Cooney&#x27;s grandparents lived in Placentia, Newfoundland, in Canada.

==Amateur career==
Fighting as an amateur, Gerry Cooney won international tournaments in England, Wales, and Scotland, as well as the New York Golden Gloves titles. He won two New York Golden Gloves Championships, the 1973 160-lb (72.6 kg) Sub-Novice Championship and the 1976 Heavyweight Open Championship. Cooney defeated Larry Derrick to win the 1973 160-lb (72.6 kg) Sub-Novice title, and Earlous Tripp to win the 1976 Heavyweight Open title. In 1975 he reached the finals of the 175-lb (79.4 kg) Open division, but was defeated by Johnny Davis.

Cooney trained at the Huntington Athletic Club in Long Island, New York, where his trainer was John Capobianco. His amateur record consisted of 55 wins and 3 losses.

When he turned professional, Cooney signed with co-managers Mike Jones and Dennis Rappaport. He was trained by Victor Valle.

==Professional career==

Known for his big left-hook and his imposing size, the tall, lean Cooney had his first paid fight on February 15, 1977, beating Billy Jackson by a knockout in one round. Nine wins followed and Cooney gained attention as a future contender, although his opponents were carefully chosen. He moved up a weight class and fought future world cruiserweight champion S. T. Gordon in Las Vegas, winning by a fourth round disqualification. Cooney had 11 more wins, spanning 1978 and 1979. Among those he defeated were Charlie Polite, Eddie Lopez, and Tom Prater. These were not rated contenders, however.

By 1980, Cooney was being featured on national television. Stepping up, he beat one-time title challengers Jimmy Young and Ron Lyle, both by &#x27;knockouts.&#x27; The Young fight was stopped because of cuts sustained by Young. By then Cooney was ranked number 1 by the WBC and eager for a match with champion Larry Holmes.

In 1981, he defeated former world heavyweight champion Ken Norton by a knockout just 54 seconds into the first round with a blisteringly powerful attack. This tied the record set in 1948 by Lee Savold for the quickest knockout in a main event in Madison Square Garden. Since his management team was unwilling to risk losing a big future pay day with Holmes by having him face another viable fighter, Cooney did not fight for 13 months after defeating Norton.

The following year, Holmes agreed to fight him with the fight held June 11, 1982. With a purse of ten million dollars for the challenger, it was the richest fight in boxing history to that time. The promotion of the fight took on racial overtones that were exaggerated by the promoters, something Cooney did not agree with. He believed that skill, not race, should determine if a boxer was good. However, if Cooney won, he would have become the first Caucasian world heavyweight champion since Swede Ingemar Johansson defeated Floyd Patterson 23 years earlier. Don King called Cooney &quot;The Great White Hope.&quot; The bout, held June 11, 1982 drew attention worldwide, and Larry Holmes vs. Gerry Cooney was one of the biggest closed-circuit/pay-per-view productions in history, broadcast to over 150 countries.

Cooney fought bravely after he was knocked down briefly in the second round. He was fined three points for repeated low blows. After 12 rounds, the more skillful and experienced Holmes finally wore him down. In round 13, Cooney&#x27;s trainer Victor Valle stepped into the ring, forcing the referee to stop the fight. Two of the three judges would have had Cooney ahead after the 12th round if it weren&#x27;t for the point deductions. Holmes and Cooney became friends after the fight, a relationship that endured for them. On December 14, 1982, Cooney fought Harold Rice, the heavyweight champion of Connecticut, in a four-round bout. No winner was declared, so Cooney told the crowd following the bout: &quot;This is only an exhibition. I&#x27;m sorry if I disappointed anybody. I&#x27;m trying to work myself back in shape so I can knock out Larry Holmes. Everything is OK. I felt a little rusty, but that is normal. It has been a while. I felt good in front of the people.&quot;

After a long layoff, Cooney fought in September, 1984, beating Phillip Brown by a 4th-round knockout in Anchorage, Alaska. He fought once more that year and won, but personal problems kept him out of the ring.

Although Cooney had only fought three official bouts in five years following his loss to Holmes, in 1987 he challenged former world heavyweight and world light heavyweight champion Michael Spinks in a title bout. Cooney appeared past his prime and Spinks, boxing carefully with constant sharp counters, knocked him out in round 5. Cooney&#x27;s last fight was in 1990. He was knocked out in a match-up of power-punching veterans in two rounds by former world champion George Foreman. Cooney did stagger Foreman in the first round, but he was over-matched, and Foreman knocked him out two minutes into the second round.

The losses to Holmes, Spinks, and Foreman exposed Cooney&#x27;s Achilles&#x27; heel: his inability to clinch and tie up his opponent when hurt. In the Foreman fight, he rose from a second-round knockdown and stood in the center of the ring as Foreman delivered the coup de grâce. Cooney was also notorious for his poor footwork.

Cooney compiled a professional record of 28 wins and 3 losses, with 24 knockouts. None of his 10 to 15-round fights went the distance. He is ranked number 53 on &quot;The Ring&quot;&#x27;s list of &quot;100 Greatest Punchers of All Time&quot;.

== Fighting style ==
Cooney, who is naturally left-handed, used an orthodox stance like Oscar De La Hoya. This provided him with a powerful jab and a lethal left hook, but a comparatively weaker right, which he seldom used except in combinations. Most of his fights ended in quick knockouts; while this benefited him in the beginning of his career, it left him unprepared for his fight against world heavyweight champion Larry Holmes. Despite his devastating punching power, Cooney&#x27;s moderate stamina and lack of experience proved to be his downfall.

Cooney&#x27;s left-hook is described as one of the most powerful punches in boxing history.

Cooney was known for not throwing punches at the head, aiming instead for his opponent&#x27;s chest, ribs, or stomach. This made him vulnerable at times, the fight against Holmes being an example.

According to George Foreman, Gerry Cooney was one of the three hardest punchers he had faced in his career along with Ron Lyle and Cleveland Williams.

==Life after boxing==
Cooney founded the &quot;Fighters&#x27; Initiative for Support and Training&quot;, an organization which helps retired boxers find jobs. He did not encourage the racially charged promotion of the &quot;Holmes vs. Cooney&quot; match and became good friends with his former rival Holmes in the years afterward.

Cooney is deeply involved in J.A.B., the first union for boxers. He became a boxing promoter for title bouts featuring Roberto Durán, Héctor Camacho, and George Foreman. Cooney is a supporter of the &quot;hands are not for hitting&quot; program, which tries to prevent domestic violence. He guides young fighters in the gym.

In June 2010, Cooney became the co-host of &quot;Friday Night at the Fights&quot; on SIRIUS XM Radio.

Cooney resides in Fanwood, New Jersey, with his wife Jennifer and two of their three children, Jackson and Sarah. His son Chris resides in New York.

==Honors==
*Cooney has been inducted into the Hall of Fame at Walt Whitman High School (New York), where he graduated.

==Professional boxing record==

==Exhibition boxing record==

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q734244" start="0" end="20" title="Gerry Cooney" label="Gerald Arthur Cooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631720" start="66" end="84" title="professional boxer" label="professional boxer"/>
<link wikidata="Q281678" start="147" end="158" title="heavyweight" label="heavyweight"/>
<link wikidata="Q707814" start="269" end="279" title="Ken Norton" label="Ken Norton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2388831" start="284" end="296" title="S. T. Gordon" label="S. T. Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970683" start="301" end="309" title="Ron Lyle" label="Ron Lyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639938" start="314" end="325" title="Jimmy Young (boxer)" label="Jimmy Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191714" start="424" end="435" title="blue collar" label="blue collar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645960" start="436" end="450" title="Irish Catholics" label="Irish-Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q18438" start="461" end="472" title="Long Island" label="Long Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507719" start="626" end="639" title="Golden Gloves" label="Golden Gloves"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607939" start="709" end="718" title="Placentia, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Placentia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="720" end="732" title="Newfoundland" label="Newfoundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="737" end="743" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="844" end="849" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="855" end="863" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507719" start="889" end="902" title="Golden Gloves" label="Golden Gloves"/>
<link wikidata="Q867600" start="1952" end="1965" title="Cruiserweight boxing" label="cruiserweight"/>
<link wikidata="Q2388831" start="1975" end="1987" title="S. T. Gordon" label="S. T. Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624848" start="1991" end="2000" title="Las Vegas Valley" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639938" start="2319" end="2330" title="Jimmy Young (boxer)" label="Jimmy Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970683" start="2335" end="2343" title="Ron Lyle" label="Ron Lyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q668642" start="2359" end="2367" title="knockout" label="knockout"/>
<link wikidata="Q724450" start="2482" end="2485" title="World Boxing Council" label="WBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q370932" start="2522" end="2534" title="Larry Holmes" label="Larry Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q707814" start="2592" end="2602" title="Ken Norton" label="Ken Norton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514957" start="2727" end="2737" title="Lee Savold" label="Lee Savold"/>
<link wikidata="Q186125" start="2783" end="2804" title="Madison Square Garden" label="Madison Square Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q335872" start="3497" end="3514" title="Ingemar Johansson" label="Ingemar Johansson"/>
<link wikidata="Q314051" start="3524" end="3539" title="Floyd Patterson" label="Floyd Patterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q344977" start="3558" end="3566" title="Don King (boxing promoter)" label="Don King"/>
<link wikidata="Q6490518" start="3674" end="3703" title="Larry Holmes vs. Gerry Cooney" label="Larry Holmes vs. Gerry Cooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q206536" start="3929" end="3938" title="groin attack" label="low blows"/>
<link wikidata="Q39450" start="4901" end="4918" title="Anchorage, Alaska" label="Anchorage, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q708416" start="5189" end="5203" title="Michael Spinks" label="Michael Spinks"/>
<link wikidata="Q213919" start="5476" end="5490" title="George Foreman" label="George Foreman"/>
<link wikidata="Q304821" start="5730" end="5736" title="clinch (grappling)" label="clinch"/>
<link wikidata="Q524931" start="5893" end="5906" title="coup de grâce" label="coup de grâce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140774" start="6125" end="6133" title="The Ring (magazine)" label="The Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q293534" start="6291" end="6307" title="Oscar De La Hoya" label="Oscar De La Hoya"/>
<link wikidata="Q213919" start="7064" end="7078" title="George Foreman" label="George Foreman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970683" start="7169" end="7177" title="Ron Lyle" label="Ron Lyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q930643" start="7182" end="7200" title="Cleveland Williams" label="Cleveland Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q471571" start="7654" end="7667" title="Roberto Durán" label="Roberto Durán"/>
<link wikidata="Q114355" start="7669" end="7683" title="Héctor Camacho" label="Héctor Camacho"/>
<link wikidata="Q213919" start="7689" end="7703" title="George Foreman" label="George Foreman"/>
<link wikidata="Q949850" start="7982" end="8001" title="Fanwood, New Jersey" label="Fanwood, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7964079" start="8176" end="8211" title="Walt Whitman High School (New York)" label="Walt Whitman High School (New York)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143182" wikidata="Q441921" url="?curid=143182" title="Blank">
<text>Blank or Blanks may refer to:
*Blank (archaeology), a thick, shaped stone biface for refining into a stone tool
*Blank (cartridge), a type of gun cartridge
*Blank (Scrabble), a playing piece in the board game Scrabble 
*Blank (solution), a solution containing no analyte
*A planchet or blank, a round metal disk to be struck as a coin
*Application blank, a space provided for data on a form
*Glass blank, an unfinished piece of glass
*Intake blank, used to cover aircraft components
*Key blank, an uncut key
*, a Web browser function
*Blank (playing card), playing card in card-point games
== Created works ==
*&quot;Blank&quot; (Eyehategod song), a track on the album &quot;Take as Needed for Pain&quot;
*&quot;Blank&quot; (2009 film), a French drama film
*&quot;Blank&quot; (2019 film), an Indian action thriller film
*The Blanks, an American a cappella group
*&quot;Blank!&quot;, a 1957 short story by Isaac Asimov
*&quot;[BLANK]&quot;, a 2019 play by Alice Birch
*&quot;Blank&quot; (2022 film), a British science fiction film
*&quot;Blank&quot;, a song by DaBaby featuring Anthony Hamilton from &quot;Baby on Baby 2&quot;, 2022

== Names ==
*Blank (horse), a Thoroughbred racehorse and sire
*Blank (surname)

==Blanks==
*Blanks, Louisiana, an unincorporated community in the United States
*Blanks (musician), Dutch musician and Youtuber
*Ernests Blanks (1894–1972), Latvian publicist
*Jim Blanks (born 1952), American basketball player

==See also==
* Blanking (disambiguation)
* Blank page (disambiguation)
* Blank space (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q441921" start="0" end="5" title="Blank" label="Blank"/>
<link wikidata="Q441921" start="9" end="15" title="Blank" label="Blanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142470" start="31" end="50" title="Blank (archaeology)" label="Blank (archaeology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424040" start="113" end="130" title="Blank (cartridge)" label="Blank (cartridge)"/>
<link wikidata="Q170436" start="157" end="173" title="Blank (Scrabble)" label="Blank (Scrabble)"/>
<link wikidata="Q368951" start="220" end="236" title="Blank (solution)" label="Blank (solution)"/>
<link wikidata="Q653278" start="274" end="282" title="planchet" label="planchet"/>
<link wikidata="Q676108" start="336" end="353" title="Application blank" label="Application blank"/>
<link wikidata="Q60741377" start="392" end="403" title="Glass blank" label="Glass blank"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424592" start="435" end="447" title="Intake blank" label="Intake blank"/>
<link wikidata="Q17093294" start="484" end="493" title="Key blank" label="Key blank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1877685" start="535" end="555" title="Blank (playing card)" label="Blank (playing card)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624261" start="611" end="646" title="Blank (Eyehategod song)" label="&amp;quot;Blank&amp;quot; (Eyehategod song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3201391" start="706" end="735" title="Blank (2009 film)" label="&amp;quot;Blank&amp;quot; (2009 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q63244731" start="758" end="787" title="Blank (2019 film)" label="&amp;quot;Blank&amp;quot; (2019 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544664" start="821" end="831" title="The Blanks" label="The Blanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925104" start="869" end="875" title="Blank!" label="Blank!"/>
<link wikidata="Q115867093" start="925" end="931" title="(BLANK)" label="[BLANK"/>
<link wikidata="Q120532447" start="968" end="997" title="Blank (2022 film)" label="&amp;quot;Blank&amp;quot; (2022 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q114494321" start="1105" end="1119" title="Baby on Baby 2" label="Baby on Baby 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925119" start="1146" end="1159" title="Blank (horse)" label="Blank (horse)"/>
<link wikidata="Q13552819" start="1196" end="1211" title="Blank (surname)" label="Blank (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925194" start="1225" end="1242" title="Blanks, Louisiana" label="Blanks, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q102358549" start="1294" end="1311" title="Blanks (musician)" label="Blanks (musician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016537" start="1342" end="1356" title="Ernests Blanks" label="Ernests Blanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q91079315" start="1389" end="1399" title="Jim Blanks" label="Jim Blanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925190" start="1456" end="1481" title="Blanking (disambiguation)" label="Blanking (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16263501" start="1484" end="1511" title="Blank page (disambiguation)" label="Blank page (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25102739" start="1514" end="1542" title="Blank space (disambiguation)" label="Blank space (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143183" wikidata="Q262090" url="?curid=143183" title="Football (ball)">
<text>A football is a ball inflated with air that is used to play one of the various sports known as football. In these games, with some exceptions, goals or points are scored only when the ball enters one of two designated goal-scoring areas; football games involve the two teams each trying to move the ball in opposite directions along the field of play.

The first balls were made of natural materials, such as an inflated pig bladder, later put inside a leather cover, which has given rise to the American slang-term &quot;pigskin&quot;. Modern balls are designed by teams of engineers to exacting specifications, with rubber or plastic bladders, and often with plastic covers. Various leagues and games use different balls, though they all have one of the following basic shapes:
# A sphere, used in association football and Gaelic football
# A prolate spheroid (elongated sphere), used in the rugby codes and Australian football
# A lemon, used in Gridiron football
The precise shape and construction of footballs is typically specified as part of the rules and regulations.

The oldest football still in existence, which is thought to have been made circa 1550, was discovered in the roof of Stirling Castle, Scotland, in 1981. The ball is made of leather (possibly from a deer) and a pig&#x27;s bladder. It is roughly spherical with a diameter of between , weighs and is currently on display at the Smith Art Gallery and Museum in Stirling.

==Association football==
Law 2 of the game specifies that the ball is an air-filled sphere with a circumference of , a weight of , inflated to a pressure of 0.6 to 1.1 atmospheres () &quot;at sea level&quot;, and covered in leather or &quot;other suitable material&quot;. The weight specified for a ball is the dry weight, as older balls often became significantly heavier in the course of a match played in wet weather. There are a number of different types of football balls depending on the match and turf including: training footballs, match footballs, professional match footballs, beach footballs, street footballs, indoor footballs, turf balls, futsal footballs and mini/skills footballs.

Most modern Association footballs are stitched from 32 panels of waterproofed leather or plastic: 12 regular pentagons and 20 regular hexagons. The 32-panel configuration is the spherical polyhedron corresponding to the truncated icosahedron; it is spherical because the faces bulge from the pressure of the air inside. The first 32-panel ball was marketed by Select in the 1950s in Denmark. This configuration became common throughout Continental Europe in the 1960s, and was publicised worldwide by the Adidas Telstar, the official ball of the 1970 World Cup. This design in often referenced when describing the truncated icosahedron Archimedean solid, carbon buckyballs, or the root structure of geodesic domes.

==Australian rules football==

The football used in Australian football is similar to a rugby ball but generally slightly smaller and more rounded at the ends, but more elongated in overall appearance, being longer by comparison with its width than a rugby ball. A regulation football is in circumference, and transverse circumference, and inflated to a pressure of . In the AFL, the balls are red for day matches and yellow for night matches.

The first games of Australian football were played with a round ball, because balls of that shape were more readily available. In 1860, Australian football pioneer Tom Wills argued that the oval rugby ball travelled further in the air and made for a more exciting game. It became customary in Australian football by the 1870s.

The Australian football ball was invented by T. W. Sherrin in 1880, after he was given a misshapen rugby ball to fix. Sherrin designed the ball with indented rather than pointy ends to give the ball a better bounce.

Australian football ball brands include Burley, Ross Faulkner, and Sherrin (the brand used by the Australian Football League).

==Gaelic football==
The game is played with a round leather football made of 18 stitched leather panels, similar in appearance to a traditional volleyball (but larger), with a circumference of , weighing between when dry. It may be kicked or &quot;hand passed&quot;. A hand pass is not a punch but rather a strike of the ball with the side of the closed fist, using the knuckle of the thumb.

== Gridiron football ==

In the United States and Canada, the term football usually refers to a ball made of cow hide leather, which is required in professional and collegiate football. Footballs used in recreation and in organized youth leagues may be made of rubber or plastic materials (the high school football rulebooks still allow the inexpensive all-rubber footballs, though they are less common than leather). Since 1941, Horween Leather Company has been the exclusive supplier of leather for National Football League footballs. The arrangement was established by Arnold Horween, who had played and coached in the NFL. Horween Leather Company also supplies leather to Spalding, supplier of balls to the Arena Football League.

Leather panels are typically tanned to a natural brown color, which is usually required in professional leagues and collegiate play. At least one manufacturer uses leather that has been tanned to provide a &quot;tacky&quot; grip in dry or wet conditions. Historically, white footballs have been used in games played at night so that the ball can be seen more easily however, improved artificial lighting conditions have made this no longer necessary. At most levels of play (but not, notably, the NFL), white stripes are painted on each end of the ball, halfway around the circumference, to improve nighttime visibility and also to differentiate the college football from the pro football. However, the NFL once explored the usage of white-striped footballs – in Super Bowl VIII.

In the CFL the stripes traverse the entire circumference of the ball. The UFL used a ball with lime-green stripes. The XFL of 2001 used a novel color pattern, a black ball with red curved lines in lieu of stripes, for its footballs; this design was redone in a tan and navy color scheme for the Arena Football League in 2003. A ball with red, white and blue panels was introduced in the American Indoor Football League in 2005 and used by its successors, as well as the Ultimate Indoor Football League of the early 2010s and the Can-Am Indoor Football League during its lone season in 2017. The XFL of 2020 uses standard brown but with X markings on each point instead of stripes.

Footballs used in gridiron-style games have prominent points on both ends. The shape is generally credited to official Hugh &quot;Shorty&quot; Ray, who introduced the new ball in 1934 as a way to make the forward pass more effective.

== Rugby football ==

Until 1870, rugby was played with a near spherical ball with an inner-tube made of a pig&#x27;s bladder. In 1870 Richard Lindon and Bernardo Solano started making balls for Rugby school out of hand stitched, four-panel, leather casings and pigs&#x27; bladders. The rugby ball&#x27;s distinctive shape is supposedly due to the pig&#x27;s bladder, although early balls were more plum-shape than oval. The balls varied in size in the beginning depending upon how large the pig&#x27;s bladder was. Because of the pliability of rubber the shape gradually changed from a sphere to an egg. In 1892 the RFU endorsed ovalness as the compulsory shape. The gradual flattening of the ball continued over the years.
The introduction of synthetic footballs over the traditional leather balls, in both rugby codes, was originally governed by weather conditions. If the playing surface was wet, the synthetic ball was used, because it wouldn&#x27;t absorb water and become heavy. Eventually, the leather balls were phased out completely.

===Rugby league===
Rugby league is played with a prolate spheroid shaped football which is inflated with air. A referee will stop play immediately if the ball does not meet the requirements of size and shape. Traditionally made of brown leather, modern footballs are synthetic and manufactured in a variety of colours and patterns. Senior competitions should use light-coloured balls to allow spectators to see the ball more easily. The football used in rugby league is known as &quot;international size&quot; or &quot;size 5&quot; and is approximately long and in circumference at its widest point. Smaller-sized balls are used for junior versions of the game, such as &quot;Mini&quot; and &quot;Mod&quot;. A full size ball weighs between . Rugby league footballs are slightly more pointed than rugby union footballs and larger than American footballs.

The Australasian National Rugby League and Super League use balls made by Steeden. Steeden is also sometimes used in Australia as a noun to describe the ball itself.

===Rugby union===
The ball used in rugby union, usually referred to as a rugby ball, is a prolate spheroid essentially elliptical in profile. Traditionally made of brown leather, modern footballs are manufactured in a variety of colours and patterns. A regulation football is long and in circumference at its widest point. It weighs and is inflated to .

In 1980, leather-encased balls, which were prone to water-logging, were replaced with balls encased in synthetic waterproof materials. The Gilbert Synergie was the match ball of the 2007 Rugby World Cup.

==See also==
* List of inflatable manufactured goods

==Bibliography==
* Angela Royston, 2005. &quot;How Is a Soccer Ball Made?&quot; Heinemann. .

==Footnotes==
==External links==

* Official FIFA Football BALL Website
* Ki-o-Rahi history and rules
* Paper model truncated icosahedron (association football ball)
* Popular Mechanics article on American football manufacturing process</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q262090" start="2" end="10" title="Football (ball)" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q18545" start="16" end="20" title="ball" label="ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081491" start="95" end="103" title="football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q18530" start="143" end="148" title="Goal (sport)" label="goals"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435308" start="152" end="158" title="Score (sport)" label="points"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310214" start="337" end="350" title="field of play" label="field of play"/>
<link wikidata="Q7193233" start="421" end="432" title="pig bladder" label="pig bladder"/>
<link wikidata="Q12507" start="784" end="790" title="sphere" label="sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="800" end="820" title="association football" label="association football"/>
<link wikidata="Q204632" start="825" end="840" title="Gaelic football" label="Gaelic football"/>
<link wikidata="Q208395" start="845" end="861" title="prolate spheroid" label="prolate spheroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378" start="894" end="899" title="rugby football" label="rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q50776" start="910" end="929" title="Australian rules football" label="Australian football"/>
<link wikidata="Q85776234" start="934" end="939" title="Lemon (geometry)" label="lemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546270" start="949" end="966" title="Gridiron football" label="Gridiron football"/>
<link wikidata="Q766366" start="1053" end="1074" title="Regulation of sport" label="rules and regulations"/>
<link wikidata="Q756268" start="1194" end="1209" title="Stirling Castle" label="Stirling Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q23390" start="1275" end="1279" title="deer" label="deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617582" start="1402" end="1430" title="Stirling Smith Museum and Art Gallery" label="Smith Art Gallery and Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q182923" start="1434" end="1442" title="Stirling" label="Stirling"/>
<link wikidata="Q506630" start="1470" end="1487" title="Laws of the Game (association football)" label="Law 2 of the game"/>
<link wikidata="Q12507" start="1529" end="1535" title="sphere" label="sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q843905" start="1543" end="1556" title="circumference" label="circumference"/>
<link wikidata="Q11423" start="1564" end="1570" title="Mass" label="weight"/>
<link wikidata="Q39552" start="1590" end="1598" title="pressure" label="pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q13582667" start="1613" end="1624" title="technical atmosphere" label="atmospheres"/>
<link wikidata="Q127840" start="2251" end="2259" title="pentagon" label="pentagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q83043" start="2276" end="2283" title="hexagon" label="hexagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2785034" start="2320" end="2340" title="spherical polyhedron" label="spherical polyhedron"/>
<link wikidata="Q499980" start="2362" end="2383" title="truncated icosahedron" label="truncated icosahedron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179671" start="2502" end="2508" title="SELECT Sport A/S" label="Select"/>
<link wikidata="Q466039" start="2578" end="2596" title="Continental Europe" label="Continental Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q644994" start="2647" end="2661" title="Adidas Telstar" label="Adidas Telstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q132664" start="2688" end="2702" title="1970 FIFA World Cup" label="1970 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q213486" start="2778" end="2795" title="Archimedean solid" label="Archimedean solid"/>
<link wikidata="Q178026" start="2804" end="2814" title="Fullerene" label="buckyballs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135180" start="2841" end="2854" title="geodesic dome" label="geodesic dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q50776" start="2910" end="2929" title="Australian rules football" label="Australian football"/>
<link wikidata="Q50783" start="3233" end="3236" title="Australian Football League" label="AFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530930" start="3467" end="3476" title="Tom Wills" label="Tom Wills"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999140" start="3888" end="3894" title="Burley-Sekem" label="Burley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7495368" start="3915" end="3922" title="Sherrin" label="Sherrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q50783" start="3946" end="3972" title="Australian Football League" label="Australian Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q927924" start="4120" end="4130" title="volleyball (ball)" label="volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="4401" end="4414" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="4419" end="4425" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109032" start="4534" end="4544" title="college football" label="collegiate"/>
<link wikidata="Q184872" start="4573" end="4583" title="recreation" label="recreation"/>
<link wikidata="Q131877" start="4630" end="4636" title="rubber" label="rubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q5757701" start="4663" end="4683" title="high school football" label="high school football"/>
<link wikidata="Q5907046" start="4799" end="4822" title="Horween Leather Company" label="Horween Leather Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q4795088" start="4941" end="4955" title="Arnold Horween" label="Arnold Horween"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555271" start="5045" end="5053" title="Spalding (sports equipment)" label="Spalding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725641" start="5080" end="5101" title="Arena Football League" label="Arena Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q211578" start="5290" end="5296" title="leather tanning" label="tanned"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="5601" end="5604" title="National Football League" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188158" start="5867" end="5882" title="Super Bowl VIII" label="Super Bowl VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032175" start="5892" end="5895" title="Canadian Football League" label="CFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q778946" start="5959" end="5962" title="United Football League (2009)" label="UFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358492" start="6004" end="6015" title="XFL (2001)" label="XFL of 2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725641" start="6180" end="6201" title="Arena Football League (1987–2008)" label="Arena Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842955" start="6272" end="6296" title="American Indoor Football" label="American Indoor Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880204" start="6355" end="6386" title="Ultimate Indoor Football League" label="Ultimate Indoor Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q30646684" start="6414" end="6443" title="Can-Am Indoor Football League" label="Can-Am Indoor Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q47496155" start="6480" end="6491" title="XFL (2020)" label="XFL of 2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q15998875" start="6686" end="6713" title="Shorty Ray" label="Hugh &amp;quot;Shorty&amp;quot; Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433685" start="6772" end="6784" title="forward pass" label="forward pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327391" start="6937" end="6951" title="Richard Lindon" label="Richard Lindon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143281" start="6997" end="7009" title="Rugby School" label="Rugby school"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347463" start="7419" end="7422" title="Rugby Football Union" label="RFU"/>
<link wikidata="Q10962" start="7866" end="7878" title="Rugby league" label="Rugby league"/>
<link wikidata="Q6887975" start="8544" end="8547" title="Mod league" label="Mod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140630" start="8719" end="8740" title="National Rugby League" label="National Rugby League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142995" start="8745" end="8757" title="Super League" label="Super League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497769" start="8776" end="8783" title="Steeden" label="Steeden"/>
<link wikidata="Q40112" start="8988" end="8998" title="ellipse" label="elliptical"/>
<link wikidata="Q17105758" start="9363" end="9379" title="Gilbert Synergie" label="Gilbert Synergie"/>
<link wikidata="Q124753" start="9406" end="9426" title="2007 Rugby World Cup" label="2007 Rugby World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q6624030" start="9444" end="9481" title="List of inflatable manufactured goods" label="List of inflatable manufactured goods"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9502" end="9516" title="Angela Royston" label="Angela Royston"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143184" wikidata="Q202698" url="?curid=143184" title="Yesterday (song)">
<text>&quot;Yesterday&quot; is a song by the English rock band the Beatles, written by Paul McCartney and credited to Lennon–McCartney. It was first released on the album &quot;Help!&quot; in August 1965, except in the United States, where it was issued as a single in September. The song reached number one on the US &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 chart. It subsequently appeared on the UK EP &quot;Yesterday&quot; in March 1966 and made its US album debut on &quot;Yesterday and Today&quot;, in June 1966.

McCartney&#x27;s vocal and acoustic guitar, together with a string quartet, was essentially the band&#x27;s first solo performance. It remains popular today and, with 2,200 cover versions, is one of the most covered songs in the history of recorded music. &quot;Yesterday&quot; was voted the best song of the 20th century in a 1999 BBC Radio 2 poll of music experts and listeners and was also voted the No. 1 pop song of all time by MTV and &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; magazine the following year. In 1997, the song was inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame. Broadcast Music Incorporated (BMI) asserts that it was performed over seven million times in the 20th century.

&quot;Yesterday&quot; is a melancholic ballad about the break-up of a relationship. The singer nostalgically laments for yesterday when he and his love were together before she left because of something he said. McCartney is the only member of the Beatles to appear on the track. The final recording was so different from other works by the Beatles that the band members vetoed the song&#x27;s release as a single in the United Kingdom. However, other artists quickly recorded versions of it for single release. The Beatles&#x27; recording was issued in the U.K. as a single in 1976 and peaked at number 8 on the UK Singles Chart.

==Origin==
According to biographers of Paul McCartney and the Beatles, the entire melody came to McCartney in a dream one night in his room at the Wimpole Street home of his then-girlfriend Jane Asher and her family. Upon waking, he hurried to a piano and played the tune to avoid forgetting it. Initially he was concerned, though, that he had subconsciously plagiarised someone else&#x27;s work; as he put it: &quot;For about a month I went round to people in the music business and asked them whether they had ever heard it before. Eventually it became like handing something in to the police. I thought if no one claimed it after a few weeks then I could have it.&quot;

Upon being convinced that he had not copied the melody, McCartney began writing lyrics to suit it. As John Lennon and McCartney were known to do at the time, a substitute working lyric, titled &quot;Scrambled Eggs&quot; (the working opening verse was &quot;Scrambled eggs/Oh my baby how I love your legs/Not as much as I love scrambled eggs&quot;), was used for the song until something more suitable was written.

During the shooting of &quot;Help!&quot;, a piano was placed on one of the stages where filming was being conducted, and McCartney took advantage of this opportunity to tinker with the song. This eventually greatly annoyed the director Richard Lester, who lost his temper, telling McCartney to finish writing the song or he would have the piano removed. The patience of the other Beatles was also tested by McCartney&#x27;s work in progress; George Harrison summed this up when he said: &quot;Blimey, he&#x27;s always talking about that song. You&#x27;d think he was Beethoven or somebody!&quot;

McCartney originally claimed he had written &quot;Yesterday&quot; during the Beatles&#x27; tour of France in 1964; however, the song was not released until the summer of 1965. During the intervening time, the Beatles released two albums, &quot;A Hard Day&#x27;s Night&quot; and &quot;Beatles for Sale&quot;, each of which could have included &quot;Yesterday&quot;. Although McCartney has never elaborated on his claims, a delay may have been due to a disagreement between McCartney and George Martin regarding the song&#x27;s arrangement or the opinion of the other Beatles who felt it did not suit their image.

Lennon later indicated that the song had been around for a while before:
McCartney said the breakthrough with the lyrics came during a trip to Portugal in May 1965:
On 27 May 1965, McCartney and Asher flew to Lisbon for a holiday in Albufeira, Algarve, and he borrowed an acoustic guitar from Bruce Welch, in whose house they were staying, and completed the work on &quot;Yesterday&quot;. The song was offered as a demo to Chris Farlowe before the Beatles recorded it, but he turned it down as he considered it &quot;too soft&quot;. In a March 1967 interview with Brian Matthew, McCartney said that Lennon came up with the word that would replace &quot;scrambled eggs&quot;: Yesterday.

===Resemblance to other songs===
In 2001, Ian Hammond speculated that McCartney subconsciously based &quot;Yesterday&quot; on Ray Charles&#x27; version of Hoagy Carmichael&#x27;s &quot;Georgia on My Mind&quot;. Hammond concluded his article by saying that, despite the similarities, &quot;Yesterday&quot; is a &quot;completely original and individual [work]&quot;.

In July 2003, British musicologists stumbled upon superficial similarities between the lyric and rhyming schemes of &quot;Yesterday&quot; and David Whitfield&#x27;s, Frankie Laine&#x27;s, and Nat King Cole&#x27;s &quot;Answer Me, My Love&quot;; originally a German song by Gerhard Winkler and Fred Rauch called &quot;Mütterlein&quot;, it was a number 1 hit for Laine on the UK Singles Chart in 1953 as &quot;Answer Me, O Lord&quot;, leading to speculation that the song had influenced McCartney. McCartney&#x27;s publicists denied any resemblance between &quot;Answer Me, My Love&quot; and &quot;Yesterday&quot;. &quot;Yesterday&quot; begins with the lines: &quot;Yesterday, all my troubles seemed so far away. Now it looks as though they&#x27;re here to stay.&quot; In its second stanza, &quot;Answer Me, My Love&quot; has the lines: &quot;You were mine yesterday. I believed that love was here to stay. Won&#x27;t you tell me where I&#x27;ve gone astray&quot;.

==Composition and structure==

Ostensibly simple, featuring only McCartney playing an Epiphone Texan steel-string acoustic guitar backed by a string quartet in one of the Beatles&#x27; first uses of session musicians, &quot;Yesterday&quot; has two contrasting sections, differing in melody and rhythm, producing a sense of variety and fitting contrast. The main melody is seven bars in length, extremely rare in popular songs, while the bridge, or &quot;middle eight&quot;, is the more standard form of eight bars, often two four-bar phrases combined.

The first section (&quot;Yesterday, all my troubles seemed so far away ...&quot;) opens with an F chord (the 3rd of the chord is omitted), then moving to Em7 before proceeding to A7 and then to D minor. In this sense, the opening chord is a decoy; as musicologist Alan Pollack points out, the home key (F major) has little time to establish itself before &quot;heading towards the relative D minor&quot;. He points out that this diversion is a compositional device commonly used by Lennon and McCartney, which he describes as &quot;deferred gratification&quot;.

According to Pollack, the second section (&quot;Why she had to go I don&#x27;t know ...&quot;) is less musically surprising on paper than it sounds. Starting with Em7, the harmonic progression quickly moves through the A major, D minor, and (closer to F major) B, before resolving back to F major, and at the end of this, McCartney holds F while the strings descend to resolve to the home key to introduce the restatement of the first section, before a brief hummed closing phrase.

Pollack described the scoring as &quot;truly inspired&quot;, citing it as an example of &quot;[Lennon &amp; McCartney&#x27;s] flair for creating stylistic hybrids&quot;; in particular, he praises the &quot;ironic tension drawn between the schmaltzy content of what is played by the quartet and the restrained, spare nature of the medium in which it is played&quot;.

The tonic key of the song is F major (although, since McCartney tuned his guitar down a whole step, he was playing the chords as if it were in G), where the song begins before veering off into the key of D minor. It is this frequent use of the minor, and the ii–V7 chord progression (Em and A7 chords in this case) leading into it, that gives the song its melancholic aura. The A7 chord is an example of a secondary dominant, specifically a V/vi chord. The G7 chord in the bridge is another secondary dominant, in this case a V/V chord, but rather than resolve it to the expected chord, as with the A7 to Dm in the verse, McCartney instead follows it with the IV chord, a B. This motion creates a descending chromatic line of C–B–B–A to accompany the title lyric.

The string arrangement reinforces the song&#x27;s air of sadness in the groaning cello line that connects the two halves of the bridge, notably the &quot;blue&quot; seventh in the second bridge pass (the E played after the vocal line &quot;I don&#x27;t know / she wouldn&#x27;t say&quot;) and in the descending run by the viola that segues the bridge back into the verses, mimicked by McCartney&#x27;s vocal on the second pass of the bridge. This viola line, the &quot;blue&quot; cello phrase, the high A sustained by the violin over the final verse and the minimal use of vibrato are elements of the string arrangement attributable to McCartney rather than George Martin.

When the song was performed on &quot;The Ed Sullivan Show&quot;, it was done in the key mentioned above of F, with McCartney as the only Beatle to perform and the studio orchestra providing the string accompaniment. However, all of the Beatles played in a G-major version when the song was included in tours in 1965 and 1966.

When McCartney appeared on &quot;The Howard Stern Show&quot;, he stated that he owned the original lyrics to &quot;Yesterday&quot; written on the back of an envelope. McCartney later performed the original &quot;Scrambled Eggs&quot; version of the song, plus additional new lyrics, with Jimmy Fallon and the Roots on &quot;Late Night with Jimmy Fallon&quot;.

When asked whether some of the lyrics from &quot;Yesterday&quot; are a reference to his early loss of his mother, Mary McCartney, he stated that &quot;I didn&#x27;t mean it to be, but ... it could be&quot;.

==Recording==
The track was recorded at Abbey Road Studios on 14 June 1965, immediately following the taping of &quot;I&#x27;m Down&quot; and four days before McCartney&#x27;s 23rd birthday. There are conflicting accounts of how the song was recorded. Some sources state that McCartney and the other Beatles tried a variety of instruments, including drums and an organ, and that George Martin later persuaded them to allow McCartney to play his Epiphone Texan steel-string acoustic guitar, later overdubbing a string quartet for backup. Regardless, none of the other band members were included in the final recording.

McCartney performed two takes of &quot;Yesterday&quot; on 14 June 1965. Take 2 was deemed better and used as the master take. On 17 June, an additional vocal track by McCartney and a string quartet were overdubbed on take two and that version was released.

Take 1, without the string overdub, was later released on the &quot;Anthology 2&quot; compilation. On take 1, McCartney can be heard giving chord changes to Harrison before starting. Still, while Harrison does not appear actually to play, he is most certainly present because his voice is captured on the session tapes. Take 2 had two lines transposed from the first take: &quot;There&#x27;s a shadow hanging over me&quot;/&quot;I&#x27;m not half the man I used to be&quot;, though it seems clear that their order in take 2 was the correct one because McCartney can be heard, in take 1, suppressing a laugh at his mistake.

In 2006, just before the album &quot;Love&quot; was released, George Martin elaborated on the recording set-up of the song:

The sound leakage from one track to another caused concern when the surround version of the song was mixed for &quot;Love&quot;, but it was decided to include the track nevertheless. As Martin explained in the liner notes of &quot;Love&quot;:
We agonised over the inclusion of &quot;Yesterday&quot; in the show. It is such a famous song, the icon of an era, but had it been heard too much? The story of the addition of the original string quartet is well known, however, few people know how limited the recording was technically, and so the case for not including it was strong, but how could we ignore such a marvellous work? We introduced it with some of Paul&#x27;s guitar work from &quot;Blackbird&quot;, and hearing it now, I know it was right to include it. Its simplicity is so direct; it tugs at the heartstrings.

==Release==
Concerning the debate on how the song should be released, Martin later said: &quot;[&#x27;Yesterday&#x27;] wasn&#x27;t really a Beatles record and I discussed this with Brian Epstein: &#x27;You know this is Paul&#x27;s song ... shall we call it Paul McCartney?&#x27; He said &#x27;No, whatever we do we are not splitting up the Beatles.&#x27;&quot; Since &quot;Yesterday&quot; was unlike the Beatles&#x27; previous work and did not fit in with their image, the Beatles refused to permit the release of a single in the United Kingdom. This did not prevent Matt Monro from recording the first of many cover versions of &quot;Yesterday&quot;. His version made it into the top ten in the UK charts soon after its release in the autumn of 1965.

The Beatles&#x27; influence over their US record label, Capitol, was not as strong as it was over EMI&#x27;s Parlophone label in Britain. A single was released in the US, pairing &quot;Yesterday&quot; with &quot;Act Naturally&quot;, a track which featured vocals by Ringo Starr. The single was released on 13 September 1965 and topped the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 chart for four weeks, beginning on 9 October. The song spent a total of 11 weeks on the chart, selling a million copies within five weeks. The single was also number one for three weeks on the US &quot;Cash Box&quot; pop singles chart the same year.

&quot;Yesterday&quot; was the fifth of six number-one Beatles singles in a row on the American charts, a record at the time. The other singles were &quot;I Feel Fine&quot;, &quot;Eight Days a Week&quot;, &quot;Ticket to Ride&quot;, &quot;Help!&quot; and &quot;We Can Work It Out&quot;. On 4 March 1966, the song was issued as the title track of the British EP &quot;Yesterday&quot;. On 26 March, the EP went to number one, a position it held for two months. Later that year, &quot;Yesterday&quot; was included as the title track of the North American album &quot;Yesterday and Today&quot;.

&quot;Yesterday&quot; was released on the album &quot;A Collection of Beatles Oldies&quot;, a compilation album released in the United Kingdom in December 1966, featuring hit singles and other songs issued by the group between 1963 and 1966.

On 8 March 1976, &quot;Yesterday&quot; was released by Parlophone as a single in the UK, featuring &quot;I Should Have Known Better&quot; on the B-side. The single peaked at number 8 on the UK Singles Chart. The release came about due to the expiration of the Beatles&#x27; contract with EMI, which allowed the company to repackage the Beatles&#x27; recordings as they wished. EMI reissued all 22 of the Beatles&#x27; UK singles, plus &quot;Yesterday&quot;, on the same day, leading to six of them placing on the UK chart.

In 2006, a version of the song was included on the album &quot;Love&quot;. The version begins with the acoustic guitar intro from the song &quot;Blackbird&quot; transposed down a whole step to F major from its original key G to transition smoothly into &quot;Yesterday&quot;.

==Reception and legacy==
&quot;Yesterday&quot; is one of the most recorded songs in the history of popular music. Its entry in &quot;Guinness World Records&quot; states that, by January 1986, 1,600 cover versions had been made. After Muzak switched in the 1990s to programs based on commercial recordings, its inventory grew to include about 500 &quot;Yesterday&quot; covers. In his 1972 article on the development of rock music, Joel Vance of &quot;Stereo Review&quot; magazine credited the song with originating the vogue for classical and baroque rock, anticipating the Rolling Stones&#x27; recording of &quot;As Tears Go By&quot; and works by artists such as the Moody Blues and the Classics IV.

&quot;Yesterday&quot; won the Ivor Novello Award for &quot;Outstanding Song of 1965&quot;, and came second in the &quot;Most Performed Work of the Year&quot; category, behind the Lennon–McCartney composition &quot;Michelle&quot;. More recently, &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; ranked &quot;Yesterday&quot; at number 13 on its 2004 list &quot;The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time&quot; and fourth on its 2010 list of &quot;The Beatles&#x27; 100 Greatest Songs&quot;. In 1999, Broadcast Music Incorporated (BMI) placed &quot;Yesterday&quot; third on its list of songs of the 20th century most performed on American radio and television, with approximately seven million performances. &quot;Yesterday&quot; was surpassed only by the Association&#x27;s &quot;Never My Love&quot; and the Righteous Brothers&#x27; &quot;You&#x27;ve Lost That Lovin&#x27; Feelin&#x27;&quot;. &quot;Yesterday&quot; was voted Best Song of the 20th century in a 1999 BBC Radio 2 poll.

The song was inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame in 1997. Although it was nominated for Song of the Year at the 1966 Grammy Awards, it lost out to Tony Bennett&#x27;s &quot;The Shadow of Your Smile&quot;. &quot;Yesterday&quot; was nominated for six Grammys in total that year, and &quot;Help!&quot; was also nominated in four categories. After the band had failed to win any of the ten awards, Alan Livingston, the head of Capitol Records, officially protested about the results, saying that &quot;Yesterday&quot; being passed over for the Song of the Year &quot;makes a mockery of the whole event&quot;.
Chuck Berry said that &quot;Yesterday&quot; was the song that he wished that he had written. &quot;Yesterday&quot; has also been criticised for being mundane and mawkish. Bob Dylan had a marked dislike for the song, stating that &quot;If you go into the Library of Congress, you can find a lot better than that. There are millions of songs like &#x27;Michelle&#x27; and &#x27;Yesterday&#x27; written in Tin Pan Alley.&quot; Accompanied by Harrison, Dylan recorded his own version of &quot;Yesterday&quot; four years later, on 1 May 1970, but it was never released.

Shortly before he died in 1980, Lennon commented, &quot;Although the lyrics don&#x27;t resolve into any sense, they&#x27;re good lines. They certainly work ... but if you read the whole song, it doesn&#x27;t say anything&quot; and added the song was &quot;beautiful – and I never wished I&#x27;d written it&quot;. Lennon made reference to &quot;Yesterday&quot; in his song &quot;How Do You Sleep?&quot; on his 1971 album &quot;Imagine&quot;. The song appears to attack McCartney with the line &quot;The only thing you done was yesterday, but since you&#x27;ve gone you&#x27;re just another day&quot;, a reference to McCartney&#x27;s recent hit &quot;Another Day&quot;.

In 2001, McCartney said that he had asked Yoko Ono to agree to change the writing credit for &quot;Yesterday&quot; from &quot;Lennon/McCartney&quot; to &quot;McCartney/Lennon&quot;. He said that Ono refused, which was one of the reasons for their poor relationship at the time.

At the 2006 Grammy Awards, McCartney performed &quot;Yesterday&quot; live as a mash-up with Linkin Park and Jay Z&#x27;s &quot;Numb/Encore&quot;.

In 2012, the BBC reported that &quot;Yesterday&quot; remained the fourth-most-successful song of all time in terms of royalties paid, having amassed a total of £19.5 million in payments.

==Personnel==
According to Mark Lewisohn and Ian MacDonald:

The Beatles
*Paul McCartney – vocal, acoustic guitar

Additional musicians and production
*Tony Gilbert – violin
*Sidney Sax – violin
*Kenneth Essex – viola
*Peter Halling/Francisco Gabarró – cello
* George Martin – producer, string arrangement
*Norman Smith – engineer

==Charts==
===Weekly charts===



===Year-end charts===
==Certifications==




==Notes==
==References==
===Sources===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q202698" start="6" end="15" title="Yesterday (song)" label="Yesterday"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="47" end="51" title="Rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="57" end="68" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="81" end="95" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q239177" start="112" end="128" title="Lennon–McCartney" label="Lennon–McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q201816" start="171" end="176" title="Help!" label="Help!"/>
<link wikidata="Q134556" start="253" end="259" title="Single (music)" label="single"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="312" end="341" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755305" start="393" end="402" title="Yesterday (Beatles EP)" label="Yesterday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445837" start="460" end="479" title="Yesterday and Today" label="Yesterday and Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q31561" start="529" end="544" title="acoustic guitar" label="acoustic guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q207338" start="562" end="576" title="string quartet" label="string quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q155171" start="675" end="688" title="cover version" label="cover version"/>
<link wikidata="Q795578" start="834" end="845" title="BBC Radio 2" label="BBC Radio 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="911" end="914" title="Pop music" label="pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="935" end="938" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="949" end="962" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q81180" start="1038" end="1057" title="Grammy Hall of Fame" label="Grammy Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q891885" start="1059" end="1087" title="Broadcast Music Incorporated" label="Broadcast Music Incorporated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077388" start="1210" end="1216" title="Sentimental ballad" label="ballad"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="1784" end="1800" title="UK singles chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="1842" end="1856" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569249" start="1950" end="1964" title="Wimpole Street" label="Wimpole Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q204426" start="1993" end="2003" title="Jane Asher" label="Jane Asher"/>
<link wikidata="Q164666" start="2162" end="2173" title="plagiarism" label="plagiarised"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="2579" end="2590" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131815" start="2921" end="2926" title="Help! (film)" label="Help!"/>
<link wikidata="Q346508" start="3128" end="3142" title="Richard Lester" label="Richard Lester"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643" start="3334" end="3349" title="George Harrison" label="George Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q255" start="3459" end="3468" title="Beethoven" label="Beethoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q182518" start="3733" end="3756" title="A Hard Day&amp;#x27;s Night (album)" label="A Hard Day&amp;#x27;s Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q207336" start="3773" end="3789" title="Beatles for Sale" label="Beatles for Sale"/>
<link wikidata="Q191819" start="3975" end="3988" title="George Martin" label="George Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q379755" start="4015" end="4026" title="arrangement (music)" label="arrangement"/>
<link wikidata="Q597" start="4311" end="4317" title="Lisbon" label="Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q373813" start="4335" end="4344" title="Albufeira" label="Albufeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q26831" start="4346" end="4353" title="Algarve" label="Algarve"/>
<link wikidata="Q991880" start="4395" end="4406" title="Bruce Welch" label="Bruce Welch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077211" start="4525" end="4538" title="Chris Farlowe" label="Chris Farlowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4964625" start="4666" end="4679" title="Brian Matthew" label="Brian Matthew"/>
<link wikidata="Q544387" start="4915" end="4926" title="Ray Charles" label="Ray Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q460662" start="4944" end="4960" title="Hoagy Carmichael" label="Hoagy Carmichael"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420007" start="4974" end="4992" title="Georgia on My Mind" label="Georgia on My Mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q164204" start="5177" end="5190" title="musicology" label="musicologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q679865" start="5297" end="5312" title="David Whitfield" label="David Whitfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q342774" start="5321" end="5334" title="Frankie Laine" label="Frankie Laine"/>
<link wikidata="Q137042" start="5347" end="5360" title="Nat King Cole" label="Nat King Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q4770809" start="5374" end="5392" title="Answer Me, My Love" label="Answer Me, My Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512780" start="5428" end="5443" title="Gerhard Winkler (composer)" label="Gerhard Winkler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452480" start="5448" end="5458" title="Fred Rauch" label="Fred Rauch"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="5529" end="5545" title="UK singles chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383155" start="6205" end="6219" title="Epiphone Texan" label="Epiphone Texan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2563510" start="6220" end="6248" title="steel-string acoustic guitar" label="steel-string acoustic guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q207338" start="6261" end="6275" title="string quartet" label="string quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q170439" start="6770" end="6775" title="chord (music)" label="chord"/>
<link wikidata="Q4707967" start="6936" end="6948" title="Alan W. Pollack" label="Alan Pollack"/>
<link wikidata="Q210411" start="8089" end="8098" title="tonic (music)" label="tonic key"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326471" start="8350" end="8367" title="chord progression" label="chord progression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411564" start="8491" end="8509" title="secondary dominant" label="secondary dominant"/>
<link wikidata="Q568678" start="8638" end="8645" title="resolution (music)" label="resolve"/>
<link wikidata="Q11221917" start="8793" end="8802" title="chromatic" label="chromatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109478" start="8978" end="8984" title="bridge (music)" label="bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q151992" start="9004" end="9008" title="Blue note" label="blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q80284" start="9172" end="9177" title="viola" label="viola"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081494" start="9561" end="9581" title="The Ed Sullivan Show" label="The Ed Sullivan Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q3987626" start="9884" end="9905" title="The Howard Stern Show" label="The Howard Stern Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q170124" start="10008" end="10016" title="envelope" label="envelope"/>
<link wikidata="Q335680" start="10138" end="10150" title="Jimmy Fallon" label="Jimmy Fallon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052139" start="10155" end="10164" title="the Roots" label="the Roots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817561" start="10174" end="10202" title="Late Night with Jimmy Fallon" label="Late Night with Jimmy Fallon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10325" end="10339" title="Personal relationships of Paul McCartney#Jim and Mary McCartney" label="Mary McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q209651" start="10459" end="10477" title="Abbey Road Studios" label="Abbey Road Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099033" start="10537" end="10550" title="I&amp;#x27;m Down" label="I&amp;#x27;m Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444" start="10782" end="10787" title="Organ (music)" label="organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383155" start="10864" end="10878" title="Epiphone Texan" label="Epiphone Texan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2563510" start="10879" end="10907" title="steel-string acoustic guitar" label="steel-string acoustic guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124733" start="11062" end="11066" title="take" label="take"/>
<link wikidata="Q421031" start="11151" end="11157" title="Audio mastering" label="master"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760913" start="11241" end="11251" title="overdubbing" label="overdubbed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753625" start="11364" end="11375" title="Anthology 2" label="Anthology 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324743" start="11957" end="11961" title="Love (Beatles album)" label="Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q880719" start="12737" end="12746" title="Blackbird (Beatles song)" label="Blackbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q203690" start="13049" end="13062" title="Brian Epstein" label="Brian Epstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q981789" start="13435" end="13445" title="Matt Monro" label="Matt Monro"/>
<link wikidata="Q193023" start="13677" end="13684" title="Capitol Records" label="Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q183412" start="13719" end="13722" title="EMI" label="EMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q208909" start="13730" end="13740" title="Parlophone" label="Parlophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2374767" start="13833" end="13846" title="Act Naturally" label="Act Naturally"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632" start="13887" end="13898" title="Ringo Starr" label="Ringo Starr"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="13960" end="13989" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q656903" start="14192" end="14200" title="Cashbox (magazine)" label="Cash Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q268440" start="14395" end="14406" title="I Feel Fine" label="I Feel Fine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303515" start="14420" end="14437" title="Eight Days a Week (song)" label="Eight Days a Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q959812" start="14451" end="14465" title="Ticket to Ride (song)" label="Ticket to Ride"/>
<link wikidata="Q839842" start="14479" end="14484" title="Help! (song)" label="Help!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050831" start="14501" end="14519" title="We Can Work It Out" label="We Can Work It Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q169930" start="14598" end="14600" title="extended play" label="EP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755305" start="14607" end="14616" title="Yesterday (Beatles EP)" label="Yesterday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445837" start="14804" end="14823" title="Yesterday and Today" label="Yesterday and Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q300373" start="14886" end="14916" title="A Collection of Beatles Oldies" label="A Collection of Beatles Oldies"/>
<link wikidata="Q610889" start="15180" end="15206" title="I Should Have Known Better" label="I Should Have Known Better"/>
<link wikidata="Q31561" start="15702" end="15717" title="acoustic guitar" label="acoustic guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="16009" end="16031" title="Guinness World Records" label="Guinness World Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q108796044" start="16110" end="16115" title="Muzak" label="Muzak"/>
<link wikidata="Q610609" start="16326" end="16339" title="Sound &amp;amp; Vision (magazine)" label="Stereo Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q49451" start="16404" end="16413" title="Progressive rock" label="classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q46046" start="16418" end="16430" title="Baroque pop" label="baroque rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036" start="16445" end="16463" title="the Rolling Stones" label="the Rolling Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263951" start="16489" end="16503" title="As Tears Go By (song)" label="As Tears Go By"/>
<link wikidata="Q211965" start="16539" end="16554" title="the Moody Blues" label="the Moody Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096139" start="16559" end="16574" title="the Classics IV" label="the Classics IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q61116" start="16607" end="16625" title="Ivor Novello Award" label="Ivor Novello Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353749" start="16791" end="16799" title="Michelle (song)" label="Michelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="16828" end="16841" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q286102" start="16913" end="16947" title="The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time" label="The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q891885" start="17044" end="17072" title="Broadcast Music Incorporated" label="Broadcast Music Incorporated"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118895" start="17295" end="17310" title="the Association" label="the Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7004168" start="17324" end="17337" title="Never My Love" label="Never My Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q610228" start="17348" end="17370" title="the Righteous Brothers" label="the Righteous Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1487396" start="17383" end="17429" title="You&amp;#x27;ve Lost That Lovin&amp;#x27; Feelin&amp;#x27;" label="You&amp;#x27;ve Lost That Lovin&amp;#x27; Feelin&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q795578" start="17509" end="17520" title="BBC Radio 2" label="BBC Radio 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q81180" start="17559" end="17578" title="Grammy Hall of Fame" label="Grammy Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027904" start="17618" end="17634" title="Grammy Award for Song of the Year" label="Song of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542228" start="17642" end="17660" title="1966 Grammy Awards" label="1966 Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q296729" start="17677" end="17689" title="Tony Bennett" label="Tony Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522673" start="17703" end="17727" title="The Shadow of Your Smile" label="The Shadow of Your Smile"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="17779" end="17786" title="Grammy Awards" label="Grammys"/>
<link wikidata="Q3000674" start="17924" end="17939" title="Alan W. Livingston" label="Alan Livingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5921" start="18135" end="18146" title="Chuck Berry" label="Chuck Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="18306" end="18315" title="Bob Dylan" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="18389" end="18408" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121111" start="18538" end="18551" title="Tin Pan Alley" label="Tin Pan Alley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453037" start="19080" end="19097" title="How Do You Sleep? (John Lennon song)" label="How Do You Sleep?"/>
<link wikidata="Q333266" start="19128" end="19135" title="Imagine (John Lennon album)" label="Imagine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428833" start="19351" end="19362" title="Another Day (Paul McCartney song)" label="Another Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q117012" start="19413" end="19421" title="Yoko Ono" label="Yoko Ono"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542334" start="19657" end="19675" title="48th Annual Grammy Awards" label="2006 Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q261" start="19742" end="19753" title="Linkin Park" label="Linkin Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q62766" start="19758" end="19763" title="Jay Z" label="Jay Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q19979" start="19777" end="19788" title="Numb/Encore" label="Numb/Encore"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="19810" end="19813" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780375" start="20012" end="20025" title="Mark Lewisohn" label="Mark Lewisohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630321" start="20030" end="20043" title="Ian MacDonald" label="Ian MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="20059" end="20073" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7509328" start="20160" end="20170" title="Sidney Sax" label="Sidney Sax"/>
<link wikidata="Q80284" start="20197" end="20202" title="viola" label="viola"/>
<link wikidata="Q191819" start="20246" end="20259" title="George Martin" label="George Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q361940" start="20292" end="20304" title="Norman Smith (record producer)" label="Norman Smith"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143185" wikidata="Q5447950" url="?curid=143185" title="Fighting words">
<text>Fighting words are spoken words intended to provoke a retaliatory act of violence against the speaker. In United States constitutional law, the term describes words that inflict injury or would tend to incite an immediate breach of the peace.

== United States ==
The fighting words doctrine, in United States constitutional law, is a limitation to freedom of speech as protected by the First Amendment to the United States Constitution.

In 1942, the U.S. Supreme Court established the doctrine by a 9–0 decision in &quot;Chaplinsky v. New Hampshire&quot;. It held that &quot;insulting or &#x27;fighting words&#x27;, those that by their very utterance inflict injury or tend to incite an immediate breach of the peace&quot; are among the &quot;well-defined and narrowly limited classes of speech the prevention and punishment of [which] ... have never been thought to raise any constitutional problem.&quot;

=== &quot;Chaplinsky&quot; decision ===
Walter Chaplinsky, a Jehovah&#x27;s Witness, had purportedly told a New Hampshire town marshal who was attempting to prevent him from preaching that he was &quot;a damned racketeer&quot; and &quot;a damned fascist&quot; and was arrested. The court upheld the arrest and wrote in its decision that:

=== Post-&quot;Chaplinsky&quot; ===
The Court has continued to uphold the doctrine but also steadily narrowed the grounds on which fighting words are held to apply. In &quot;Street v. New York&quot; (1969), the Court overturned a statute prohibiting flag-burning and verbally abusing the flag, holding that mere &quot;offensiveness&quot; does not qualify as &quot;fighting words&quot;. In similar manner, in &quot;Cohen v. California&quot; (1971), Paul Robert Cohen&#x27;s wearing a jacket that said &quot;fuck the draft&quot; did not constitute uttering fighting words since there had been no &quot;personally abusive epithets&quot;.

In &quot;Brandenburg v. Ohio&quot; (1969), even speech such as &quot;Bury the niggers&quot; and &quot;Send the Jews back to Israel,&quot; was held to be protected speech under the First Amendment in a  decision. In addition, despite the speech being broadcast on network television it did not direct to incite or produce imminent lawless action nor was it likely to produce such action.

In 1972, the Court held that offensive and insulting language, even when directed at specific individuals, is not fighting words:
* &quot;Gooding v. Wilson&quot; (1972): &quot;White son of a bitch, I&#x27;ll kill you.&quot;
* &quot;Rosenfeld v. New Jersey&quot; (1972): &quot;mother fucking.&quot;
* &quot;Lewis v. City of New Orleans&quot; (1972): &quot;god damn mother fucking police.&quot;
* &quot;Brown v. Oklahoma&quot; (1972): &quot;mother fucking fascist&quot;, &quot;black mother fucking pig&quot;. Found constitutional because the &quot;speech [may] have been anticipated by the audience.&quot;

In &quot;Collin v. Smith&quot; (1978) Nazis displaying swastikas and wearing military-style uniforms marching through a community with a large Jewish population, including survivors of German concentration camps, were not using fighting words.

&quot;Texas v. Johnson&quot; (1989) redefined the scope of fighting words to &quot;a direct personal insult or an invitation to exchange fisticuffs&quot; in juxtapose to flag burning as symbolic speech.

In &quot;R.A.V. v. City of St. Paul&quot; (1992) and &quot;Virginia v. Black&quot; (2003), the Court held that cross burning is not &#x27;fighting words&#x27; without intent to intimidate.

In &quot;Snyder v. Phelps&quot; (2011), respondents&#x27; counsel argued that the Court&#x27;s definition of fighting words required immediacy, imminence, intent and proximity. Justice Ginsburg stated that the Court had rejected spreading the concept beyond words that immediately trigger an instinctive reaction. The Court held that even &quot;outrageous&quot; and &quot;hurtful speech&quot; such as: &quot;God Hates the USA/Thank God for 9/11&quot;, &quot;America is Doomed&quot;, &quot;Don&#x27;t Pray for the USA&quot;, &quot;Thank God for IEDs&quot;, &quot;Thank God for Dead Soldiers&quot;, &quot;Pope in Hell&quot;, &quot;Priests Rape Boys&quot;, &quot;God Hates Fags&quot;, &quot;Fags Doom Nations&quot;, &quot;You&#x27;re Going to Hell,&quot; and &quot;God Hates You&quot; is to be considered public debate, particularly when conducted on public land, and must enjoy &quot;special&quot; First Amendment protection. Lone dissenting Justice Samuel Alito likened the protests of the Westboro Baptist Church members to fighting words and of a personal character, and thus not protected speech. The majority disagreed and stated that the protesters&#x27; speech was not personal but public, and that local laws which can shield funeral attendees from protesters are adequate for protecting those in times of emotional distress.

==Australia==

The Australian Constitution does not explicitly protect freedom of expression, but the High Court has held that an implied freedom of political communication exists as an indispensable part of the system of representative and responsible government created by the Constitution. It operates as a freedom from government restraint, rather than a right conferred directly on individuals.

In &quot;Nationwide News Pty Ltd v Wills&quot;, and &quot;Australian Capital Television Pty Ltd v Commonwealth&quot;, the majority of the High Court held that an implied freedom of political communication exists as an incident of the system of representative government established by the Constitution. This was reaffirmed in &quot;Unions NSW v New South Wales&quot; [2013] HCA 58.

In 2004, the High Court considered the meaning of a statutory offence of using insulting words in a public place. Justices Gummow and Hayne held that in the context of the section, &#x27;&quot;abusive&quot; and &quot;insulting&quot; should be understood as those words which, in the circumstances in which they are used, are so hurtful as either they are intended to, or they are reasonably likely to provoke unlawful physical retaliation&#x27;. Judge Michael Kirby employed similar reasoning. Chief Justice Gleeson took a slightly different approach to the construction of the section, finding that:

It is open to parliament to form the view that threatening, abusive or insulting speech and behaviour may in some circumstances constitute a serious interference with public order, even where there is no intention, and no realistic possibility, that the person threatened, abused or insulted, or some third person, might respond in such a manner that a breach of the peace will occur.

This faithfully reflects the original &quot;fighting words&quot; doctrine and not how it is now understood and applied by the United States Supreme Court. Greenawalt argues that in the First Amendment context, the application of one part of the original Chaplinsky formula (&#x27;words likely to cause an average addressee to fight&#x27;) is problematic in important respects:

The first ambiguity concerns the persons to be counted among potential addressees: everyone, only people to whom a phrase really &#x27;applies&#x27;, or all those likely to be angered by having the label applied to them? Someone of French origin reacts differently to being called a &#x27;Polack&#x27; than someone of Polish origin. ... Another ambiguity is how an &#x27;average addressee&#x27; is to be conceived ... [And], [c]an the same remark be punishable if directed at the one person able to respond and constitutionally protected if directed at people not able to match the speaker physically?

===Offensive language that is considered criminal in Australia===
A number of criminal laws in Australia prohibit the use of offensive, obscene, abusive, insulting or indecent language in a public place. One such example is section 4A of the &quot;Summary Offences Act&quot; 1988 (NSW), which prohibits the use of offensive language in, near or within hearing from a public place or school. The penalty for using offensive, indecent or obscene language in Australia ranges from a small fine (for example, $660 in NSW) to up to 6 months imprisonment.

Police in a number of Australian states and territories also have the power to issue on-the-spot fines (infringement notices) for offensive language. Police commonly use these offences to target four-letter words (such as &quot;cunt&quot;, or &quot;fuck&quot;, and their derivatives) uttered towards them, or in their presence.

==Versus incitement==
Incitement is a related doctrine, allowing the government to prohibit advocacy of unlawful actions if the advocacy is both intended to and likely to cause immediate breach of the peace. In the United States, the modern standard was defined in &quot;Brandenburg v. Ohio&quot; (1969), where the Supreme Court reversed the conviction of a Ku Klux Klan leader accused of advocating violence against racial minorities and the national government. The Ohio statute under which the conviction occurred was overturned as unconstitutional because &quot;the mere abstract teaching of the moral propriety or even moral necessity for a resort to force and violence is not the same as preparing a group for violent action and steeling it to such action.&quot;

The difference between incitement and fighting words is subtle, focusing on the intent of the speaker. Inciting speech is characterized by the speaker&#x27;s intent to make someone else the instrument of his or her unlawful will. Fighting words, by contrast, are intended to cause the hearer to react to the speaker.

== See also ==
*Intimidation
*Trash talk
*Verbal aggression

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5447950" start="0" end="14" title="Fighting words" label="Fighting words"/>
<link wikidata="Q52946" start="19" end="30" title="speech" label="spoken word"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892395" start="106" end="138" title="United States constitutional law" label="United States constitutional law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722536" start="222" end="241" title="breach of the peace" label="breach of the peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892395" start="296" end="328" title="United States constitutional law" label="United States constitutional law"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="349" end="366" title="freedom of speech" label="freedom of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q12616" start="387" end="436" title="First Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="First Amendment to the United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="452" end="470" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5073245" start="523" end="550" title="Chaplinsky v. New Hampshire" label="Chaplinsky v. New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q571571" start="577" end="583" title="insult" label="insult"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722536" start="699" end="718" title="breach of the peace" label="breach of the peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q35269" start="971" end="993" title="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witness" label="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283181" start="1121" end="1130" title="racketeer" label="racketeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="1156" end="1163" title="fascism" label="fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623063" start="1423" end="1441" title="Street v. New York" label="Street v. New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426793" start="1499" end="1511" title="flag desecration" label="flag-burning"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141332" start="1663" end="1682" title="Cohen v. California" label="Cohen v. California"/>
<link wikidata="Q4956667" start="1894" end="1913" title="Brandenburg v. Ohio" label="Brandenburg v. Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070065" start="2086" end="2086" title="per curiam decision" label=""/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2411" end="2428" title="Gooding v. Wilson" label="Gooding v. Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2505" end="2528" title="Rosenfeld v. New Jersey" label="Rosenfeld v. New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2579" end="2607" title="Lewis v. City of New Orleans" label="Lewis v. City of New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2674" end="2691" title="Brown v. Oklahoma" label="Brown v. Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895452" start="2887" end="2902" title="Collin v. Smith" label="Collin v. Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q949984" start="3129" end="3145" title="Texas v. Johnson" label="Texas v. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7273299" start="3336" end="3362" title="R.A.V. v. City of St. Paul" label="R.A.V. v. City of St. Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934714" start="3386" end="3403" title="Virginia v. Black" label="Virginia v. Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188444" start="3438" end="3451" title="cross burning" label="cross burning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7548911" start="3526" end="3542" title="Snyder v. Phelps" label="Snyder v. Phelps"/>
<link wikidata="Q11138" start="4465" end="4477" title="Samuel Alito" label="Samuel Alito"/>
<link wikidata="Q692942" start="4506" end="4529" title="Westboro Baptist Church" label="Westboro Baptist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979888" start="5260" end="5291" title="Nationwide News Pty Ltd v Wills" label="Nationwide News Pty Ltd v Wills"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823919" start="5309" end="5361" title="Australian Capital Television Pty Ltd v Commonwealth" label="Australian Capital Television Pty Ltd v Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q8010270" start="5757" end="5763" title="William Gummow" label="Gummow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6390196" start="5768" end="5773" title="Kenneth Hayne" label="Hayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6831895" start="6080" end="6099" title="Michael Kirby (judge)" label="Judge Michael Kirby"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409185" start="6128" end="6141" title="Chief Justice of Australia" label="Chief Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q6939251" start="6142" end="6149" title="Murray Gleeson" label="Gleeson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600" start="8382" end="8386" title="cunt" label="cunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q31928" start="8403" end="8407" title="fuck" label="fuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q570354" start="8505" end="8515" title="Incitement" label="Incitement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4956667" start="8754" end="8773" title="Brandenburg v. Ohio" label="Brandenburg v. Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q47131" start="8841" end="8853" title="Ku Klux Klan" label="Ku Klux Klan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3858303" start="9587" end="9599" title="Intimidation" label="Intimidation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901826" start="9601" end="9611" title="Trash talk" label="Trash talk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7920932" start="9613" end="9630" title="Verbal aggression" label="Verbal aggression"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143191" wikidata="Q204404" url="?curid=143191" title="2112 (album)">
<text>2112 (pronounced &quot;twenty-one twelve&quot;) is the fourth studio album by Canadian rock band Rush, released in March 1976 by Mercury Records. It reached No. 5 in Canada and became the band&#x27;s commercial breakthrough in America, peaking at No. 61.

The band was in financial hardship due to the disappointing sales of 1975&#x27;s &quot;Caress of Steel&quot;, which also got an unfavourable critical reception and a decline in attendance at its shows. Mercury, their international label, considered dropping them but granted one more album following negotiations with manager Ray Danniels. Rush were pressured to deliver more commercial material but decided to continue developing its progressive rock direction they had explored on &quot;Caress of Steel&quot; and made the 20-minute futuristic science-fiction title track occupy side one of &quot;2112&quot; with a collection of shorter songs on side two that display their hard rock roots.

&quot;2112&quot; was released to favourable reviews from music critics and quickly outsold the band&#x27;s previous albums. Rush toured the album extensively in 1976 and 1977, which culminated in their debut concerts in Europe. &quot;2112&quot; remains the band&#x27;s second-highest-selling album behind &quot;Moving Pictures&quot; with more than 3 million copies sold in the US alone. It’s listed in &quot;1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die&quot; and ranked second on &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;″s reader&#x27;s poll, Your Favorite Prog Rock Albums of All Time. &quot;2112&quot; has been reissued several times: a 40th Anniversary Edition was released in 2016 with previously unreleased material, including the album performed by numerous contemporary artists.

== Background ==
In January 1976, Rush ended its 1975–1976 tour to support 1975&#x27;s &quot;Caress of Steel&quot;. The band had enjoyed writing and recording the album. However, guitarist Alex Lifeson recalled the group was in a state of confusion after the tour, sensing the disappointing reaction from crowds after playing songs from it on stage. The album marked the band&#x27;s foray into progressive rock with lengthy, story-based songs, more complex song structures, and hard-to-grasp lyrics, which made it difficult to receive radio airplay and promote effectively. Vocalist and bassist Geddy Lee said the band could not understand the underwhelming response, and later dubbed the tour the &quot;Down the Tubes Tour&quot; as they struggled to meet their $125-a-week salary while crowds declined. Lee added, &quot;That really shakes your confidence. We were so confused and disheartened.&quot; In 1980, Lifeson, who had formed the band in 1968, said this was the only moment in its history when he felt close to giving up.

In addition to their financial hardship, Rush&#x27;s international label, Mercury Records, considered dropping them. Peart recalled seeing label owner Polygram&#x27;s financial predictions for the forthcoming year, and the band were not listed. To help the situation Rush manager Ray Danniels flew to the label&#x27;s head offices in Chicago to try to regain confidence and spoke highly of the band&#x27;s ideas for a new album without having heard any of it. This followed the group&#x27;s conscious decision to exclude Danniels from the writing and recording sessions, and only played the album to him when it was finished. Danniel&#x27;s plea was a success, and Mercury approved one more album. Despite pressure from the label and management to make a more commercial record, the band ignored the advice and proceeded with material as they saw fit. Lifeson said, &quot;I remember having these conversations about, &#x27;What are we going to do? Are we going to try to make another mini-Led Zeppelin record or are we going to do what we are going to do and continue forward and whatever happens, happens?&#x27; ... We fully intended to [not] go down in flames but we were prepared to do that.&quot; Drummer and lyricist Neil Peart looked back on the situation: &quot;We had been working towards something a little more ambitious on each of the previous two albums. We simply decided that &quot;2112&quot; would have to be the realization of all our hopes.&quot; Following the commercial success of &quot;2112&quot; and its tour, the band vowed to take full creative control of their music from that point on.

== Writing and recording ==
Rush put down musical ideas for &quot;2112&quot; in backstage dressing rooms, hotel rooms, and in their van while touring &quot;Caress of Steel&quot; in the second half of 1975. Peart had already started writing lyrics, to which Lee and Lifeson would develop songs on acoustic guitars that complemented the mood of what Peart was writing about. This was a departure from the pair using their acoustic guitars to write heavy rock arrangements that were eventually recorded on electric instruments, although some passages were written on electric guitar using a portable Pignose practise amplifier. Lee and Lifeson composed with little overdubbing in order to recreate the music on stage as much as possible. Lifeson recalled developing &quot;The Temples of Syrinx&quot; backstage at a gig in Sault Ste. Marie, Ontario in front of their opening act Mendelson Joe. The &quot;Overture&quot; was the final piece to be written on the album. Lifeson said &quot;2112&quot; was the first Rush album that &quot;really sounded like Rush&quot;.

In January 1976, the band entered Toronto Sound Studios to record with their longtime associate Terry Brown assuming his role as producer, operating a Studer 24-track machine. Lifeson plays a 1968 Gibson ES-335 for the majority of the electric guitar parts, with some lead parts played on a Gibson Les Paul Standard. For the acoustic sections, he plays a 12-string Gibson B-45 and a six-string Gibson Dove. His amplifiers were the Fender Super Reverb and a Twin Reverb. A section of &quot;Discovery&quot; features a Fender Stratocaster that Lifeson borrowed from a friend. Lee used a Rickenbacker 4001 bass with stereo output; Brown fed one channel into the mixing board and then into a compressor, and the other was channelled into Lee&#x27;s Electro-Voice speakers turned up to the maximum. Upon completing the album, the band expressed an interest in recording in another studio to explore different sounds. 

== Songs ==
=== Side one ===
Side one is occupied by the 20-minute futuristic science-fiction song &quot;2112&quot;. The seven-part track is based on a story by Peart who credits Russian-American novelist Ayn Rand, inventor of the philosophy of Objectivism and author of the dystopian fictional novella &quot;Anthem&quot;, the plot of which bears several similarities to &quot;2112&quot;. The band had read the book, and Peart added the credit in the album&#x27;s liner notes to avoid legal action. In the British paper &quot;NME&quot;, Barry Miles made allusions of the Rand influence to Nazism, which particularly offended Lee, whose parents were Holocaust survivors. &quot;Overture&quot; begins with a soundscape from musician and album cover artist Hugh Syme performed on his ARP Odyssey synthesizer with an envelope filter and Echoplex Delay pedal. Music writer and professor Rob Bowman calculated that in the entire piece, 2:34 of the song contains improvised guitar solos. &quot;Overture&quot; contains the lyric &quot;And the meek shall inherit the earth&quot;, a reference to the Biblical passages Book of Psalms 37:11 and Matthew 5:5 and borrows a short sequence from Tchaikovsky&#x27;s &quot;1812 Overture&quot;.

&quot;2112&quot; tells a story set in the city of Megadon in the year 2112, after an intergalactic war in 2062 forces many of the planets to be ruled by the Solar Federation (symbolized by the Red Star on the cover artwork), where music is unknown and individualism and creativity are outlawed. The population is controlled by a cabal of priests living in the temples of Syrinx, who take orders from giant banks of computers that control all aspects of life (&quot;The Temples of Syrinx&quot;). An unnamed protagonist finds a guitar inside a cave and rediscovers the lost art of music (&quot;Discovery&quot;). Upon playing the guitar to the priests, they destroy it and declare music a waste of time and against the computers&#x27; plan (&quot;Presentation&quot;). In a dream, an oracle shows him a planet established simultaneously with the Solar Federation, where an elder race flourish in creativity and individuality (&quot;Oracle: The Dream&quot;). He awakens, depressed that music is part of such a society that he can never be part of and kills himself (&quot;Soliloquy&quot;). Another planetary war begins and the elder race successfully take down the Solar Federation, but the song ends with an ambiguous spoken ending: &quot;Attention all planets of the Solar Federation: We have assumed control&quot; (&quot;Grand Finale&quot;). Peart described the ending as a &quot;double surprise ... a real Hitchcock killer&quot;.

=== Side two ===
Side two contains five individual songs that display the band&#x27;s more traditional hard-rock sound and Lee&#x27;s higher-pitched vocals featured on their previous albums. Lifeson said while having a title track more serious, the rest of the album was to be &quot;just a little lighter and a little more fun&quot;. Bowman wrote that the variation of styles on side two offers &quot;a very different listening experience&quot; in comparison. Though the tracks are not specifically about the &quot;2112&quot; concept, they do contain ideas that can relate to its overall theme. Lee wrote the lyrics for &quot;Tears&quot; and Lifeson the lyrics to &quot;Lessons&quot;, while Peart wrote the rest.

&quot;A Passage to Bangkok&quot; is a song about marijuana; Lee said it is &quot;a travelogue for all the places in the world that grow the best weed&quot;. The track mentions a number of cities and countries, specifically Bogotá, Jamaica, Acapulco, Morocco, Bangkok, Lebanon, Afghanistan, and Kathmandu. Rush started to write &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot; at a time when they needed one more song to fill side two. It was quickly put together, Peart said it was written and recorded in one day. The band were big fans of the television series &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot; and based the track on the stories written for it from its host, Rod Serling. &quot;Lessons&quot; is one of the few Rush songs written solely by Lifeson. For him, the process of songwriting is more seldom and spontaneous in comparison to dedicating time to write, rehearse and scrap parts that do not work. &quot;Tears&quot; is a romantic ballad and is the first Rush track to incorporate the Mellotron, which Syme performs. &quot;Something for Nothing&quot; is a song about freewill and decision making. Peart was inspired by graffiti on a wall that he saw while on his way to perform at the Shrine Auditorium in Los Angeles that read &quot;Freedom isn&#x27;t free&quot;, which he adapted into the song. Lifeson asserted that its lyrical tie-in with the &quot;2112&quot; suite makes the track act as a coda to the record.

== Artwork ==
The album was packaged in a gatefold sleeve designed and produced by longtime Rush cover artist Hugh Syme. It marks the first appearance of the emblem later known by fans as the &quot;Starman&quot; logo, which was adopted into the band&#x27;s stage design and future album covers. Peart used it on the front bass drum heads of his kit from 1977 to 1983, and again in 2004 and 2015. The Red Star, a symbol of the Solar Federation depicted in the &quot;2112&quot; suite, represents what Peart described as &quot;any collectivist mentality&quot;, while the man represents the protagonist of the story and to Peart, &quot;the abstract man against the masses&quot;. Syme said: &quot;That he is nude is just a classic tradition ... the pureness of his person and creativity without the trappings of other elements such as clothing&quot;. In July 2013, the Starman logo was featured on a Canada Post stamp honouring Rush. The gatefold includes a photograph of the band dressed in white and standing in front of a wind machine, and was a shoot Lifeson remembered for being particularly awkward.

==Commercial performance==
&quot;2112&quot; was released in March 1976 on vinyl, 8-track cartridge, and cassette tape. It received strong promotion from Polydor, the distributor of Mercury Records albums, who issued an advertising campaign based on graphics on the album sleeve, in major trade publications. It became Rush&#x27;s second album after &quot;Fly by Night&quot; to enter the top ten on the Canadian Albums Chart, peaking at No. 5. In the US, it peaked at No. 61 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Top LPs &amp; Tape chart, the week of 29 May 1976, during a 37-week stay on the chart. It was the band&#x27;s first to crack the U.S. top 100.

The album sold faster than any of Rush&#x27;s previous albums. In June 1976, the album had outsold the band&#x27;s past catalogue in Canada and the United States, selling close to 35,000 and more than 200,000 copies, respectively. &quot;2112&quot; became a strong seller in the United States; it reached gold certification by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) in November 1977 for selling 500,000 copies. In November 1995, the album reached triple platinum for selling more than 3 million copies, becoming Rush&#x27;s second-biggest seller after &quot;Moving Pictures&quot;.

==Reception==

&quot;Cashbox&quot; praised the album, calling it &quot;a valid and melodic tale ... the story/song is a definite cohesive listen&quot;. They said of &quot;Temples of Syrinx&quot; that it &quot;combines growling guitars with an incredibly shrill lead vocal.&quot; In an article about &quot;2112&quot; for &quot;Creem&quot;, Dan Nooger wrote the album &quot;features some significant Mellotron meanderings and amazingly eccentric lyrics&quot;.

*&quot;2112&quot; was included in IGN&#x27;s list &quot;10 Classic Prog Rock Albums&quot;.
*In a reader&#x27;s poll held by &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;, it placed second on the list of favourite Prog Rock albums.
*AllMusic&#x27;s Greg Prato (4.5 out of 5): &quot;1976&#x27;s &quot;2112&quot; proved to be their much sought-after commercial breakthrough and remains one of their most popular albums.&quot;

The Audio-Visual Preservation Trust of Canada, a non-profit Canadian charitable organization dedicated to promoting the preservation of Canada&#x27;s audio-visual heritage, has sponsored MasterWorks, which annually recognizes twelve culturally significant Canadian classics from the film, radio, TV and music industries. In 2006, &quot;2112&quot; was one of the albums chosen to be preserved.

In 2018, the album won the Polaris Heritage Prize Audience Award in the 1976–1985 category.

&quot;Ultimate Classic Rock&quot; included the album on their list of the &quot;Top 100 &#x27;70s Rock Albums&quot;. &quot;Prog&quot; readers voted &quot;2112&quot; the 15th best progressive rock album of all time.

&quot;2112&quot; is the tenth favorite album of Megadeth co-founder and frontman David Mustaine.

== Tour ==
Rush promoted &quot;2112&quot; with a concert tour of the United States, Canada, and for the first time in their career, across Europe, between February 1976 and June 1977. The tour saw the band perform over 140 shows. To make their set tighter, &quot;Discovery&quot; and &quot;Oracle: The Dream&quot; were omitted from the performance of the &quot;2112&quot; suite. However, &quot;Discovery&quot; was performed on later performances of &quot;2112&quot; on tours for A Farewell to Kings and Hemispheres. Rush would not perform the track in its entirety until their 1996 tour following the release of &quot;Test for Echo&quot;. The shows at Massey Hall in Toronto in June 1976 were recorded and compiled for release as their double live album &quot;All the World&#x27;s a Stage&quot;, released in September 1976.

==Reissues==
== Track listing ==
===Original release===


===40th Anniversary Edition (2016)===
== Personnel ==
Credits are adapted from the album&#x27;s 1976 liner notes.

;Rush
* Geddy Lee – vocals, bass
* Alex Lifeson – guitar
* Neil Peart – drums, percussion

;Additional musician
* Hugh Syme – ARP Odyssey synthesizer, synth guitar, Mellotron on &quot;Tears&quot;

;Production
* Rush – production, arrangement
* Terry Brown – arrangement, production, recording, engineering, mixing
* Brian Lee – mastering
* Bob Ludwig – mastering
* Hugh Syme – graphics
* Yosh Inouye – photography
* Gerard Gentil – photography (band)
* Ray Danniels – management
* Vic Wilson – management
* Moon Records – executive production

==Charts==
== Certifications ==


== References ==
== External links ==

* &quot;2112&quot; (Adobe Flash) at Radio3Net (streamed copy where licensed)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q203871" start="97" end="101" title="Rush (band)" label="Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q165745" start="129" end="144" title="Mercury Records" label="Mercury Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q582220" start="343" end="358" title="Caress of Steel" label="Caress of Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q16728378" start="582" end="594" title="Ray Danniels" label="Ray Danniels"/>
<link wikidata="Q49451" start="691" end="707" title="progressive rock" label="progressive rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q204417" start="817" end="828" title="2112 (song)" label="title track"/>
<link wikidata="Q83270" start="931" end="940" title="hard rock" label="hard rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q904976" start="1260" end="1275" title="Moving Pictures (Rush album)" label="Moving Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q164932" start="1357" end="1397" title="1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die" label="1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="1431" end="1444" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q582220" start="1810" end="1825" title="Caress of Steel" label="Caress of Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q348177" start="1906" end="1918" title="Alex Lifeson" label="Alex Lifeson"/>
<link wikidata="Q49451" start="2111" end="2127" title="progressive rock" label="progressive rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q320895" start="2312" end="2321" title="Geddy Lee" label="Geddy Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q165745" start="2822" end="2837" title="Mercury Records" label="Mercury Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q700359" start="2899" end="2907" title="Polygram" label="Polygram"/>
<link wikidata="Q16728378" start="3028" end="3040" title="Ray Danniels" label="Ray Danniels"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331" start="3737" end="3749" title="Led Zeppelin" label="Led Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q313668" start="3970" end="3980" title="Neil Peart" label="Neil Peart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7193432" start="4957" end="4964" title="Pignose" label="Pignose"/>
<link wikidata="Q463165" start="5179" end="5204" title="Sault Ste. Marie, Ontario" label="Sault Ste. Marie, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q6816586" start="5235" end="5248" title="Mendelson Joe" label="Mendelson Joe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154207" start="5518" end="5529" title="Terry Brown (record producer)" label="Terry Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500925" start="5573" end="5579" title="Studer" label="Studer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552913" start="5580" end="5596" title="Multitrack recording" label="24-track machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143818" start="5619" end="5632" title="Gibson ES-335" label="Gibson ES-335"/>
<link wikidata="Q322625" start="5713" end="5728" title="Gibson Les Paul" label="Gibson Les Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q5559291" start="5787" end="5798" title="Gibson B series" label="Gibson B-45"/>
<link wikidata="Q5559315" start="5816" end="5827" title="Gibson Dove" label="Gibson Dove"/>
<link wikidata="Q5443274" start="5853" end="5872" title="Fender Super Reverb" label="Fender Super Reverb"/>
<link wikidata="Q5443281" start="5879" end="5890" title="Twin Reverb" label="Twin Reverb"/>
<link wikidata="Q208173" start="5938" end="5957" title="Fender Stratocaster" label="Fender Stratocaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q922217" start="6006" end="6023" title="Rickenbacker 4001" label="Rickenbacker 4001"/>
<link wikidata="Q204417" start="6440" end="6444" title="2112 (song)" label="2112"/>
<link wikidata="Q132524" start="6540" end="6548" title="Ayn Rand" label="Ayn Rand"/>
<link wikidata="Q74950" start="6580" end="6591" title="Objectivism" label="Objectivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743935" start="6644" end="6650" title="Anthem (novella)" label="Anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="6861" end="6864" title="NME" label="NME"/>
<link wikidata="Q809078" start="6872" end="6883" title="Barry Miles" label="Barry Miles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="6924" end="6930" title="Nazism" label="Nazism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="6984" end="6993" title="Holocaust" label="Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733891" start="7088" end="7097" title="Hugh Syme" label="Hugh Syme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638169" start="7115" end="7126" title="ARP Odyssey" label="ARP Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5332830" start="7167" end="7175" title="Echoplex" label="Echoplex"/>
<link wikidata="Q7339991" start="7216" end="7226" title="Rob Bowman (music writer)" label="Rob Bowman"/>
<link wikidata="Q41064" start="7442" end="7456" title="Book of Psalms" label="Book of Psalms"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7467" end="7478" title="Matthew 5:5" label="Matthew 5:5"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315" start="7513" end="7524" title="Tchaikovsky" label="Tchaikovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q212776" start="7538" end="7551" title="1812 Overture" label="1812 Overture"/>
<link wikidata="Q217123" start="8340" end="8346" title="oracle" label="oracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374" start="8965" end="8974" title="Alfred Hitchcock" label="Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q4658723" start="9710" end="9730" title="A Passage to Bangkok" label="A Passage to Bangkok"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="9753" end="9762" title="marijuana" label="marijuana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2841" start="9927" end="9933" title="Bogotá" label="Bogotá"/>
<link wikidata="Q766" start="9935" end="9942" title="Jamaica" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q81398" start="9944" end="9952" title="Acapulco" label="Acapulco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="9954" end="9961" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861" start="9963" end="9970" title="Bangkok" label="Bangkok"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="9972" end="9979" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="9981" end="9992" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3037" start="9998" end="10007" title="Kathmandu" label="Kathmandu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7770863" start="10037" end="10054" title="The Twilight Zone (Rush song)" label="The Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q14329491" start="10254" end="10271" title="The Twilight Zone" label="The Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q435920" start="10343" end="10354" title="Rod Serling" label="Rod Serling"/>
<link wikidata="Q212483" start="10671" end="10680" title="Mellotron" label="Mellotron"/>
<link wikidata="Q731437" start="10871" end="10888" title="Shrine Auditorium" label="Shrine Auditorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527049" start="11144" end="11152" title="gatefold" label="gatefold"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733891" start="11212" end="11221" title="Hugh Syme" label="Hugh Syme"/>
<link wikidata="Q4430243" start="11630" end="11642" title="collectivist" label="collectivist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032001" start="11997" end="12008" title="Canada Post" label="Canada Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q155152" start="12357" end="12364" title="Polydor" label="Polydor"/>
<link wikidata="Q204364" start="12559" end="12571" title="Fly by Night (album)" label="Fly by Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418776" start="12606" end="12627" title="Canadian Albums Chart" label="Canadian Albums Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="12685" end="12725" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Top LPs &amp;amp; Tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503026" start="13155" end="13159" title="RIAA certification" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="13181" end="13222" title="Recording Industry Association of America" label="Recording Industry Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q904976" start="13422" end="13437" title="Moving Pictures (Rush album)" label="Moving Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q656903" start="13467" end="13474" title="Cashbox (magazine)" label="Cashbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q869645" start="13772" end="13777" title="Creem" label="Creem"/>
<link wikidata="Q207708" start="13939" end="13942" title="IGN" label="IGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="14035" end="14048" title="Rolling Stone magazine" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="14117" end="14125" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4819795" start="14313" end="14354" title="Audio-Visual Preservation Trust of Canada" label="Audio-Visual Preservation Trust of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q685954" start="14730" end="14752" title="Polaris Music Prize" label="Polaris Heritage Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830269" start="14802" end="14823" title="Ultimate Classic Rock" label="Ultimate Classic Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q25351734" start="14919" end="14923" title="Prog (magazine)" label="Prog"/>
<link wikidata="Q83431" start="15060" end="15068" title="Megadeth" label="Megadeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q187165" start="15093" end="15107" title="David Mustaine" label="David Mustaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q300403" start="15588" end="15607" title="A Farewell to Kings" label="A Farewell to Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q168219" start="15612" end="15623" title="Hemispheres (Rush album)" label="Hemispheres"/>
<link wikidata="Q632873" start="15727" end="15740" title="Test for Echo" label="Test for Echo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122776" start="15761" end="15772" title="Massey Hall" label="Massey Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q654371" start="15869" end="15897" title="All the World&amp;#x27;s a Stage (album)" label="All the World&amp;#x27;s a Stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q320895" start="16115" end="16124" title="Geddy Lee" label="Geddy Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q348177" start="16142" end="16154" title="Alex Lifeson" label="Alex Lifeson"/>
<link wikidata="Q313668" start="16166" end="16176" title="Neil Peart" label="Neil Peart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733891" start="16221" end="16230" title="Hugh Syme" label="Hugh Syme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638169" start="16233" end="16244" title="ARP Odyssey" label="ARP Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q212483" start="16272" end="16281" title="Mellotron" label="Mellotron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154207" start="16351" end="16362" title="Terry Brown (record producer)" label="Terry Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q981970" start="16447" end="16457" title="Bob Ludwig" label="Bob Ludwig"/>
<link wikidata="Q16728378" start="16560" end="16572" title="Ray Danniels" label="Ray Danniels"/>
<link wikidata="Q6907545" start="16614" end="16626" title="Moon Records (Canada)" label="Moon Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q165658" start="16744" end="16755" title="Adobe Flash" label="Adobe Flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280574" start="16760" end="16769" title="Radio3Net" label="Radio3Net"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143193" wikidata="Q642873" url="?curid=143193" title="Midwest Airlines">
<text>Midwest Airlines (formerly Midwest Express Airlines) was an airline in the United States headquartered in Oak Creek, Wisconsin, that operated from Milwaukee Mitchell International Airport between 1984 and 2010. For a short time, it also operated as a brand of Republic Airways Holdings.

Operations as an independent airline ceased in November 2010, upon its merger with Frontier Airlines.

==History==
===K-C Aviation===
Midwest Airlines began in 1948, when Kimberly-Clark began providing air transportation for company executives and engineers between the company&#x27;s Neenah, Wisconsin headquarters and its mills. Operating out of the nearby Appleton International Airport, early employee shuttle destinations included Chicago O&#x27;Hare, Memphis, and Atlanta&#x27;s Fulton County Airport.

In 1969, K-C Aviation was born from this, and was dedicated to the maintenance of corporate aircraft. K-C Aviation was sold in 1998 to Gulfstream Aerospace for $250 million; included were its operations in Appleton, Dallas, and Westfield, Massachusetts.

===Midwest Express Airlines===
After the Airline Deregulation Act of 1978, Kimberly-Clark and K-C Aviation decided to form a regularly scheduled passenger airline, and Midwest Express Airlines began operations on June 11, 1984. At the time the airline had two Douglas DC-9-10 twin-engine jets and 83 employees. Early plans for the airline called for it to serve Appleton, Chicago, and Atlanta. Kimberly-Clark then opted against this plan with regard to the Atlanta service after local resistance over the carrier&#x27;s desire to serve Atlanta&#x27;s Fulton County Airport, which is a general aviation airport located on the city&#x27;s west side. From 1983 to 1985, the airline also operated a single Convair 580 twin-turboprop aircraft provided by Kimberly-Clark&#x27;s corporate aviation department on corporate shuttle flights for Kimberly-Clark.

The airline slowly grew, adding additional DC-9 aircraft to its fleet, including larger McDonnell Douglas DC-9-30 jets, with a total of 24 by the end of 1996. Eventually, Midwest Express Airlines served most major Midwestern and East Coast destinations. Its longtime slogan, &quot;The Best Care in the Air&quot;, represented its inflight product. For many years, all flights featured 2-by-2 leather seating (in aircraft usually fitted with 3-2 seating), ample legroom, complimentary gourmet meals, and warm chocolate chip cookies. This made the airline popular with business travelers. In addition, Midwest Express operated a sizable executive charter operation with a specially configured DC-9.

In 1989, Midwest Express added two McDonnell Douglas MD-80 aircraft to its fleet, acquiring eleven additional aircraft between 1998 and 2001. These enabled the airline to expand services to the West Coast and Florida. 1989 also saw the addition of commuter airline feeder services operated by Skyway Airlines. Skyway was a division of Mesa Airlines using Beechcraft 1900 aircraft providing service to small communities in Wisconsin and the surrounding region. Midwest Express experienced steady growth and continued profitability, opening an additional hub in Omaha, Nebraska in early 1995. In 1994 Midwest Express established Astral Aviation to take over the operation of Skyway Airlines, dba Midwest Express Connection and Fairchild Dornier 328JETs were added in 1999. Kimberly-Clark relinquished its ownership in two initial public offerings on September 22, 1995, and May 8, 1996. The airline&#x27;s new parent company, Midwest Air Group, traded on the American Stock Exchange under the ticker symbol &quot;MEH.&quot;

Midwest Express Airlines also added Midwest Vacations in the 1990s, naming GOGO Worldwide Vacations as the original partner to provide hotel service and later partnering with Mark Travel. 

In 1997, according to the Midwest Express timetable, the airline was code sharing with Virgin Atlantic Airways for flights between London Heathrow Airport and Milwaukee and Kansas City with passengers connecting between the two air carriers in Boston.

After fourteen years of profit-making, Midwest Express Airlines was affected with serious financial problems after the September 11 terrorist attacks. To return to profitability, the airline made major changes. The Omaha hub was reduced to a focus city in early 2002, with hub status transferred to Kansas City. Some MD-80 series aircraft were reconfigured into a new &quot;Saver Service&quot;, featuring cloth coach seats in a 2-by-3 arrangement. Saver Service, while decreasing the width of the seats, continued to feature ample legroom. This service was initially offered from the Milwaukee and Kansas City hubs to leisure destinations such as Florida, Los Angeles, Las Vegas, and Phoenix on McDonnell Douglas MD-80 aircraft. The airline&#x27;s Signature Service was also affected by financial difficulties. The signature gourmet meal services, which had been served on china after being cooked on board, were discontinued in 2002 and replaced with a buy-on-board product.

====Midwest Express Airlines destinations in 1984====
Midwest Express was serving the following destinations in October 1984:

*Appleton, WI (ATW)
*Boston, MA (BOS)
* Dallas/Fort Worth, TX (DFW)
*Newark, NJ (EWR)
*Milwaukee, WI (MKE) – hub &amp; airline headquarters
By 1985, Atlanta (ATL) had been added to the route system with service to Newark being discontinued at this time and by 1986 flights had been begun to Madison, Wisconsin (MSN), New York City LaGuardia Airport (LGA) and Washington, D.C. National Airport (DCA). All service was flown nonstop between Milwaukee and these destinations, with the exception of a nonstop route between Appleton and Newark in 1984 that had been discontinued by 1985.

==== Midwest Express Airlines destinations in 2001====
The airline was serving the following destinations in June 2001:

*Appleton, WI (ATW)
*Atlanta, GA (ATL)
*Boston, MA (BOS)
*Cleveland, OH (CLE)
* Columbus, OH (CMH)
* Dallas/Fort Worth, TX (DFW)
*Denver, CO (DEN)
*Des Moines, IA (DSM)
*Fort Lauderdale, FL (FLL) – &quot;seasonal service&quot;
*Fort Myers, FL (RSW) – &quot;seasonal service&quot;
*Hartford, CT (BDL)
*Kansas City, MO (MCI) – focus city
*Las Vegas, NV (LAS)
* Los Angeles (LAX)
*Madison, WI (MSN)
*Milwaukee, WI (MKE) – primary hub &amp; airline headquarters
*Newark, NJ (EWR)
*New Orleans, LA (MSY)
*New York City, NY – LaGuardia Airport (LGA)
*Omaha, NE (OMA) – secondary hub
*Orlando, FL (MCO)
*Philadelphia, PA (PHL)
*Raleigh/Durham, NC (RDU)
*San Antonio, TX (SAT)
*San Francisco, CA (SFO) – &quot;seasonal service&quot;
*Tampa, FL (TPA) – &quot;seasonal service&quot;
* Washington, D.C. – Dulles International Airport (IAD)
* Washington, D.C. – Reagan National Airport (DCA)
In early 2002 Kansas City became a secondary hub for the airline while Omaha was reduced to a focus city.

===Midwest Airlines===
In 2002, the airline made another major change, shortening its name from Midwest Express Airlines to simply Midwest Airlines. A major reason for the change was the modern association of &quot;express&quot; with a regional airline, which Midwest was not. At the same time, Midwest&#x27;s commuter airline subsidiary changed its name from Skyway Airlines, the Midwest Express Connection, to Midwest Connect. In a move to save money on jet fuel, the airline accelerated the replacement of DC-9 aircraft with the Boeing 717-200. On May 23, 2006, Midwest Airlines accepted one of the last two Boeing 717s delivered in a ceremony with AirTran Airways, who accepted the other 717. Midwest also announced that selected MD-80 aircraft would leave the fleet.

In May 2005, Midwest announced a new buy-on-board meal service for customers. The new program was a change from the previous &#x27;In-flight Cafe&#x27; and featured chefs and inspiration from the renowned Mader&#x27;s restaurant. Chocolate chip cookies continued to be baked on the plane and served warm.

Midwest became the largest longstanding operation at Mitchell Airport and served 21 cities nonstop (San Antonio (SAT) as well as Orange County, CA (SNA) were served from Milwaukee with one stop flights via Kansas City in 2005), while its regional partner Skyway Airlines, operating as Midwest Connect, served nearly 30 destinations throughout the Central United States.

In 2006, a second regional airline, SkyWest Airlines, began providing feeder service as Midwest Connect along with Skyway. SkyWest flew Bombardier CRJ100/200 regional jets. Skyway was later shut down in 2008 and service to many of the smaller cities served with Beech 1900&#x27;s had ended. 

On May 17, 2007, Midwest Airlines signed a Memorandum of Understanding with Northwest Airlines to form a codeshare agreement with them. The codeshare agreement added 250 city pairs and 1,000 new flight options for Midwest Airlines customers. Northwest routes that included the Midwest Airlines YX code were destinations beyond Northwest&#x27;s hubs at Detroit, Minneapolis/St. Paul and Memphis throughout the United States and Canada. Midwest placed its code on Northwest flights from Indianapolis, then a Northwest focus city, as well as a number of Northwest-operated flights to Hawaii and Alaska. Routes operated by Midwest Airlines that carried the NW Northwest code were flights that connected at Midwest&#x27;s Milwaukee and Kansas City hubs, as well as Omaha, a Midwest focus city. Northwest also code shared on Midwest Airlines-operated flights between Milwaukee and Kansas City to Atlanta, Boston, Hartford, Los Angeles and San Francisco that connected to the Northwest/KLM trans-Atlantic network and trans-Pacific network.

Midwest won more awards for exceptional service in &quot;Condé Nast Traveler&quot; magazine than any other U.S. airline, although it won no further awards from the magazine after ceasing to be an independent company.

===Signature and Saver service added===
On May 29, 2007, Midwest announced the next phase of the company&#x27;s strategic plan, which offered customers the choice of Signature and Saver seating on all flights. The dual-seating option, replacing the original 88-seat configuration, was available on the airline&#x27;s Boeing 717s until their retirement. The same amenities were provided to all passengers in either cabin, including leather seats.

The new configuration consisted of 40 Signature leather seats, arranged in 10 rows of two-by-two, offering a 36&quot; pitch and providing 2 to 3 more inches of leg room than the previous Signature seating, and 59 Saver seats arranged two-by-three which the company claimed were among the roomiest coach seats in the industry.

The company projected that the implementation of seating choices would generate $30–35 million in annualized revenue.

The addition of 11 seats on each of the airline&#x27;s 9 Boeing 717 aircraft would have reduced the airline&#x27;s unit costs by increasing capacity 12.5%. Had the new seating configuration on the Boeing 717s been in effect in 2006, Midwest Airlines&#x27; cost per available seat mile excluding fuel of 7.22 cents would have been 6.77 cents, a 6.3% improvement.

===Acquisition by TPG===
In December 2006, AirTran Holdings Inc., owner of AirTran Airways, made public that in December 2005 it had approached the Board of Directors of Midwest Air Group—owner of Midwest Airlines and Midwest Connect, and had asked the board to negotiate a sale of the company. That AirTran offer in 2005 was rebuffed by Midwest&#x27;s board, which also rebuffed a second offer in late 2006. In December 2006, AirTran disclosed the rejection of both offers in hopes of bringing shareholder pressure on Midwest&#x27;s board to reconsider, which the board recommended that shareholders reject.

On August 12, 2007, it was announced that AirTran had lost the bid for Midwest. A private equity group, headed by TPG Capital and including Northwest Airlines, purchased Midwest and turned the airline into a privately funded company. The inclusion of Northwest in the investing partners required anti-trust review from the United States Department of Justice, which reviews all airline mergers.

On August 14, 2007, AirTran increased its offer to the equivalent of $16.25 a share, slightly more than the $16 a share from TPG Capital investors group. However, Midwest announced TPG would increase its offer to $17 per share and a definitive agreement had been reached late on August 16, 2007.

On August 17, 2007, TPG and Northwest Airlines finalized their bid for Midwest with the final offer of $17 per share and a total deal of $450 million.

On February 1, 2008, Midwest Air Group announced that the US Department of Justice had cleared the acquisition of Midwest by TPG Capital and Northwest. This finalized the acquisition; trading of Midwest Air Group on the American Stock Exchange ceased at the end of the trading day on January 31, 2008, and stockholders in Midwest received the agreed-upon $17 per share. This ended the independent existence of Midwest Airlines.

In accordance with the rest of the airline industry during the oil price increases since 2003, Midwest Airlines was forced to cut back services. To do this, Midwest Airlines announced its intent to retire the 12 remaining McDonnell Douglas MD-80 jets in its fleet. According to the company, the MD-80 was &quot;a very fuel inefficient airplane and at the cost of fuel today it&#x27;s just become economically infeasible to operate these planes.&quot; The MD-80s, and the crews that operated them, left Midwest in late 2008.

In April of 2007, SkyWest Airlines began operating flights under the Midwest Connect brand alongside in-house subsidiary Skyway Airlines. Skyway shut down one year later, leaving SkyWest as Midwest&#x27;s sole regional contractor. Midwest failed to pay a $3.3 million receivable that was due to SkyWest in June, 2008, forcing them to record a full reserve and corresponding reduction in revenue during the second quarter of that year.

Additional changes were announced on September 3, 2008, when the airline announced that it had raised $60 million from TPG, Northwest Airlines, and Republic Airways Holdings. As part of the outsourcing deal, Republic Airline operated 12 Embraer 170 aircraft under the Midwest Airlines brand, though Midwest had the option to convert the aircraft into a long-term lease and operate them directly. The airline also reached an agreement with Boeing Capital to return 16 Boeing 717s, leaving it at the time with a fleet of only 9 aircraft.

===Acquisition by Republic Airways Holdings===
On June 23, 2009, Republic Airways Holdings, Inc announced they would acquire Midwest Airlines for $31 million. The deal closed on July 30. Midwest became a wholly owned subsidiary of Republic Airways and continued to operate under current branding. The Midwest Airlines FAA operating certificate expired on November 3, 2009. The acquisition by Republic occurred just 22 months after TPG and Northwest Airlines paid $450 million for Midwest. The total loss of investment by TPG and Northwest was 93% or $419 million.

====Flight outsourcing to Republic Airlines====
On September 3, 2008, Midwest Airlines announced its plan to outsource all of its flight operations to Republic Airways. Republic began operating twelve 76-seat Embraer ERJ-170 jets under the Midwest Connect name while Midwest returned its 25 Boeing 717 planes to Boeing under a lease renegotiation. While this change caused the additional layoffs bringing the total of pink-slipped Midwest pilots to nearly 300 and total employee cuts for the year to 1,850, Midwest indicated that it hoped to begin operating these new planes itself with Midwest crews in 8–12 months from that time. Additional aircraft from Republic were added to the operation in the form of larger Embraer ERJ-190s in August 2009. Chautauqua Airlines, a wholly owned subsidiary of Republic Airways, also began service as Midwest Connect in August 2009 using Embraer 135/145 regional jets.

The Midwest branch of the Air Line Pilots Association launched a campaign protesting the Midwest outsourcing plan shortly after it was announced. They argued that the pilots had already made significant concessions to help Midwest Airlines survive and that the company&#x27;s new contract offers represented draconian demands.

====Merger into Frontier Airlines====
Midwest Airlines&#x27; final flight operated with a Boeing 717-200 and staffed with Midwest Airlines flight crews landed in Milwaukee on November 2, 2009. Effective November 3, 2009, Midwest Airlines ceased to exist as an operating airline (allowing its DOT air carrier operator certificate to lapse). Midwest Connect flights operated by SkyWest Airlines also ended. Midwest Connect flights operated by Republic and Chautauqua Airlines would continue to operate using the YX code through September 2010.

On April 13, 2010, parent company Republic Airways Holdings announced that its Frontier Airlines and Midwest Airlines brands would merge under the Frontier Airlines name. Parts of the Midwest brand were incorporated into the Frontier brand as part of the merger, namely the Midwest cookie and the slogan of Midwest Airlines, &quot;The Best Care In The Air.&quot;Some Frontier Airlines Airbus A319 aircraft also began operating on former Midwest routes using the YX code alongside Midwest Connect flights. 

On October 1, 2010, the midwestairlines.com website was shut down for future reservations (besides frequent flyer tickets), and shut down completely on October 28, and users redirected to Frontier Airlines&#x27; website. In early November 2010, Midwest&#x27;s YX code was retired and adopted by Republic Airlines.

The Republic and Chautauqua feeder operations would then operate as Frontier Airlines. Several of the Embraer 170/190 aircraft retained the Midwest livery into late 2013 until their retirement or reassignment by Republic. The Chautauqua Embraer 135/145 fleet was repainted with the Frontier livery but were retired by January, 2013.

===Proposed revival of Midwest Express brand (2017–present)===

In August 2017, reports surfaced that there were ongoing efforts to revive the Midwest brand. According to the &quot;Milwaukee Journal Sentinel&quot;, a group of people was trying to secure investors to relaunch the airline using the original &quot;Midwest Express&quot; name.

On August 9, 2019, it was announced that Elite Airways had signed an operating agreement to provide the initial aircraft, flight crews, and maintenance service for Midwest Express. On August 28, 2019, the airline announced its initial route network, which were to include Cincinnati, Omaha, and Grand Rapids, with service to commence by the year end.

As of end-February 2020, however, the launch had been delayed three months.

In early May 2020, Republic (RPA) aircraft were being observed via ADS-B virtual radar being operated on Republic routes using scheduled RPA flight numbers but with the Midwest Airlines (MEP) prefix.

==Corporate affairs==
===Corporate identity===
====Aircraft livery====

Midwest Express&#x27; original livery consisted of dark blue on the upper half, and white on the lower half. The two were separated by blue and red cheatlines with white in between, which ran up the trailing edge of the tail. The engines were white, and on the tail was a bold &quot;M&quot; and a script &quot;E&quot;, representing the airline name, and the way the titles were printed on the fuselage. This scheme could still be found on one Beech 1900D of Midwest Connect, without the &quot;M E&quot; on the tail, as late as 2005.

In 1989, the airline started to add the McDonnell Douglas MD-80 to the fleet, initially in the same livery. In the mid-1990s, the livery was substantially revised. The top half of the aircraft remained blue (albeit slightly brighter), but the bottom half was repainted light grey, along with the engines, and they were now separated by gold, white, and red cheatline. The tail logo also underwent minor changes, adding a circle around the lettering and the same cheatline from the fuselage connecting the circle to the leading edge of the tail. Despite the unchanged lettering on the tail, the titles on the fuselage were changed to all bold letters, rather than the script &quot;Express&quot; titles.

In 2003, Midwest Express Airlines began to create a new identity, as the first Boeing 717s were being delivered, and the DC-9 aircraft were being retired. The company started with removing the &quot;Express&quot; from its name (and thus, off the fuselage), and it designed a new logo that would help point it out as a representative of Milwaukee. The result was a logo that looked much like a wing, with a small &#x27;M&#x27; inside of it. However, if the logo is turned on its side, it bears a resemblance to the Milwaukee Art Museum, designed by Santiago Calatrava, which was being constructed at the same time. The Art Museum had risen as an icon of Milwaukee, and so the new Midwest Airlines felt this would be a good representation. Along with this new identity came a new livery. The bottom of the aircraft remained grey, while the top was repainted in a deeper blue, with essentially the same gold, white, and red cheatlines separating the two. On the lower half, there was also a blue swoop, starting at the front (looking much like another stripe), getting larger as it went back until it covered the entire rear fuselage. The engines on these planes were painted in the same blue color, with four gold rings on the port engine, and three on the starboard. This was meant to represent the ranking of Captain and First Officer, along with where they sit. Only three MD-80 aircraft, registered N813ME, N822ME, and N823ME ever wore the full new livery; all other MD-80s wore a hybrid livery until retirement, combining the second Midwest Express livery with the current logo and titling of Midwest Airlines. In the transitional period, some MD-80s also received the new titles before the new tail logo, resulting in another variation on the livery.

====Cookies====

A defining feature of the airline was the chocolate chip cookies baked on the aircraft and served during flights. The airline began serving the cookies after an employee experimented with different snacks on an empty leg of a charter flight.

The cookie was featured in Midwest advertisements, such as the &quot;Save the Cookie&quot; campaign in opposition to the proposed and failed AirTran takeover. The cookie was served during professional baseball games at Kauffman Stadium, as well as Bucks basketball and Admirals hockey games at Milwaukee&#x27;s Bradley Center.

The cookie outlived the brand, as it was briefly served on Frontier Airlines flights. The airline&#x27;s branded cookie dough, sold at Milwaukee-area grocery stores, was subsequently re-labeled as a Frontier product until its discontinuation. Frontier announced in 2012 that the airline would discontinue its cookie service as a cost-per-value cut, and instead added for-purchase snacks from Colorado-based suppliers.

==Destinations==

This is a list of destinations that Midwest Airlines, operated by Frontier Airlines and Republic Airlines, was serving as of April 2010. Midwest Connect destinations are not included.
==Fleet==
===Fleet at time of closure===
, Frontier Airlines pilots and crew operated five Airbus A319-100 aircraft for Midwest Airlines. All former Midwest Airlines Boeing 717s were retired on November 3, 2009. The majority of Midwest Airlines routes were operated by Midwest Connect through outsourcing, allowing Midwest to advertise and maintain a route system similar to what existed prior to Midwest Air Group&#x27;s takeover by Texas Pacific Group: The Boeing 717 aircraft were replaced by the Airbus A319 flown by Frontier Airlines and 15 Embraer 190 aircraft flown by Republic Airlines. Ten of these aircraft were purchased from US Airways.

During the merger with Frontier Airlines, it was announced that the Midwest Airlines fleet of Embraers would not be merged into Frontier Airlines&#x27; operating certificate; the two types of aircraft would continue to be crewed and operated separately by the two airlines.

===Historical fleet===
==Services==
===In-flight services===
Until 2002, Midwest Express served gourmet meals on china along with complimentary alcoholic beverages. With the cost-cutting programs instituted following the post-September 11 industry downturn, this was changed to a buy on board food program, &quot;Best Care Cuisine,&quot; with breakfast, lunch, and dinner meals available for purchase. Throughout the airline&#x27;s existence, warm chocolate chip cookies were served on most flights.

===Frequent-flyer program===
Midwest Airlines&#x27; frequent flyer program was called Midwest Miles. It maintained one airport lounge, the Best Care Club at its Milwaukee hub in the D Concourse, until its closure on May 31, 2012.

While Midwest was not a member of any airline alliance, Midwest Miles were redeemable in the Delta Air Lines SkyMiles program, and vice versa. , Northwest route maps showed Midwest as a partner airline and Northwest (now Delta) pulled its non-hub flights out of Milwaukee.

Midwest Miles was unusual in that it had links to the Amtrak program. Midwest Miles members could transfer blocks of , up to a maximum of 25,000 miles per year to Amtrak&#x27;s program. Amtrak points could be used for travel on Amtrak and United Airlines (ex Continental Airlines).

==Accidents and incidents==

*On September 6, 1985, Midwest Express Flight 105 crashed shortly after takeoff from Milwaukee, bound for Atlanta. According to the NTSB investigation, the crash was caused by improper control inputs by the pilots when the plane&#x27;s right engine failed due to stress corrosion cracking. The improper reaction caused the Douglas DC-9 jet aircraft to enter an uncommanded roll and accelerated stall. All 31 people on board died in the airline&#x27;s sole fatal accident.
*On September 11, 2001, Midwest Express Flight 7 operated by a DC-9-30, en route from Milwaukee to New York City, narrowly missed a collision with United Airlines Flight 175 over the Hudson River at approximately 9:01 a.m. local time. The pilot of Midwest 7 maneuvered the aircraft, under the direction of an air traffic controller, out of the flight path of Flight 175. One minute later, Flight 175 hit the South Tower of the World Trade Center, killing all 65 passengers and crew on board and resulting in the collapse of the South Tower.
*On May 12, 2005, Midwest Airlines Flight 490, a Boeing 717 en route from Kansas City to Washington D.C., briefly lost control mid-flight due to icing that was improperly handled by the flight crew. Control was regained and the aircraft made an emergency landing at Kirksville Regional Airport.
*On November 13, 2007, a Midwest Connect flight from Milwaukee bound for Dayton was in a near-collision with a United Express jet heading to Chicago from Greensboro while flying over northern Indiana. Air traffic controllers with Chicago Center directed the Midwest flight to begin its descent while traveling head-on towards the United Express CRJ a few thousand feet below. The planes came as close as apart horizontally and vertically. The Midwest Connect Dornier 328JET was just above the United Express aircraft and descending while they were closing in on each other. An audible TCAS alarm in the Midwest cockpit alerted the pilots of the proximity, allowing them to pull up in time to avert disaster.
*On July 8, 2008, a Midwest charter MD-81 carrying Presidential candidate Barack Obama made an emergency landing at Lambert Field in St. Louis, Missouri, after an evacuation slide inside the plane underneath the tail in the airstair passageway deployed, interfering with the plane&#x27;s control cables, which affected the control of the pitch of the plane. The pilot radioed the control tower &quot;at this time we would like to declare an emergency and also have CFR [crash equipment] standing by in St. Louis.&quot; A preliminary NTSB report said it detected &quot;marks consistent with rubbing of elevator control cables&quot; and a broken railing that &quot;impinged upon elevator control cables.&quot; No one was injured. At the time, Obama&#x27;s main campaign plane – a North American Airlines Boeing 757 on lease by the MatlinPatterson hedge fund firm and owner directors of Global Aero Logistics d.b.a. North American Airlines – was being overhauled. It went back into campaign service on July 20, 2008.

==See also==
* List of defunct airlines of the United States

==References==
==External links==

*Former Midwest Airlines website (brings up the Republic Airways website)
*Proposed &#x27;revived&#x27; Midwest Express official website
*NTSB accident report of Flight 105</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q642873" start="0" end="16" title="Midwest Airlines" label="Midwest Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q642873" start="27" end="51" title="Midwest Airlines" label="Midwest Express Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="75" end="88" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003711" start="106" end="115" title="Oak Creek, Wisconsin" label="Oak Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537" start="117" end="126" title="Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q537950" start="147" end="187" title="Milwaukee Mitchell International Airport" label="Milwaukee Mitchell International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536457" start="260" end="285" title="Republic Airways Holdings" label="Republic Airways Holdings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139541" start="371" end="388" title="Frontier Airlines" label="Frontier Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741634" start="459" end="473" title="Kimberly-Clark" label="Kimberly-Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570604" start="573" end="590" title="Neenah, Wisconsin" label="Neenah, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294586" start="647" end="677" title="Appleton International Airport" label="Appleton International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1554299" start="932" end="952" title="Gulfstream Aerospace" label="Gulfstream Aerospace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055854" start="1025" end="1049" title="Westfield, Massachusetts" label="Westfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q408772" start="1093" end="1117" title="Airline Deregulation Act" label="Airline Deregulation Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q221414" start="1312" end="1327" title="McDonnell Douglas DC-9" label="Douglas DC-9-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274683" start="1603" end="1624" title="Fulton County Airport (Georgia)" label="Fulton County Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q868965" start="1754" end="1765" title="Convair CV-240 family" label="Convair 580"/>
<link wikidata="Q221414" start="1992" end="2017" title="McDonnell Douglas DC-9-30" label="McDonnell Douglas DC-9-30"/>
<link wikidata="Q207400" start="2636" end="2659" title="McDonnell Douglas MD-80" label="McDonnell Douglas MD-80"/>
<link wikidata="Q2440569" start="2849" end="2865" title="Regional airline" label="commuter airline"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293467" start="2894" end="2909" title="Skyway Airlines" label="Skyway Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922297" start="2936" end="2949" title="Mesa Airlines" label="Mesa Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q661819" start="2956" end="2971" title="Beechcraft 1900" label="Beechcraft 1900"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347672" start="3161" end="3176" title="Eppley Airfield" label="Omaha, Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q7451362" start="3326" end="3350" title="Fairchild Dornier 328JET" label="Fairchild Dornier 328JET"/>
<link wikidata="Q1980998" start="3525" end="3542" title="Midwest Air Group" label="Midwest Air Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q846626" start="3558" end="3581" title="NYSE American" label="American Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548784" start="3592" end="3605" title="ticker symbol" label="ticker symbol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3799" end="3810" title="Mark Travel" label="Mark Travel"/>
<link wikidata="Q754886" start="3883" end="3895" title="Codeshare agreement" label="code sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q32277" start="3901" end="3916" title="Virgin Atlantic" label="Virgin Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8691" start="3952" end="3968" title="Heathrow Airport" label="Heathrow Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="4186" end="4216" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 terrorist attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431674" start="4366" end="4377" title="Kansas City International Airport" label="Kansas City"/>
<link wikidata="Q207400" start="4762" end="4785" title="McDonnell Douglas MD-80" label="McDonnell Douglas MD-80"/>
<link wikidata="Q94928" start="5172" end="5184" title="Appleton, Wisconsin" label="Appleton, WI"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="5192" end="5202" title="Boston" label="Boston, MA"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="5211" end="5217" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16558" start="5218" end="5232" title="Fort Worth, Texas" label="Fort Worth, TX"/>
<link wikidata="Q25395" start="5240" end="5250" title="Newark, New Jersey" label="Newark, NJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q37836" start="5258" end="5271" title="Milwaukee" label="Milwaukee, WI"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="5320" end="5327" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q43788" start="5462" end="5480" title="Madison, Wisconsin" label="Madison, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="5488" end="5501" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q319654" start="5502" end="5519" title="LaGuardia Airport" label="LaGuardia Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="5530" end="5546" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q676576" start="5547" end="5563" title="Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport" label="National Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q94928" start="5876" end="5888" title="Appleton, Wisconsin" label="Appleton, WI"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="5896" end="5907" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta, GA"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="5915" end="5925" title="Boston" label="Boston, MA"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="5933" end="5946" title="Cleveland" label="Cleveland, OH"/>
<link wikidata="Q16567" start="5955" end="5967" title="Columbus, OH" label="Columbus, OH"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="5976" end="5982" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16558" start="5983" end="5997" title="Fort Worth, Texas" label="Fort Worth, TX"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="6005" end="6015" title="Denver" label="Denver, CO"/>
<link wikidata="Q39709" start="6023" end="6037" title="Des Moines, Iowa" label="Des Moines, IA"/>
<link wikidata="Q165972" start="6045" end="6064" title="Fort Lauderdale, Florida" label="Fort Lauderdale, FL"/>
<link wikidata="Q506451" start="6103" end="6117" title="Fort Myers, Florida" label="Fort Myers, FL"/>
<link wikidata="Q33486" start="6156" end="6168" title="Hartford, Connecticut" label="Hartford, CT"/>
<link wikidata="Q41819" start="6176" end="6191" title="Kansas City, Missouri" label="Kansas City, MO"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="6212" end="6225" title="Las Vegas" label="Las Vegas, NV"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="6234" end="6245" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q8731" start="6247" end="6250" title="Los Angeles International Airport" label="LAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q43788" start="6253" end="6264" title="Madison, Wisconsin" label="Madison, WI"/>
<link wikidata="Q37836" start="6272" end="6285" title="Milwaukee" label="Milwaukee, WI"/>
<link wikidata="Q25395" start="6334" end="6344" title="Newark, New Jersey" label="Newark, NJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="6352" end="6367" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans, LA"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="6375" end="6392" title="New York City" label="New York City, NY"/>
<link wikidata="Q319654" start="6395" end="6412" title="LaGuardia Airport" label="LaGuardia Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q43199" start="6420" end="6429" title="Omaha, Nebraska" label="Omaha, NE"/>
<link wikidata="Q49233" start="6453" end="6464" title="Orlando, Florida" label="Orlando, FL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="6472" end="6488" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia, PA"/>
<link wikidata="Q41087" start="6496" end="6503" title="Raleigh, North Carolina" label="Raleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q49229" start="6504" end="6514" title="Durham, North Carolina" label="Durham, NC"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="6522" end="6537" title="San Antonio" label="San Antonio, TX"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="6545" end="6562" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco, CA"/>
<link wikidata="Q8688" start="6564" end="6567" title="San Francisco International Airport" label="SFO"/>
<link wikidata="Q49255" start="6601" end="6610" title="Tampa, Florida" label="Tampa, FL"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="6650" end="6666" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q466835" start="6669" end="6697" title="Washington Dulles International Airport" label="Dulles International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q676576" start="6725" end="6748" title="Reagan National Airport" label="Reagan National Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2440569" start="7098" end="7114" title="regional airline" label="regional airline"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312738" start="7274" end="7289" title="Midwest Connect" label="Midwest Connect"/>
<link wikidata="Q6401" start="7394" end="7404" title="Boeing 717" label="Boeing 717"/>
<link wikidata="Q406695" start="7514" end="7529" title="AirTran Airways" label="AirTran Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="8041" end="8052" title="San Antonio" label="San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5925" start="8070" end="8087" title="Orange County, CA" label="Orange County, CA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293467" start="8196" end="8211" title="Skyway Airlines" label="Skyway Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312738" start="8226" end="8241" title="Midwest Connect" label="Midwest Connect"/>
<link wikidata="Q773662" start="8348" end="8364" title="SkyWest Airlines" label="SkyWest Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3000403" start="8448" end="8469" title="Bombardier CRJ100/200" label="Bombardier CRJ100/200"/>
<link wikidata="Q309174" start="8681" end="8699" title="Northwest Airlines" label="Northwest Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="8957" end="8964" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480013" start="8966" end="8986" title="Minneapolis–Saint Paul" label="Minneapolis/St. Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q16563" start="8991" end="8998" title="Memphis, Tennessee" label="Memphis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6346" start="9090" end="9102" title="Indianapolis" label="Indianapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="9186" end="9192" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="9197" end="9203" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q309174" start="9261" end="9270" title="Northwest Airlines" label="Northwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q37836" start="9322" end="9331" title="Milwaukee" label="Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q41819" start="9336" end="9347" title="Kansas City, Missouri" label="Kansas City"/>
<link wikidata="Q43199" start="9365" end="9370" title="Omaha, Nebraska" label="Omaha"/>
<link wikidata="Q309174" start="9394" end="9403" title="Northwest Airlines" label="Northwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q754886" start="9409" end="9419" title="code share" label="code share"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="9495" end="9502" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="9504" end="9510" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q33486" start="9512" end="9520" title="Hartford, Connecticut" label="Hartford"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="9522" end="9533" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="9538" end="9551" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q309174" start="9574" end="9583" title="Northwest Airlines" label="Northwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q181912" start="9584" end="9587" title="KLM" label="KLM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663233" start="9696" end="9715" title="Condé Nast Traveler" label="Condé Nast Traveler"/>
<link wikidata="Q4033612" start="11156" end="11172" title="AirTran Holdings" label="AirTran Holdings"/>
<link wikidata="Q406695" start="11188" end="11203" title="AirTran Airways" label="AirTran Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164606" start="11837" end="11848" title="TPG Capital" label="TPG Capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q309174" start="11863" end="11881" title="Northwest Airlines" label="Northwest Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q326498" start="12019" end="12029" title="Competition law" label="anti-trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="12046" end="12081" title="United States Department of Justice" label="United States Department of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q46970" start="13032" end="13039" title="airline" label="airline"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000852" start="13060" end="13090" title="World oil market chronology from 2003" label="oil price increases since 2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q207400" start="13219" end="13242" title="McDonnell Douglas MD-80" label="McDonnell Douglas MD-80"/>
<link wikidata="Q773662" start="13540" end="13556" title="SkyWest Airlines" label="SkyWest Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312738" start="13591" end="13606" title="Midwest Connect" label="Midwest Connect"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293467" start="13643" end="13658" title="Skyway Airlines" label="Skyway Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536457" start="14106" end="14131" title="Republic Airways Holdings" label="Republic Airways Holdings"/>
<link wikidata="Q61515" start="14148" end="14159" title="outsource" label="outsourcing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669658" start="14166" end="14182" title="Republic Airline" label="Republic Airline"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495319" start="14195" end="14206" title="Embraer E-Jet family" label="Embraer 170"/>
<link wikidata="Q4937128" start="14397" end="14411" title="Boeing Capital" label="Boeing Capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536457" start="14560" end="14585" title="Republic Airways Holdings" label="Republic Airways Holdings"/>
<link wikidata="Q61515" start="15169" end="15178" title="Outsourcing" label="outsource"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536457" start="15211" end="15227" title="Republic Airways Holdings" label="Republic Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495319" start="15269" end="15284" title="Embraer E-Jet family" label="Embraer ERJ-170"/>
<link wikidata="Q6401" start="15351" end="15361" title="Boeing 717" label="Boeing 717"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495319" start="15776" end="15792" title="Embraer E-Jet family" label="Embraer ERJ-190s"/>
<link wikidata="Q183547" start="15809" end="15828" title="Chautauqua Airlines" label="Chautauqua Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q109423211" start="15936" end="15951" title="Embraer ERJ family" label="Embraer 135/145"/>
<link wikidata="Q407436" start="15994" end="16021" title="Air Line Pilots Association, International" label="Air Line Pilots Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6401" start="16386" end="16396" title="Boeing 717" label="Boeing 717"/>
<link wikidata="Q852211" start="16588" end="16591" title="United States Department of Transportation" label="DOT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536457" start="16873" end="16898" title="Republic Airways Holdings" label="Republic Airways Holdings"/>
<link wikidata="Q3317803" start="17224" end="17235" title="Airbus A319" label="Airbus A319"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669658" start="17641" end="17658" title="Republic Airways (airline)" label="Republic Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q16974622" start="18378" end="18391" title="Elite Airways" label="Elite Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698555" start="19187" end="19196" title="cheatline" label="cheatline"/>
<link wikidata="Q975211" start="19238" end="19251" title="trailing edge" label="trailing edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q661819" start="19482" end="19493" title="Beech 1900D" label="Beech 1900D"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312738" start="19497" end="19512" title="Midwest Connect" label="Midwest Connect"/>
<link wikidata="Q207400" start="19613" end="19636" title="McDonnell Douglas MD-80" label="McDonnell Douglas MD-80"/>
<link wikidata="Q37836" start="20612" end="20621" title="Milwaukee" label="Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q325712" start="20790" end="20810" title="Milwaukee Art Museum" label="Milwaukee Art Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q168482" start="20824" end="20842" title="Santiago Calatrava" label="Santiago Calatrava"/>
<link wikidata="Q14169302" start="22091" end="22113" title="chocolate chip cookies" label="chocolate chip cookies"/>
<link wikidata="Q406695" start="22433" end="22440" title="AirTran Airways" label="AirTran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737017" start="22511" end="22527" title="Kauffman Stadium" label="Kauffman Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q169637" start="22540" end="22545" title="Milwaukee Bucks" label="Bucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267828" start="22561" end="22569" title="Milwaukee Admirals" label="Admirals"/>
<link wikidata="Q737976" start="22603" end="22617" title="Bradley Center" label="Bradley Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139541" start="23123" end="23140" title="Frontier Airlines" label="Frontier Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744520" start="23145" end="23162" title="Republic Airlines" label="Republic Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312738" start="23194" end="23209" title="Midwest Connect" label="Midwest Connect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139541" start="23284" end="23301" title="Frontier Airlines" label="Frontier Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3317803" start="23339" end="23347" title="A319-100" label="A319-100"/>
<link wikidata="Q6401" start="23407" end="23417" title="Boeing 717" label="Boeing 717"/>
<link wikidata="Q61515" start="23534" end="23545" title="outsourcing" label="outsourcing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423981" start="23592" end="23597" title="airway (aviation)" label="route"/>
<link wikidata="Q1980998" start="23638" end="23655" title="Midwest Air Group" label="Midwest Air Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164606" start="23675" end="23694" title="Texas Pacific Group" label="Texas Pacific Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q3317803" start="23741" end="23752" title="Airbus A319" label="Airbus A319"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495319" start="23787" end="23798" title="Embraer 190" label="Embraer 190"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744520" start="23817" end="23834" title="Republic Airlines" label="Republic Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q208046" start="23878" end="23888" title="US Airways" label="US Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q407701" start="24043" end="24064" title="Air operator&amp;#x27;s certificate" label="operating certificate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4260029" start="24446" end="24458" title="buy on board" label="buy on board"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062332" start="24719" end="24741" title="frequent flyer program" label="frequent flyer program"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349657" start="24786" end="24800" title="airport lounge" label="airport lounge"/>
<link wikidata="Q465909" start="24936" end="24952" title="airline alliance" label="airline alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q188920" start="24991" end="25006" title="Delta Air Lines" label="Delta Air Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q16984670" start="25007" end="25015" title="SkyMiles" label="SkyMiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6843375" start="25507" end="25533" title="Midwest Express Airlines Flight 105" label="Midwest Express Flight 105"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053145" start="25616" end="25620" title="National Transportation Safety Board" label="NTSB"/>
<link wikidata="Q221414" start="25807" end="25819" title="Douglas DC-9" label="Douglas DC-9"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="25960" end="25978" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11, 2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="26055" end="26068" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q11705" start="26103" end="26129" title="United Airlines Flight 175" label="United Airlines Flight 175"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140" start="26139" end="26151" title="Hudson River" label="Hudson River"/>
<link wikidata="Q862632" start="26265" end="26287" title="air traffic controller" label="air traffic controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127212" start="26364" end="26375" title="2 World Trade Center" label="South Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q11235" start="26383" end="26401" title="World Trade Center (1973–2001)" label="World Trade Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q62179" start="26468" end="26495" title="Collapse of the World Trade Center" label="collapse of the South Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q6401" start="26546" end="26556" title="Boeing 717" label="Boeing 717"/>
<link wikidata="Q41819" start="26571" end="26582" title="Kansas City, Missouri" label="Kansas City"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="26586" end="26601" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q6415839" start="26763" end="26790" title="Kirksville Regional Airport" label="Kirksville Regional Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q37836" start="26845" end="26854" title="Milwaukee" label="Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q34739" start="26865" end="26871" title="Dayton, Ohio" label="Dayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188413" start="26903" end="26917" title="United Express" label="United Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="26933" end="26940" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q49238" start="26946" end="26956" title="Greensboro" label="Greensboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q862632" start="26993" end="27015" title="Air traffic controller" label="Air traffic controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="27574" end="27586" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425838" start="27616" end="27629" title="Lambert Field" label="Lambert Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="27633" end="27652" title="St. Louis, Missouri" label="St. Louis, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419730" start="27663" end="27679" title="evacuation slide" label="evacuation slide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055947" start="27724" end="27732" title="airstair" label="airstair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1298120" start="27965" end="27968" title="Aircraft Rescue and Firefighting" label="CFR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053145" start="28033" end="28037" title="NTSB" label="NTSB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188991" start="28278" end="28301" title="North American Airlines" label="North American Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6418" start="28302" end="28312" title="Boeing 757" label="Boeing 757"/>
<link wikidata="Q6787677" start="28329" end="28344" title="MatlinPatterson" label="MatlinPatterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q105611" start="28345" end="28355" title="hedge fund" label="hedge fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570130" start="28384" end="28405" title="Global Aero Logistics" label="Global Aero Logistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417728" start="28406" end="28412" title="Trade name" label="d.b.a."/>
<link wikidata="Q1188991" start="28413" end="28436" title="North American Airlines" label="North American Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6615902" start="28530" end="28575" title="List of defunct airlines of the United States" label="List of defunct airlines of the United States"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143195" wikidata="Q15711114" url="?curid=143195" title="Right On! (magazine)">
<text>Right On! is an American teen magazine first published by the Laufer Company in 1971. It was headquartered in New York City. It continued publishing on a regular basis until 2014, focusing on African-American celebrities. The magazine was acquired by Right On! Media Holdings, LLC in 2016, which promotes its digital platform, rightondigital.com and publishes select print titles.

==History and profile==
The magazine&#x27;s title was derived from the expression of positivity and featured exclusive coverage of The Jackson 5. Like &quot;Tiger Beat&quot; did with White American and Hispanic celebrities, &quot;Right On!&quot; covered everything and everyone African-American and involved in the entertainment business. It also offered readers a close-up look into the lives of such celebrities as the Soul Train Gang, The Sylvers, Black Ivory and many more.

During its early years, &quot;Right On!&quot; focused primarily on the lives and careers of The Jackson 5, featuring numerous interviews with each Jackson family member as well as Motown labelmates The Temptations and Diana Ross. In the 1980s &quot;Right On!&quot; was instrumental in the popularity of R&amp;B teen group New Edition. Cynthia Horner is among the former editors-in-chief of the magazine and now serves as publisher/CEO of its print titles and digital property.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1711354" start="25" end="38" title="teen magazine" label="teen magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="192" end="208" title="African-American" label="African-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q43267" start="513" end="526" title="The Jackson 5" label="The Jackson 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801388" start="539" end="549" title="Tiger Beat" label="Tiger Beat"/>
<link wikidata="Q49078" start="565" end="579" title="White American" label="White American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211934" start="584" end="592" title="Hispanic" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7765360" start="803" end="818" title="Soul Train Gang" label="Soul Train Gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7767800" start="820" end="831" title="The Sylvers" label="The Sylvers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921059" start="833" end="844" title="Black Ivory" label="Black Ivory"/>
<link wikidata="Q43327" start="1041" end="1047" title="Motown" label="Motown"/>
<link wikidata="Q846373" start="1059" end="1074" title="The Temptations" label="The Temptations"/>
<link wikidata="Q36290" start="1079" end="1089" title="Diana Ross" label="Diana Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370588" start="1183" end="1194" title="New Edition" label="New Edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q5200084" start="1196" end="1210" title="Cynthia Horner" label="Cynthia Horner"/>
<link wikidata="Q589298" start="1231" end="1247" title="editors-in-chief" label="editors-in-chief"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143196" wikidata="Q572541" url="?curid=143196" title="The Beatles Anthology">
<text>The Beatles Anthology is a multimedia retrospective project consisting of a television documentary, a three-volume set of double albums, and a book describing the history of the Beatles. Beatles members Paul McCartney, George Harrison and Ringo Starr participated in the making of the works, which are sometimes referred to collectively as the &quot;Anthology&quot; project, while John Lennon appears in archival interviews.

The documentary series was first broadcast in November 1995, with expanded versions released on VHS and LaserDisc in 1996 and on DVD in 2003. The documentary used interviews with the Beatles and their associates to narrate the history of the band as seen through archival footage and performances. The &quot;Anthology&quot; book, released in 2000, paralleled the documentary in presenting the group&#x27;s history through quotes from interviews.

The initial volume of the album set (&quot;Anthology 1&quot;) was released the same week of the documentary&#x27;s airdate, with the subsequent two volumes (&quot;Anthology 2&quot; and &quot;Anthology 3&quot;) released in 1996. They included unreleased performances and outtakes presented in roughly chronological order, along with two new songs based on demo tapes recorded by Lennon after the group broke up: &quot;Free as a Bird&quot; and &quot;Real Love&quot;, both produced by Jeff Lynne.

==Documentary series==

Approximately coinciding with the release of the &quot;Free as a Bird&quot; single and &quot;Anthology 1&quot; album (the first of three double-CD albums), &quot;The Beatles Anthology&quot; series of documentaries was broadcast on ITV in the United Kingdom and ABC television in the United States in 1995. The &quot;Anthology&quot; series takes a form similar to that of the &quot;Anthology&quot; book, by being a series of first-person accounts by the Beatles themselves, with no external &quot;objective&quot; narration. Footage in the &quot;Anthology&quot; series features voice-over recordings of all four Beatles to push the narrative of the story, with contributions from their producer, road manager and others. As well as telling their story through archival footage, Paul McCartney, George Harrison and Ringo Starr appear in interview segments recorded exclusively for the series; John Lennon appears only in historic archival footage.

The series, which included over 5000 hours of planning and production, is composed of numerous film clips and interviews that present a complete history of the band from the Beatles&#x27; own personal perspectives. When it aired on ABC, the series comprised six hour-long programs, aired on three nights in November 1995. The series was later released as eight expanded episodes on VHS, laserdisc and as a boxed set of five DVDs (4 discs with 2 episodes apiece and a disc of extras).

Air dates on ABC:

* Sunday, 19 November 1995: 9–11 p.m.
* Wednesday, 22 November 1995: 9–11 p.m.
* Thursday, 23 November 1995: 9–11 p.m.

Part 1 of the series drew 17 million households, meaning an average of 27.3 million viewers, which was much better than usual for ABC at the time, but behind most broadcasts of &quot;Friends&quot; on NBC, which in its second season was averaging 29.4 million viewers per episode.

In promoting the series, ABC identified itself as &quot;A-Beatles-C&quot; – an homage to the mid-1960s &quot;77 W-A-Beatles-C&quot; call sign of the network&#x27;s flagship NYC AM radio station – and several of the network&#x27;s prime-time sitcoms replaced their regular opening credit themes with Beatles tracks.

==Albums==

To accompany the &quot;Anthology&quot; series, three albums were issued, each containing two CDs, two cassette tapes or three vinyl LPs of mostly never-before-released Beatles material (the exceptions being the Tony Sheridan-era material), although many of the tracks had appeared on bootlegs for many years prior.

Two days after the first television special in the series had aired, &quot;Anthology 1&quot; was released to stores, and included music recorded by the Quarrymen, the famous Decca Records audition tapes, and various out-takes and demos from &quot;Please Please Me&quot;, &quot;With the Beatles&quot;, &quot;A Hard Day&#x27;s Night&quot; and &quot;Beatles for Sale&quot;. It also included the song &quot;Lend Me Your Comb&quot;, omitted from the collection &quot;Live at the BBC&quot;, released the previous year (1994). The song &quot;Free as a Bird&quot; was included at the very start. Some 450,000 copies of &quot;Anthology 1&quot; were sold in its first day of release, the most sales for an album in a single day ever. The band&#x27;s first drummer Pete Best, replaced by Ringo Starr in 1962 before the Beatles recorded professionally for EMI, received his first substantial Beatles royalties from this album, for the inclusion of early demo tracks on which he played.

&quot;Anthology 2&quot; was released on 17 March 1996. The second collection presented out-takes and demos from the Beatles&#x27; sessions for &quot;Help!&quot;, &quot;Rubber Soul&quot;, &quot;Revolver&quot;, &quot;Sgt. Pepper&#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band&quot; and &quot;Magical Mystery Tour&quot;. These included selected early demos and takes for Lennon&#x27;s &quot;Strawberry Fields Forever&quot;, previously available only to bootleg collectors. The new song &quot;Real Love&quot; – which, like &quot;Free as a Bird&quot;, was based on an unfinished Lennon recording – was also included in the two-CD collection.

&quot;Anthology 3&quot; was released on 28 October 1996. The third collection featured out-takes and demos from &quot;The Beatles&quot; (&quot;White Album&quot;), &quot;Let It Be&quot; and &quot;Abbey Road&quot;, as well as several songs from Harrison and McCartney which later became post-Beatle tracks.

Mark Lewisohn wrote the liner notes that appear in the booklets accompanying all three audio sets. These notes, including the date and location of each session or appearance, were based on his own extensive research.

===Collage===
The three album covers, when laid side-by-side, become one long painted collage of various peeling posters and album covers representing the different stages of the Beatles&#x27; career. This was the work of Klaus Voormann, who also created the album cover for &quot;Revolver&quot; in 1966. The &quot;Anthology&quot; covers required Voormann to recreate elements of his cover for &quot;Revolver&quot; within the collage. During the music video for &quot;Free as a Bird&quot;, the &quot;Anthology&quot; collage appears as posters on a shop window as the camera pans quickly across the street. The design also adorned the VHS, laserdisc and DVD releases, again to be properly encountered by laying the cases side by side. Upon the release of &quot;Anthology 3&quot;, HMV stores made available a limited edition cardboard sleeve designed to hold all three CD volumes of which each side of the sleeve make up half of the collage.

===Digital release and &quot;Anthology Highlights&quot;===
All three albums were made digitally available on the iTunes Store on 14 June 2011, alongside a new &quot;Anthology Highlights&quot; album which featured a selection of tracks from all three albums and reached number 184 on &quot;Billboard&quot;&#x27;s United States Top Current Albums chart.

====&quot;Anthology Highlights&quot; track listing====
#&quot;Free as a Bird&quot; – 4:25
#&quot;One After 909&quot; (Complete) – 2:55
#&quot;That Means a Lot&quot; – 2:26
#&quot;Leave My Kitten Alone&quot; – 2:56
#&quot;If You&#x27;ve Got Trouble&quot; – 2:48
#&quot;Can&#x27;t Buy Me Love&quot; – 2:10
#&quot;Mr. Moonlight&quot; – 2:47
#&quot;Kansas City / Hey-Hey-Hey-Hey!&quot; – 2:46
#&quot;Eight Days a Week&quot; (Complete) – 2:47
#&quot;I&#x27;m Looking Through You&quot; – 2:53
#&quot;Yesterday&quot; – 2:34
#&quot;Tomorrow Never Knows&quot; (Take 1) – 3:14
#&quot;Strawberry Fields Forever&quot; (Take 1) – 2:34
#&quot;Across the Universe&quot; (Take 2) – 3:30
#&quot;Something&quot; – 3:18
#&quot;Not Guilty&quot; – 3:22
#&quot;Octopus&#x27;s Garden&quot; – 2:49
#&quot;All Things Must Pass&quot; – 3:04
#&quot;Come and Get It&quot; – 2:30
#&quot;Good Night&quot; – 2:38
#&quot;While My Guitar Gently Weeps&quot; – 3:27
#&quot;The Long and Winding Road&quot; – 3:41
#&quot;Real Love&quot; – 3:54

==Book==
In October 2000, &quot;The Beatles Anthology&quot; book was released, which included interviews with all four band members and others involved, plus rare photos. Many of the interviews quoted are from those featured in the documentary films. The book is designed as a large-format hardback, with imaginative artwork throughout, and several visually vibrant and colourful spreads featuring graphics relevant to the proceeding chronology, photographic arrays and a variety of text styles and layouts. The book went straight to the top of &quot;The New York Times&quot; bestsellers list. In 2002, the book was released as a large-format paperback.

==Unreleased recordings==

During early 1995, as work on &quot;The Beatles Anthology&quot; continued, Yoko Ono and McCartney recorded an avant-garde piece called &quot;Hiroshima Sky Is Always Blue&quot;. Ono provided vocals and McCartney played bass, while Sean Lennon, Linda McCartney, and McCartney&#x27;s children played various instruments. The piece was broadcast on Japanese public television in memory of the 50th anniversary of the atomic bombing of Hiroshima.

The track &quot;Carnival of Light&quot;, recorded during the &quot;Sgt. Pepper&#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band&quot; sessions, was intended to be released on the &quot;Anthology 2&quot; album, but was vetoed by George Harrison.

It was reported that McCartney, Harrison and Starr worked on a new composition called &quot;All for Love&quot; in March 1995, intended as a track on &quot;Anthology 3&quot;, but the effort was abandoned. No version of the song has reached the public.

McCartney, Harrison, Starr, and Jeff Lynne attempted a full band recording of Lennon&#x27;s song &quot;Now and Then&quot; using his demo vocals, intending it to anchor &quot;Anthology 3&quot;. The poor fidelity and excessive ambient noise of the original tape proved too difficult to alleviate with contemporary digital equipment, and the song was abandoned. George Harrison was dismissive of the quality of the song, calling it &quot;fucking rubbish&quot;. The song was replaced as the opening track on &quot;Anthology 3&quot; with the &quot;White Album&quot; outtake &quot;A Beginning&quot;. In 2023, McCartney, Starr and Giles Martin refurbished and completed the track, using artificial intelligence to extricate Lennon&#x27;s vocal from the demo tape, and released it as a &quot;final Beatles song&quot;, both as a single and as a bonus track on the expanded edition of the &quot;1967-1970&quot; compilation album.

==Promotional items==
Each of the three &quot;Anthology&quot; albums was accompanied by a promotional CD sampler sent to radio stations shortly before the official release dates. These CDs have since become highly sought collector&#x27;s items. Even rarer is a vinyl version of the sampler for &quot;Anthology 2&quot;, which was only sent to college radio stations and featured a different cover (though the contents were the same).

In October 1996 there was a strictly limited release from EMI, a slip case cover to house all three CD volumes, which have since become extremely rare, fetching high prices among collectors.

==Parodies==

The success of the &quot;Anthology&quot; albums was parodied by the release of the Rutles&#x27; &quot;Archaeology&quot; some months later. Delays in the release of the third volume of the Beatles&#x27; series ultimately meant that the Rutles&#x27; parody arrived in shops on the same day as its inspiration.

&quot;Weird Al&quot; Yankovic parodied &quot;The Beatles Anthology&quot; in an &quot;Al TV&quot; special. He said he had a copy of a fictional &quot;Anthology 17&quot;, which he claimed would not be available to the public for a while. He played for the audience a track of Paul McCartney brushing his teeth and Ringo Starr shaving before &quot;The Ed Sullivan Show&quot;. Yankovic also considered parodying the album&#x27;s single &quot;Free as a Bird&quot; as &quot;Gee, I&#x27;m a Nerd&quot;, and requested McCartney&#x27;s permission for the parody. McCartney had no problem with the parody; however, since &quot;Free as a Bird&quot; was written by John Lennon, he deferred the decision to Yoko Ono, who was not comfortable with the idea.

&quot;The Beatles Anthology&quot; was also parodied on the short-lived &quot;Dana Carvey Show&quot;, which was being aired on ABC around the same time that &quot;Anthology&quot; was being televised on the network.

On &quot;Late Night with Conan O&#x27;Brien&quot; the host had the remaining Beatles adding music and doing backup singing to a fictitious vocal track of John Lennon&#x27;s answering machine message.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q131765" start="27" end="37" title="multimedia" label="multimedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603925" start="76" end="98" title="television documentary" label="television documentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="174" end="185" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="203" end="217" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643" start="219" end="234" title="George Harrison" label="George Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632" start="239" end="250" title="Ringo Starr" label="Ringo Starr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="381" end="392" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q183976" start="522" end="525" title="VHS" label="VHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q273309" start="530" end="539" title="LaserDisc" label="LaserDisc"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="555" end="558" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q7716123" start="728" end="754" title="The Beatles Anthology (book)" label="&amp;quot;Anthology&amp;quot; book"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753618" start="916" end="927" title="Anthology 1" label="Anthology 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753625" start="1036" end="1047" title="Anthology 2" label="Anthology 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753632" start="1064" end="1075" title="Anthology 3" label="Anthology 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253825" start="1290" end="1304" title="Free as a Bird" label="Free as a Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q1698590" start="1321" end="1330" title="Real Love (Beatles song)" label="Real Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q314358" start="1355" end="1365" title="Jeff Lynne" label="Jeff Lynne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253825" start="1447" end="1461" title="Free as a Bird" label="Free as a Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753618" start="1485" end="1496" title="Anthology 1" label="Anthology 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="1623" end="1626" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="1653" end="1656" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146822" start="1968" end="1978" title="voice-over" label="voice-over"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="2168" end="2182" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643" start="2184" end="2199" title="George Harrison" label="George Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632" start="2204" end="2215" title="Ringo Starr" label="Ringo Starr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="2282" end="2293" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="2836" end="2839" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q79784" start="3145" end="3152" title="Friends" label="Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="3162" end="3165" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q558325" start="3855" end="3863" title="Bootleg recording" label="bootlegs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753618" start="3962" end="3973" title="Anthology 1" label="Anthology 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q384664" start="4035" end="4048" title="the Quarrymen" label="the Quarrymen"/>
<link wikidata="Q557632" start="4061" end="4074" title="Decca Records" label="Decca Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q2275227" start="4075" end="4089" title="The Decca audition" label="audition tapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q181826" start="4134" end="4150" title="Please Please Me" label="Please Please Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q182389" start="4164" end="4180" title="With the Beatles" label="With the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q182518" start="4194" end="4217" title="A Hard Day&amp;#x27;s Night (album)" label="A Hard Day&amp;#x27;s Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q207336" start="4234" end="4250" title="Beatles for Sale" label="Beatles for Sale"/>
<link wikidata="Q934340" start="4349" end="4364" title="Live at the BBC (The Beatles album)" label="Live at the BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253825" start="4422" end="4436" title="Free as a Bird" label="Free as a Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q207335" start="4641" end="4650" title="Pete Best" label="Pete Best"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753625" start="4868" end="4879" title="Anthology 2" label="Anthology 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q201816" start="5011" end="5016" title="Help!" label="Help!"/>
<link wikidata="Q190640" start="5030" end="5041" title="Rubber Soul" label="Rubber Soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q185121" start="5055" end="5063" title="Revolver (The Beatles album)" label="Revolver"/>
<link wikidata="Q169226" start="5077" end="5119" title="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band" label="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q60676411" start="5136" end="5156" title="Magical Mystery Tour (album)" label="Magical Mystery Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q213718" start="5234" end="5259" title="Strawberry Fields Forever" label="Strawberry Fields Forever"/>
<link wikidata="Q1698590" start="5335" end="5344" title="Real Love (John Lennon song)" label="Real Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753632" start="5490" end="5501" title="Anthology 3" label="Anthology 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295515" start="5602" end="5613" title="The Beatles (album)" label="The Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q199585" start="5653" end="5662" title="Let It Be (album)" label="Let It Be"/>
<link wikidata="Q173643" start="5679" end="5689" title="Abbey Road" label="Abbey Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780375" start="5790" end="5803" title="Mark Lewisohn" label="Mark Lewisohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q366700" start="6230" end="6244" title="Klaus Voormann" label="Klaus Voormann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253825" start="6476" end="6490" title="Free as a Bird" label="Free as a Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q273309" start="6647" end="6656" title="laserdisc" label="laserdisc"/>
<link wikidata="Q10854572" start="6787" end="6790" title="HMV" label="HMV"/>
<link wikidata="Q9593" start="7062" end="7074" title="iTunes Store" label="iTunes Store"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="7238" end="7247" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7275" end="7293" title="Billboard charts#Albums" label="Top Current Albums"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253825" start="7364" end="7378" title="Free as a Bird" label="Free as a Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q2412360" start="7399" end="7412" title="One After 909" label="One After 909"/>
<link wikidata="Q2328202" start="7444" end="7460" title="That Means a Lot" label="That Means a Lot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392894" start="7481" end="7502" title="Leave My Kitten Alone" label="Leave My Kitten Alone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352484" start="7523" end="7549" title="If You&amp;#x27;ve Got Trouble" label="If You&amp;#x27;ve Got Trouble"/>
<link wikidata="Q864783" start="7570" end="7592" title="Can&amp;#x27;t Buy Me Love" label="Can&amp;#x27;t Buy Me Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630434" start="7613" end="7626" title="Mr. Moonlight (song)" label="Mr. Moonlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723915" start="7647" end="7658" title="Kansas City (Beatles song)" label="Kansas City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982565" start="7661" end="7677" title="Hey-Hey-Hey-Hey!" label="Hey-Hey-Hey-Hey!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303515" start="7698" end="7715" title="Eight Days a Week" label="Eight Days a Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445861" start="7747" end="7775" title="I&amp;#x27;m Looking Through You" label="I&amp;#x27;m Looking Through You"/>
<link wikidata="Q202698" start="7796" end="7805" title="Yesterday (Beatles song)" label="Yesterday"/>
<link wikidata="Q630338" start="7826" end="7846" title="Tomorrow Never Knows" label="Tomorrow Never Knows"/>
<link wikidata="Q213718" start="7876" end="7901" title="Strawberry Fields Forever" label="Strawberry Fields Forever"/>
<link wikidata="Q342879" start="7931" end="7950" title="Across the Universe" label="Across the Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q210485" start="7980" end="7989" title="Something (Beatles song)" label="Something"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136817" start="8010" end="8020" title="Not Guilty (song)" label="Not Guilty"/>
<link wikidata="Q210389" start="8041" end="8062" title="Octopus&amp;#x27;s Garden" label="Octopus&amp;#x27;s Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4033752" start="8083" end="8103" title="All Things Must Pass (song)" label="All Things Must Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q632238" start="8124" end="8139" title="Come and Get It (Badfinger song)" label="Come and Get It"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075370" start="8160" end="8170" title="Good Night (Beatles song)" label="Good Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q548046" start="8191" end="8219" title="While My Guitar Gently Weeps" label="While My Guitar Gently Weeps"/>
<link wikidata="Q640978" start="8240" end="8265" title="The Long and Winding Road" label="The Long and Winding Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1698590" start="8286" end="8295" title="Real Love (Beatles song)" label="Real Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="8861" end="8879" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q117012" start="9067" end="9075" title="Yoko Ono" label="Yoko Ono"/>
<link wikidata="Q102932" start="9102" end="9113" title="avant-garde" label="avant-garde"/>
<link wikidata="Q311238" start="9222" end="9233" title="Sean Lennon" label="Sean Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q228899" start="9235" end="9250" title="Linda McCartney" label="Linda McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q488" start="9405" end="9432" title="Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki" label="atomic bombing of Hiroshima"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044095" start="9451" end="9468" title="Carnival of Light" label="Carnival of Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q169226" start="9502" end="9544" title="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band" label="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753625" start="9602" end="9613" title="Anthology 2" label="Anthology 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q3293037" start="10018" end="10030" title="Now and Then (Beatles song)" label="Now and Then"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295515" start="10458" end="10469" title="The Beatles (album)" label="White Album"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10490" end="10501" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Pass Me By#&amp;quot;A Beginning&amp;quot;" label="A Beginning"/>
<link wikidata="Q723009" start="10539" end="10551" title="Giles Martin" label="Giles Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="10595" end="10618" title="artificial intelligence" label="artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950377" start="10800" end="10809" title="1967-1970" label="1967-1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q183412" start="11328" end="11331" title="EMI" label="EMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q187709" start="11559" end="11565" title="The Rutles" label="Rutles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437944" start="11578" end="11589" title="Archaeology (album)" label="Archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q8349" start="11785" end="11814" title="&amp;quot;Weird Al&amp;quot; Yankovic" label="&amp;quot;Weird Al&amp;quot; Yankovic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3607549" start="11870" end="11875" title="Al TV" label="Al TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081494" start="12130" end="12150" title="The Ed Sullivan Show" label="The Ed Sullivan Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q7728800" start="12606" end="12622" title="Dana Carvey Show" label="Dana Carvey Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="12655" end="12658" title="ABC Television Network" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639429" start="12753" end="12787" title="Late Night with Conan O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="Late Night with Conan O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q568717" start="12917" end="12934" title="answering machine" label="answering machine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143199" wikidata="Q3942210" url="?curid=143199" title="Rubén Rodríguez (basketball)">
<text>Rubén Rodríguez Leon (born August 5, 1953) is a Puerto Rican former basketball player. Born in New York City and also a former resident of Los Angeles, California, he played 23 seasons in the Baloncesto Superior Nacional (BSN) tournament.

Many people consider either him to be, along with José Ortíz, Raymond Dalmau, Juan Vicens, Rafael Valle, Georgie Torres or Mario Morales, the greatest or one of the greatest basketball players in Puerto Rico&#x27;s national tournament&#x27;s history. He was one of only five players (Morales, Dalmau, Georgie Torres and Mario Butler being the other four) to reach 10,000 or more points during his BSN career, and for a long time, was the second best scorer ever behind Dalmau.

Rodríguez spent his whole career with the &quot;Vaqueros de Bayamon&quot; of Bayamón. With the Vaqueros, he won 8 national championships, in 1969, five in a row from 1971 to 1975, one in 1981 and one in 1988, the year that the team inaugurated his actual venue, that carries his name, the Rubén Rodríguez Coliseum. He also garnered the MVP award in 1979, and, once the three-point shot was established for the first time in the Puerto Rican tournament during the 1980 season, he started making shots from behind the three-point line too.

Rodríguez was a member of the Puerto Rican national basketball team, playing in many international tournaments such as the Olympic Games and Pan American Games. Rodríguez for Team Puerto Rico played against Michael Jordan for Team USA, in Bayamon, in 1983.

He retired from basketball in 1991. He tried several times to coach a basketball team in the Puerto Rico League, BSN, but without success. His most recent attempt was with the Bayamón team in 2002. He started the season 0-5 and was eventually fired. He is now a basketball analyst for several radio shows in Puerto Rico.

==References==
== External links ==
* Gallery of Pictures of Puerto Rican players at enciclopediapr.org
* Statistics in BSN</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3942210" start="0" end="20" title="Rubén Rodríguez (basketball)" label="Rubén Rodríguez Leon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="68" end="78" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="95" end="108" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="139" end="162" title="Los Angeles, California" label="Los Angeles, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q805497" start="192" end="220" title="Baloncesto Superior Nacional" label="Baloncesto Superior Nacional"/>
<link wikidata="Q966899" start="290" end="300" title="José Ortiz (basketball player)" label="José Ortíz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3930679" start="302" end="316" title="Raymond Dalmau" label="Raymond Dalmau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773826" start="318" end="329" title="Juan Vicens" label="Juan Vicens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3928979" start="331" end="343" title="Rafael Valle" label="Rafael Valle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3760772" start="345" end="359" title="Georgie Torres" label="Georgie Torres"/>
<link wikidata="Q3848838" start="363" end="376" title="Mario Morales" label="Mario Morales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="436" end="447" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q2882641" start="766" end="785" title="Vaqueros de Bayamon" label="Vaqueros de Bayamon"/>
<link wikidata="Q739675" start="795" end="802" title="Bayamón, Puerto Rico" label="Bayamón"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918692" start="1007" end="1031" title="Rubén Rodríguez Coliseum" label="Rubén Rodríguez Coliseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347419" start="1287" end="1324" title="Puerto Rico men&amp;#x27;s national basketball team" label="Puerto Rican national basketball team"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="1380" end="1393" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q230186" start="1398" end="1416" title="Pan American Games" label="Pan American Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q739675" start="1691" end="1698" title="Bayamón, Puerto Rico" label="Bayamón"/>
<link wikidata="Q805497" start="1957" end="1960" title="Baloncesto Superior Nacional" label="BSN"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143202" wikidata="Q187046" url="?curid=143202" title="Newsprint">
<text>Newsprint is a low-cost, non-archival paper consisting mainly of wood pulp and most commonly used to print newspapers and other publications and advertising material. Invented in 1844 by Charles Fenerty of Nova Scotia, Canada, it usually has an off white cast and distinctive feel. It is designed for use in printing presses that employ a long web of paper (web offset, letterpress and flexographic), rather than individual sheets of paper.

Newsprint is favored by publishers and printers as it is relatively low cost (compared with paper grades used for glossy magazines and sales brochures), strong (to run through modern high-speed web printing presses) and can accept four-color printing at qualities that meet the needs of typical newspapers.

==Invention==
Charles Fenerty began experimenting with wood pulp around 1838, making his discovery in 1844. On October 26, 1844, Fenerty took a sample of his paper to Halifax&#x27;s top newspaper, the &quot;Acadian Recorder&quot;, where he had written a letter on his newly invented paper saying:

Messrs. English &amp; Blackadar,

Enclosed is a small piece of , the result of an experiment I have made, in order to ascertain if that useful article might not be manufactured from . The result has proved that opinion to be correct, for—by the sample which I have sent you, Gentlemen—you will perceive the feasibility of it. The enclosed, which is as firm in its texture as white, and to all appearance as durable as the common wrapping paper made from hemp, Cotton, or the ordinary materials of manufacture is , reduced to a pulp, and subjected to the same treatment as paper is in course of being made, only with this exception, viz: my insufficient means of giving it the required pressure. I entertain an opinion that our common forest trees, either hard or soft wood, but more especially the fir, spruce, or poplar, on account of the fibrous quality of their wood, might easily be reduced by a chafing machine, and manufactured into paper of the finest kind. This opinion, Sirs, I think the experiment will justify, and leaving it to be prosecuted further by the scientific, or the curious. I remain, Gentlemen, your obdt. servant,

&quot;The Acadian Recorder&quot;
Halifax, N.S.
Saturday, October 26, 1844
==Use==
The web of paper is placed on the printer, in the form of a roll of paper, from a paper mill (surplus newsprint can also be cut into individual sheets by a processor for use in a variety of other applications such as wrapping or commercial printing). World demand of newsprint in 2006 totaled about 37.2 million metric tonnes, according to the Montreal-based Pulp &amp; Paper Products Council (PPPC). This was about 1.6% less than in 2000. Between 2000 and 2006, the biggest changes were in Asia—which saw newsprint demand grow by about 20%—and North America, where demand fell by about 25%. Demand in China virtually doubled during the period, to about 3.2 million metric tonnes.

About 35% of global newsprint usage in 2006 was in Asia, with approximately 26% being in North America and about 25% in Western Europe. Latin America and Eastern Europe each represented about 5% of world demand in 2006, according to PPPC, with smaller shares going to Oceania and Africa.

Among the biggest factors depressing demand for newsprint in North America have been the decline in newspaper readership among many sectors of the population—particularly young adults—along with increasing competition for advertising business from the Internet and other media. According to the Newspaper Association of America, a United States newspaper trade group, average U.S. daily circulation in 2006 on a typical weekday was 52.3 million (53.2 million on Sundays), compared with 62.5 million in 1986 (58.9 million on Sundays) and 57.0 million in 1996 (60.8 million on Sundays). According to NAA, daily ad revenues (not adjusted for inflation) reached their all-time peak in 2000, and by 2007 had fallen by 13%. Newsprint demand has also been affected by attempts on the part of newspaper publishers to reduce marginal printing costs through various conservation measures intended to cut newsprint usage.

While demand has been trending down in North America in recent years, the rapid economic expansion of such Asian countries as China and India greatly benefited the print newspaper, and thus their newsprint suppliers. According to the World Association of Newspapers, in 2007 Asia was the home to 74 of the world&#x27;s 100 highest-circulation dailies. With millions of Chinese and Indians entering the ranks of those with disposable income, newspapers have gained readers along with other news media.

Newsprint is used worldwide in the printing of newspapers, flyers, and other printed material intended for mass distribution. In the U.S., about 80% of all newsprint that is consumed is purchased by daily newspaper publishers, according to PPPC. Dailies use a large majority of total demand in most other regions as well. Newsprint is also used for cheap books, such as the Dutch Bulkboeken, affordable reprints of literary classics published from the 1970s on.

Typically in North America, newsprint is purchased by a daily newspaper publisher and is shipped from the mill to the publisher&#x27;s pressroom or pressrooms, where it is used to print the main body of the newspaper (called the run-of-press, or ROP, sections). The daily newspaper publisher may also be hired by outside companies such as advertisers or publishers of weekly newspapers or other daily newspapers to produce printed products for those companies using its presses. In such cases the press owner might also purchase newsprint from the mill for such contract printing jobs.

For the roughly 20% of demand which is not purchased by a daily newspaper, common end uses include the printing of weekly newspapers, advertising flyers and other printed products, generally by a commercial printer, a company whose business consists largely of printing products for other companies using its presses. In such a case, the newsprint may be purchased by the printer on behalf of an advertiser or a weekly newspaper publisher, or it may be purchased by the client and then ordered to be shipped to the printer&#x27;s location.

===Economic issues===
The biggest inputs to the newsprint manufacturing process are energy, fiber, and labor. Mill operating margins have been significantly affected in the 2006–2008 time-frame by rising energy costs. Many mills&#x27; fiber costs have also been affected during the U.S. housing market slowdown of 2007–8 by the shutdown of many sawmills, particularly in Canada, since the virgin fiber used by mills generally comes from nearby sawmills in the form of wood chips produced as a residual product of the saw milling process.

===Distribution===
Another consideration in the newsprint business is delivery, which is affected by energy cost trends. Newsprint around the world may be delivered by rail or truck; or by barge, container or break-bulk shipment if a water delivery is appropriate. (Aside from delivery cost, another consideration in selecting freight mode may be the potential for avoiding damage to the product.) All things being equal, for domestic shipments in areas like North America or Europe where modern road and rail networks are readily available, trucks can be more economical than rail for short-haul deliveries (a day or less from the mill), while rail may be more economical for longer shipments. The cost-competitiveness of each freight mode for a specific mill&#x27;s business may depend on local infrastructure issues, as well as the degree of truck-vs-freight competition in the mill&#x27;s region. The appropriate freight mode for delivery from a mill to a specific pressroom can also depend on the press room ability to accept enough trucks or rail cars.

===Web (width) downsizing===
A newspaper roll&#x27;s width is called its web width and is defined by how many front pages it can print. A full roll prints four front pages with four back pages behind it (two front and back on each of the two sections). Modern printing facilities most efficiently print newspapers in multiples of eight pages on a full newsprint roll in two sections of four pages each. The two sections are then cut in half.

Faced with dwindling revenue from competition with broadcast, cable, and internet outlets, U.S. newspapers in the 21st century—particularly broadsheets—have begun to reduce the width of their newsprint rolls, and hence of the newspapers, across the business.

&quot;The Boston Globe&quot; and &quot;USA Today&quot; shifted to a web in 2000.

&quot;The Guardian&quot; adopted a smaller &quot;Berliner&quot; format in 2005.

A web with page widths was adopted by &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot; starting on January 2, 2007. &quot;The New York Times&quot; followed suit on August 6, 2007.

In 2009, &quot;The Seattle Times&quot; moved from web to a web, producing an inch page width.

==Manufacturing==
Newsprint is generally made by a mechanical milling process, without the chemical processes that are often used to remove lignin from the pulp. The lignin causes the paper to become brittle and yellow when exposed to air or sunlight. Traditionally, newsprint was made from fibers extracted from various softwood species of trees (most commonly, spruce, fir, balsam fir or pine). However, an increasing percentage of the world&#x27;s newsprint is made with recycled fibers.

==Sustainability==
There are upper limits on the percentage of the world&#x27;s newsprint that can be manufactured from recycled fiber. For instance, some of the fiber that enters a recycled pulp mill is lost in pulping, due to inefficiencies inherent in the process. According to the web site of the U.K. chapter of Friends of the Earth, wood fiber can normally only be recycled up to five times due to damage to the fiber. Thus, unless the quantity of newsprint used each year worldwide declines in line with the lost fiber, a certain amount of new (virgin) fiber is required each year globally, even though individual newsprint mills may use 100% recycled fiber. Many mills mix fresh fibers along with recycled fibers to promote sustainability.

==See also==
* Bleaching of wood pulp

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q187046" start="0" end="9" title="Newsprint" label="Newsprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q830393" start="25" end="37" title="Preservation (library and archival science)" label="non-archival"/>
<link wikidata="Q11472" start="38" end="43" title="paper" label="paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q672506" start="65" end="74" title="Pulp (paper)" label="wood pulp"/>
<link wikidata="Q11032" start="107" end="116" title="newspaper" label="newspaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5077621" start="187" end="202" title="Charles Fenerty" label="Charles Fenerty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="206" end="217" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460350" start="245" end="254" title="off white" label="off white"/>
<link wikidata="Q144334" start="308" end="322" title="printing press" label="printing press"/>
<link wikidata="Q190408" start="358" end="368" title="Offset printing" label="web offset"/>
<link wikidata="Q582102" start="370" end="381" title="Letterpress printing" label="letterpress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137927" start="386" end="398" title="Flexography" label="flexographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q41298" start="563" end="571" title="magazine" label="magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5173771" start="583" end="591" title="brochure" label="brochure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396295" start="673" end="692" title="Color printing" label="four-color printing"/>
<link wikidata="Q672506" start="805" end="814" title="wood pulp" label="wood pulp"/>
<link wikidata="Q11032" start="936" end="945" title="newspaper" label="newspaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q4671595" start="957" end="973" title="Acadian Recorder" label="Acadian Recorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q918088" start="2351" end="2361" title="paper mill" label="paper mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="2760" end="2764" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="2814" end="2827" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="2871" end="2876" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="3492" end="3500" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875652" start="3535" end="3567" title="Newspaper Association of America" label="Newspaper Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q22988237" start="5034" end="5042" title="Bulkboek" label="Bulkboek"/>
<link wikidata="Q665319" start="8427" end="8437" title="broadsheet" label="broadsheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q824451" start="8553" end="8569" title="The Boston Globe" label="The Boston Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q39681" start="8586" end="8595" title="USA Today" label="USA Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="8635" end="8647" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="8754" end="8777" title="The Wall Street Journal" label="The Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="8819" end="8837" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q221718" start="8893" end="8910" title="The Seattle Times" label="The Seattle Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q10580063" start="9024" end="9050" title="Mechanical pulping" label="mechanical milling process"/>
<link wikidata="Q184817" start="9113" end="9119" title="lignin" label="lignin"/>
<link wikidata="Q26782" start="9336" end="9342" title="spruce" label="spruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q25350" start="9344" end="9347" title="fir" label="fir"/>
<link wikidata="Q428023" start="9349" end="9359" title="balsam fir" label="balsam fir"/>
<link wikidata="Q12024" start="9363" end="9367" title="pine" label="pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q672506" start="9447" end="9462" title="deinked pulp" label="recycled fibers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906055" start="10229" end="10251" title="Bleaching of wood pulp" label="Bleaching of wood pulp"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143206" wikidata="Q559583" url="?curid=143206" title="Ostvorpommern">
<text>Ostvorpommern was a &quot;Kreis&quot; (district) in the eastern part of Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, Germany. Neighboring districts were (from east clockwise) Uecker-Randow, Mecklenburg-Strelitz, Demmin and Nordvorpommern. The Hanseatic city of Greifswald was enclosed by the district, but did not belong to it.

==History==
Ostvorpommern District was established on June 12, 1994 by merging the former districts of Anklam, Greifswald and Wolgast. It was merged into Vorpommern-Greifswald on 4 September 2011.

==Coat of arms==
==Towns and municipalities==
The subdivisions of the district were (situation August 2011): 

==References==
==External links==

* Official website (German)
* Touristic website of Usedom (English, German, Polish)
* Regional Tourist Board Vorpommern (English, German, Swedish, Polish)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q559583" start="0" end="13" title="Ostvorpommern" label="Ostvorpommern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196" start="72" end="101" title="Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania" label="Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="103" end="110" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q559492" start="161" end="174" title="Uecker-Randow" label="Uecker-Randow"/>
<link wikidata="Q559552" start="176" end="196" title="Mecklenburg-Strelitz (district)" label="Mecklenburg-Strelitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q559530" start="198" end="204" title="Demmin (district)" label="Demmin"/>
<link wikidata="Q559510" start="209" end="223" title="Nordvorpommern" label="Nordvorpommern"/>
<link wikidata="Q42908" start="229" end="238" title="Hanseatic League" label="Hanseatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4098" start="247" end="257" title="Greifswald" label="Greifswald"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917" start="469" end="490" title="Vorpommern-Greifswald" label="Vorpommern-Greifswald"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143211" wikidata="Q545175" url="?curid=143211" title="Saint Mungo">
<text>Kentigern (; ), known as Mungo, was a missionary in the Brittonic Kingdom of Strathclyde in the late sixth century, and the founder and patron saint of the city of Glasgow.

==Name==
In Wales and England, this saint is known by his birth and baptismal name Kentigern (). This name probably comes from the British , which is composed of the elements , a hound, and , a lord, prince, or king. The evidence is based on the Old Welsh record . Other etymologies have been suggested, including British &#x27;chief prince&#x27; based on the English form Kentigern, but the Old Welsh form above and Old English do not appear to support this.

Particularly in Scotland, he is known by the pet name Mungo, possibly derived from the Cumbric equivalent of the &#x27;my dear (one)&#x27;. The Mungo pet name or hypocorism has a Gaelic parallel in the form or , under which guise Kentigern appears in Kirkmahoe, for example, in Dumfriesshire, which appears as in the &quot;Arbroath Liber&quot; in 1321. An ancient church in Bromfield, Cumbria, is named after him, as are Crosthwaite Parish Church and some other churches in the northern part of Cumbria, for example St Mungo&#x27;s Church, Dearham.

==Biographers==
The &quot;Life of Saint Mungo&quot; was written by the monastic hagiographer Jocelyn of Furness in about 1185. Jocelyn states that he rewrote the &#x27;life&#x27; from an earlier Glasgow legend and an Old Irish document. There are certainly two other medieval lives: the earlier partial life in the Cottonian manuscript now in the British Library, and the later &quot;Life&quot;, based on Jocelyn, by John of Tynemouth.

==Life==
Mungo&#x27;s mother Teneu was a princess, the daughter of King Lleuddun (Latin: Leudonus) who ruled a territory around what is now Lothian in Scotland, perhaps the kingdom of Gododdin in the Old North. She became pregnant after being raped by Owain mab Urien according to the British Library manuscript. However, other historic accounts claim Owain and Teneu (also known as Thaney) had a love affair whilst he was still married to his wife Penarwen and that her father, King Lot, separated the pair after she became pregnant. Later, allegedly, after Penarwen died, Tenue/Thaney returned to King Owain and the pair were able to marry before King Owain met his death battling Bernicia in 597 AD.

Her furious father had her thrown from the heights of Traprain Law. Surviving, she was then abandoned in a coracle in which she drifted across the Firth of Forth to Culross in Fife. There Mungo was born.

Mungo was brought up by Saint Serf who was ministering to the Picts in that area. It was Serf who gave him his popular pet-name. At the age of twenty-five, Mungo began his missionary labours on the Clyde, on the site of modern Glasgow. He built his church across the water from an extinct volcano, next to the Molendinar Burn, where the present medieval cathedral now stands. For some thirteen years, he laboured in the district, living a most austere life in a small cell and making many converts by his holy example and his preaching.

A strong anti-Christian movement in Strathclyde, headed by a certain King Morken, compelled Mungo to leave the district, and he retired to Wales, via Cumbria, staying for a time with Saint David at St David&#x27;s, and afterwards moving on to Gwynedd where he founded a cathedral at Llanelwy (St Asaph in English). While there, he undertook a pilgrimage to Rome. However, the new King of Strathclyde, Riderch Hael, invited Mungo to return to his kingdom. He decided to go and appointed Saint Asaph/Asaff as Bishop of Llanelwy in his place.

For some years, Mungo fixed his Episcopal seat at Hoddom in Dumfriesshire, evangelising thence the district of Galloway. He eventually returned to Glasgow where a large community grew up around him. It was nearby, in Kilmacolm, that he was visited by Saint Columba, who was at that time labouring in Strathtay. The two saints embraced, held long converse, and exchanged their pastoral staves. In old age, Mungo became very feeble and his chin had to be set in place with a bandage. He is said to have died in his bath, on Sunday 13 January.

==Miracles==
In the &quot;Life of Saint Mungo&quot;, he performed four miracles in Glasgow. The following verse is used to remember Mungo&#x27;s four miracles:
The verses refer to the following:
* &quot;The Bird&quot;: Mungo restored life to a robin that had been killed by some of his classmates.
* &quot;The Tree&quot;: Mungo had been left in charge of a fire in Saint Serf&#x27;s monastery. He fell asleep and the fire went out. Taking a hazel branch, he restarted the fire.
* &quot;The Bell&quot;: the bell is thought to have been brought by Mungo from Rome. It was said to have been used in services and to mourn the dead. The original bell no longer exists, and a replacement, created in the 1640s, is now on display in Glasgow.
* &quot;The Fish&quot;: refers to the story about Queen Languoreth of Strathclyde who was suspected of infidelity by her husband. King Riderch demanded to see her ring, which he claimed she had given to her lover. In reality the King had thrown it into the River Clyde. Faced with execution she appealed for help to Mungo, who ordered a messenger to catch a fish in the river. On opening the fish, the ring was miraculously found inside, which allowed the Queen to clear her name. (This story may be confused with an almost identical one concerning King Maelgwn of Gwynedd and Saint Asaph.)

==Analysis==
Mungo&#x27;s ancestry is recorded in the &quot;Bonedd y Saint&quot;. His father, Owain was a King of Rheged. His maternal grandfather, Lleuddun, was probably a King of the Gododdin; Lothian was named after him. There seems little reason to doubt that Mungo was one of the first evangelists of Strathclyde, under the patronage of King Rhiderch Hael, and probably became the first Bishop of Glasgow.

Jocelin seems to have altered parts of the original life that he did not understand; while adding others, like the trip to Rome, that served his own purposes, largely the promotion of the Bishopric of Glasgow. Some new parts may have been collected from genuine local stories, particularly those of Mungo&#x27;s work in Cumbria. S. Mundahl-Harris has shown that Mungo&#x27;s associations with St Asaph were a Norman invention. However, in Scotland, excavations at Hoddom have brought confirmation of early Christian activity there, uncovering a late 6th-century stone baptistery.

Details of Mungo&#x27;s infirmity have a ring of authenticity about them. The year of Mungo&#x27;s death is sometimes given as 603, but is recorded in the Annales Cambriae as 612. 13 January was a Sunday in both 603 and 614. David McRoberts has argued that his death in the bath is a garbled version of his collapse during a baptismal service.

In a late 15th-century fragmentary manuscript generally called &#x27;Lailoken and Kentigern&#x27;, Mungo appears in conflict with the mad prophet, Lailoken alias Merlin. Lailoken&#x27;s appearance at the Battle of Arfderydd in 573 has led to a connection being made between this battle, the rise of Riderch Hael and the return of Mungo to Strathclyde.

The &quot;Life of Saint Mungo&quot; bears similarities with Chrétien de Troyes&#x27;s French romance &quot;Yvain, the Knight of the Lion&quot;. In Chrétien&#x27;s story, Yvain, a version of Owain mab Urien, courts and marries Laudine, only to leave her for a period to go adventuring. This suggests that the works share a common source.

==Veneration==

On the spot where Mungo was buried now stands the cathedral dedicated in his honour. His shrine was a great centre of Christian pilgrimage until the Scottish Reformation. His remains are said to still rest in the crypt. A spring called &quot;St. Mungo&#x27;s Well&quot;
fell eastwards from the apse.

His festival was kept throughout Scotland on 13 January. The Bollandists have printed a special mass for this feast, dating from the 13th century. His feast day in the West is 13 January. His feast day in the Eastern Orthodox Church is 14 January.

Mungo&#x27;s four religious miracles in Glasgow are represented in the city&#x27;s coat of arms. Glasgow&#x27;s current motto &quot;Let Glasgow flourish by the preaching of His word and the praising of His name&quot; and the more secular &quot;Let Glasgow flourish&quot;, are both inspired by Mungo&#x27;s original call &quot;Let Glasgow flourish by the preaching of the word&quot;.

Saint Mungo&#x27;s Well was a cold water spring and bath at Copgrove, near Ripon, North Yorkshire, formerly believed effective for treating rickets.

Glasgow Fire Brigade also named their fireboat &quot;St. Mungo&quot;, which served the around the Clyde from 1959 to 1975.

LNER Peppercorn Class A1 steam locomotive 60145 was named &quot;Saint Mungo&quot;, entering service with British Railways in 1949.

Mungo is remembered in the Church of England with a commemoration on 13 January.

===Namesake churches, schools and charities===
Saint Mungo founded a number of churches during his period as Archbishop of Strathclyde of which Stobo Kirk is a notable example. At Townhead and Dennistoun in Glasgow there is a modern Roman Catholic church and a traditional Scottish Episcopal Church respectively dedicated to the saint.

St Mungo&#x27;s Academy is a Roman Catholic, co-educational, comprehensive, secondary school located in Bridgeton, Glasgow.

Another church established by the saint himself was St Kentigern&#x27;s Church of Lanark, founded shortly before his death, and which now stands in ruins. Another church called St Kentigern&#x27;s was built in the town in the late 19th century. It is still present but has been converted to housing and office space.

In Kilmarnock, a Church of Scotland congregation is named St Kentigern&#x27;s.

St. Kentigern&#x27;s Academy opened in Blackburn, West Lothian in September 1974.

In Alloa, a chapel dedicated to St. Mungo is thought to have been erected during the fourteenth or fifteenth-century. The present Church of Scotland St. Mungo&#x27;s Parish Church in Alloa was built in 1817.

In Cumbernauld, there is St. Mungo&#x27;s Parish Church in the centre of the New Town.

In the Lake District village of Caldbeck there is a church and a well named after him. The Cumbrian parish churches at Crossthwaite in Keswick, Mungrisdale, Castle Sowerby, and Irthington are also dedicated to St Kentigern. There are two Cumbrian churches dedicated to St Mungo, one at Bromfield (also a well and castle) and one at Dearham.

There is a St Kentigern&#x27;s school and church in Blackpool.

In Falkirk, there is a St. Mungo&#x27;s High School.

In Grinsdale, Cumbria there is a church venerated to St. Kentigern.

Also in Cumbria, there are two Greek Orthodox Communities venerated to St. Mungo/Kentigern, one in Dalton-in-Furness and the other in Keswick.

In Fallowfield, a suburb of the city of Manchester, a Roman Catholic church is dedicated to Saint Kentigern.

St Kentigern&#x27;s is a small Roman Catholic Church in the village of Eyeries, on the Beara peninsula in West Cork, Ireland.

Mungo or Kentigern is the patron of a Presbyterian church school in Auckland, New Zealand, which has two campuses: Saint Kentigern College, a secondary co-ed college in the suburb of Pakuranga, and a joint Boys School, Girls School and Pre-School in the suburb of Remuera.

There is a United Church of Canada charge in Cushing Quebec Canada, Saint Mungo&#x27;s United Church. Built in the 1836 originally as a Church of Scotland, it has recently been restored for its 180th anniversary.

Although secular, the English charity for the support and empowerment of the homeless, St. Mungo&#x27;s, was named after the saint by its founder. The Glasgow-born Harry Stone named it in honour of the patron saint of his birth city when the charity was established in 1969. Saint Mungo&#x27;s runs hostels, outreach, emergency shelters, and employment and training services. It provides an online and in-person &quot;Recovery College&quot; free to its students.

The ruinous St. Mungo&#x27;s Chapel (also known as St. Serf&#x27;s Chapel) in Culross is traditionally said to have been built on the site of Mungo&#x27;s birth place. Founded in 1503, it later fell into ruin and was silted up. The site was excavated in 1926. It is now a scheduled monument.

==Fiction==
St. Mungo is mentioned in the &quot;Father Brown&quot; series of books by G. K. Chesterton, as the titular saint of Father Brown&#x27;s parish.

St. Mungo is a primary antagonist in the book &quot;The Lost Queen&quot; by Signe Pike. He is portrayed as vindictive, cruel, and malicious.

St. Mungo&#x27;s Hospital for Magical Maladies and Injuries is the primary hospital of Magical Britain in the &quot;Harry Potter&quot; series of books by J. K. Rowling.

Kentigern Gardens is the location of a murder in &quot;The Cuckoo&#x27;s Calling&quot;, a novel published under J. K. Rowling&#x27;s pseudonym of Robert Galbraith. 

Mungo is the main character in &quot;Young Mungo&quot;, a novel by Douglas Stuart. Name holds symbolic importance for the character&#x27;s story.

Mungo&#x27;s tomb is featured in the book Raven Nightshade - The Demon Sword - in the series of books by Martin Roy, where it is described as containing a cup of coffee, adding an intriguing and surreal detail to the narrative.

==See also==
*St Kentigern&#x27;s Church – dedicated churches

==Notes==
==Sources and references==
* The Magnificent Gael [Reginald B. Hale] 1976, World Media Productions* Baring-Gould, Sabine &amp; Fisher, John (1907: 2000) &quot;Lives of the British Saints&quot;. 8 vols. Felinfach: Llanerch (Facsim. reprint in 8 parts of the 4 vol. ed. published: London: Honourable Society of Cymmrodorion, 1907–1913.)
* Chrétien de Troyes; Burton Raffel, ed. (1987) &quot;Yvain, the Knight of the Lion&quot;. New Haven: Yale University Press.
* Davies, John Reuben, &quot;Bishop Kentigern among the Britons,&quot; in Boardman, Steve, John Reuben Davies, Eila Williamson (eds), &quot;Saints&#x27; Cults in the Celtic World&quot; (Woodbridge, Boydell Press, 2009) (Studies in Celtic History),
* Delaney, John J. (1983) &quot;Pocket Dictionary of Saints&quot;. Image Books.
* Lowe, Chris (1999) &quot;Angels, Fools and Tyrants&quot;. Edinburgh: Canongate Books &amp; Historic Scotland
* Rees, Elizabeth (2000) &quot;Celtic Saints: passionate wanderers&quot;. London: Thames &amp; Hudson
* &quot;St. Kentigern&quot;. &quot;The Catholic Encyclopedia&quot;. New Advent. 
* Tranter, Nigel (1993) &quot;Druid Sacrifice&quot;. London: Hodder &amp; Stoughton (historical novel)
* Wade-Evans, A. W. (1934) &quot;Welsh Christian Origins&quot;. Oxford: Alden Press
* McArthur Irvin, Lindsay, &quot;Building a British Identity: Jocelin of Furness&#x27;s Use of Sources in Vita Kentigerni,&quot; in &quot;Identity and Alterity in Hagiography and the Cult ofSaints&quot;, eds. Ana Marinkovic and Trpimir Vedris (Zagreb: Hagiotheca, 2010), 103–117

==External links==
* Jocelyn&#x27;s &quot;Life of Saint Mungo&quot;
*Glasgow Museums: St Mungo Museum of Religious Life and Art
*Kentigern and Gonothigernus (&quot;Heroic Age Online Journal&quot;) 
*St Mungo&#x27;s Holy Well, Alloway, Ayrshire</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q545175" start="0" end="9" title="Saint Mungo" label="Kentigern"/>
<link wikidata="Q545175" start="25" end="30" title="Saint Mungo" label="Mungo"/>
<link wikidata="Q849967" start="56" end="65" title="Celtic Britons" label="Brittonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q225890" start="66" end="88" title="Kingdom of Strathclyde" label="Kingdom of Strathclyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q28914" start="136" end="148" title="patron saint" label="patron saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="164" end="171" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="186" end="191" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="196" end="203" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248800" start="305" end="312" title="Common Brittonic" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q38923" start="353" end="358" title="hound" label="hound"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266723" start="420" end="429" title="Old Welsh" label="Old Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="591" end="602" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q49614" start="680" end="688" title="nickname" label="pet name"/>
<link wikidata="Q35965" start="722" end="729" title="Cumbric language" label="Cumbric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130279" start="797" end="807" title="hypocorism" label="hypocorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q20713711" start="886" end="895" title="Kirkmahoe" label="Kirkmahoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1819869" start="1009" end="1027" title="Bromfield, Cumbria" label="Bromfield, Cumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188918" start="1056" end="1081" title="Crosthwaite Parish Church" label="Crosthwaite Parish Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q23066" start="1130" end="1137" title="Cumbria" label="Cumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7594896" start="1151" end="1182" title="St Mungo&amp;#x27;s Church, Dearham" label="St Mungo&amp;#x27;s Church, Dearham"/>
<link wikidata="Q44613" start="1256" end="1264" title="monastery" label="monastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q208628" start="1265" end="1277" title="hagiography" label="hagiographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6207186" start="1278" end="1296" title="Jocelyn of Furness" label="Jocelyn of Furness"/>
<link wikidata="Q35308" start="1402" end="1411" title="Old Irish" label="Old Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q943336" start="1500" end="1509" title="Cotton library" label="Cottonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q23308" start="1532" end="1547" title="British Library" label="British Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q16850557" start="1602" end="1619" title="John of Tynemouth (chronicler)" label="John of Tynemouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4454645" start="1651" end="1656" title="Teneu" label="Teneu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584977" start="1689" end="1702" title="King Lot" label="King Lleuddun"/>
<link wikidata="Q642024" start="1762" end="1769" title="Lothian" label="Lothian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345964" start="1806" end="1814" title="Gododdin" label="Gododdin"/>
<link wikidata="Q547241" start="1822" end="1831" title="Y Gogledd Hen" label="Old North"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486268" start="1874" end="1889" title="Owain mab Urien" label="Owain mab Urien"/>
<link wikidata="Q23308" start="1907" end="1922" title="British Library" label="British Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q1119359" start="2380" end="2392" title="Traprain Law" label="Traprain Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131847" start="2433" end="2440" title="coracle" label="coracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q202083" start="2473" end="2487" title="Firth of Forth" label="Firth of Forth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424554" start="2491" end="2498" title="Culross" label="Culross"/>
<link wikidata="Q201149" start="2502" end="2506" title="Fife" label="Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811124" start="2555" end="2565" title="Saint Serf" label="Saint Serf"/>
<link wikidata="Q102891" start="2593" end="2598" title="Picts" label="Picts"/>
<link wikidata="Q19721" start="2729" end="2734" title="River Clyde" label="Clyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q331697" start="3252" end="3263" title="Saint David" label="Saint David"/>
<link wikidata="Q648732" start="3267" end="3282" title="St David&amp;#x27;s" label="St David&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q816814" start="3312" end="3319" title="Kingdom of Gwynedd" label="Gwynedd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991350" start="3339" end="3348" title="St Asaph Cathedral" label="cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q548248" start="3352" end="3360" title="St Asaph" label="Llanelwy"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="3426" end="3430" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q887367" start="3470" end="3482" title="Riderch I of Alt Clut" label="Riderch Hael"/>
<link wikidata="Q721005" start="3555" end="3572" title="Saint Asaph" label="Saint Asaph/Asaff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435499" start="3576" end="3594" title="Bishop of St Asaph" label="Bishop of Llanelwy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138500" start="3642" end="3656" title="cathedra" label="Episcopal seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5875994" start="3660" end="3666" title="Hoddom" label="Hoddom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247384" start="3670" end="3683" title="Dumfriesshire" label="Dumfriesshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342092" start="3721" end="3729" title="Galloway" label="Galloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011533" start="3827" end="3836" title="Kilmacolm" label="Kilmacolm"/>
<link wikidata="Q236326" start="3861" end="3874" title="Columba" label="Saint Columba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661" start="4316" end="4321" title="Verse (poetry)" label="verse"/>
<link wikidata="Q886399" start="5441" end="5448" title="Maelgwn Hir ap Cadwallon" label="Maelgwn"/>
<link wikidata="Q721005" start="5464" end="5475" title="Saint Asaph" label="Saint Asaph"/>
<link wikidata="Q4941597" start="5539" end="5553" title="Bonedd y Saint" label="Bonedd y Saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q633573" start="5593" end="5599" title="Rheged" label="Rheged"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345964" start="5664" end="5672" title="Gododdin" label="Gododdin"/>
<link wikidata="Q642024" start="5674" end="5681" title="Lothian" label="Lothian"/>
<link wikidata="Q946465" start="5871" end="5888" title="Bishop of Glasgow" label="Bishop of Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q15187215" start="6079" end="6099" title="Diocese of Glasgow" label="Bishopric of Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q23066" start="6211" end="6218" title="Cumbria" label="Cumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q548248" start="6284" end="6292" title="St Asaph" label="St Asaph"/>
<link wikidata="Q83418" start="6300" end="6306" title="Normans" label="Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q564369" start="6627" end="6643" title="Annales Cambriae" label="Annales Cambriae"/>
<link wikidata="Q6473918" start="6886" end="6894" title="Lailoken" label="Lailoken"/>
<link wikidata="Q188044" start="6979" end="6985" title="Merlin (wizard)" label="Merlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633662" start="7021" end="7040" title="Battle of Arfderydd" label="Battle of Arfderydd"/>
<link wikidata="Q4302" start="7230" end="7248" title="Chrétien de Troyes" label="Chrétien de Troyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928169" start="7277" end="7306" title="Yvain, the Knight of the Lion" label="Yvain, the Knight of the Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6129446" start="7340" end="7345" title="Ywain" label="Yvain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3218591" start="7396" end="7403" title="Laudine" label="Laudine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473348" start="7574" end="7583" title="Glasgow Cathedral" label="cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q697295" start="7613" end="7619" title="shrine" label="shrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532351" start="7673" end="7693" title="Scottish Reformation" label="Scottish Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q670974" start="7886" end="7896" title="Bollandist" label="Bollandist"/>
<link wikidata="Q688564" start="7976" end="7985" title="feast day" label="feast day"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="8034" end="8057" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q30462586" start="8157" end="8169" title="Coat of arms of Glasgow" label="coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q42470" start="8194" end="8199" title="motto" label="motto"/>
<link wikidata="Q661529" start="8533" end="8538" title="Ripon" label="Ripon"/>
<link wikidata="Q183392" start="8598" end="8605" title="rickets" label="rickets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190275" start="8646" end="8654" title="fireboat" label="fireboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q25351823" start="8655" end="8676" title="St. Mungo (fireboat)" label="&amp;quot;St. Mungo&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712924" start="8732" end="8756" title="LNER Peppercorn Class A1" label="LNER Peppercorn Class A1"/>
<link wikidata="Q605169" start="8837" end="8849" title="British Rail" label="British Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019506" start="8873" end="8883" title="Calendar of saints (Church of England)" label="remembered"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="8891" end="8908" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152292" start="8916" end="8929" title="Commemoration (observance)" label="commemoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617796" start="9090" end="9100" title="Stobo Kirk" label="Stobo Kirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830118" start="9126" end="9134" title="Townhead" label="Townhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259129" start="9139" end="9149" title="Dennistoun" label="Dennistoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="9153" end="9160" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="9179" end="9193" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205829" start="9219" end="9244" title="Scottish Episcopal Church" label="Scottish Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7594895" start="9283" end="9306" title="St Mungo&amp;#x27;s Academy" label="St Mungo&amp;#x27;s Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="9312" end="9326" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q541394" start="9328" end="9342" title="co-educational" label="co-educational"/>
<link wikidata="Q682697" start="9344" end="9357" title="Comprehensive school" label="comprehensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q159334" start="9359" end="9375" title="secondary school" label="secondary school"/>
<link wikidata="Q4966763" start="9387" end="9405" title="Bridgeton, Glasgow" label="Bridgeton, Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q24197225" start="9460" end="9486" title="St Kentigern&amp;#x27;s Church, Lanark (Hyndford Road)" label="St Kentigern&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002124" start="9490" end="9496" title="Lanark" label="Lanark"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9585" end="9604" title="St Kentigern&amp;#x27;s Church, Lanark (Hope Street)" label="St Kentigern&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q576562" start="9729" end="9739" title="Kilmarnock" label="Kilmarnock"/>
<link wikidata="Q922480" start="9743" end="9761" title="Church of Scotland" label="Church of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7589427" start="9806" end="9834" title="St. Kentigern&amp;#x27;s Academy" label="St. Kentigern&amp;#x27;s Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016707" start="9845" end="9868" title="Blackburn, West Lothian" label="Blackburn, West Lothian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009331" start="9892" end="9897" title="Alloa" label="Alloa"/>
<link wikidata="Q922480" start="10019" end="10037" title="Church of Scotland" label="Church of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q11839380" start="10038" end="10068" title="St. Mungo&amp;#x27;s Parish Church" label="St. Mungo&amp;#x27;s Parish Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q996616" start="10101" end="10112" title="Cumbernauld" label="Cumbernauld"/>
<link wikidata="Q211778" start="10193" end="10206" title="Lake District" label="Lake District"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002646" start="10218" end="10226" title="Caldbeck" label="Caldbeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q7594896" start="10518" end="10525" title="St Mungo&amp;#x27;s Church, Dearham" label="Dearham"/>
<link wikidata="Q170377" start="10580" end="10589" title="Blackpool" label="Blackpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q2490815" start="10649" end="10658" title="Grinsdale" label="Grinsdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158089" start="10814" end="10831" title="Dalton-in-Furness" label="Dalton-in-Furness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025076" start="10849" end="10856" title="Keswick, Cumbria" label="Keswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q637582" start="10862" end="10873" title="Fallowfield" label="Fallowfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084172" start="11040" end="11047" title="Eyeries" label="Eyeries"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="11134" end="11153" title="Presbyterian church" label="Presbyterian church"/>
<link wikidata="Q37100" start="11164" end="11172" title="Auckland" label="Auckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="11174" end="11185" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7401596" start="11211" end="11234" title="Saint Kentigern College" label="Saint Kentigern College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7126082" start="11279" end="11288" title="Pakuranga" label="Pakuranga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312235" start="11360" end="11367" title="Remuera" label="Remuera"/>
<link wikidata="Q17062727" start="11671" end="11687" title="St Mungo&amp;#x27;s (charity)" label="St. Mungo&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811124" start="12099" end="12107" title="St. Serf" label="St. Serf"/>
<link wikidata="Q219538" start="12320" end="12338" title="scheduled monument" label="scheduled monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545219" start="12389" end="12401" title="Father Brown" label="Father Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q183167" start="12427" end="12443" title="G. K. Chesterton" label="G. K. Chesterton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12550" end="12564" title="The Lost Queen" label="The Lost Queen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12574" end="12584" title="Signe Pike" label="Signe Pike"/>
<link wikidata="Q8337" start="12756" end="12768" title="Harry Potter" label="Harry Potter"/>
<link wikidata="Q34660" start="12794" end="12807" title="J. K. Rowling" label="J. K. Rowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q13882199" start="12865" end="12890" title="The Cuckoo&amp;#x27;s Calling" label="The Cuckoo&amp;#x27;s Calling"/>
<link wikidata="Q34660" start="12922" end="12935" title="J. K. Rowling" label="J. K. Rowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q61002" start="12943" end="12952" title="pseudonym" label="pseudonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q111432741" start="13013" end="13024" title="Young Mungo" label="Young Mungo"/>
<link wikidata="Q22349211" start="13366" end="13392" title="St Kentigern&amp;#x27;s Church (disambiguation)" label="St Kentigern&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242472" start="13525" end="13545" title="Sabine Baring-Gould" label="Baring-Gould, Sabine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4302" start="13762" end="13780" title="Chrétien de Troyes" label="Chrétien de Troyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5000906" start="13782" end="13795" title="Burton Raffel" label="Burton Raffel"/>
<link wikidata="Q111854" start="14306" end="14323" title="Historic Scotland" label="Historic Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14537" end="14552" title="Historical novels by Nigel Tranter set before 1286#Druid Sacrifice" label="Druid Sacrifice"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143212" wikidata="Q631416" url="?curid=143212" title="H. H. Kung">
<text>Kung Hsiang-hsi (; 11 September 1880 – 16 August 1967), often known as Dr. H. H. Kung, also known as Dr. Chauncey Kung, was a Chinese banker and politician. He married Soong Ai-ling, the eldest of the three Soong sisters; the other two married President Sun Yat-sen and President Chiang Kai-shek. Together with his brother-in-law, Soong Tse-ven, he was highly influential in determining the economic policies of the Kuomintang-led Nationalist government of the Republic of China in the 1930s and 1940s.

==Biography==

===Early life===
Kung was born during the late Qing dynasty into a prosperous banking and trading family in Taigu County, Shanxi Province, where he attended a mission school in spite of his family&#x27;s doubts. He then attended North China Union College in Tongzhou, near Beijing, where he took courses in mathematics, physics and chemistry, subjects which were not offered in traditional Chinese schools. Upon hearing of the Boxer attacks, he returned to Taigu, but his family prevented him from leaving the house. After the Taiyuan Massacre, which included members of the Oberlin Band, he carried letters from several of the murdered missionaries to Beijing by hiding them between the layers of his cloth shoes. Returning to Taigu, by using the powers of the Boxer Indemnity, he distributed relief to the families of those killed, buried the dead, and confiscated the estate of a family which had supported the Boxers.

In the summer of 1901, Luella Miner, a missionary and Oberlin graduate, arranged for Kung to travel to Oberlin for further study. Upon landing in San Francisco, however, because of the Chinese Exclusion Act, Kung and his companion were locked up for several weeks before the Chinese Consul-General posted bond, and they were then not allowed to go to Oberlin for another year. Their railway passage took them into Canada, but only by strong intervention from an Ohio congressman were they allowed to re-enter the United States. Kung graduated from Oberlin in 1906, then proceeded to take a master&#x27;s degree in chemistry from Yale University.

After completing his education abroad, Kung returned to his home province in China. During the 1911 Xinhai Revolution, Kung mobilized forces in support of Yan Xishan, helping Yan to overthrow the authority of the Qing imperial government in Shanxi. After 1911, Kung became one of Yan&#x27;s most trusted advisors, and Yan was soon recognized as the military governor of Shanxi by Yuan Shikai, and effectively controlled Shanxi until 1949, when the Communists took control of mainland China. Kung&#x27;s influence on Yan&#x27;s thinking from 1911 onward was significant, and was a major factor in Yan&#x27;s subsequent determination to modernize Shanxi. The reforms that Yan subsequently conducted won Yan widespread acclaim, and Shanxi gained a reputation during the Warlord Era as being the &quot;Model Province&quot;.

After 1911, Kung helped to establish Ming Hsien, a complex of Christian schools in Taigu on the land Kung had acquired through the Boxer Indemnity. Kung became principal, and married Han Yu-mei, a fellow graduate of the North China Union College, who died of tuberculosis. In 1913, he met Soong Ai-ling, one of the Soong sisters, and married her the following year. Supporters in Oberlin established the Oberlin Shansi Memorial Association, to which Kung made regular and substantial contributions.

In 1922, Shanxi experienced a serious famine. Kung worked closely with the American Red Cross and missionary organizations like American Mission Board and the China International Famine Relief Commission to deliver relief supplies and to improve Shanxi&#x27;s infrastructure to make the delivery of relief easier. According to foreign members of the Famine Relief Commission, the collective efforts of all involved were successful in preventing what otherwise would have been an &quot;appalling calamity&quot;, and by 1923 conditions in Shanxi returned to normal.

In the summer of 1926 Kung returned to the United States; during this trip he represented China at the Philadelphia Sesquicentennial celebrations, and Oberlin bestowed Kung an LL.D. degree.

===Minister in the Nationalist government===
Kung was an early supporter of Sun Yat-sen and the Kuomintang (KMT or Nationalist Party), including early leaders such as Wang Jingwei. He developed close family ties. His wife was a sister of Soong Tse-ven. Soong Ching-ling, another sister, married Sun Yat-sen in 1915 and Chiang Kai-shek became Kung&#x27;s brother-in-law in 1927 when he married Soong Mei-ling. The Soong sisters and their husbands had the reputation of being one of the Four Big Families of the time.

Kung began his career in the Nationalist government of the Republic of China as Minister of Industry, holding this position from 1927-1928 in the Wuhan Nationalist Government, led by Wang Jingwei during the Northern Expedition as a leftist rival to Chiang&#x27;s faction. After the fall of Wang&#x27;s government, Kung served as the Minister of Industry and Commerce from 1928-1931 in the Nanking Government, and later as the Minister of Finance, from 1933–1944. Kung was governor of the Central Bank of China from 1933 to 1945, and also chairman of the China Development Finance Corporation from its creation in 1934.

In 1927 one of his first acts in government was to balance the national budget. To raise the capital required, Kung increased the taxes on cigarettes by 50%. Several Shanghai cigarette factories protested against these taxes with shutdowns. Kung also threatened to increase the salt tax by 28%.

Kung joined the central executive committee of the KMT in 1931. He served as Premier of the Republic of China from 1 January 1938 – 20 November 1939. Kung then served as the Vice-Premier of the Executive Yuan, from 1935-1945. Kung served as China&#x27;s Chief Delegate to the International Monetary &amp; Financial Conference in 1944, where he signed the Bretton Woods Accord during the Bretton Woods Conference at the Mount Washington Hotel, in New Hampshire, United States. This conference established the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD), which today is part of the World Bank Group.

After his move to the central government, Kung continued to advocate for good relations between Chiang Kai-shek and Yan Xishan. Yan&#x27;s opposition to Chiang during the 1930 Central Plains War caused Yan to formally retire from all positions of leadership in Shanxi, and to flee to Dalian. Kung&#x27;s tireless advocacy for Yan within the central government was successful, as Chiang allowed Yan to return to Shanxi in 1931. Chiang clearly recognized Yan as the &quot;de facto&quot; ruler of Shanxi by 1934.

In 1933, Kung spent weeks in Germany, a German business delegation accompanied him back to China, among them Vizeadmiral a. D. Walther Kinzel, who represented Zeiss, Rheinmetall, Krupp and Loewe. In June 1933, Hans von Seeckt published the memorandum to Marshal Chiang Kai-shek on his program to industrialize and militarize China. In 1934, Kung stated, in response to the American &quot;nationalization of silver&quot;, that &quot;We also would like to nationalize silver but for China this is impossible because our Government is hampered by extraterritorial treaties. We do not want the price to skyrocket, for silver is vital to our national life.&quot;

Kung directed the creation of the fiat currency fabi, which replaced the silver standard in 1935. The fabi experienced from inflation and hyperinflation, and its collapse during Kung&#x27;s tenure resulted in his legacy as minister of finance being viewed poorly.

===Diplomacy with Axis powers===

In 1937, as the Minister of Finance of the Republic of China, Kung and two other KMT officials visited Germany and were received by Adolf Hitler on 13 June. Hitler told Kung, &quot;I understand that people in China think the Soviet Union is their friend. But from our talk I understand that you, Herr Doktor, realize the danger of Communist doctrines.&quot; Kung also convinced Hitler to cancel a scheduled speech at a Nazi conference by Prince Chichibu, the Japanese Emperor&#x27;s brother. Kung said, &quot;I was able to make Hitler understand that Japan wanted to dominate the world... I was able to make Hitler think twice before getting too close to Japan.&quot; While he was in Germany, Kung stated his &quot;deep satisfaction&quot; with Hitler.

Hitler, Hermann Göring and Hjalmar Schacht bestowed upon Kung an honorary degree, and attempted to open China&#x27;s market to German exports. Hitler, Göring, and Schacht earmarked for Chinese students for studying in Germany after they persuaded an industrialist to set aside the money for that purpose. Kung, in favor of commercial credits, refused an international loan offer by Hitler.

Kung also met Hjalmar Schacht while in Germany. Schacht told him that &quot;German-Chinese friendship stemmed in good part from the hard struggle of both for independence.&quot; Kung said, &quot;China considers Germany its best friend... I hope and wish that Germany will participate in supporting the further development of China, the opening up of its sources of raw materials, the upbringing of its industries and [its] means of transportation.&quot;

Kung also visited U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt and Italian leader Benito Mussolini in 1937. Kung said, &quot;I thought Mussolini was doing great things for Italy... We got along well. I thought he would be a good ally of our Government.&quot;

===During the Second Sino-Japanese War===
By the time of the Second Sino Japanese War (1937–45), Kung had achieved a reputation as an exceptionally powerful and manipulative figure within the Nationalist government, sometimes in alliance with his brother-in-law, Soong Tse-ven and his sister-in-law, Soong Mei-ling, and sometimes in rivalry with them. By the time the Nationalist government had moved to Chongqing, Kung was running his own secret service. Zhou Enlai, while serving as the Communist Party&#x27;s ambassador to the KMT in Chongqing, was notably successful in gaining the confidence of Kung&#x27;s advisor, Hu Egong, allowing Zhou to conduct his intelligence work more efficiently.

In January 1938, Kung, a 75th-generation descendant of Confucius, greeted his relative, Kung Te-cheng, who was also a descendant of Confucius, after Kung Te-cheng had fled to Hankou after the Japanese invasion of Shandong. After Kung Te-cheng fled, the Japanese blew up his residence on Mount Tai. &quot;Time&quot; magazine addressed Kung Te-cheng by the title &quot;Duke Kung&quot;, and referred to his residence as the &quot;ducal seat&quot;.

After a string of Japanese mishaps in 1938, Kung gave a radio address in which he stated that &quot;God is helping China!&quot; Kung&#x27;s radio speech came after reports that a Japanese attempt to seize Hankou had failed; and, with constant Chinese guerrilla activity, Chinese forces had seized territory captured by Japan.

In 1944, Kung gave a speech at China House in New York with one of Mencius&#x27;s direct descendants, Meng Chih. Both were alumni of American universities.

Chiang had lost confidence in Kung by 1944, likely because of widespread reports of corruption by Kung. Kung became unpopular among many different factions of the Kuomintang and was removed from politics. Among other issues, Kung was one of the Nationalist government insiders implicated in corruption during the 1942-1943 American Dollar Bond scandal. After the 1941 Japanese declaration of war against the United States and the United Kingdom, the two allies sought to support China in a concrete way despite logistical limitations following the loss of British Burma. The two countries loaned significant amounts of money to the Nationalist government. The Nationalist government decided to use USD$200 million to absorb excess fabi in an effort to curb inflation. In theory, Chinese purchasers would use fabi to buy bonds at the official exchange rate and be paid in dollars when the bonds were redeemed following victory over Japan. The American Dollar Bonds were issued on March 24, 1942. The public response was poor, with few bond sales. In October 1943, Kung sent a secret memorandum to Chiang Kai-shek asking that the bond sales end. Subscriptions were closed on October 15, 1943 and a central bank official falsely announced that all bonds had been sold. Secretly, insiders then purchased the remaining bonds using currency acquired on the black market. The result was a windfall for Nationalist government insiders including Kung, Long Yun, Wei Daoming, members of the Soong family, and others.

In November 1944, Chiang replaced Kung with Yu Hongjun as the new minister of finance. Kung continued to hold positions as the vice president of the Executive Yuan and head of the Central Bank of China until he was likewise removed from those positions in spring 1945. Chiang nonetheless appointed Kung as the chair of the Central Bank&#x27;s Board of Directors in an effort to save face. In a further effort to protect Kung, Chiang dismissed lower level finance ministry officials as scapegoats and blocked newspapers from publishing allegations of Kung&#x27;s corruption in the American Dollar Bond scandal.

Among the KMT factions which criticized Kung in the period leading to his resignation was the Gexin movement.

==Personal life==
After the KMT retreated to Taiwan in 1949 at the end of the Chinese Civil War, Kung moved to the United States. He died in 1967 in Locust Valley, New York.

Kung had a habit of smoking stogies. &quot;Time&quot; magazine claimed that Kung smoked &quot;15 Havana cigars&quot; a day. He was a Christian.

Kung was a 75th generation descendant of Confucius, as indicated by the generation name &quot;hsiang&quot; (祥; &quot;xiáng&quot;). Kung&#x27;s father was (; 1861–1911), a 74th generation descendant of Confucius, indicated by the generation name &quot;fan&quot; (繁; &quot;fán&quot;).

Kung first marriage was to Han Yu-mei in 1910, but she died in 1913. In 1914, Kung married his second wife, Soong Ai-ling, the eldest of the Soong sisters. Kung and Soong had two sons and two daughters:
* Kung Ling-i (; Kong Lingyi), daughter
* David Kung Ling-kan (; Kong Lingkan), son
* Kung Ling-chun (; Kong Lingjun), daughter, also known as Kung Ling-wei (孔令偉)
* Kung Ling-chie (; Kong Lingjie), son. His son Gregory Kung (Kung Teh-chi) (Kong Deji) (孔德基) was born from his marriage to Debra Paget.

The children all have the generation name &quot;ling&quot; (令; &quot;lìng&quot;) in their names to indicate that they are 76th generation descendants of Confucius.

The Kung family residential compound, a well-preserved example of mid-Qing dynasty architecture, is now a tourist attraction in Taigu County, Shanxi.

==See also==

* Soong sisters
* Chiang Kai-shek
* History of the Republic of China
* Military of the Republic of China

==Footnotes==
==References==
* Barnouin, Barbara and Yu Changgen. &quot;Zhou Enlai: A Political Life&quot;. Hong Kong: Chinese University of Hong Kong, 2006. . Retrieved 12 March 2011.
* Gillin, Donald G. &quot;Warlord: Yen Hsi-shan in Shansi Province 1911-1949&quot;. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press. 1967.
* 
* 

==Further reading==
* Seagrave, Sterling. &quot;The Soong Dynasty&quot;. Corgi Books, 1996. .

==External links==
* 
*Finding aid to the H.H. Kung papers at Columbia University. Rare Book &amp; Manuscript Library</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q631416" start="0" end="15" title="H. H. Kung" label="Kung Hsiang-hsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q631416" start="71" end="85" title="H. H. Kung" label="Dr. H. H. Kung"/>
<link wikidata="Q22687" start="134" end="140" title="banker" label="banker"/>
<link wikidata="Q82955" start="145" end="155" title="politician" label="politician"/>
<link wikidata="Q256411" start="168" end="181" title="Soong Ai-ling" label="Soong Ai-ling"/>
<link wikidata="Q714663" start="207" end="220" title="Soong sisters" label="Soong sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q887003" start="244" end="253" title="President of the Republic of China" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q8573" start="254" end="265" title="Sun Yat-sen" label="Sun Yat-sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q887003" start="270" end="279" title="President of the Republic of China" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q16574" start="280" end="295" title="Chiang Kai-shek" label="Chiang Kai-shek"/>
<link wikidata="Q716051" start="331" end="344" title="T. V. Soong" label="Soong Tse-ven"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="416" end="426" title="Kuomintang" label="Kuomintang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308761" start="431" end="453" title="Nationalist government" label="Nationalist government"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426199" start="461" end="478" title="Republic of China (1912–1949)" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="566" end="578" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q955461" start="627" end="639" title="Taigu County" label="Taigu County"/>
<link wikidata="Q46913" start="641" end="656" title="Shanxi" label="Shanxi Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q393836" start="777" end="785" title="Tongzhou District, Beijing" label="Tongzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="792" end="799" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q150229" start="946" end="951" title="Boxer Rebellion" label="Boxer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7676655" start="1046" end="1062" title="Taiyuan Massacre" label="Taiyuan Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7074757" start="1094" end="1106" title="Oberlin Band (China)" label="Oberlin Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q672556" start="1281" end="1296" title="Boxer Indemnity" label="Boxer Indemnity"/>
<link wikidata="Q17119997" start="1465" end="1477" title="Luella Miner" label="Luella Miner"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="1588" end="1601" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073716" start="1627" end="1648" title="Chinese Exclusion Act" label="Chinese Exclusion Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="2071" end="2086" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q190517" start="2189" end="2206" title="Xinhai Revolution" label="Xinhai Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q699698" start="2244" end="2254" title="Yan Xishan" label="Yan Xishan"/>
<link wikidata="Q210329" start="2469" end="2480" title="Yuan Shikai" label="Yuan Shikai"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="2537" end="2547" title="Communist Party of China" label="Communists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201263" start="2856" end="2867" title="Warlord Era" label="Warlord Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q256411" start="3199" end="3212" title="Soong Ai-ling" label="Soong Ai-ling"/>
<link wikidata="Q714663" start="3225" end="3238" title="Soong sisters" label="Soong sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7074768" start="3314" end="3349" title="Oberlin Shansi Memorial Association" label="Oberlin Shansi Memorial Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q470110" start="3485" end="3503" title="American Red Cross" label="American Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q463587" start="3538" end="3560" title="American Mission Board" label="American Mission Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q18658327" start="3569" end="3613" title="China International Famine Relief Commission" label="China International Famine Relief Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q7456097" start="4078" end="4107" title="Sesquicentennial Exposition" label="Philadelphia Sesquicentennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q6518699" start="4151" end="4155" title="Legum Doctor" label="LL.D"/>
<link wikidata="Q8573" start="4242" end="4253" title="Sun Yat-sen" label="Sun Yat-sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="4262" end="4299" title="Kuomintang" label="Kuomintang (KMT or Nationalist Party)"/>
<link wikidata="Q22303" start="4333" end="4345" title="Wang Jingwei" label="Wang Jingwei"/>
<link wikidata="Q716051" start="4404" end="4417" title="T. V. Soong" label="Soong Tse-ven"/>
<link wikidata="Q17132" start="4419" end="4435" title="Soong Ching-ling" label="Soong Ching-ling"/>
<link wikidata="Q16574" start="4485" end="4500" title="Chiang Kai-shek" label="Chiang Kai-shek"/>
<link wikidata="Q17135" start="4559" end="4573" title="Soong Mei-ling" label="Soong Mei-ling"/>
<link wikidata="Q714663" start="4579" end="4592" title="Soong sisters" label="Soong sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q5475645" start="4651" end="4668" title="Four big families of the Republic of China" label="Four Big Families"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426199" start="4742" end="4759" title="Republic of China (1912–49)" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073476" start="4890" end="4909" title="Northern Expedition" label="Northern Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q697099" start="5109" end="5128" title="List of finance ministers of the Republic of China" label="Minister of Finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q198642" start="5171" end="5192" title="Central Bank of China" label="Central Bank of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q111802894" start="5237" end="5274" title="China Development Finance Corporation" label="China Development Finance Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q702650" start="5676" end="5708" title="Premier of the Republic of China" label="Premier of the Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194052" start="5986" end="6010" title="Bretton Woods Conference" label="Bretton Woods Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="6107" end="6134" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q191384" start="6149" end="6202" title="International Bank for Reconstruction and Development" label="International Bank for Reconstruction and Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="6238" end="6248" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q717809" start="6433" end="6451" title="Central Plains War" label="Central Plains War"/>
<link wikidata="Q74881" start="6541" end="6547" title="Dalian" label="Dalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q57204" start="6978" end="6993" title="Hans von Seeckt" label="Hans von Seeckt"/>
<link wikidata="Q16574" start="7030" end="7045" title="Chiang Kai-shek" label="Chiang Kai-shek"/>
<link wikidata="Q672897" start="7475" end="7479" title="History of Chinese currency" label="fabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="7858" end="7870" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="7951" end="7963" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q700317" start="8164" end="8179" title="Yasuhito, Prince Chichibu" label="Prince Chichibu"/>
<link wikidata="Q34479" start="8185" end="8201" title="Hirohito" label="Japanese Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q47906" start="8487" end="8501" title="Hermann Göring" label="Hermann Göring"/>
<link wikidata="Q151691" start="8506" end="8521" title="Hjalmar Schacht" label="Hjalmar Schacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="9358" end="9379" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="9399" end="9415" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="9638" end="9662" title="Second Sino Japanese War" label="Second Sino Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308761" start="9769" end="9791" title="Nationalist government" label="Nationalist government"/>
<link wikidata="Q716051" start="9840" end="9853" title="T. V. Soong" label="Soong Tse-ven"/>
<link wikidata="Q17135" start="9877" end="9891" title="Soong Mei-ling" label="Soong Mei-ling"/>
<link wikidata="Q11725" start="9981" end="9990" title="Chongqing" label="Chongqing"/>
<link wikidata="Q17410" start="10033" end="10043" title="Zhou Enlai" label="Zhou Enlai"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="10066" end="10081" title="Communist Party of China" label="Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4604" start="10329" end="10338" title="Confucius" label="Confucius"/>
<link wikidata="Q698846" start="10362" end="10375" title="Kung Te-cheng" label="Kung Te-cheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208250" start="10449" end="10455" title="Hankou" label="Hankou"/>
<link wikidata="Q43407" start="10487" end="10495" title="Shandong" label="Shandong"/>
<link wikidata="Q216059" start="10561" end="10570" title="Mount Tai" label="Mount Tai"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="10578" end="10582" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q5312919" start="10641" end="10650" title="Duke Yansheng" label="Duke Kung"/>
<link wikidata="Q188903" start="11114" end="11121" title="Mencius" label="Mencius"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11149" end="11158" title="Paul Chih Meng" label="Meng Chih"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376315" start="11760" end="11773" title="British Burma" label="British Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q281514" start="12647" end="12655" title="Long Yun" label="Long Yun"/>
<link wikidata="Q701051" start="12657" end="12668" title="Wei Tao-ming" label="Wei Daoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q714663" start="12685" end="12697" title="Soong sisters" label="Soong family"/>
<link wikidata="Q708912" start="12756" end="12766" title="Yu Hongjun" label="Yu Hongjun"/>
<link wikidata="Q715055" start="12861" end="12875" title="Executive Yuan" label="Executive Yuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503480" start="13090" end="13099" title="Face (sociological concept)" label="save face"/>
<link wikidata="Q123376462" start="13417" end="13431" title="Gexin movement" label="Gexin movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="13479" end="13485" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q179975" start="13512" end="13529" title="Chinese Civil War" label="Chinese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q541406" start="13583" end="13596" title="Locust Valley, New York" label="Locust Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="13598" end="13606" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2962769" start="13637" end="13643" title="Cheroot" label="stogie"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="13652" end="13656" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142914" start="13706" end="13718" title="Habanos S.A." label="Havana cigar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4604" start="13795" end="13804" title="Confucius" label="Confucius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037731" start="13826" end="13841" title="generation name" label="generation name"/>
<link wikidata="Q256411" start="14146" end="14159" title="Soong Ai-ling" label="Soong Ai-ling"/>
<link wikidata="Q714663" start="14179" end="14192" title="Soong sisters" label="Soong sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q10944216" start="14243" end="14254" title="Kung Ling-i" label="Kung Ling-i"/>
<link wikidata="Q10944212" start="14283" end="14302" title="David Kung Ling-kan" label="David Kung Ling-kan"/>
<link wikidata="Q239854" start="14528" end="14539" title="Debra Paget" label="Debra Paget"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="14777" end="14789" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q955461" start="14835" end="14847" title="Taigu County" label="Taigu County"/>
<link wikidata="Q46913" start="14849" end="14855" title="Shanxi" label="Shanxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q714663" start="14874" end="14887" title="Soong sisters" label="Soong sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q16574" start="14890" end="14905" title="Chiang Kai-shek" label="Chiang Kai-shek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151968" start="14908" end="14940" title="History of the Republic of China" label="History of the Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q458428" start="14943" end="14976" title="Military of the Republic of China" label="Military of the Republic of China"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143213" wikidata="Q642024" url="?curid=143213" title="Lothian">
<text>Lothian (; ; ) is a region of the Scottish Lowlands, lying between the southern shore of the Firth of Forth and the Lammermuir Hills and the Moorfoot Hills. The principal settlement is the Scottish capital, Edinburgh, while other significant towns include Livingston, Linlithgow, Bathgate, Queensferry, Dalkeith, Bonnyrigg, Penicuik, Musselburgh, Prestonpans, Tranent, North Berwick, Dunbar and Haddington.

Historically, the term Lothian referred to a province encompassing most of what is now southeastern Scotland. In the 7th century it came under the control of the Anglian kingdom of Bernicia, the northern part of the later kingdom of Northumbria, but the Angles&#x27; grip on Lothian was quickly weakened following the Battle of Nechtansmere in which they were defeated by the Picts. Lothian was annexed to the Kingdom of Scotland around the 10th century.

Subsequent Scottish history saw the region subdivided into three counties—Midlothian, East Lothian, and West Lothian—leading to the popular designation of &quot;the Lothians&quot;.

== Etymology ==
The origin of the name is debated. It perhaps comes from the British &quot;*Lugudūniānā&quot; (&quot;&quot; in Modern Welsh spelling), meaning &quot;country of the fort of Lugus&quot;, the latter being a Celtic god. Alternatively, it may take its name from a watercourse that flows through the region, now known as the Lothian Burn, the name of which comes from either the British &quot;lutna&quot; meaning &quot;dark or muddy stream,&quot; &quot;*lǭd&quot;, with a meaning associated with flooding (c.f. Leeds), or &quot;lǖch&quot;, meaning &quot;bright, shining.&quot;

A popular legend is that the name comes from King Lot, who is king of Lothian in the Arthurian legend. The usual Latin form of the name is &quot;Laudonia&quot;.

== Anglian settlement ==
Lothian was settled by Angles at an early stage and formed part of the Kingdom of Bernicia, which extended south into present-day Northumberland and Durham. Many place names in the Lothians and Scottish Borders demonstrate that the English language became firmly established in the region from the 6th century onwards. In due course, Bernicia united with Deira to form the Kingdom of Northumbria. Important Anglo-Saxon structural remains have been found in Aberlady along with various artefacts such as an early 9th-century Anglo-Saxon coin.

Little is recorded of Lothian&#x27;s history specifically at this time. After the Norse-speaking Viking Great Army conquered southern Northumbria (including areas that would later become Yorkshire), northern Northumbria – centred on the former Anglian kingdom of Bernicia – was cut off from the other Anglo-Saxon kingdoms. How much Norse influence spread north of the River Tees is uncertain. Bernicia continued as a distinct territory, sometimes described as having a king, at other times an &quot;ealdorman&quot; (earl). Bernicia became distinct from other English territories at this time due to its links with the other Christian kingdoms in what is present-day Scotland and seems to have little to do with the Norse-controlled areas to the south. Roger of Wendover wrote that Edgar, King of the English granted &quot;Laudian&quot; to Kenneth II, King of Scots in 973 on condition that he come to court whenever the English king or his successors wore his crown. It is widely accepted by medieval historians that this marks the point at which Lothian became part of Scotland. Despite this transaction, the control of Lothian was not finally settled and the region was taken by the Scots at the Battle of Carham in 1018 and the River Tweed became the &quot;de facto&quot; Anglo-Scottish border.

William the Conqueror invaded Lothian and crossed over the River Forth but was not able to conquer it. At this time Lothian appears in the &quot;Anglo-Saxon Chronicle&quot; as &quot;Loðen&quot; or &quot;Loþen&quot;. As late as 1091, the &quot;Chronicle&quot; describes how the Scottish king, Malcolm Canmore, &quot;went with his army out of Scotland into Lothian in England&quot;.

== Language ==
In the post-Roman period, Lothian was dominated by British-speakers whose language is generally called Cumbric and was closely related to Welsh. In Welsh tradition Lothian is part of the &quot;Old North&quot; (&quot;&quot;). Reminders exist in British place-names like Tranent, Linlithgow and Penicuik.

During the Anglo-Saxon period, the Northumbrian dialect of Old English came to be spoken in the region. Initially confined to Lothian and the Borders, the language would grow, change, and spread across the lowlands of Scotland, becoming the Scots language. The dialects of the modern Lothians are usually considered to be part of Central Scots. Place names in the Lothians of Anglian origin include Ingliston.

Although one of the few areas of mainland Scotland where the Gaelic language was never dominant, the presence of some Gaelic place-names, e.g. Dalry, Currie, Balerno and Cockenzie, has been attributed to the &quot;temporary occupation...[and] the presence of a landowning Gaelic-speaking aristocracy and their followers for something like 150–200 years.&quot;

==Governance==
By 1305, the area of Lothian had been divided into three shires (the area controlled by a sheriff), called the shires of Edinburgh (or Edinburghshire), Haddington (or Haddingtonshire), and Linlithgow (or Linlithgowshire). Each of these three counties had an informal alternative name referencing their position within the former province of Lothian: Edinburghshire was also known as Midlothian, Haddingtonshire as East Lothian, and Linlithgowshire as West Lothian. The city of Edinburgh was made a county of itself in 1482, making it administratively independent from the surrounding county of Edinburghshire.

The three Lothian counties were all legally renamed during the 20th century, with Haddingtonshire becoming East Lothian in 1921, Linlithgowshire becoming West Lothian in 1925, and Edinburghshire becoming Midlothian in 1947.
In 1975 the old county councils and burgh corporations were abolished under the Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973, being replaced with regions and districts. Lothian Regional Council formally took over responsibility from the old county councils in May 1975. The Lothian region was split into four districts: East Lothian, Edinburgh, Midlothian, and West Lothian. Each district was broadly based on the areas of the pre-1975 counties and city, but with some notable alterations. The Lothian Regional Council was responsible for education, social work, water, sewerage, and transport (including local buses within Edinburgh). The regional council was based at Lothian Chambers on King George IV Bridge in Edinburgh, which had been built in 1904 as the headquarters of the old Midlothian County Council.

Lothian Regional Council was abolished in 1996 under the Local Government etc. (Scotland) Act 1994. The region&#x27;s four districts took over all local government functions as unitary council areas.

===Political control===
The first election to the Lothian Regional Council was held in 1974, initially operating as a shadow authority alongside the outgoing authorities until the new system came into force on 16 May 1975. Political control of the council from 1975 until its abolition in 1996 was as follows:

== Notes ==
== References ==
== External links ==
*Herman Moll&#x27;s map of the Lothian shires (c.1745)
* Lothian Buses
* NHS Lothian</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q642024" start="0" end="7" title="Lothian" label="Lothian"/>
<link wikidata="Q654252" start="34" end="51" title="Scottish Lowlands" label="Scottish Lowlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q202083" start="93" end="107" title="Firth of Forth" label="Firth of Forth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216412" start="116" end="132" title="Lammermuir Hills" label="Lammermuir Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q6908381" start="141" end="155" title="Moorfoot Hills" label="Moorfoot Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="207" end="216" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q848287" start="256" end="266" title="Livingston, West Lothian" label="Livingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016911" start="268" end="278" title="Linlithgow" label="Linlithgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q810794" start="280" end="288" title="Bathgate, West Lothian" label="Bathgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q767798" start="290" end="301" title="South Queensferry" label="Queensferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q727520" start="303" end="311" title="Dalkeith" label="Dalkeith"/>
<link wikidata="Q4942522" start="313" end="322" title="Bonnyrigg" label="Bonnyrigg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011428" start="324" end="332" title="Penicuik" label="Penicuik"/>
<link wikidata="Q37718" start="334" end="345" title="Musselburgh" label="Musselburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242055" start="347" end="358" title="Prestonpans" label="Prestonpans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011336" start="360" end="367" title="Tranent" label="Tranent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012054" start="369" end="382" title="North Berwick" label="North Berwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002133" start="384" end="390" title="Dunbar" label="Dunbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281658" start="395" end="405" title="Haddington, East Lothian" label="Haddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q108392704" start="453" end="461" title="Provinces of Scotland" label="province"/>
<link wikidata="Q104238" start="570" end="577" title="Angles (people)" label="Anglian"/>
<link wikidata="Q623751" start="589" end="597" title="Bernicia" label="Bernicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q107299" start="641" end="652" title="Northumbria" label="Northumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q961243" start="726" end="748" title="Battle of Dun Nechtain" label="Battle of Nechtansmere"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="818" end="837" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Kingdom of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350181" start="929" end="937" title="Shires of Scotland" label="counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q67317221" start="938" end="948" title="Midlothian (historic)" label="Midlothian"/>
<link wikidata="Q207257" start="950" end="962" title="East Lothian" label="East Lothian"/>
<link wikidata="Q67317108" start="968" end="980" title="West Lothian (historic)" label="West Lothian"/>
<link wikidata="Q642024" start="1025" end="1037" title="Lothian" label="the Lothians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248800" start="1123" end="1130" title="Common Brittonic" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821380" start="1234" end="1239" title="Lugus" label="Lugus"/>
<link wikidata="Q465434" start="1266" end="1276" title="Celtic deities" label="Celtic god"/>
<link wikidata="Q39121" start="1567" end="1572" title="Leeds" label="Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584977" start="1679" end="1687" title="King Lot" label="King Lot"/>
<link wikidata="Q507738" start="1719" end="1735" title="Arthurian legend" label="Arthurian legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q623751" start="1903" end="1911" title="Bernicia" label="Bernicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q506008" start="2176" end="2181" title="Deira" label="Deira"/>
<link wikidata="Q107299" start="2194" end="2216" title="Kingdom of Northumbria" label="Kingdom of Northumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010412" start="2278" end="2286" title="Aberlady" label="Aberlady"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="2446" end="2451" title="Old Norse" label="Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419965" start="2468" end="2478" title="Great Heathen Army" label="Great Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q623751" start="2627" end="2635" title="Bernicia" label="Bernicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q515022" start="2732" end="2742" title="River Tees" label="River Tees"/>
<link wikidata="Q727241" start="3116" end="3133" title="Roger of Wendover" label="Roger of Wendover"/>
<link wikidata="Q192925" start="3145" end="3171" title="Edgar of England" label="Edgar, King of the English"/>
<link wikidata="Q352800" start="3203" end="3213" title="Kenneth II" label="Kenneth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575960" start="3562" end="3578" title="Battle of Carham" label="Battle of Carham"/>
<link wikidata="Q503262" start="3595" end="3606" title="River Tweed" label="River Tweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="3624" end="3632" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q37594" start="3663" end="3684" title="William the Conqueror" label="William the Conqueror"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421" start="3722" end="3733" title="River Forth" label="River Forth"/>
<link wikidata="Q212746" start="3808" end="3829" title="Anglo-Saxon Chronicle" label="Anglo-Saxon Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q68508" start="3955" end="3970" title="Malcolm Canmore" label="Malcolm Canmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q35965" start="4163" end="4170" title="Cumbric" label="Cumbric"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="4198" end="4203" title="Welsh language" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011336" start="4329" end="4336" title="Tranent" label="Tranent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016911" start="4338" end="4348" title="Linlithgow" label="Linlithgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011428" start="4353" end="4361" title="Penicuik" label="Penicuik"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="4423" end="4434" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q14549" start="4605" end="4619" title="Scots language" label="Scots language"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061810" start="4694" end="4707" title="Central Scots" label="Central Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q14948846" start="4763" end="4772" title="Ingliston" label="Ingliston"/>
<link wikidata="Q9314" start="4836" end="4842" title="Scottish Gaelic" label="Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5211609" start="4918" end="4923" title="Dalry, Edinburgh" label="Dalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144879" start="4925" end="4931" title="Currie" label="Currie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2880785" start="4933" end="4940" title="Balerno" label="Balerno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013257" start="4945" end="4954" title="Cockenzie" label="Cockenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350181" start="5208" end="5214" title="shires of Scotland" label="shires"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494998" start="5241" end="5248" title="sheriff principal" label="sheriff"/>
<link wikidata="Q67317221" start="5534" end="5544" title="Midlothian (historic)" label="Midlothian"/>
<link wikidata="Q207257" start="5565" end="5577" title="East Lothian" label="East Lothian"/>
<link wikidata="Q67317108" start="5602" end="5614" title="West Lothian (historic)" label="West Lothian"/>
<link wikidata="Q104828357" start="5649" end="5665" title="county of city" label="county of itself"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664037" start="6066" end="6102" title="Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973" label="Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q383493" start="6124" end="6145" title="Regions and districts of Scotland" label="regions and districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q206934" start="6323" end="6333" title="Midlothian" label="Midlothian"/>
<link wikidata="Q204940" start="6339" end="6351" title="West Lothian" label="West Lothian"/>
<link wikidata="Q17811966" start="6648" end="6664" title="Lothian Chambers" label="Lothian Chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258386" start="6849" end="6890" title="Local Government etc. (Scotland) Act 1994" label="Local Government etc. (Scotland) Act 1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q461231" start="6977" end="6990" title="council areas" label="council areas"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143215" wikidata="Q1104185" url="?curid=143215" title="Coaching">
<text>Coaching is a form of development in which an experienced person, called a &quot;coach&quot;, supports a learner or client in achieving a specific personal or professional goal by providing training and guidance. The learner is sometimes called a &quot;coachee&quot;. Occasionally, &quot;coaching&quot; may mean an informal relationship between two people, of whom one has more experience and expertise than the other and offers advice and guidance as the latter learns; but coaching differs from mentoring by focusing on specific tasks or objectives, as opposed to more general goals or overall development.

==Origins==

The word &quot;coaching&quot; originated in the 16th century and initially referred to a method of transportation, specifically a horse-drawn carriage. It derived from the Hungarian word which meant a carriage from the village of Kocs, known for producing high-quality carriages. Over time, the term &quot;coaching&quot; transitioned from its literal transportation context to metaphorically represent the process of guiding and supporting individuals in their personal and professional development.

The first use of the term &quot;coach&quot; in connection with an instructor or trainer arose around 1830 in Oxford University slang for a tutor who &quot;carried&quot; a student through an exam. The word &quot;coaching&quot; thus identified a process used to transport people from where they are to where they want to be. The first use of the term in relation to sports came in 1861.

== History ==
Mathematical coaches at Cambridge University became famous for preparing wranglers competing in the Mathematical Tripos (1780 to 1909). This contest over several days tested for well-scripted solutions to mathematical problems.

The development of coaching has been influenced by many fields of activity, including adult education, the Human Potential Movement in the 1960s, large-group awareness training (LGAT) groups (such as Erhard Seminars Training, founded in 1971), leadership studies, personal development, and various subfields of psychology. The University of Sydney offered the world&#x27;s first coaching psychology unit of study in January 2000, and various academic associations and academic journals for coaching psychology were established in subsequent years (see ).

==Applications==
Coaching is applied in fields such as sports, performing arts (singers get vocal coaches), acting (drama coaches and dialect coaches), business, education, health care, relationships (for example, dating coaches), trauma healing (mind, body, soul coaches), and mindset (for example, positive thinking coaches).

Coaches use a range of communication skills (such as targeted restatements, listening, questioning, clarifying, etc.) to help clients shift their perspectives and thereby discover different approaches to achieve their goals. These skills can be used in almost all types of coaching. In this sense, coaching is a form of &quot;meta-profession&quot; that can apply to supporting clients in any human endeavor, ranging from their concerns in health, personal, professional, sport, social, family, political, spiritual dimensions, etc. There may be some overlap between certain types of coaching activities. Coaching approaches are also influenced by cultural differences.

=== Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) ===

The concept of ADHD coaching was introduced in 1994 by psychiatrists Edward M. Hallowell and John J. Ratey in their book &quot;Driven to Distraction&quot;. ADHD coaching is a specialized type of life coaching that uses techniques designed to assist individuals with attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder by mitigating the effects of executive function deficit, which is a common impairment for people with ADHD. Coaches work with clients to help them better manage time, organize, set goals, and complete projects. In addition to assisting clients understand the impact of ADHD on their lives, coaches can help them develop &quot;workaround&quot; strategies to deal with specific challenges, and determine and use individual strengths. Coaches also help clients get a better grasp of what reasonable expectations are for them as individuals since people with ADHD &quot;brain wiring&quot; often seem to need external &quot;mirrors&quot; for self-awareness about their potential despite their impairment.

===Business and executive===
Business coaching is a type of human resource development for executives, members of management, teams, and leadership. It provides positive support, feedback, and advice on an individual or group basis to improve personal effectiveness in the business setting, many a time focusing on behavioral changes through psychometrics or 360-degree feedback for example. Business coaching is also called executive coaching, corporate coaching or leadership coaching. Coaches help their clients advance towards specific professional goals. These include career transition, interpersonal and professional communication, performance management, organizational effectiveness, managing career, and personal changes, developing executive presence, building credibility, enhancing strategic thinking, dealing effectively with conflict, facing work challenges and making swift and sound decisions, leading a change and building an effective team within an organization. An industrial-organizational psychologist may work as an executive coach.

Business coaching is not restricted to external experts or providers. Many organizations expect their senior leaders and middle managers to coach their team members to reach higher levels of performance, increased job satisfaction, personal growth, and career development. Research studies suggest that executive coaching has positive effects both within workplace performance as well as personal areas outside the workplace, with some differences in the impact of internal and external coaches.

In some countries, there is no licensing required to be a business or executive coach, and membership of a coaching organization is optional. Further, standards and methods of training coaches can vary widely between coaching organizations. Many business coaches refer to themselves as consultants, a broader business relationship than one which exclusively involves coaching. Research findings from a systematic review indicate that effective coaches are known for having integrity, support for those they coach, communication skills, and credibility.

In the workplace, leadership coaching has been shown to be effective for increasing employee confidence in expressing their own ideas. Research findings in a systematic review demonstrate that coaching can help reduce stress in the workplace.

===Career ===

Career coaching focuses on work and career and is similar to career counseling. Career coaching is not to be confused with life coaching, which concentrates on personal development. Another common term for a career coach is &quot;career guide&quot;.

===Christian ===

A Christian coach is not a pastor or counselor (although the coach may also be qualified in those disciplines), but someone who has been professionally trained to address specific coaching goals from a distinctively Christian or biblical perspective.

===Co-coaching===

Co-coaching is a structured practice of coaching between peers with the goal of learning improved coaching techniques.

===Dating===

Dating coaches offer coaching and related products and services to improve their clients&#x27; success in dating and relationships.

===Financial ===

Financial coaching is a relatively new form of coaching that focuses on helping clients overcome their struggle to attain specific financial goals and aspirations they have set for themselves. Financial coaching is a one-on-one relationship in which the coach works to provide encouragement and support aimed at facilitating attainment of the client&#x27;s economic plans. A &quot;financial coach&quot;, also called &quot;money coach&quot;, typically focuses on helping clients to restructure and reduce debt, reduce spending, develop saving habits, and develop fiscal discipline. In contrast, the term &quot;financial adviser&quot; refers to a broader range of professionals who typically provide clients with financial products and services. Although early research links financial coaching to improvements in client outcomes, much more rigorous analysis is necessary before any causal linkages can be established.

===Health and wellness ===

Health coaching is becoming recognized as a new way to help individuals &quot;manage&quot; their illnesses and conditions, especially those of a chronic nature. The coach will use special techniques, personal experience, expertise and encouragement to assist the coachee in bringing his/her behavioral changes about while aiming for lowered health risks and decreased healthcare costs. The National Society of Health Coaches (NSHC) has differentiated the term &quot;health coach&quot; from &quot;wellness coach&quot;. According to the NSHC, health coaches are qualified &quot;to guide those with acute or chronic conditions and/or moderate to high health risk&quot;, and wellness coaches provide guidance and inspiration &quot;to otherwise &#x27;healthy&#x27; individuals who desire to maintain or improve their overall general health status&quot;.

===Homework ===

Homework coaching focuses on equipping a student with the study skills required to succeed academically. This approach is different from regular tutoring which typically seeks to improve a student&#x27;s performance in a specific subject.

===In education===

Coaching is applied to support students, faculty, and administrators in educational organizations. For students, opportunities for coaching include collaborating with fellow students to improve grades and skills, both academic and social; for teachers and administrators, coaching can help with transitions into new roles.

===Life===
Life coaching is the process of helping people identify and achieve personal goals through developing skills and attitudes that lead to self-empowerment. Life coaching generally deals with issues such as procrastination, fear of failure, relationships&#x27; issues, lack of confidence, work–life balance and career changes, and often occurs outside the workplace setting. Systematic academic psychological engagement with life coaching dates from the 1980s. 

Skeptics have criticized life coaching&#x27;s focus on self-improvement for its potential for commercializing friendships and other human relationships. 

The business practices of the life coach industry have also stirred controversy. Unlike a psychotherapist, there is no required training, occupational licensing, or regulatory oversight for life coaching. Anyone can claim to be a life coach, and anyone can start a business selling &quot;certificates&quot; to would-be life coaches. Most life coaches in the US find that there is relatively low demand for the services they offer, and it ends up being a part-time side hustle rather than a full career. Many pay for expensive classes in the hope that it will make them more marketable, leading critics to suggest that the most profitable area of the field is in training the would-be life coaches, rather than being a life coach.

===Relationship ===

Relationship coaching is the application of coaching to personal and business relationships.

===Sports===

In sports, a coach is an individual that provides supervision and training to the sports team or individual players. Sports coaches are involved in administration, athletic training, competition coaching, and representation of the team and the players. A survey in 2019 of the literature on sports coaching found an increase in the number of publications and most articles featured a quantitative research approach. Sports psychology emerged from the 1890s.

===Esports===
In esports, coaches are often responsible for planning game strategies and assisting in player development. For example, in the League of Legends World Championship, the head coach is responsible for advising players during the pick–ban phase of the game via voice-chat and during the intermission between matches. 

===Vocal===

A vocal coach, also known as a voice coach (though this term often applies to those working with speech and communication rather than singing), is a music teacher, usually a piano accompanist, who helps singers prepare for a performance, often also helping them to improve their singing technique and take care of and develop their voice, but is not the same as a singing teacher (also called a &quot;voice teacher&quot;). Vocal coaches may give private music lessons or group workshops or masterclasses to singers. They may also coach singers who are rehearsing on stage, or who are singing during a recording session.

=== Writing ===
A writing coach helps writers—such as students, journalists, and other professionals—improve their writing and productivity.

==Ethics and standards==

Since the mid-1990s, coaching professional associations have worked towards developing training standards. Psychologist Jonathan Passmore noted in 2016:

One of the challenges in the field of coaching is upholding levels of professionalism, standards, and ethics. To this end, coaching bodies and organizations have codes of ethics and member standards. However, because these bodies are not regulated, and because coaches do not need to belong to such a body, ethics and standards are variable in the field. In February 2016, the AC and the EMCC launched a &quot;Global Code of Ethics&quot; for the entire industry; individuals, associations, and organizations are invited to become signatories to it.

Many coaches have little training in comparison to the training requirements of some other helping professions: for example, licensure as a counseling psychologist in the State of California requires 3,000 hours of supervised professional experience. Some coaches are both certified coaches and licensed counseling psychologists, integrating coaching and counseling.

Critics see life coaching as akin to psychotherapy but without the legal restrictions and state regulation of psychologists. There are no state regulations/licensing requirements for coaches. Due to lack of regulation, people who have no formal training or certification can legally call themselves life or wellness coaches.

==See also==

* List of counseling topics
* List of psychotherapies
* 
* 


==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1104185" start="0" end="8" title="Coaching" label="Coaching"/>
<link wikidata="Q967647" start="497" end="506" title="Mentorship" label="mentoring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011605" start="853" end="857" title="Kocs" label="Kocs"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="1233" end="1250" title="Oxford University" label="Oxford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q349" start="1488" end="1493" title="sport" label="sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2464579" start="1597" end="1605" title="wrangler (University of Cambridge)" label="wrangler"/>
<link wikidata="Q3539558" start="1624" end="1643" title="Mathematical Tripos" label="Mathematical Tripos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166625" start="1729" end="1749" title="mathematical problem" label="mathematical problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319035" start="1839" end="1854" title="adult education" label="adult education"/>
<link wikidata="Q567981" start="1860" end="1884" title="Human Potential Movement" label="Human Potential Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q627655" start="1899" end="1929" title="large-group awareness training" label="large-group awareness training"/>
<link wikidata="Q76847" start="1953" end="1977" title="Erhard Seminars Training" label="Erhard Seminars Training"/>
<link wikidata="Q2697537" start="1997" end="2015" title="leadership studies" label="leadership studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998095" start="2017" end="2037" title="personal development" label="personal development"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="2064" end="2074" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q487556" start="2080" end="2100" title="University of Sydney" label="University of Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q65064514" start="2132" end="2151" title="coaching psychology" label="coaching psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q955824" start="2195" end="2215" title="academic association" label="academic association"/>
<link wikidata="Q737498" start="2221" end="2237" title="academic journal" label="academic journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350126" start="2401" end="2412" title="vocal coach" label="vocal coach"/>
<link wikidata="Q28135085" start="2425" end="2436" title="drama coach" label="drama coach"/>
<link wikidata="Q5270498" start="2443" end="2456" title="dialect coach" label="dialect coach"/>
<link wikidata="Q5227670" start="2523" end="2535" title="dating coach" label="dating coach"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2556" end="2578" title="mind, body, soul coach" label="mind, body, soul coach"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2609" end="2632" title="positive thinking coach" label="positive thinking coach"/>
<link wikidata="Q181923" start="3380" end="3384" title="attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder" label="ADHD"/>
<link wikidata="Q211346" start="3420" end="3432" title="psychiatrist" label="psychiatrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343283" start="3434" end="3453" title="Edward M. Hallowell" label="Edward M. Hallowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6254288" start="3458" end="3471" title="John J. Ratey" label="John J. Ratey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343283" start="3492" end="3513" title="Driven to Distraction (ADHD)" label="Driven to Distraction"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3560" end="3573" title="#Life" label="life coaching"/>
<link wikidata="Q181923" start="3631" end="3671" title="attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder" label="attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419936" start="3701" end="3727" title="Executive dysfunction" label="executive function deficit"/>
<link wikidata="Q355217" start="3826" end="3837" title="Time management" label="manage time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759895" start="3998" end="4008" title="Coping skill" label="workaround"/>
<link wikidata="Q348960" start="4433" end="4459" title="human resource development" label="human resource development"/>
<link wikidata="Q506132" start="4715" end="4728" title="psychometrics" label="psychometrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q227031" start="4732" end="4751" title="360-degree feedback" label="360-degree feedback"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593332" start="5012" end="5034" title="performance management" label="performance management"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045692" start="5359" end="5397" title="Industrial and organizational psychology" label="industrial-organizational psychologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q15978655" start="6214" end="6224" title="consultant" label="consultant"/>
<link wikidata="Q282049" start="6741" end="6747" title="Career" label="Career"/>
<link wikidata="Q741939" start="6802" end="6819" title="career counseling" label="career counseling"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6864" end="6877" title="#Life" label="life coaching"/>
<link wikidata="Q5038936" start="6971" end="6983" title="career guide" label="career guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q683476" start="8175" end="8192" title="financial adviser" label="financial adviser"/>
<link wikidata="Q753877" start="9379" end="9387" title="Homework" label="Homework"/>
<link wikidata="Q183257" start="10679" end="10694" title="psychotherapist" label="psychotherapist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075804" start="10727" end="10749" title="occupational licensing" label="occupational licensing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1863649" start="11053" end="11064" title="Side job" label="side hustle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001929" start="11410" end="11432" title="Business relationship management" label="business relationships"/>
<link wikidata="Q349" start="11452" end="11458" title="sports" label="sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q632190" start="11865" end="11882" title="Sports psychology" label="Sports psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q300920" start="11925" end="11932" title="esports" label="esports"/>
<link wikidata="Q12594341" start="12050" end="12086" title="League of Legends World Championship" label="League of Legends World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q27908" start="12401" end="12414" title="music teacher" label="music teacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q27939" start="12455" end="12461" title="singer" label="singer"/>
<link wikidata="Q27939" start="12531" end="12538" title="singing" label="singing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7939609" start="12616" end="12631" title="voice teacher" label="singing teacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281422" start="12742" end="12753" title="masterclass" label="masterclass"/>
<link wikidata="Q829080" start="13071" end="13095" title="professional association" label="professional association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075804" start="13870" end="13879" title="licensure" label="licensure"/>
<link wikidata="Q12166572" start="13885" end="13908" title="Counseling psychology" label="counseling psychologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="13925" end="13935" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q183257" start="14150" end="14163" title="psychotherapy" label="psychotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q26830865" start="14455" end="14480" title="List of counseling topics" label="List of counseling topics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750270" start="14483" end="14506" title="List of psychotherapies" label="List of psychotherapies"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143217" wikidata="Q504836" url="?curid=143217" title="Andrew Geddes Bain">
<text>Andrew Geddes Bain (baptised 11 June 1797 – 20 October 1864), was a Cape Colony geologist, road engineer, palaeontologist and explorer.

==Life history==

The only child of Alexander Bain and Jean Geddes, both of whom died when Bain was still a young boy, Bain was baptised 11 June 1797 in Thurso, Scotland. He was raised by an aunt who lived near Edinburgh. Here he received a classical education, but no vocational training. In 1816 he emigrated to Cape Town accompanied by his uncle Lieutenant Colonel William Geddes of the 83rd Regiment, who was stationed in the Cape. He married Maria Elizabeth von Backstrom on 16 November 1818 and had 3 sons and 7 daughters. In 1822 he bought property in Graaff Reinet and carried on for some years the business of a saddler. In 1825 he accompanied John Burner Biddulph on a trading expedition to Kuruman, the mission outpost on the edge of the Kalahari and home of Dr. Robert Moffat (father-in-law of David Livingstone). They explored further north and reached Dithubaruba in Bechuanaland, becoming the first recorded Europeans to return safely from so far north. In 1829 they trekked to the vicinity of present-day Kokstad. They were forced to return by hordes of Bantu fleeing Dingaan. During these journeys he discovered his talent for drawing and writing and became a regular correspondent for John Fairbairn&#x27;s &quot;South African Commercial Advertiser&quot;. Outspoken, he was sued for libel a number of times by Gerrit Maritz, one of the eventual Voortrekker leaders. He was awarded a special medal in 1832 for &#x27;gratuitously superintending the construction of Van Ryneveld&#x27;s Pass, Graaff-Reinet&#x27;. In 1834 he made another trip to Bechuanaland where he lost his wagons and collection of zoological specimens during an attack by the Matabele, caused by his Griqua guides&#x27; stealing some of the King&#x27;s cattle. During the Cape Frontier Wars in 1833–1834 he served as captain of the Beaufort Levies raised for the defence of the frontier. He tried his hand at farming in the newly annexed Queen Adelaide Province, but lost the farm when the land was returned to the Xhosa in 1836. Later he was engaged to construct a military road through the Ecca Pass, and displayed engineering talents which gave rise to permanent employment as surveyor of military roads under the Corps of Royal Engineers in 1836. During this period he had a part in building the Fish River Bridge, then the largest bridge in the country. He constructed the Queen&#x27;s Road from Grahamstown to Fort Beaufort. Appointed Engineering Inspector by the Cape Roads Board in 1845 he began construction at Michell&#x27;s Pass near Ceres in 1848, subsequently followed on completion by Bain&#x27;s Kloof Pass near Wellington in 1853. During 1853 he met with Russian novelist I. A. Goncharov, while the latter was conducting a journey to Japan on frigate Pallada. He was the first man to attempt to build a road across the Limiet Mountains into the interior for which feat he was presented with table silver and a candelabrum by grateful colonists.

Returning to the Eastern Cape in 1854, he built numerous roads and passes including the Katberg Pass near Fort Beaufort. This occupation created an interest in geology, inspired in 1837 by a copy of Lyell&#x27;s &quot;Elements of Geology&quot;. He was friendly with William Guybon Atherstone, who was also a keen geologist and fossil collector and who happened to be present at the discovery of &quot;Paranthodon africanus&quot; Broom at the farm Dassieklip on the Bushmans River, being about half-way between Grahamstown and Port Elizabeth. Bain discovered many fossil remains, including the herbivorous mammal-like reptile dicynodon &quot;Oudenodon bainii Owen&quot;, which was excavated from the Karoo Beds on the farm Mildenhall south of Fort Beaufort and described in the literature by Sir Richard Owen. Among the specimens sent to Owen was the so-called Blinkwater monster, &quot;Pareiasaurus serridens&quot; as well as a variety of mammal-like reptiles.

He was awarded £200 by the British government in 1845 for his researches. Devoting his spare time to geological studies, Bain prepared in 1852 the first comprehensive geological map of South Africa, a work of great merit, which was published by the Geological Society of London in 1856. Sir Roderick Murchison and Sir Henry de la Beche, prominent geologists of the time, both recommended Bain&#x27;s appointment as Cape Geological Surveyor in 1852, but since no funds were available, nothing came of it. Bain went to Namaqualand in 1854 and reported to the Government on the copper mines there.

He was granted sick leave to visit England for a second time in 1864, where he was entertained by Sir Richard Owen of the British Museum and Sir Roderick Murchison of the Royal Geographical Society, and was made an honorary member of the Athenaeum Club. His health at this time deteriorated markedly and he returned to South Africa; he died in Cape Town following a heart attack on 20 October 1864. The Colonial Secretary, the Colonial Treasurer, Charles Davidson Bell, the Surveyor-General and Sir Thomas Maclear, her Majesty&#x27;s astronomer at the Cape, were among the pallbearers.

While resident in Grahamstown he wrote some satirical sketches for local amateur dramatic entertainment and invented the character &quot;Caatje Kekelbek or Life Among the Hottentots&quot; (1838), also known as &quot;Kaatje Kekkelbek&quot; (Katie Gossip) who endeared herself forever to South Africans, and held John Philip and other missionaries up to ridicule. Kaatje, the Hottentot girl, uses Hottentot-Afrikaans in the spoken parts, and sings in Afrikaans-English. She comes on stage playing a Jew&#x27;s-harp:

:&quot;My name is Kaatje Kekkelbek,&quot;
:&quot;I come from Kat Rivier,&quot;
:&quot;Daar’s van water geen gebrek,&quot;
:&quot;But scarce of wine and beer.&quot;
:&quot;Myn A B C at Philip&#x27;s school&quot;
:&quot;I learnt a kleine beetje,&quot;
:&quot;But left it just as great a fool&quot;
:&quot;As gekke Tante Meitje.&quot;

Bain&#x27;s journals were published by the Van Riebeeck Society in 1949. A memorial plaque was unveiled at the summit of Bain&#x27;s Kloof Pass on 14 September 1953, and a memorial to him was erected at the top of the Ecca Pass on the Queen&#x27;s Road on 7 September 1964. Bain built eight major mountain roads and passes during his career. His son Thomas Charles John Bain was also a road engineer in South Africa.

==Construction projects==
#Ouberg/Oudeberg Pass near Graaff-Reinet 1832
#Van Ryneveld Pass near Graaff-Reinet 1830s
#Ecca Pass from Grahamstown to Fort Beaufort (The Queen&#x27;s Road) 1837
#Michell&#x27;s Pass near Ceres through the Skurweberg, following the course of the Breede River 1846–48
#Bain&#x27;s Kloof Pass near Wellington 1848–52
#Gydo Pass due north of Ceres up the Skurweberg
#Houw Hoek Pass from Elgin to Botrivier
#Katberg Pass near Fort Beaufort 1860–64
== Bain&#x27;s Cape Mountain Whisky ==

Distilled at the James Sedgwick distillery in Wellington, South Africa, Bain&#x27;s Cape Mountain Whisky is named after Bain, in honour of his construction of the Bainskloof Pass that connects the town of Wellington to the interior of the country in 1853.

==See also==
*Thomas Charles John Bain

==References==
*&quot;The Romance of Cape Mountain Passes&quot; – Graham Ross (David Phillips Publishers, Cape Town) 

==External links==

*Bain&#x27;s &quot;Bidental Reptile&quot;, 2009, Brian Switek
*Garden Route passes
*Pakhuis Pass
*Roadbuilders
*Civil Engineering article
*Albany Museum pamphlet
*As far as the eye could see</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q504836" start="0" end="18" title="Andrew Geddes Bain" label="Andrew Geddes Bain"/>
<link wikidata="Q526576" start="290" end="296" title="Thurso" label="Thurso"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="348" end="357" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004667" start="696" end="709" title="Graaff Reinet" label="Graaff Reinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025965" start="838" end="845" title="Kuruman" label="Kuruman"/>
<link wikidata="Q384766" start="911" end="924" title="Robert Moffat (missionary)" label="Robert Moffat"/>
<link wikidata="Q48373" start="943" end="960" title="David Livingstone" label="David Livingstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q747314" start="1018" end="1030" title="Bechuanaland" label="Bechuanaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671256" start="1158" end="1165" title="Kokstad, KwaZulu-Natal" label="Kokstad"/>
<link wikidata="Q470145" start="1221" end="1228" title="Dingane" label="Dingaan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3642733" start="1465" end="1478" title="Gerrit Maritz" label="Gerrit Maritz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211360" start="1798" end="1806" title="Northern Ndebele people" label="Matabele"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547060" start="1822" end="1828" title="Griqua people" label="Griqua"/>
<link wikidata="Q582594" start="1894" end="1912" title="Cape Frontier Wars" label="Cape Frontier Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q207996" start="2137" end="2142" title="Xhosa people" label="Xhosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280176" start="2214" end="2223" title="Ecca Pass" label="Ecca Pass"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2422" end="2439" title="Fish River Bridge" label="Fish River Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q951161" start="2523" end="2534" title="Grahamstown" label="Grahamstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q473216" start="2538" end="2551" title="Fort Beaufort" label="Fort Beaufort"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2957" end="2973" title="Limiet Mountains" label="Limiet Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q6375293" start="3172" end="3184" title="Katberg Pass" label="Katberg Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333" start="3283" end="3295" title="Charles Lyell" label="Lyell&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q8010295" start="3350" end="3375" title="William Guybon Atherstone" label="William Guybon Atherstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q135602" start="3485" end="3496" title="Paranthodon" label="Paranthodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q359576" start="3513" end="3518" title="Robert Broom" label="Broom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117710" start="3549" end="3563" title="Boesmans River (Eastern Cape)" label="Bushmans River"/>
<link wikidata="Q319520" start="3689" end="3708" title="mammal-like reptile" label="mammal-like reptile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064681" start="3725" end="3734" title="Oudenodon" label="Oudenodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q473216" start="3826" end="3839" title="Fort Beaufort" label="Fort Beaufort"/>
<link wikidata="Q151556" start="3879" end="3891" title="Richard Owen" label="Richard Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q967742" start="3970" end="3982" title="Pareiasaurus" label="Pareiasaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230936" start="4295" end="4323" title="Geological Society of London" label="Geological Society of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q361900" start="4337" end="4355" title="Roderick Murchison" label="Roderick Murchison"/>
<link wikidata="Q302176" start="4364" end="4381" title="Henry de la Beche" label="Henry de la Beche"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757791" start="4563" end="4574" title="Namaqualand" label="Namaqualand"/>
<link wikidata="Q691152" start="4813" end="4839" title="Royal Geographical Society" label="Royal Geographical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q492758" start="4880" end="4894" title="Athenaeum Club, London" label="Athenaeum Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q5076755" start="5089" end="5110" title="Charles Davidson Bell" label="Charles Davidson Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617295" start="5141" end="5155" title="Thomas Maclear" label="Thomas Maclear"/>
<link wikidata="Q951161" start="5247" end="5258" title="Grahamstown" label="Grahamstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701417" start="5540" end="5551" title="John Philip (missionary)" label="John Philip"/>
<link wikidata="Q561504" start="6427" end="6451" title="Thomas Charles John Bain" label="Thomas Charles John Bain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7110233" start="6522" end="6542" title="Ouberg Pass" label="Ouberg/Oudeberg Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004667" start="6548" end="6561" title="Graaff-Reinet" label="Graaff-Reinet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6568" end="6585" title="Van Ryneveld Pass" label="Van Ryneveld Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280176" start="6612" end="6621" title="Ecca Pass" label="Ecca Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q951161" start="6627" end="6638" title="Grahamstown" label="Grahamstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q473216" start="6642" end="6655" title="Fort Beaufort" label="Fort Beaufort"/>
<link wikidata="Q13035448" start="6686" end="6705" title="Michell&amp;#x27;s Pass" label="Michell&amp;#x27;s Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038408" start="6711" end="6716" title="Ceres, Western Cape" label="Ceres"/>
<link wikidata="Q904992" start="6769" end="6781" title="Breede River" label="Breede River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422542" start="6791" end="6813" title="Bain&amp;#x27;s Kloof Pass" label="Bain&amp;#x27;s Kloof Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534385" start="6819" end="6829" title="Wellington, South Africa" label="Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q10967680" start="6839" end="6848" title="Gydo Pass" label="Gydo Pass"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6887" end="6901" title="Houw Hoek Pass" label="Houw Hoek Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263903" start="6907" end="6912" title="Elgin, Western Cape" label="Elgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q894766" start="6916" end="6925" title="Botrivier" label="Botrivier"/>
<link wikidata="Q6375293" start="6927" end="6939" title="Katberg Pass" label="Katberg Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534385" start="7053" end="7077" title="Wellington, South Africa" label="Wellington, South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q42915974" start="7079" end="7111" title="Bain&amp;#x27;s Cape Mountain Whisky" label="Bain&amp;#x27;s Cape Mountain Whisky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422542" start="7170" end="7185" title="Bainskloof Pass" label="Bainskloof Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q561504" start="7278" end="7302" title="Thomas Charles John Bain" label="Thomas Charles John Bain"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143218" wikidata="Q647081" url="?curid=143218" title="John Bainbridge (astronomer)">
<text>John Bainbridge (1582 – 3 November 1643) was an English astronomer and mathematician.

==Life==

Bainbridge was born at Ashby-de-la-Zouch, in Leicestershire to Robert and Anne (née Everard) Bainbridge.

He attended the Free Grammar School in Ashby-de-la-Zouch and then became a student at Emmanuel College, Cambridge. He returned to Ashby where he practiced as a physician for some years, kept a school and studied astronomy. Having been removed to London, he was admitted (6 November 1618) a licentiate of the college of physicians, and was noticed due to a publication concerning the comet of 1618.

In 1618, he became a member of the Puritan group of scholars known as the Gresham Circle. In 1619, Sir Henry Savile (Bible translator) (1549–1622) elected him as the first Savilian Professor of Astronomy at Oxford University. Bainbridge was incorporated of Merton College and became, in 1631 and 1635 respectively, junior and senior reader of Linacre&#x27;s lectures.

Bainbridge was a puritan.

He died at Oxford on 3 November 1643. He was a friend of Christopher Heydon, the writer on astrology; and also of John Greaves, his successor to both the Savilian chair and Linacre&#x27;s lectures.

==Works==

He wrote &quot;An Astronomical Description of the late Comet&quot; (1619); &quot;Canicularia&quot; (1648); and translated Proclus&#x27; &quot;De Sphaera&quot;, and Ptolemy&#x27;s &quot;De Planetarum Hypothesibus&quot; (1620). Several manuscript works by him exist in the Library of Trinity College, Dublin.

==References==
*Andrew Pyle (editor), &quot;Dictionary of Seventeenth Century British Philosophers&quot; (2000), article pp. 52–4.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q647081" start="0" end="15" title="John Bainbridge (astronomer)" label="John Bainbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q11063" start="56" end="66" title="astronomer" label="astronomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q170790" start="71" end="84" title="mathematician" label="mathematician"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046537" start="120" end="137" title="Ashby-de-la-Zouch" label="Ashby-de-la-Zouch"/>
<link wikidata="Q23106" start="142" end="156" title="Leicestershire" label="Leicestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q797892" start="289" end="305" title="Emmanuel College, Cambridge" label="Emmanuel College"/>
<link wikidata="Q350" start="307" end="316" title="Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q39631" start="363" end="372" title="physician" label="physician"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="415" end="424" title="astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559" start="586" end="591" title="comet" label="comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q711589" start="705" end="736" title="Henry Savile (Bible translator)" label="Henry Savile (Bible translator)"/>
<link wikidata="Q510602" start="774" end="805" title="Savilian chair of astronomy" label="Savilian Professor of Astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="809" end="826" title="Oxford University" label="Oxford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q82513" start="859" end="873" title="Merton College, Oxford" label="Merton College"/>
<link wikidata="Q730540" start="945" end="952" title="Thomas Linacre" label="Linacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q137073" start="988" end="995" title="puritan" label="puritan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34217" start="1009" end="1015" title="Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112533" start="1055" end="1073" title="Christopher Heydon" label="Christopher Heydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q381336" start="1112" end="1124" title="John Greaves" label="John Greaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q271809" start="1330" end="1337" title="Proclus" label="Proclus"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="1372" end="1379" title="Ptolemy" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q856559" start="1479" end="1486" title="Trinity College Library, Dublin" label="Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q258464" start="1490" end="1513" title="Trinity College, Dublin" label="Trinity College, Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758334" start="1532" end="1543" title="Andrew Pyle (philosopher)" label="Andrew Pyle"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143219" wikidata="Q706469" url="?curid=143219" title="Vanden Plas (band)">
<text>Vanden Plas is a German progressive metal band, based in Kaiserslautern and founded in the mid-1980s.

==History==
In 1991, Vanden Plas recorded the song &quot;Keep On Running&quot; as an anthem for the local national league football club FC Kaiserslautern, and did the same in 1994 with &quot;Das ist für euch&quot; (&quot;This Is for You All&quot;). All of its members have been involved in theatre projects and rock musicals such as &quot;Jesus Christ Superstar&quot;, &quot;The Rocky Horror Show&quot;, &quot;Little Shop of Horrors&quot;, and &quot;Evita&quot;.

In 2004, vocalist Andy Kuntz released an ambitious solo project under the name &quot;Abydos&quot;.
A musical, based on Andy Kuntz&#x27;s solo project, premiered on 2 February 2006, at the Pfalztheater in Kaiserslautern.

On 31 March 2006, the band released a concept album entitled &quot;Christ 0&quot;, loosely based on Alexandre Dumas, père&#x27;s book &quot;The Count of Monte Cristo&quot;. In April 2008 the album was brought to theatre stages in Germany; the stage production was named &quot;ChristO - Die Rockoper&quot;.

&quot;The Seraphic Clockwork&quot;, was released on 4 June 2010 (Europe) and 22 June 2010 (USA).

The latest two releases &quot;Chronicles of the Immortals – Netherworld (Path One)&quot; and &quot;Chronicles of the Immortals – Netherworld II&quot; are based on &quot;Die Chronik der Unsterblichen&quot; by fantasy author Wolfgang Hohlbein. Both albums are adapted from the theatre play &quot;Blutnacht&quot;.
The first part was released on 21 February 2014 (Europe) and 24 February 2014 (USA). The second part was released on 6 November 2015.

A new studio album, &quot;The Ghost Xperiment&quot;, had its original release planned for 2017. After long delays, in February 2019, &quot;The Ghost Xperiment&quot; was announced as being a double album. The first album, entitled &quot;Awakening&quot;, was released in Fall 2019, with the second part, &quot;Illumination&quot; being released in 2020. In May 2019, a box Set containing all of the band&#x27;s studio albums, an EP and a live recording, called &quot;The Epic Works 1991-2015&quot; was announced. The collection, released that July, also includes unreleased, bonus, rare, and demo tracks spanning the band&#x27;s entire career.

==Line-up==

===Current Line-up===
* Andy Kuntz - Vocals
* Stephan Lill - Guitars
* Alessandro Del Vecchio - Keyboards
* Torsten Reichert - Bass
* Andreas Lill - Drums

===Former Members===
* Günter Werno - Keyboards

==Discography==
===Studio albums===
* &quot;Colour Temple&quot; (1994)
* &quot;The God Thing&quot; (1997)
* &quot;Far Off Grace&quot; (1999)
* &quot;Beyond Daylight&quot; (2002)
* &quot;Christ 0&quot; (2006)
* &quot;The Seraphic Clockwork&quot; (2010)
* &quot;Chronicles of the Immortals: Netherworld (Path One)&quot; (2014)
* &quot;Chronicles of the Immortals: Netherworld II&quot; (2015)
* &quot;The Ghost Xperiment: Awakening&quot; (2019)
* &quot;The Ghost Xperiment: Illumination&quot; (2020)
* &quot;The Empyrean Equation of the Long Lost Things&quot; (2024)

===EPs===
*&quot;Accult&quot; (1996)

===Live Albums===
*Spirit of Live (2000)
*The Seraphic Live Works (2017)
*Live &amp; Immortal (2022)

== References ==
==External links==
*Official website (English)
*Official website (Brazil)
*Encyclopaedia Metallum page
*Vanden Plas on Progboard: Vanden Plas albums reviews and ratings</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q706469" start="0" end="11" title="Vanden Plas (band)" label="Vanden Plas"/>
<link wikidata="Q484344" start="24" end="41" title="progressive metal" label="progressive metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3758" start="57" end="71" title="Kaiserslautern" label="Kaiserslautern"/>
<link wikidata="Q8466" start="239" end="256" title="1. FC Kaiserslautern" label="FC Kaiserslautern"/>
<link wikidata="Q242667" start="442" end="464" title="Jesus Christ Superstar" label="Jesus Christ Superstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q583612" start="478" end="499" title="The Rocky Horror Show" label="The Rocky Horror Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199246" start="513" end="535" title="Little Shop of Horrors (musical play)" label="Little Shop of Horrors"/>
<link wikidata="Q830549" start="553" end="558" title="Evita (musical)" label="Evita"/>
<link wikidata="Q5108650" start="855" end="863" title="Christ 0" label="Christ 0"/>
<link wikidata="Q38337" start="888" end="909" title="Alexandre Dumas, père" label="Alexandre Dumas, père"/>
<link wikidata="Q191838" start="928" end="953" title="The Count of Monte Cristo" label="The Count of Monte Cristo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7763339" start="1101" end="1123" title="The Seraphic Clockwork" label="The Seraphic Clockwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q61994" start="1416" end="1433" title="Wolfgang Hohlbein" label="Wolfgang Hohlbein"/>
<link wikidata="Q526456" start="2318" end="2328" title="Andy Kuntz" label="Andy Kuntz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7608147" start="2340" end="2352" title="Stephan Lill" label="Stephan Lill"/>
<link wikidata="Q61995839" start="2365" end="2387" title="Alessandro Del Vecchio" label="Alessandro Del Vecchio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4755520" start="2428" end="2440" title="Andreas Lill" label="Andreas Lill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149204" start="2543" end="2556" title="Colour Temple" label="Colour Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967671" start="2578" end="2591" title="The God Thing" label="The God Thing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5434592" start="2613" end="2626" title="Far Off Grace" label="Far Off Grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q4899958" start="2648" end="2663" title="Beyond Daylight" label="Beyond Daylight"/>
<link wikidata="Q5108650" start="2685" end="2693" title="Christ 0" label="Christ 0"/>
<link wikidata="Q7763339" start="2715" end="2737" title="The Seraphic Clockwork" label="The Seraphic Clockwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577984" start="3121" end="3142" title="Spirit of Live" label="Spirit of Live (2000)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3144" end="3174" title="The Seraphic Live Works" label="The Seraphic Live Works (2017)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3176" end="3202" title="Live &amp;amp; Immortal" label="Live &amp;amp; Immortal (2022)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143222" wikidata="Q382533" url="?curid=143222" title="William Bainbridge">
<text>Commodore William Bainbridge (May 7, 1774July 27, 1833) was a United States Navy officer. During his long career in the young American navy he served under six presidents beginning with John Adams and is notable for his many victories at sea. He commanded several famous naval ships, including , and saw service in the Barbary Wars and the War of 1812. Bainbridge was also in command of when she grounded off the shores of Tripoli, Libya in North Africa, resulting in his capture and imprisonment for many months. In the latter part of his career he became the U.S. Naval Commissioner.

==Early life==
William Bainbridge was born in Princeton, New Jersey, eldest son of Dr. Absalom Bainbridge and Mary Taylor. His father, a loyalist during the American Revolution, served as a surgeon in the British Army and was convicted of high treason by the State of New Jersey and successfully filed for damages with the American Loyalist Claims Commission. William had two brothers: Joseph, who also became a Navy captain, and John T.; and a sister, Mary. He was raised by his maternal grandfather, John Taylor, Esq., of Middleton, New Jersey as his father left for England in 1783 and his mother remained behind due to her ill health (though his father returned to the United States and died in New York City in 1807).

==Pre-naval service==
In his teens William Bainbridge was already of athletic build and had an energetic and adventurous spirit. He was trained as a seaman in ships in the Delaware River, then considered the best &#x27;school&#x27; for seamanship because of the great skill required to navigate that river.

Bainbridge served aboard the small merchant ship &quot;Cantor&quot; in 1792.

In 1796 after returning from Brazil, Bainbridge served aboard the merchant ship &quot;Hope&quot;, a small vessel of 140 tons with four nine-pound guns. While he was in port in the Garonne River at Bordeaux preparing for his fourth voyage, the captain of a nearby ship which was under mutiny hailed Bainbridge and asked for help; though outnumbered by seven seamen and being severely wounded by exploding gunpowder, Bainbridge succeeded in helping restore order. For his courage and in recognition of his navigational and seaman skills he was made commander of that ship in 1796 at the age of nineteen.

After leaving France that same year he sailed to the Caribbean. While in port at St. Johns, &quot;Hope&quot; was hailed by a British merchant schooner, but refused to stop. The schooner fired at &quot;Hope&quot; in response, and Bainbridge and his crew quickly turned about and with only two guns fired a broadside, inflicting enough damage that led to the schooner striking the colors.

==Service in US Navy==

Bainbridge saw service in several wars and commanded a number of famous early U.S. Navy vessels including , USS &quot;Philadelphia&quot; and USS &quot;Constitution&quot;, ultimately becoming a member of the board of naval commissioners during the latter part of his long naval career.

===Quasi-War===
With the organization of the United States Navy in 1798, Bainbridge was included in the naval officer corps and in September 1798 was appointed commanding Lieutenant of the schooner . He was ordered to patrol the waters in the West Indies along with Captain Williams of USS &quot;Norfolk&quot;, both of whom were under the command of Murray, who was in command of the frigate USS &quot;Montezuma&quot;. On November 20, 1798, Lt. Bainbridge surrendered &quot;Retaliation&quot; without resistance to two French frigates, &quot;Volontier&quot;, with 44 guns and &quot;l&#x27;Insurgente&quot; bearing 40 guns, after he mistook them for British warships and approached them without identifying them. Bainbridge and his crew were taken aboard &quot;Volontier&quot; where the two French frigates continued in their pursuit of other nearby American vessels. During the flight to capture the Americans, Bainbridge offered words of caution to the French commander of &quot;L&#x27; Insurgente&quot;, Captain St. Laurent, about American strength; this made St. Laurent wait for his consorts far behind him.

&quot;Retaliation&quot; was the first ship in the nascent United States Navy to be surrendered. Bainbridge was not disciplined for this action.

In March 1799, Bainbridge was appointed Master Commandant of the brig of 18 guns and ordered to cruise against the French.

===First Barbary War===

In 1800 during the months before the First Barbary War broke out, Bainbridge, who was now Capt. of USS George Washington, was given the ignominious task of carrying the tribute which the United States still paid to the Dey of Algiers to secure exemption from capture for U.S. merchant ships in the Mediterranean. Upon arrival in the 24-gun USS &quot;George Washington&quot;, he allowed the harbor pilot to guide him directly under the guns of the fort overlooking the harbor. Upon his arrival the Dey demanded that Bainbridge use his ship to ferry the Algerian ambassador and tributary gifts to Constantinople, and that he fly the Algerian flag during the journey. With &quot;George Washington&quot; under the guns of the fort and surrounded by the Dey&#x27;s warships and military personnel Bainbridge reluctantly complied for fear of imprisonment, raised the Algerian flag on his masthead and delivered gifts of animals and slaves to Constantinople. After returning to the U.S. on 4 May 1801, he was relieved of command, and was succeeded by Lt. John Shaw as Captain. He commanded USS Essex on her second cruise, receiving command from Capt. Preble on 29 May, 1801,

President Jefferson found that bribing the pirate Barbary states did not work, and decided to use force. On May 21, 1803, Bainbridge was placed in command of USS &quot;Philadelphia&quot;, tasked with enforcing a blockade of Tripoli, Libya. Bainbridge ran the ship aground on an uncharted reef on October 21, 1803. Bainbridge made the situation worse by putting on all sail before sounding around the boat to determine the actual situation, resulting in driving the ship hard onto the bank. All efforts to refloat her under five hours of cannon fire from Tripolitan gunboats, inaccurate fire that with no shots coming near the powerful frigate, and Bainbridge decided to surrender. Before doing so he ordered all small arms thrown overboard, the powder magazine flooded and the naval signal book destroyed. Soon afterward, the ship floated free after high tide and was captured by the Pasha of Tripoli. Bainbridge and his crewmen were imprisoned in Tripoli for nineteen months.

Lieutenant Stephen Decatur commanding executed a night raid into Tripoli, Libya harbor on February 16, 1804, to destroy &quot;Philadelphia&quot;. Admiral Horatio Nelson is said to have called this &quot;the most bold and daring act of the Age&quot;.

The capture of &quot;Philadelphia&quot; and its crew also motivated President Jefferson&#x27;s decision to send William Eaton, a former Army officer, known for his brash and defiant diplomacy, to Tripoli in 1805 to free the 300 American hostages in what was the first U.S. covert mission to overthrow a foreign government. William Eaton established a group of about 20 Christian (eight of whom were U.S. Marines) and perhaps 100 Muslim mercenaries to begin the takeover of Tripoli starting with Derna. He managed to trek with the small detachment of Marines led by Presley O&#x27;Bannon and his mercenary force over 500 miles. Supported at sea by Isaac Hull, Captain of , in an effective &quot;combined operation&quot;, Eaton led the attack in the Battle of Derna on 27 April 1805. The town&#x27;s capture, memorialized in the &quot;Marines&#x27; Hymn&quot; famous line &quot;to the shores of Tripoli&quot; and the threat of further advance on Tripoli, were strong influences toward peace, negotiated in June 1805 by Tobias Lear and Commodore John Rodgers with the Pasha of Tripoli.

After four separate bombardments from Preble&#x27;s squadron, Bainbridge was released from the prison in Tripoli on June 3, 1805 and returned to the United States and received a warm welcome. Shortly thereafter a Naval Court of Inquiry tasked with looking into his surrender found no evidence of misconduct, and he was allowed to continue serving. On his release, he returned for a time to the merchant service in order to make good the loss of profit caused by his captivity. With the conclusion of the campaign against the Barbary states, the US Navy was downsized and nearly all of her frigates remained in port. Realizing war with the United Kingdom was imminent Bainbridge and Commodore Stewart hastened to Washington to urge President Jefferson and Congress to strengthen the country&#x27;s naval forces. They concurred with this timely advice and Congress forced a change to this policy that had led the current naval force to decay in early 1809. Satisfied with the results Bainbridge returned to Boston and took command of the navy yard at Charlestown.

Bainbridge took command of the frigate in 1809 and began patrolling off the Atlantic coast in September of that year. Bainbridge was transferred to shore duty in June, 1810.

===War of 1812===
On 15 September, shortly after the War of 1812 broke out between the United Kingdom and the United States, Bainbridge was appointed to command the 44-gun frigate USS &quot;Constitution&quot;, succeeding Captain Isaac Hull. &quot;Constitution&quot; was an enormous frigate of 1,533 tons, armed with 24-pounders, which had already captured the 18-pounder frigate of 1072 tons. Under Bainbridge, she was sent to cruise in the South Atlantic.
On 29 December 1812, Bainbridge fell in with the 38-gun , off the coast of Brazil. &quot;Java&quot; was a vessel armed with 18-pounders and of 1,083 tons, formerly the French frigate &quot;Renommée&quot;. She had a crew of 300 men under Captain Henry Lambert and was on her way to the East Indies, carrying the newly appointed Lieutenant-General Hislop of Bombay and his staff along with dispatches to St. Helena, Cape of Good Hope and every British port in the Indian and China Seas. She had an inexperienced crew with only a very few trained seamen, and her men had only had one day&#x27;s gunnery drill. In addition to her crew, &quot;Java&quot; was carrying officers and seamen who were to join the British fleet in the East Indies bringing her complement to around 400, among them Captain John Marshall who was to take command of a sloop of war stationed there. Under Bainbridge, &quot;Constitution&quot; had a well-drilled crew. &quot;Java&quot; was cut to pieces, with its rigging almost completely destroyed, and was forced to surrender, while having inflicted moderate damage to &quot;Constitution&quot;, including removing &quot;Constitution&quot;″s helm with shot and hitting the lower masts (which did not fall because of their large diameter). During the action, Bainbridge was wounded twice, but maintained command throughout. &quot;Java&quot; fought extremely well as compared to the &quot;Guerriere&quot; and &quot;Macedonian&quot; which had been taken earlier that year by similarly overwhelming force. &quot;Java&quot; successfully outmaneuvered the large &quot;Constitution&quot; until her jib was shot away. If &quot;Constitution&quot; had been built with smaller diameter masts, she would have been dismasted. Fortunately, &quot;Constitution&#x27;s&quot; masts were so wide that the smaller 18 lb shot from &quot;Java&quot; could not penetrate them. After three hours of intense fighting, &quot;Constitution&quot; prevailed. Because of the heavy damage inflicted on &quot;Java&quot; and the great distance from the American coast, Bainbridge decided to burn his prize. On March 3, 1813, President Madison presented Bainbridge with the Congressional Gold Medal for his service aboard &quot;Constitution&quot;.

===Second Barbary War===
After the conclusion of the war with Britain, the United States engaged in the Second Barbary War of 1815 (also known as the &quot;Algerian War&quot;). It was the second of two wars fought between the United States and the Ottoman Empire&#x27;s North African regencies of Tripoli, Tunis, and Algeria known collectively as the Barbary states. On March 3, 1815, the US Congress authorized deployment of naval power against the Regency of Algiers, and two squadrons were assembled and readied for war. Bainbridge served against the Barbary pirates and was commander of the US squadron sent to Algiers to enforce a blockade, show the extent of American naval resources and determination and enforce the neutrality and peace that was established by Stephen Decatur and William Shaler. The war ended in 1815 with the victory of the United States.

===USS &quot;Columbus&quot;===
Bainbridge transported Canova&#x27;s &quot;George Washington&quot; from Italy to Boston aboard his flagship . The statue was delivered to Boston, transported to Raleigh, North Carolina, and then installed in the rotunda of the North Carolina State House on December 24, 1821.
==Later life==

In 1820, Bainbridge served as second for Stephen Decatur in a duel with James Barron that cost Decatur his life. Decatur&#x27;s wife, along with many historians, believe that Bainbridge had actually harbored a long-standing resentment of the younger but more famous Decatur and arranged the duel in a way that made the wounding or killing of one or more duelists very likely.

Between 1824 and 1827, he served on the Board of Navy Commissioners. He died in Philadelphia in July 1833 and was buried there at the Christ Church Burial Ground.

==Legacy==
Bainbridge was survived by his son William Jr. and four daughters (Mary Taylor Bainbridge Jaudon, Susan Parker Hayes, Louisa Alexina Bainbridge and Lucy Ann Bainbridge). He left some money that was invested in Pennsylvania State bonds, which were sold and invested in other projects. After the American Civil War, Mary T. Jaudon&#x27;s bonds were mismanaged by her husband&#x27;s brother, Samuel Jaudon and ultimately became the subject of a United States Supreme Court case, &quot;Jaudon v. Duncan&quot;.

Several ships of the Navy have since been named USS &quot;Bainbridge&quot; in his honor, including the U.S. Navy&#x27;s first destroyer (), a unique nuclear-powered destroyer/cruiser (), and a contemporary . This last ship is known as the ship that rescued the in the 2009 attempted hijacking by Somali pirates. The now-deactivated United States Naval Training Center Bainbridge in Port Deposit, Cecil County, Maryland, was named for him.

Other places named after him include Bainbridge Island, Washington, as well as Bainbridge Township, Ohio; Bainbridge, Georgia, county seat of Decatur County; Bainbridge, Indiana; Bainbridge, New York; Bainbridge Street in Philadelphia; Bainbridge Street in Richmond, Virginia, and Old Bainbridge Road in Tallahassee, Florida. Bainbridge Avenue in the Bronx, New York, is also named for William Bainbridge, it runs near Decatur Avenue, named for Stephen Decatur, Jr. in the Norwood section of the Bronx. Bainbridge Street in Montgomery, Alabama, on which street the state capitol building is located, is also named for Bainbridge. Parallel to that Bainbridge Street and beginning directly to its west are streets named for other Barbary War/War of 1812 naval heroes: Decatur Street, named for Stephen Decatur; Hull Street, named for Isaac Hull; McDonough Street, named for Thomas Macdonough; Lawrence Street, named for James Lawrence and Perry Street, named for Oliver Hazard Perry. Bainbridge was also the namesake for Fort Bainbridge, built during the Creek War near Tuskegee, Alabama.
==See also==
*Bibliography of early American naval history
*Continental Navy
*Glossary of nautical terms (A-L)
*Glossary of nautical terms (M-Z)
*List of ships captured in the 19th century
*List of sea captains

==References==
==Bibliography==
* URL
* URL
* URL1 URL2
* URL
* URL 
* URL
* E&#x27;book1 E&#x27;book2
* url-1, url-2
* E&#x27;book
* URL1 URL2 URL3
* URL

==Further reading==
*Dearborn, H. A. S. &quot;The Life of William Bainbridge, Esq.&quot; Princeton, N.J.; Princeton University Press, 1931.
*London, Joshua E. &quot;Victory in Tripoli: How America&#x27;s War with the Barbary Pirates Established the U.S. Navy and Shaped a Nation&quot;. New Jersey: John Wiley &amp; Sons, Inc., 2005. .
*Long, David F. &quot;Ready to Hazard: A Biography of Commodore William Bainbridge, 1774–1833&quot;. Hanover, New Hampshire: University Press of New England, 1981.

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q844242" start="0" end="9" title="Commodore (United States)" label="Commodore"/>
<link wikidata="Q382533" start="10" end="28" title="William Bainbridge" label="William Bainbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="62" end="80" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11806" start="186" end="196" title="John Adams" label="John Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q807741" start="319" end="331" title="Barbary Wars" label="Barbary Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="340" end="351" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q3579" start="423" end="437" title="Tripoli, Libya" label="Tripoli, Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q138518" start="633" end="642" title="Princeton, New Jersey" label="Princeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q935481" start="724" end="732" title="Loyalist (American Revolution)" label="loyalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="792" end="804" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="826" end="838" title="high treason" label="high treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q5077" start="1877" end="1890" title="Garonne" label="Garonne River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479" start="1894" end="1902" title="Bordeaux" label="Bordeaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247" start="2353" end="2362" title="Caribbean Sea" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q36262" start="2381" end="2390" title="St. John&amp;#x27;s, Antigua and Barbuda" label="St. Johns"/>
<link wikidata="Q17116086" start="2666" end="2685" title="striking the colors" label="striking the colors"/>
<link wikidata="Q669037" start="3241" end="3252" title="West Indies" label="West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="4168" end="4186" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q202539" start="4320" end="4324" title="brig" label="brig"/>
<link wikidata="Q468293" start="4441" end="4458" title="First Barbary War" label="First Barbary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q748289" start="4573" end="4580" title="tribute" label="tribute"/>
<link wikidata="Q12821337" start="4623" end="4626" title="Dey" label="Dey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561" start="4630" end="4637" title="Algiers" label="Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893092" start="4744" end="4777" title="USS George Washington (1798)" label="USS &amp;quot;George Washington&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="4999" end="5013" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q461843" start="5487" end="5496" title="USS Essex (1799)" label="USS Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="5573" end="5592" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="President Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q501768" start="5623" end="5637" title="Barbary states" label="Barbary states"/>
<link wikidata="Q2022439" start="5731" end="5759" title="USS Philadelphia (1799)" label="USS &amp;quot;Philadelphia&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q273976" start="5785" end="5793" title="blockade" label="blockade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3579" start="5797" end="5811" title="Tripoli, Libya" label="Tripoli, Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q14920473" start="5832" end="5844" title="Ship grounding" label="ship aground"/>
<link wikidata="Q23384" start="6428" end="6432" title="tide" label="tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q720374" start="6562" end="6577" title="Stephen Decatur" label="Stephen Decatur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3579" start="6616" end="6630" title="Tripoli, Libya" label="Tripoli, Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q83235" start="6705" end="6719" title="Horatio Nelson" label="Horatio Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568584" start="6914" end="6927" title="William Eaton (soldier)" label="William Eaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q192620" start="7039" end="7046" title="hostage" label="hostage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673271" start="7093" end="7123" title="Regime change" label="overthrow a foreign government"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="7201" end="7213" title="United States Marine Corps" label="U.S. Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q178197" start="7238" end="7249" title="mercenary" label="mercenaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q707476" start="7367" end="7388" title="Presley O&amp;#x27;Bannon" label="Presley O&amp;#x27;Bannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422525" start="7449" end="7459" title="Isaac Hull" label="Isaac Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888407" start="7550" end="7565" title="Battle of Derna (1805)" label="Battle of Derna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331540" start="7635" end="7653" title="Marines&amp;#x27; Hymn" label="Marines&amp;#x27; Hymn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7811643" start="7819" end="7830" title="Tobias Lear" label="Tobias Lear"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733407" start="7845" end="7857" title="John Rodgers (naval officer, War of 1812)" label="John Rodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7141945" start="7867" end="7883" title="Pasha of Tripoli" label="Pasha of Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="8525" end="8539" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q161705" start="8980" end="8987" title="frigate" label="frigate"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="9177" end="9188" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="9211" end="9225" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="9234" end="9247" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422525" start="9353" end="9363" title="Isaac Hull" label="Isaac Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891439" start="9826" end="9839" title="Henry Lambert" label="Henry Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q213137" start="9866" end="9877" title="East Indies" label="East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156" start="9937" end="9943" title="Bombay" label="Bombay"/>
<link wikidata="Q34497" start="9983" end="9993" title="St. Helena" label="St. Helena"/>
<link wikidata="Q4092" start="9995" end="10012" title="Cape of Good Hope" label="Cape of Good Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="10043" end="10049" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q398805" start="10054" end="10064" title="China Seas" label="China Seas"/>
<link wikidata="Q639410" start="10367" end="10388" title="John Marshall (British captain)" label="Captain John Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1980202" start="10741" end="10745" title="Ship&amp;#x27;s wheel" label="helm"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="11689" end="11706" title="James Madison" label="President Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q721743" start="11737" end="11761" title="Congressional Gold Medal" label="Congressional Gold Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q233505" start="11916" end="11934" title="Second Barbary War" label="Second Barbary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="12038" end="12051" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="12060" end="12081" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="12082" end="12094" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529261" start="12109" end="12116" title="Ottoman Tripolitania" label="Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q4899891" start="12118" end="12123" title="Beylik of Tunis" label="Tunis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045696" start="12129" end="12136" title="Regency of Algiers" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q501768" start="12163" end="12177" title="Barbary states" label="Barbary states"/>
<link wikidata="Q720374" start="12581" end="12596" title="Stephen Decatur" label="Stephen Decatur"/>
<link wikidata="Q5547" start="12733" end="12739" title="Antonio Canova" label="Canova"/>
<link wikidata="Q60676720" start="12753" end="12770" title="George Washington (Canova)" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="12791" end="12797" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q41087" start="12871" end="12878" title="Raleigh, North Carolina" label="Raleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q60884711" start="12937" end="12963" title="North Carolina State House" label="North Carolina State House"/>
<link wikidata="Q720374" start="13043" end="13058" title="Stephen Decatur" label="Stephen Decatur"/>
<link wikidata="Q191503" start="13064" end="13068" title="duel" label="duel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605005" start="13074" end="13086" title="James Barron" label="James Barron"/>
<link wikidata="Q4931363" start="13419" end="13446" title="Board of Navy Commissioners" label="Board of Navy Commissioners"/>
<link wikidata="Q5108770" start="13513" end="13540" title="Christ Church Burial Ground" label="Christ Church Burial Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="13848" end="13866" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q16065404" start="13943" end="13956" title="Samuel Jaudon" label="Samuel Jaudon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468540" start="14109" end="14135" title="USS Bainbridge" label="USS &amp;quot;Bainbridge&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7890804" start="14393" end="14439" title="United States Naval Training Center Bainbridge" label="United States Naval Training Center Bainbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q803903" start="14538" end="14555" title="Bainbridge Island, Washington" label="Bainbridge Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q4848546" start="14580" end="14599" title="Bainbridge Township, Geauga County, Ohio" label="Bainbridge Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q788794" start="14607" end="14617" title="Bainbridge, Georgia" label="Bainbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q493037" start="14643" end="14657" title="Decatur County, Georgia" label="Decatur County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2222459" start="14659" end="14669" title="Bainbridge, Indiana" label="Bainbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879945" start="14680" end="14690" title="Bainbridge (town), New York" label="Bainbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="14723" end="14735" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43421" start="14758" end="14766" title="Richmond, Virginia" label="Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q37043" start="14805" end="14816" title="Tallahassee, Florida" label="Tallahassee"/>
<link wikidata="Q29364" start="15025" end="15035" title="Montgomery, Alabama" label="Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q720374" start="15293" end="15308" title="Stephen Decatur" label="Stephen Decatur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422525" start="15333" end="15343" title="Isaac Hull" label="Isaac Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q125719" start="15373" end="15390" title="Thomas Macdonough" label="Thomas Macdonough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680697" start="15419" end="15433" title="James Lawrence" label="James Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q580513" start="15462" end="15481" title="Oliver Hazard Perry" label="Oliver Hazard Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q28873543" start="15520" end="15535" title="Fort Bainbridge" label="Fort Bainbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186260" start="15554" end="15563" title="Creek War" label="Creek War"/>
<link wikidata="Q79718" start="15569" end="15577" title="Tuskegee, Alabama" label="Tuskegee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903414" start="15602" end="15646" title="Bibliography of early American naval history" label="Bibliography of early American naval history"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367216" start="15648" end="15664" title="Continental Navy" label="Continental Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626877" start="15666" end="15698" title="Glossary of nautical terms (A-L)" label="Glossary of nautical terms (A-L)"/>
<link wikidata="Q105973607" start="15700" end="15732" title="Glossary of nautical terms (M-Z)" label="Glossary of nautical terms (M-Z)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6638857" start="15734" end="15776" title="List of ships captured in the 19th century" label="List of ships captured in the 19th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q6638030" start="15778" end="15798" title="List of sea captains" label="List of sea captains"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143223" wikidata="Q221686" url="?curid=143223" title="Twelve-tone technique">
<text>The twelve-tone technique—also known as dodecaphony, twelve-tone serialism, and (in British usage) twelve-note composition—is a method of musical composition. The technique is a means of ensuring that all 12 notes of the chromatic scale are sounded equally often in a piece of music while preventing the emphasis of any one note through the use of tone rows, orderings of the 12 pitch classes. All 12 notes are thus given more or less equal importance, and the music avoids being in a key.

The technique was first devised by Austrian composer Josef Matthias Hauer, who published his &quot;law of the twelve tones&quot; in 1919. In 1923, Arnold Schoenberg (1874–1951) developed his own, better-known version of 12-tone technique, which became associated with the &quot;Second Viennese School&quot; composers, who were the primary users of the technique in the first decades of its existence. Over time, the technique increased greatly in popularity and eventually became widely influential on Mid 20th-century composers. Many important composers who had originally not subscribed to or actively opposed the technique, such as Aaron Copland and Igor Stravinsky, eventually adopted it in their music.

Schoenberg himself described the system as a &quot;Method of composing with twelve tones which are related only with one another&quot;. It is commonly considered a form of serialism.

Schoenberg&#x27;s fellow countryman and contemporary Hauer also developed a similar system using unordered hexachords or &quot;tropes&quot;—independent of Schoenberg&#x27;s development of the twelve-tone technique. Other composers have created systematic use of the chromatic scale, but Schoenberg&#x27;s method is considered to be most historically and aesthetically significant.

==History of use==

The twelve-tone technique is most often attributed to Austrian composer Arnold Schoenberg. He recalls using it in 1921 and describing it to pupils two years later. Simultaneously, Josef Matthias Hauer was formulating a similar theory in his writings. In the second edition of his book &quot;Vom Wesen Des Musikalischen&quot; (On the Essence of Music, 1923), Hauer wrote that the law of the atonal melody requires all twelve tones to be played repeatedly.

The method was used during the next twenty years almost exclusively by the composers of the Second Viennese School—Alban Berg, Anton Webern, and Schoenberg himself. Although, another important composer in this period was Elisabeth Lutyens who wrote more than 50 pieces using the serial method.

The twelve tone technique was preceded by &quot;freely&quot; atonal pieces of 1908–1923 which, though &quot;free&quot;, often have as an &quot;integrative element ... a minute intervallic cell&quot; which in addition to expansion may be transformed as with a tone row, and in which individual notes may &quot;function as pivotal elements, to permit overlapping statements of a basic cell or the linking of two or more basic cells&quot;. The twelve-tone technique was also preceded by &quot;nondodecaphonic serial composition&quot; used independently in the works of Alexander Scriabin, Igor Stravinsky, Béla Bartók, Carl Ruggles, and others. Oliver Neighbour argues that Bartók was &quot;the first composer to use a group of twelve notes consciously for a structural purpose&quot;, in 1908 with the third of his fourteen bagatelles. &quot;Essentially, Schoenberg and Hauer systematized and defined for their own dodecaphonic purposes a pervasive technical feature of &#x27;modern&#x27; musical practice, the ostinato&quot;. Additionally, John Covach argues that the strict distinction between the two, emphasized by authors including Perle, is overemphasized:

The distinction often made between Hauer and the Schoenberg school—that the former&#x27;s music is based on unordered hexachords while the latter&#x27;s is based on an ordered series—is false: while he did write pieces that could be thought of as &quot;trope pieces&quot;, much of Hauer&#x27;s twelve-tone music employs an ordered series.

The &quot;strict ordering&quot; of the Second Viennese school, on the other hand, &quot;was inevitably tempered by practical considerations: they worked on the basis of an interaction between ordered and unordered pitch collections.&quot;

Rudolph Reti, an early proponent, says: &quot;To replace one structural force (tonality) by another (increased thematic oneness) is indeed the fundamental idea behind the twelve-tone technique&quot;, arguing it arose out of Schoenberg&#x27;s frustrations with free atonality, providing a &quot;positive premise&quot; for atonality. In Hauer&#x27;s breakthrough piece &quot;Nomos&quot;, Op. 19 (1919) he used twelve-tone sections to mark out large formal divisions, such as with the opening five statements of the same twelve-tone series, stated in groups of five notes making twelve five-note phrases.

Felix Khuner contrasted Hauer&#x27;s more mathematical concept with Schoenberg&#x27;s more musical approach. Schoenberg&#x27;s idea in developing the technique was for it to &quot;replace those structural differentiations provided formerly by tonal harmonies&quot;. As such, twelve-tone music is usually atonal, and treats each of the 12 semitones of the chromatic scale with equal importance, as opposed to earlier classical music which had treated some notes as more important than others (particularly the tonic and the dominant note).

The technique became widely used by the fifties, taken up by composers such as Milton Babbitt, Luciano Berio, Pierre Boulez, Luigi Dallapiccola, Ernst Krenek, Riccardo Malipiero, and, after Schoenberg&#x27;s death, Igor Stravinsky. Some of these composers extended the technique to control aspects other than the pitches of notes (such as duration, method of attack and so on), thus producing serial music. Some even subjected all elements of music to the serial process.

Charles Wuorinen said in a 1962 interview that while &quot;most of the Europeans say that they have &#x27;gone beyond&#x27; and &#x27;exhausted&#x27; the twelve-tone system&quot;, in America, &quot;the twelve-tone system has been carefully studied and generalized into an edifice more impressive than any hitherto known.&quot;

American composer Scott Bradley, best known for his musical scores for works like &quot;Tom &amp; Jerry&quot; and &quot;Droopy Dog&quot;, utilized the 12-tone technique in his work. Bradley described his use thus:
An example of Bradley&#x27;s use of the technique to convey building tension occurs in the &quot;Tom &amp; Jerry&quot; short &quot;Puttin&#x27; on the Dog&quot;, from 1944. In a scene where the mouse, wearing a dog mask, runs across a yard of dogs &quot;in disguise&quot;, a chromatic scale represents both the mouse&#x27;s movements, and the approach of a suspicious dog, mirrored octaves lower. Apart from his work in cartoon scores, Bradley also composed tone poems that were performed in concert in California.

Rock guitarist Ron Jarzombek used a twelve-tone system for composing Blotted Science&#x27;s extended play &quot;The Animation of Entomology&quot;. He put the notes into a clock and rearranged them to be used that are side by side or consecutive. He called his method &quot;Twelve-Tone in Fragmented Rows.&quot;

==Tone row==


The basis of the twelve-tone technique is the &quot;tone row&quot;, an ordered arrangement of the twelve notes of the chromatic scale (the twelve equal tempered pitch classes). There are four postulates or preconditions to the technique which apply to the row (also called a &quot;set&quot; or &quot;series&quot;), on which a work or section is based:
# The row is a specific ordering of all twelve notes of the chromatic scale (without regard to octave placement).
# No note is repeated within the row.
# The row may be subjected to interval-preserving transformations—that is, it may appear in &quot;inversion&quot; (denoted I), &quot;retrograde&quot; (R), or &quot;retrograde-inversion&quot; (RI), in addition to its &quot;original&quot; or &quot;prime&quot; form (P).
# The row in any of its four transformations may begin on any degree of the chromatic scale; in other words it may be freely transposed. (Transposition being an interval-preserving transformation, this is technically covered already by 3.) Transpositions are indicated by an integer between 0 and 11 denoting the number of semitones: thus, if the original form of the row is denoted P0, then P1 denotes its transposition upward by one semitone (similarly I1 is an upward transposition of the inverted form, R1 of the retrograde form, and RI1 of the retrograde-inverted form).

(In Hauer&#x27;s system postulate 3 does not apply.)

A particular transformation (prime, inversion, retrograde, retrograde-inversion) together with a choice of transpositional level is referred to as a &quot;set form&quot; or &quot;row form&quot;. Every row thus has up to 48 different row forms. (Some rows have fewer due to symmetry; see the sections on &quot;derived rows&quot; and &quot;invariance&quot; below.)

===Example===
Suppose the prime form of the row is as follows:

Then the retrograde is the prime form in reverse order:

The inversion is the prime form with the intervals inverted (so that a rising minor third becomes a falling minor third, or equivalently, a rising major sixth):

And the retrograde inversion is the inverted row in retrograde:

P, R, I and RI can each be started on any of the twelve notes of the chromatic scale, meaning that 47 permutations of the initial tone row can be used, giving a maximum of 48 possible tone rows. However, not all prime series will yield so many variations because transposed transformations may be identical to each other. This is known as &quot;invariance&quot;. A simple case is the ascending chromatic scale, the retrograde inversion of which is identical to the prime form, and the retrograde of which is identical to the inversion (thus, only 24 forms of this tone row are available).

In the above example, as is typical, the retrograde inversion contains three points where the sequence of two pitches are identical to the prime row. Thus the generative power of even the most basic transformations is both unpredictable and inevitable. Motivic development can be driven by such internal consistency.

===Application in composition===
Note that rules 1–4 above apply to the construction of the row itself, and not to the interpretation of the row in the composition. (Thus, for example, postulate 2 does not mean, contrary to common belief, that no note in a twelve-tone work can be repeated until all twelve have been sounded.) While a row may be expressed literally on the surface as thematic material, it need not be, and may instead govern the pitch structure of the work in more abstract ways. Even when the technique is applied in the most literal manner, with a piece consisting of a sequence of statements of row forms, these statements may appear consecutively, simultaneously, or may overlap, giving rise to harmony.

Durations, dynamics and other aspects of music other than the pitch can be freely chosen by the composer, and there are also no general rules about which tone rows should be used at which time (beyond their all being derived from the prime series, as already explained). However, individual composers have constructed more detailed systems in which matters such as these are also governed by systematic rules (see serialism).

==== Topography ====
Analyst Kathryn Bailey has used the term &#x27;topography&#x27; to describe the particular way in which the notes of a row are disposed in her work on the dodecaphonic music of Webern. She identifies two types of topography in Webern&#x27;s music: block topography and linear topography.

The former, which she views as the &#x27;simplest&#x27;, is defined as follows: &#x27;rows are set one after the other, with all notes sounding in the order prescribed by this succession of rows, regardless of texture&#x27;. The latter is more complex: the musical texture &#x27;is the product of several rows progressing simultaneously in as many voices&#x27; (note that these &#x27;voices&#x27; are not necessarily restricted to individual instruments and therefore cut across the musical texture, operating as more of a background structure).

==== Elisions, Chains, and Cycles ====
Serial rows can be connected through elision, a term that describes &#x27;the overlapping of two rows that occur in succession, so that one or more notes at the juncture are shared (are played only once to serve both rows)&#x27;. When this elision incorporates two or more notes it creates a row chain; when multiple rows are connected by the same elision (typically identified as the same in set-class terms) this creates a row chain cycle, which therefore provides a technique for organising groups of rows.

===Properties of transformations===

The tone row chosen as the basis of the piece is called the &quot;prime series&quot; (P). Untransposed, it is notated as P0. Given the twelve pitch classes of the chromatic scale, there are 12 factorial (479,001,600) tone rows, although this is far higher than the number of &quot;unique&quot; tone rows (after taking transformations into account). There are 9,985,920 classes of twelve-tone rows up to equivalence (where two rows are equivalent if one is a transformation of the other).

Appearances of P can be transformed from the original in three basic ways:
* transposition up or down, giving Pχ.
* reversing the order of the pitches, giving the &quot;retrograde&quot; (R)
* turning each interval direction to its opposite, giving the &quot;inversion&quot; (I).

The various transformations can be combined. These give rise to a set-complex of forty-eight forms of the set, 12 transpositions of the &quot;four&quot; basic forms: P, R, I, RI. The combination of the retrograde and inversion transformations is known as the &quot;retrograde inversion&quot; (&quot;RI&quot;).

thus, each cell in the following table lists the result of the transformations, a four-group, in its row and column headers:

However, there are only a few numbers by which one may &quot;multiply&quot; a row and still end up with twelve tones. (Multiplication is in any case not interval-preserving.)

===Derivation===

&quot;Derivation&quot; is transforming segments of the full chromatic, fewer than 12 pitch classes, to yield a complete set, most commonly using trichords, tetrachords, and hexachords. A derived set can be generated by choosing appropriate transformations of any trichord except 0,3,6, the diminished triad. A derived set can also be generated from any tetrachord that excludes the interval class 4, a major third, between any two elements. The opposite, &quot;partitioning&quot;, uses methods to create segments from sets, most often through registral difference.

====Combinatoriality====

Combinatoriality is a side-effect of derived rows where combining different segments or sets such that the pitch class content of the result fulfills certain criteria, usually the combination of hexachords which complete the full chromatic.

====Invariance====
&quot;Invariant&quot; formations are also the side effect of derived rows where a segment of a set remains similar or the same under transformation. These may be used as &quot;pivots&quot; between set forms, sometimes used by Anton Webern and Arnold Schoenberg.

&quot;Invariance&quot; is defined as the &quot;properties of a set that are preserved under [any given] operation, as well as those relationships between a set and the so-operationally transformed set that inhere in the operation&quot;, a definition very close to that of mathematical invariance. George Perle describes their use as &quot;pivots&quot; or non-tonal ways of emphasizing certain pitches. Invariant rows are also combinatorial and derived.

===Cross partition===

A &quot;cross partition&quot; is an often monophonic or homophonic technique which, &quot;arranges the pitch classes of an aggregate (or a row) into a rectangular design&quot;, in which the vertical columns (harmonies) of the rectangle are derived from the adjacent segments of the row and the horizontal columns (melodies) are not (and thus may contain non-adjacencies).

For example, the layout of all possible &#x27;even&#x27; cross partitions is as follows:

One possible realization out of many for the &quot;order numbers&quot; of the 34 cross partition, and one variation of that, are:
 0 3 6 9 0 5 6 e
 1 4 7 t 2 3 7 t
 2 5 8 e 1 4 8 9

Thus if one&#x27;s tone row was 0 e 7 4 2 9 3 8 t 1 5 6, one&#x27;s cross partitions from above would be:
 0 4 3 1 0 9 3 6
 e 2 8 5 7 4 8 5
 7 9 t 6 e 2 t 1

Cross partitions are used in Schoenberg&#x27;s Op. 33a &quot;Klavierstück&quot; and also by Berg but Dallapicolla used them more than any other composer.

===Other===
In practice, the &quot;rules&quot; of twelve-tone technique have been bent and broken many times, not least by Schoenberg himself. For instance, in some pieces two or more tone rows may be heard progressing at once, or there may be parts of a composition which are written freely, without recourse to the twelve-tone technique at all. Offshoots or variations may produce music in which:
* the full chromatic is used and constantly circulates, but permutational devices are ignored
* permutational devices are used but not on the full chromatic

Also, some composers, including Stravinsky, have used cyclic permutation, or rotation, where the row is taken in order but using a different starting note. Stravinsky also preferred the inverse-retrograde, rather than the retrograde-inverse, treating the former as the compositionally predominant, &quot;untransposed&quot; form.

Although usually atonal, twelve tone music need not be—several pieces by Berg, for instance, have tonal elements.

One of the best known twelve-note compositions is &quot;Variations for Orchestra&quot; by Arnold Schoenberg. &quot;Quiet&quot;, in Leonard Bernstein&#x27;s &quot;Candide&quot;, satirizes the method by using it for a song about boredom, and Benjamin Britten used a twelve-tone row—a &quot;tema seriale con fuga&quot;—in his &quot;Cantata Academica: Carmen Basiliense&quot; (1959) as an emblem of academicism.

==Schoenberg&#x27;s mature practice==
Ten features of Schoenberg&#x27;s mature twelve-tone practice are characteristic, interdependent, and interactive:
# Hexachordal inversional combinatoriality
# Aggregates
# Linear set presentation
# Partitioning
# Isomorphic partitioning
# Invariants
# Hexachordal levels
# Harmony, &quot;consistent with and derived from the properties of the referential set&quot;
# Metre, established through &quot;pitch-relational characteristics&quot;
# Multidimensional set presentations.

== See also ==
* List of dodecaphonic and serial compositions
* All-interval twelve-tone row
* All-interval tetrachord
* All-trichord hexachord
* Pitch interval
* List of tone rows and series

==References==

===Notes===
===Sources===

* Alegant, Brian. 2010. &quot;The Twelve-Tone Music of Luigi Dallapiccola&quot;. Eastman Studies in Music 76. Rochester, New York: University of Rochester Press. .
* Babbitt, Milton. 1960. &quot;Twelve-Tone Invariants as Compositional Determinants&quot;. &quot;The Musical Quarterly&quot; 46, no. 2, Special Issue: Problems of Modern Music: The Princeton Seminar in Advanced Musical Studies (April): 246–259. . .
* Babbitt, Milton. 1961. &quot;Set Structure as a Compositional Determinant&quot;. &quot;Journal of Music Theory&quot; 5, no. 1 (Spring): 72–94. .
* Benson, Dave. 2007 &quot;Music: A Mathematical Offering&quot;. Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press. .
* Brett, Philip. &quot;Britten, Benjamin.&quot; &quot;Grove Music Online&quot; ed. L. Macy (Accessed 8 January 2007)
* Chase, Gilbert. 1987. &quot;America&#x27;s Music: From the Pilgrims to the Present&quot;, revised third edition. Music in American Life. Urbana: University of Illinois Press. (cloth); (pbk).
* Haimo, Ethan. 1990. &quot;Schoenberg&#x27;s Serial Odyssey: The Evolution of his Twelve-Tone Method, 1914–1928&quot;. Oxford [England] Clarendon Press; New York: Oxford University Press .
* Hill, Richard S. 1936. &quot;Schoenberg&#x27;s Tone-Rows and the Tonal System of the Future&quot;. &quot;The Musical Quarterly&quot; 22, no. 1 (January): 14–37. . .
* Lansky, Paul; George Perle and Dave Headlam. 2001. &quot;Twelve-note Composition&quot;. &quot;The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians&quot;, second edition, edited by Stanley Sadie and John Tyrrell. London: Macmillan.
* Leeuw, Ton de. 2005. &quot;Music of the Twentieth Century: A Study of Its Elements and Structure&quot;, translated from the Dutch by Stephen Taylor. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press. . Translation of &quot;Muziek van de twintigste eeuw: een onderzoek naar haar elementen en structuur&quot;. Utrecht: Oosthoek, 1964. Third impression, Utrecht: Bohn, Scheltema &amp; Holkema, 1977. .
* Loy, D. Gareth, 2007. &quot;Musimathics: The Mathematical Foundations of Music&quot;, Vol. 1. Cambridge, Massachusetts and London: MIT Press. .
* Neighbour, Oliver. 1954. &quot;The Evolution of Twelve-Note Music&quot;. &quot;Proceedings of the Royal Musical Association&quot;, volume 81, issue 1: 49–61. 
* Perle, George. 1977. &quot;Serial Composition and Atonality: An Introduction to the Music of Schoenberg, Berg, and Webern&quot;, fourth edition, revised. Berkeley, Los Angeles, and London: University of California Press. 
* Perle, George. 1991. &quot;Serial Composition and Atonality: An Introduction to the Music of Schoenberg, Berg, and Webern&quot;, sixth edition, revised. Berkeley: University of California Press. .
* Reti, Rudolph. 1958. &quot;Tonality, Atonality, Pantonality: A Study of Some Trends in Twentieth Century Music&quot;. Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press. .
* Rufer, Josef. 1954. &quot;Composition with Twelve Notes Related Only to One Another&quot;, translated by Humphrey Searle. New York: The Macmillan Company. (Original German ed., 1952)
* Schoenberg, Arnold. 1975. &quot;Style and Idea&quot;, edited by Leonard Stein with translations by Leo Black. Berkeley &amp; Los Angeles: University of California Press. .
** 207–208 &quot;Twelve-Tone Composition (1923)&quot;
** 214–245 &quot;Composition with Twelve Tones (1) (1941)&quot;
** 245–249 &quot;Composition with Twelve Tones (2) (c. 1948)&quot;
* Solomon, Larry. 1973. &quot;New Symmetric Transformations&quot;. &quot;Perspectives of New Music&quot; 11, no. 2 (Spring–Summer): 257–264. .
* Spies, Claudio. 1965. &quot;Notes on Stravinsky&#x27;s &quot;Abraham and Isaac&quot;&quot;. &quot;Perspectives of New Music&quot; 3, no. 2 (Spring–Summer): 104–126. .
* Whittall, Arnold. 2008. &quot;The Cambridge Introduction to Serialism&quot;. Cambridge Introductions to Music. New York: Cambridge University Press. (cloth) (pbk).
===Further reading===

* Covach, John. 1992. &quot;The Zwölftonspiel of Josef Matthias Hauer&quot;. &quot;Journal of Music Theory&quot; 36, no. 1 (Spring): 149–84. .
* Covach, John. 2000. &quot;Schoenberg&#x27;s &#x27;Poetics of Music&#x27;, the Twelve-tone Method, and the Musical Idea&quot;. In &quot;Schoenberg and Words: The Modernist Years&quot;, edited by Russell A. Berman and Charlotte M. Cross, New York: Garland. 
* Covach, John. 2002, &quot;Twelve-tone Theory&quot;. In &quot;The Cambridge History of Western Music Theory&quot;, edited by Thomas Christensen, 603–627. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. .
* Krenek, Ernst. 1953. &quot;Is the Twelve-Tone Technique on the Decline?&quot; &quot;The Musical Quarterly&quot; 39, no 4 (October): 513–527.
* Šedivý, Dominik. 2011. &quot;Serial Composition and Tonality. An Introduction to the Music of Hauer and Steinbauer&quot;, edited by Günther Friesinger, Helmut Neumann and Dominik Šedivý. Vienna: edition mono. 
* Sloan, Susan L. 1989. &quot;Archival Exhibit: Schoenberg&#x27;s Dodecaphonic Devices&quot;. &quot;Journal of the Arnold Schoenberg Institute&quot; 12, no. 2 (November): 202–205.
* Starr, Daniel. 1978. &quot;Sets, Invariance and Partitions&quot;. &quot;Journal of Music Theory&quot; 22, no. 1 (Spring): 1–42. .
* Wuorinen, Charles. 1979. &quot;Simple Composition&quot;. New York: Longman. . Reprinted 1991, New York: C. F. Peters. .
==External links==
* Twelve tone square to find all combinations of a 12 tone sequence
* New Transformations: Beyond P, I, R, and RI by Larry Solomon
* Javascript twelve tone matrix calculator and tone row analyzer
* Matrix generator from musictheory.net by Ricci Adams
* Twelve-Tone Technique, A Quick Reference by Dan Román
* Dodecaphonic Knots and Topology of Words by 
* Database on tone rows and tropes</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q221686" start="4" end="25" title="Twelve-tone technique" label="twelve-tone technique"/>
<link wikidata="Q221686" start="40" end="51" title="Twelve-tone technique" label="dodecaphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q221686" start="53" end="74" title="Twelve-tone technique" label="twelve-tone serialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q221686" start="99" end="122" title="Twelve-tone technique" label="twelve-note composition"/>
<link wikidata="Q207628" start="138" end="157" title="musical composition" label="musical composition"/>
<link wikidata="Q202021" start="221" end="236" title="chromatic scale" label="chromatic scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q245258" start="348" end="356" title="tone row" label="tone row"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760309" start="379" end="390" title="pitch class" label="pitch class"/>
<link wikidata="Q534932" start="485" end="488" title="Key (music)" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="Q86359" start="544" end="564" title="Josef Matthias Hauer" label="Josef Matthias Hauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q154770" start="638" end="655" title="Arnold Schoenberg" label="Arnold Schoenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q248243" start="769" end="791" title="Second Viennese School" label="Second Viennese School"/>
<link wikidata="Q192185" start="1126" end="1139" title="Aaron Copland" label="Aaron Copland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314" start="1144" end="1159" title="Igor Stravinsky" label="Igor Stravinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q507246" start="1372" end="1381" title="serialism" label="serialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431240" start="1491" end="1500" title="hexachord" label="hexachord"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1511" end="1517" title="trope (music)#20th-century music" label="tropes"/>
<link wikidata="Q154770" start="1858" end="1875" title="Arnold Schoenberg" label="Arnold Schoenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q86359" start="1966" end="1986" title="Josef Matthias Hauer" label="Josef Matthias Hauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q248243" start="2334" end="2356" title="Second Viennese School" label="Second Viennese School"/>
<link wikidata="Q78475" start="2357" end="2367" title="Alban Berg" label="Alban Berg"/>
<link wikidata="Q190933" start="2369" end="2381" title="Anton Webern" label="Anton Webern"/>
<link wikidata="Q451307" start="2463" end="2480" title="Elisabeth Lutyens" label="Elisabeth Lutyens"/>
<link wikidata="Q211745" start="2598" end="2604" title="atonality" label="atonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058142" start="2725" end="2729" title="cell (music)" label="cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q185647" start="3103" end="3121" title="Alexander Scriabin" label="Alexander Scriabin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314" start="3123" end="3138" title="Igor Stravinsky" label="Igor Stravinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q83326" start="3140" end="3151" title="Béla Bartók" label="Béla Bartók"/>
<link wikidata="Q958763" start="3153" end="3165" title="Carl Ruggles" label="Carl Ruggles"/>
<link wikidata="Q216745" start="3545" end="3553" title="ostinato" label="ostinato"/>
<link wikidata="Q214322" start="4278" end="4290" title="Rudolph Reti" label="Rudolph Reti"/>
<link wikidata="Q5442247" start="4881" end="4893" title="Felix Khuner" label="Felix Khuner"/>
<link wikidata="Q192822" start="5124" end="5129" title="tonality" label="tonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q184421" start="5130" end="5139" title="harmony" label="harmonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q211745" start="5185" end="5191" title="atonality" label="atonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q738785" start="5219" end="5227" title="semitone" label="semitone"/>
<link wikidata="Q202021" start="5236" end="5251" title="chromatic scale" label="chromatic scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q210411" start="5390" end="5395" title="tonic (music)" label="tonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q899391" start="5404" end="5417" title="dominant note" label="dominant note"/>
<link wikidata="Q318518" start="5500" end="5514" title="Milton Babbitt" label="Milton Babbitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q221450" start="5516" end="5529" title="Luciano Berio" label="Luciano Berio"/>
<link wikidata="Q156193" start="5531" end="5544" title="Pierre Boulez" label="Pierre Boulez"/>
<link wikidata="Q17575" start="5546" end="5564" title="Luigi Dallapiccola" label="Luigi Dallapiccola"/>
<link wikidata="Q158436" start="5566" end="5578" title="Ernst Krenek" label="Ernst Krenek"/>
<link wikidata="Q957978" start="5580" end="5598" title="Riccardo Malipiero" label="Riccardo Malipiero"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314" start="5636" end="5651" title="Igor Stravinsky" label="Igor Stravinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q507246" start="5814" end="5826" title="serial music" label="serial music"/>
<link wikidata="Q961861" start="5894" end="5910" title="Charles Wuorinen" label="Charles Wuorinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q670858" start="6240" end="6253" title="Scott Bradley (composer)" label="Scott Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q131144" start="6310" end="6325" title="Tom &amp;amp; Jerry" label="Tom &amp;amp; Jerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260264" start="6342" end="6352" title="Droopy Dog" label="Droopy Dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q462595" start="6567" end="6590" title="Puttin&amp;#x27; on the Dog" label="Puttin&amp;#x27; on the Dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q271802" start="6894" end="6903" title="tone poem" label="tone poem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106673" start="6967" end="6980" title="Ron Jarzombek" label="Ron Jarzombek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034482" start="7021" end="7036" title="Blotted Science" label="Blotted Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q169930" start="7044" end="7057" title="extended play" label="extended play"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034482" start="7064" end="7091" title="The Animation of Entomology" label="The Animation of Entomology"/>
<link wikidata="Q245258" start="7331" end="7339" title="tone row" label="tone row"/>
<link wikidata="Q202021" start="7397" end="7412" title="chromatic scale" label="chromatic scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q723441" start="7425" end="7439" title="Equal temperament" label="equal tempered"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760309" start="7440" end="7451" title="pitch class" label="pitch class"/>
<link wikidata="Q17736" start="7471" end="7481" title="postulates" label="postulates"/>
<link wikidata="Q386025" start="7726" end="7732" title="octave" label="octave"/>
<link wikidata="Q189962" start="7813" end="7821" title="Interval (music)" label="interval"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834080" start="7833" end="7848" title="Transformation (music)" label="transformations"/>
<link wikidata="Q137685" start="7881" end="7890" title="Melodic inversion" label="inversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7317027" start="7916" end="7926" title="Retrograde (music)" label="retrograde"/>
<link wikidata="Q7317030" start="7947" end="7967" title="Retrograde inversion" label="retrograde-inversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q815323" start="8176" end="8186" title="Transposition (music)" label="transposed"/>
<link wikidata="Q12503" start="8326" end="8333" title="integer" label="integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q12485" start="8955" end="8963" title="symmetry" label="symmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q189962" start="9208" end="9217" title="Interval (music)" label="intervals"/>
<link wikidata="Q137685" start="9218" end="9226" title="Inversion (interval)" label="inverted"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711875" start="9245" end="9256" title="minor third" label="minor third"/>
<link wikidata="Q12374823" start="9314" end="9325" title="major sixth" label="major sixth"/>
<link wikidata="Q202021" start="9463" end="9478" title="chromatic scale" label="chromatic scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169365" start="9496" end="9508" title="permutation (music)" label="permutations"/>
<link wikidata="Q184421" start="11018" end="11025" title="harmony" label="harmony"/>
<link wikidata="Q507246" start="11442" end="11451" title="serialism" label="serialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760309" start="13041" end="13052" title="pitch class" label="pitch class"/>
<link wikidata="Q120976" start="13092" end="13101" title="factorial" label="factorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q815323" start="13465" end="13478" title="Transposition (music)" label="transposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169365" start="13557" end="13567" title="Permutation (music)" label="retrograde"/>
<link wikidata="Q137685" start="13646" end="13655" title="Melodic inversion" label="inversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7317030" start="13933" end="13953" title="retrograde inversion" label="retrograde inversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q550593" start="14061" end="14071" title="four-group" label="four-group"/>
<link wikidata="Q5262628" start="14486" end="14497" title="Derived row" label="derived set"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642219" start="14562" end="14570" title="trichord" label="trichord"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585567" start="14589" end="14605" title="diminished triad" label="diminished triad"/>
<link wikidata="Q195688" start="14652" end="14662" title="tetrachord" label="tetrachord"/>
<link wikidata="Q12375546" start="14701" end="14712" title="major third" label="major third"/>
<link wikidata="Q539310" start="14842" end="14862" title="registral difference" label="registral difference"/>
<link wikidata="Q5150831" start="14891" end="14907" title="Combinatoriality" label="Combinatoriality"/>
<link wikidata="Q190933" start="15378" end="15390" title="Anton Webern" label="Anton Webern"/>
<link wikidata="Q154770" start="15395" end="15412" title="Arnold Schoenberg" label="Arnold Schoenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q188211" start="15687" end="15710" title="Invariance (mathematics)" label="mathematical invariance"/>
<link wikidata="Q201359" start="15712" end="15724" title="George Perle" label="George Perle"/>
<link wikidata="Q118819" start="15808" end="15815" title="pitch (music)" label="pitches"/>
<link wikidata="Q5150831" start="15841" end="15854" title="combinatoriality" label="combinatorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q5262628" start="15859" end="15866" title="derived row" label="derived"/>
<link wikidata="Q18164945" start="16742" end="16774" title="Zwei Klavierstücke (Schoenberg)" label="Op. 33a &amp;quot;Klavierstück&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q78475" start="16787" end="16791" title="Alban Berg" label="Berg"/>
<link wikidata="Q17575" start="16796" end="16808" title="Luigi Dallapiccola" label="Dallapicolla"/>
<link wikidata="Q212130" start="17461" end="17479" title="cyclic permutation" label="cyclic permutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7317030" start="17593" end="17611" title="Inverse retrograde" label="inverse-retrograde"/>
<link wikidata="Q3554790" start="17908" end="17932" title="Variations for Orchestra (Schoenberg)" label="Variations for Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q154770" start="17942" end="17959" title="Arnold Schoenberg" label="Arnold Schoenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q152505" start="17983" end="18000" title="Leonard Bernstein" label="Leonard Bernstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033015" start="18014" end="18021" title="Candide (musical)" label="Candide"/>
<link wikidata="Q150767" start="18092" end="18108" title="Benjamin Britten" label="Benjamin Britten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431240" start="18416" end="18425" title="Hexachord" label="Hexachord"/>
<link wikidata="Q137685" start="18428" end="18439" title="inversion (music)" label="inversional"/>
<link wikidata="Q5150831" start="18440" end="18456" title="combinatoriality" label="combinatoriality"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18459" end="18469" title="tone row#total chromatic" label="Aggregates"/>
<link wikidata="Q2508727" start="18479" end="18482" title="set (music)" label="set"/>
<link wikidata="Q5262628" start="18498" end="18510" title="Derived row" label="Partitioning"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18539" end="18549" title="#Invariance" label="Invariants"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534997" start="18564" end="18570" title="Level (music)" label="levels"/>
<link wikidata="Q184421" start="18573" end="18580" title="Harmony" label="Harmony"/>
<link wikidata="Q630649" start="18667" end="18672" title="Meter (music)" label="Metre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7521358" start="18741" end="18757" title="Simultaneity (music)" label="Multidimensional"/>
<link wikidata="Q6617144" start="18795" end="18839" title="List of dodecaphonic and serial compositions" label="List of dodecaphonic and serial compositions"/>
<link wikidata="Q4728365" start="18842" end="18870" title="All-interval twelve-tone row" label="All-interval twelve-tone row"/>
<link wikidata="Q4728363" start="18873" end="18896" title="All-interval tetrachord" label="All-interval tetrachord"/>
<link wikidata="Q4728362" start="18899" end="18921" title="All-trichord hexachord" label="All-trichord hexachord"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198856" start="18924" end="18938" title="Pitch interval" label="Pitch interval"/>
<link wikidata="Q17099275" start="18941" end="18969" title="List of tone rows and series" label="List of tone rows and series"/>
<link wikidata="Q318518" start="19180" end="19195" title="Milton Babbitt" label="Babbitt, Milton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763768" start="19275" end="19296" title="The Musical Quarterly" label="The Musical Quarterly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6295619" start="19516" end="19539" title="Journal of Music Theory" label="Journal of Music Theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422837" start="19747" end="19765" title="Grove Music Online" label="Grove Music Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q5560851" start="19812" end="19826" title="Gilbert Chase" label="Chase, Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763768" start="20300" end="20321" title="The Musical Quarterly" label="The Musical Quarterly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357058" start="20362" end="20374" title="Paul Lansky" label="Lansky, Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q201359" start="20376" end="20388" title="George Perle" label="George Perle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422837" start="20456" end="20503" title="The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians" label="The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335317" start="20537" end="20550" title="Stanley Sadie" label="Stanley Sadie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6217713" start="20555" end="20567" title="John Tyrrell (musicologist)" label="John Tyrrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q923335" start="20590" end="20603" title="Ton de Leeuw" label="Leeuw, Ton de"/>
<link wikidata="Q19800544" start="21125" end="21142" title="Oliver Neighbour" label="Neighbour, Oliver"/>
<link wikidata="Q6296194" start="21204" end="21248" title="Proceedings of the Royal Musical Association" label="Proceedings of the Royal Musical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q201359" start="21286" end="21299" title="George Perle" label="Perle, George"/>
<link wikidata="Q214322" start="21709" end="21722" title="Rudolph Reti" label="Reti, Rudolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q71198" start="21871" end="21883" title="Josef Rufer" label="Rufer, Josef"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351430" start="21976" end="21991" title="Humphrey Searle" label="Humphrey Searle"/>
<link wikidata="Q154770" start="22056" end="22074" title="Arnold Schoenberg" label="Schoenberg, Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q4439171" start="22120" end="22133" title="Leonard Stein (musicologist)" label="Leonard Stein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170760" start="22486" end="22511" title="Perspectives of New Music" label="Perspectives of New Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q5129419" start="22558" end="22572" title="Claudio Spies" label="Spies, Claudio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170760" start="22656" end="22681" title="Perspectives of New Music" label="Perspectives of New Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q4795306" start="22727" end="22743" title="Arnold Whittall" label="Whittall, Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q6295619" start="22997" end="23020" title="Journal of Music Theory" label="Journal of Music Theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q158436" start="23513" end="23526" title="Ernst Krenek" label="Krenek, Ernst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763768" start="23597" end="23618" title="The Musical Quarterly" label="The Musical Quarterly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6295619" start="24120" end="24143" title="Journal of Music Theory" label="Journal of Music Theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q961861" start="24180" end="24197" title="Charles Wuorinen" label="Wuorinen, Charles"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143226" wikidata="Q324276" url="?curid=143226" title="Edward Baines (1774–1848)">
<text>Edward Baines (1774–1848) was the editor and proprietor of the &quot;Leeds Mercury&quot; (which, by his efforts, became the leading provincial paper in England), politician, and the author of historical and geographic works of reference.
On his death in 1848, the &quot;Leeds Intelligencer&quot; (a rival of the &quot;Mercury&quot;, and its political opponent for over forty years) described his as &quot;one who has earned for himself an indisputable title to be numbered among the notable men of Leeds&quot;.

Of his character and physical appearance it remarked: &quot;Mr Baines had great industry and perseverance, as well as patience and resolution; and with those he possessed pleasing manners and address, - that debonair and affable bearing, which conciliated even those who might have felt that they had reason to regard him as an enemy… In person he was of a firm well-built frame, rather above the average stature; his features were regular, his expression of countenance frank and agreeable; and he retained his personal comeliness as well as his vivacity and suavity of manners to the last&quot;.

==Early years==
Edward Baines was born in 1774 at Walton-le-Dale, near Preston, Lancashire. He was educated at Hawkshead Grammar School (where Wordsworth was a contemporary), and then in the lower school of the grammar school in Preston. He then became a weaver, but at the age of sixteen he was apprenticed for seven years to a printer in Preston. In the fifth year of his apprenticeship, he terminated it and moved to Leeds, where he finished his apprenticeship with the printer of the &quot;Leeds Mercury&quot;, one of two Leeds weekly newspapers. In later years, both Baines and his political opponents would have it that he arrived in Leeds with little more than the clothes on his back, but on completion of his apprenticeship he set up his own printworks with the aid of a loan of £100 from his father. He became a member of the Leeds Reasoning Society (a discussion group which eschewed religious or political issues) and of the local subscription library. He became attracted to non-conformism, and after attending the chapels of both Unitarians and Congregationalists settled for the latter (although he did not formally become a member until 1840). (He married Charlotte Talbot in 1798; she and their children were also lifelong non-conformists, with the exception of the eldest son Matthew Talbot Baines who became an Anglican, and therefore was able to take a degree at Cambridge.)

==Journalism==
===Revitalisation of &quot;Leeds Mercury&quot;===
In 1801, he was approached to start a third Leeds newspaper to support the interests of Dissent and Reform; the &quot;Mercury&quot; was not a reliable friend of Dissent and the leading paper, the &quot;Leeds Intelligencer&quot;, was avowedly opposed. In the event, the owner of the &quot;Mercury&quot; offered to sell up, and with the help of loans from like-minded supporters Baines bought the paper for £1,552. The paper he acquired was published every Saturday, cost sixpence (including fourpence newspaper tax) for four pages, and had a circulation of 700–800. Baines set about improving content and circulation. Baines rapidly introduced material reflecting the commercial interests of Leeds: regular agricultural and commercial reports, shipping news (from Hull and from Liverpool) and a report of the state of the London markets. Political affairs were not neglected; a digest of parliamentary proceedings in the previous week was also added. The &quot;Mercury&quot; soon outsold the &quot;Intelligencer&quot;, and by 1807 it was selling up to 3,000 copies in a good week. Production methods were improved and outclassed those of the &quot;Intelligencer&quot;, with new fonts allowing more text per page, and cast-iron handpresses allowing clearer printing than wooden ones. He encouraged &quot;letters to the editor&quot; and was amongst the first provincial newspaper editors to make editorial comment a routine feature of their paper. His leading articles could be vigorous and pointed. In the first &quot;Mercury&quot; under new ownership, Baines promised &quot;Our Paper shall never be made the Vehicle of Party or Personal Abuse&quot;, but within the year the &quot;Mercury&quot; was exchanging insults with the &quot;Cambridge Intelligencer&quot;, which accused the &quot;Mercury&quot; of dancing to the Government&#x27;s tune with vague reports of (and editorial comment deploring) nocturnal meetings of the disaffected. In 1805 a new editor of the &quot;Leeds Intelligencer&quot; attacked the &quot;Mercury&quot; as &quot;bespattered with ... sedition&quot;; together with Baines&#x27; heated response this initiated a long-lasting state of mutual incivility between the two papers which makes each an unreliable source for the other&#x27;s deeds and motives. According to counsel in an 1820 libel case &quot;When there was a dearth of political news, nothing was more common for one Editor to attack another, and the public appeared to find amusement in their squabbles&quot;.
The &quot;Mercury&quot; sent its own reporters to significant events outside its circulation area, such as York Assizes: a &quot;Mercury&quot; reporter was present and taking shorthand notes at the giant Reform meeting at Manchester which became the Peterloo massacre. That reporter was Baines&#x27; second son Edward, who from 1820 onwards progressively took over the everyday running of the &quot;Mercury&quot; as his father became more involved in local politics. Not only did the &quot;Mercury&quot; displace the &quot;Intelligencer&quot; as the leading Leeds paper, by 1832 it could be described by another provincial paper as &quot;the leading provincial paper in England&quot;.

=== &quot;The spy Oliver&quot; ===
On 14 June 1817, the first edition of the &quot;Mercury&quot; reported that ten Yorkshire men were held in Wakefield jail accused of planning insurrection. It noted that they had been arrested the previous week at a meeting near Dewsbury between them and a Mr Oliver, who had represented himself as a delegate from a central organising committee in London; its readers would probably infer that &#x27;Oliver&#x27; was a spy. Following the arrest of the men, there had been disturbances at Huddersfield and Ossett. The second edition made three further charges, supported by the evidence of respectable named moderate reformers: firstly that &#x27;Oliver&#x27; had repeatedly urged one of them a Dewsbury bookseller, to attend the meeting: secondly, that &#x27;Oliver&#x27; had been seen by another of them at Wakefield after the arrests, and with no satisfactory explanation why he was still at liberty: thirdly that he had been seen in conversation with a liveried man-servant of General Byng, the army officer responsible for internal security in the North of England, the man-servant later saying that on a previous occasion he had driven Oliver from Byng&#x27;s house to Wakefield to catch a coach. The Mercury made no charge against Byng, but asked who were the employers of &#x27;this double-distilled traitor&#x27; and called upon local magistrates to investigate. &quot;On the 16th the exposure of Oliver in the Leeds Mercury was read in both houses of parliament, by Earl Grey in the lords and Sir Francis Burdett in the commons. A strong sensation was produced; and those members, supported by the body of the opposition condemned in the most indignant language the atrocious proceedings brought to light&quot;.

Byng wrote to the Mercury, denying much of the initial report, but Baines printed the letter the following week accompanied by further evidence supporting the &quot;Mercury&quot;&#x27;s account and rebutting Byng&#x27;s. The report triggered revulsion locally against Oliver and against conviction of those led to crime by government agents. Earl Fitzwilliam, a Whig magnate and Lord Lieutenant of the West Riding, wrote to the Home Office saying that any disturbances in the Riding had been minor and were brought about by Oliver&#x27;s activities (of which he complained) : the government should not use them to justify a renewed suspension of Habeas Corpus. Fitzwilliam advised the Huddersfield magistrates not to gather evidence against their rioters; that could only come from accomplices and hence be highly objectionable. At York assizes, the judge in his direction to the jury was even harsher than Fitzwilliam on the unreliability of the evidence of accomplices, and no convictions were secured. Whilst the &quot;Mercury&quot;&#x27;s exposure of Oliver prevented the conviction of the Yorkshire prisoners, in Derbyshire the participants in the &#x27;Pentridge rebellion&#x27; (also triggered by Oliver) were not so fortunate, having by mischance killed a man before dispersing when faced with the magistrates and twenty dragoons. Thirty-five were tried for high treason and twenty-three convicted; four being executed. Baines could therefore claim to have saved the lives of fellow-Yorkshiremen., and the unmasking of &#x27;Oliver&#x27; gave Baines a national reputation.

However, critics such as William Cobbett pointed out that it was the suspicions of a linen-draper, rather than any investigation by the editor of the &quot;Mercury&quot;, that had unmasked Oliver, and objected to Baines&#x27;s treatment of Joseph Mitchell. Oliver had made a previous tour of the North and Midlands with Mitchell, who knew and introduced him to potential insurrectionists. Mitchell was arrested in early May and Oliver made his second tour alone. After Oliver&#x27;s exposure, Baines prevented Mitchell speaking at meetings of Yorkshire fellow reformers, alleging that Mitchell was under the gravest suspicion of being a spy too. No evidence (other than &#x27;guilt by association&#x27;) to support Mitchell being an informer - let alone an &quot;agent provocateur&quot; - was produced at the time, nor has any been revealed by subsequent investigation in Home Office archives.

===&quot;The Great Liar of the North&quot;===
Baines used the &quot;Mercury&quot; to advance the causes he supported, and to resist those he opposed, not only in its editorials, but also in its news reporting. This went beyond the selective choice of events to report, and non-neutral reporting of events covered, to the confident assertion of convenient untruths: for example on factory reform the Mercury asserted that Michael Thomas Sadler had never spoken, attended a debate or voted on Hobhouse&#x27;s Bill of 1831, (a statement promptly contradicted by Hobhouse); it put into the mouth of Sir George Strickland a speech in Parliament calling for Sadler&#x27;s Bill of 1832 to go to a select committee, when Strickland had made no such speech and had called for the bill to be considered by a &quot;Committee of the whole House&quot; and not be delayed by a select committee; when Strickland attended a great county meeting in York on factory reform and disowned the words put in his mouth by the &quot;Mercury&quot; the &quot;Mercury&quot;&#x27;s report put into Strickland&#x27;s mouth its explanation of its mistake, avoiding any mention of the &quot;Leeds Mercury&quot;. The report of the county meeting alleged widespread drunkenness amongst the attendees, a point which had somehow gone unnoticed by other newspapers. Offended by the claims of drunkenness, factory reform supporters subsequently burnt Baines in effigy outside the Mercury offices; the effigy was labelled front and back &quot;The Great Liar of the North&quot;, an epithet Cobbett had previously hurled at the &quot;Mercury&quot; and Baines, to whom it had stuck. Cobbett later wrote more memorably, and more quotably, of

&quot;BROUGHAM&#x27;s grand puffer, &quot;the GREAT LIAR OF THE NORTH,&quot; NED BAINES, publisher of that mass of lies and nonsense called the &quot;Leeds Mercury&quot; … this swelled-up, greedy, and unprincipled puffer, who has been the deluder of Yorkshire for twenty years past.&quot;

==Authorship==
As well as his journalistic output, Baines was the author of a number of histories and gazetteers. His first book - a &quot;History of the Wars of the French Revolution&quot; - was published in 1817, having first been published as a part-work from 1814 onwards. Its account up to 1801 borrowed extensively (and sometimes &quot;verbatim&quot;) from another author&#x27;s earlier work of 1803 on the same topic (A Stephens &quot;The History of the Wars Which Arose out of the French Revolution to Which is Prefixed a Review of the Causes of that Event&quot; (London 1803)). This went unacknowledged until Baines revised, expanded and retitled the work as a &quot;History of the Reign of King George III&quot; (1820); his new preface stating &quot;To facilitate ... progress, and at the recommendation of the publisher and proprietor of Mr Alexander Stephens&#x27; s History of the Wars published in 1803, nearly half the details of the first volume were abridged from that work.&quot; This later led to denunciation of Baines as a plagiarist by one of the editors of the &quot;Intelligencer&quot;. He also produced history/directory/gazetteers for Yorkshire and for Lancashire, later reworking the latter as a county history, &quot;The History of the County Palatine of Lancaster&quot; which was continued by other authors.

==Political career==
===Leeds===

As proprietor and editor of the &quot;Mercury&quot; Baines became an important figure in the affairs of Leeds. An obituary in 1848 noted Mr Baines took a part in the formation and support of many, if not most of the public institutions of Leeds. In early youth he was a visitor of the Benevolent, or Strangers&#x27; Friend Society, to which he always continued a warm friend. He assisted to establish the House of Recovery, the Dispensary, the Lancasterian School, the Philosophical Society, the Mechanics&#x27; Institution, the Literary Society, the New Library, the Tradesman&#x27;s Benevolent Society, the Leeds and Yorkshire Insurance Company, our Provident institutions, our Waterworks…- in short, nearly all the institutions for public utility and benevolence established in Leeds within the last half century.
He also became an important figure in Leeds politics, although as a Dissenter and a Reformer he was effectively excluded from Leeds Corporation which until the 1830s was a &#x27;closed corporation&#x27;; vacancies were filled by election by the existing members of the corporation; they were Tories and generally Anglicans, and hence so were their successors. One area of political life from which Reformers and Dissenters could not be excluded was the vestry meeting of the (Anglican) parish church - all property owners (including Dissenters and other non-conformists) had to pay church rates and rate-payers were entitled to attend and vote. Baines fought a prolonged campaign to impose strict economy on church outgoings, starting in 1819 with a demand that accounts be published, and finally in 1828 managing to secure the election of churchwardens committed to economy.
In the decade before the Great Reform Act 1832 Leeds was not a parliamentary borough but was included in the Yorkshire constituency, now returning four MPs (normally two Whigs and two Tories, normally unopposed). In the 1830 General Election, Baines organised West Riding reformers to ensure that their interests were reflected by the choice of Lord Brougham and Viscount Morpeth as Whig nominees, a selection seen as a defeat of county Whigs by &quot;Bainesocracy&quot; of Leeds. On the Whigs coming to power, Brougham became Lord Chancellor, necessitating a by-election: this time the Whigs of rural Yorkshire forestalled the West Riding and secured a more traditional candidate: Sir John Vanden-Bempde-Johnstone of Harkness Hall, near Scarborough.

Baines was a leading light in reform agitation in Leeds, and was commissioned by Lord John Russell to determine whether qualification in borough constituencies could safely be set as low as £10 (rates paid a year). Baines found that in Leeds a £10 franchise would give the vote to the middle classes but still exclude the working classes: the results of Baines&#x27; investigation were reported by Russell in parliamentary debate as showing that &quot;the £10 qualification does not admit any person who may not safely be intrusted with the elective franchise&quot;. As the reform crisis of 1831–1832 developed, Radicals (who wanted a more thorough-going reform: significantly wider suffrage, annual parliaments and the secret ballot) broke away from the Leeds reform organisation (the Leeds Association, set up by Baines and his associates) and founded the Leeds Radical Reform Union, pressing for Whig reform bills to be more thorough-going with a minority holding that they should be opposed (as a half-measure intended to choke off thorough reform). Baines strove to minimise the Radical breakaway, and to retain Radical support for moderate reform, by his own actions, by encouraging formation of a rival Leeds Political Union, by editorials in the &quot;Mercury&quot; and by ensuring that Radical meetings and manifestations were reported upon unfavourably by the &quot;Mercury&quot;. The &quot;Leeds Patriot&quot;, a Radical paper, soon found itself under attack from Baines, responding that &quot;veracity has no charms for Mr Baines, when he has an object to carry...he will stoop to the meanest prevarication and the most contemptible falsehoods&quot;.

In the expectation that the Reform Bill of 1831, would pass, and would establish Leeds as a two-member borough constituency, the Leeds reformers chose two candidates in August 1831: John Marshall (whose father, also John Marshall was a leading Leeds millowner and had served as an MP for Yorkshire), and (at Baines&#x27;s urging) Thomas Babington Macaulay, a gifted Whig orator with a national reputation, but no previous connection with Leeds. When elections for the first reformed parliament eventually took place in December 1832, the two Whigs comfortably defeated the sole Tory candidate Michael Thomas Sadler despite active support for Sadler from the Leeds radical reformers. Sadler had taken up the issue of factory reform; the &quot;Mercury&quot; (which had printed Richard Oastler&#x27;s first letter on &quot;Yorkshire Slavery&quot; (the over-working and ill-treatment of children in the West Riding textile industry) before cooling on the issue) denounced this as a Tory trick to lure the gullible away from the Whig reform programme. (Baines and the &quot;Mercury&quot; were to hold similar views on the anti-Poor Law movement of the late 1830s; the underlying cause of working-class discontent was the Corn Laws, and all efforts should go into removing the underlying cause, rather than palliating its symptoms). Years of activity by Sadler and his brother in Leeds meant that much was known for and against him, and the &quot;Mercury&quot; was assiduous in reminding its readers of the &#x27;against&#x27;.

The Tories and their Radical allies had attacked Macaulay as a placeman and a stranger: interested in Leeds only as providing him with a seat in Parliament; interested in a seat in Parliament largely as a means of securing comfortable sinecures for himself and his family (whose government appointments were currently yielding them a total annual income of over £4000). The Macaulay family was seriously financially embarrassed, and Macaulay soon decided that income from posts held only for so long as the Whigs held power was insufficiently secure. He resigned from parliament and went out to India in 1834 as a member of the supreme council of India, on an annual salary of £10,000. Baines was the Whig candidate at the ensuing by-election; there was a separate Radical candidate, but Baines&#x27;s chief opponent was the Tory Sir John Beckett. Beckett was Leeds-born and educated; the Beckett family bank was pre-eminent in Leeds (&quot;The Rothschilds and Barings of Leeds&quot;) and was recognised to have acted in the interests of Leeds as a whole in past crises, but Sir John had pursued a legal career away from Leeds, culminating in his appointment in mid-1817 (soon after his marriage to a daughter of the Earl of Lonsdale) as Judge Advocate-General, and consequent entry into Parliament in 1818 in Cockermouth, one of his father-in-law&#x27;s pocket boroughs. As the &quot;Mercury&quot; pointed out, he had been Under-Secretary of State at the Home Office from 1806 to 1817, the &quot;Mercury&quot; going on to claim that it was from him that Oliver had received his instructions These and other accusations against Beckett were widely placarded across Leeds. Beckett (unlike Sadler) directly addressed Baines&#x27;s accusations at the earliest opportunity in a good-humoured speech. Baines was elected, but his majority over Beckett was only thirty-one. Better Tory organisation for the 1835 general election saw Beckett displace Marshall, but at this and the 1837 general election Baines topped the poll; he stood down in at the 1841 election because his health was deteriorating.

===Parliament===
In parliament he occasionally spoke against Whig policies, but generally voted for them. He spoke (and voted) against the Poor Law Amendment Act 1834, introducing the New Poor Law, because he felt that there was no call for central government to interfere in areas where poor rates were low; however he became a supporter when the new Poor Law Commission did not in practice intervene. He spoke frequently on the grievances of Dissenters: in May 1834 he chaired a national meeting of Dissenter delegations which preceded discussion of specific grievances with a resolution describing &quot;full and complete separation of church and state&quot; as &quot;the true basis on which equal rights and justice can be secured to all classes of his majesty&#x27;s subjects
&quot;; later that year he told parliament that &quot;If the principles of dissent were properly understood, the very circumstance of a man being a Dissenter was a declaration that he could not agree to the union between Church and State.&quot; However, the &quot;Mercury&quot; reported although the 1834 meeting had readily endorsed the principle behind its resolution, there had been considerable debate as to the policy of stating it; as a compromise &quot;it was determined to state the principle, but not put it forward in any petition or memorial&quot;. In 1837 Baines seems to have been badly worsted in debate as a result: in a debate on the abolition of church rates he was challenged whether this was the ultimate &quot;healing measure&quot; as far as Dissenters were concerned: he responded by denying that Dissenters had any intention to interfere with the connection between Church and State. The next speaker, however, not only gave the House an account of the proceedings at a recent anti-church rate meeting in Leeds, he had come prepared with a copy of the resolutions of the 1834 meeting, which he read out to the House. Baines failed to retrieve the situation by a subsequent editorial in the &quot;Leeds Mercury&quot; which asserted that whilst the vast majority of Dissenters thought any connection between church and state wrong, the vast majority of them did not see the existence of an established church as a political question, let alone a grievance; but was not believed. He spoke against the continuance of the English Regium Donum, and repeatedly argued that Queen Anne&#x27;s Bounty ( a fund for augmenting the income of poor Church of England ministers) should be put on a much sounder basis: its revenue of &#x27;First Fruits and Tenths&#x27; - calculated from revenues in the reign of Henry VIII - would be greatly increased by being calculated from current revenues. He supported Poulett Thomson&#x27;s Bill of 1836 for relaxation of the 1834 Factory Act; he also voted for subsequent government factory regulation bills, but when he spoke in debates on them made it clear that he thought there was no need for them.

===Children and legacy===
His son, Sir Edward Baines (1800–1890), of St Ann&#x27;s Hill, Leeds, was editor and afterwards proprietor of the &quot;Leeds Mercury,&quot; M.P. for Leeds (1859–1874), and was knighted in 1880; his &quot;History of the Cotton Manufacture&quot; (1835) was long a standard authority, he also wrote a biography of his father &quot;The life of Edward Baines, late M.P. for the Borough of Leeds&quot;.

An elder son, Matthew Talbot Baines (1799–1860), went to the bar; he became recorder of Kingston upon Hull in (1837), M.P. for Kingston upon Hull in 1847, president of the Poor Law Board in 1849, was returned as M.P. for Leeds 1852, again became president of the Poor Law Board (until 1855), and entered the cabinet as Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster in 1856.

He had two further surviving sons: Thomas Baines (1806–1881) and Frederick Baines (1811–1893); his fourth and fifth sons died during childhood.

The youngest daughter of Edward Baines – Margaret (d. 1891) – married another political figure, Charles Reed, in 1844.

Another daughter, Charlotte, was the mother of South Australian politician and mayor of Adelaide, Theodore Bruce.

==Publications==
:: 
: These became volumes 2 and 3 in an expanded four volume work:
::: (In 1820, an enterprising American published those parts of volume 2 of Baines&#x27; &quot;History of the Wars.&quot; dealing with the War of 1812 as )
* : later reworked as 


==Notes==
==References==
===Biographies===
* 

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q324276" start="0" end="13" title="Edward Baines (1774–1848)" label="Edward Baines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6515995" start="69" end="82" title="Leeds Mercury" label="Leeds Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q6515981" start="270" end="289" title="Leeds Intelligencer" label="Leeds Intelligencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951889" start="1161" end="1175" title="Walton-le-Dale" label="Walton-le-Dale"/>
<link wikidata="Q184090" start="1182" end="1201" title="Preston, Lancashire" label="Preston, Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5685270" start="1222" end="1246" title="Hawkshead Grammar School" label="Hawkshead Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q45546" start="1254" end="1264" title="William Wordsworth" label="Wordsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q39121" start="1531" end="1536" title="Leeds" label="Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q6515995" start="1605" end="1618" title="Leeds Mercury" label="Leeds Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144064" start="2099" end="2113" title="Nonconformist (Protestantism)" label="non-conformism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6791301" start="2405" end="2426" title="Matthew Talbot Baines" label="Matthew Talbot Baines"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="2441" end="2449" title="Church of England" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="2494" end="2503" title="University of Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6515981" start="2774" end="2793" title="Leeds Intelligencer" label="Leeds Intelligencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16825357" start="4303" end="4326" title="Cambridge Intelligencer" label="Cambridge Intelligencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q876357" start="5316" end="5333" title="Peterloo massacre" label="Peterloo massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q8013307" start="6044" end="6053" title="William J. Oliver" label="Mr Oliver"/>
<link wikidata="Q8009134" start="7852" end="7868" title="William Fitzwilliam, 4th Earl Fitzwilliam" label="Earl Fitzwilliam"/>
<link wikidata="Q108700" start="7872" end="7876" title="Whigs (British political party)" label="Whig"/>
<link wikidata="Q220596" start="8156" end="8169" title="Habeas Corpus" label="Habeas Corpus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6502501" start="8373" end="8394" title="direction to the jury" label="direction to the jury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7165306" start="8669" end="8688" title="Pentrich rising" label="Pentridge rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141938" start="9117" end="9132" title="William Cobbett" label="William Cobbett"/>
<link wikidata="Q4404612" start="10408" end="10429" title="Michael Thomas Sadler" label="Michael Thomas Sadler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7526931" start="10582" end="10603" title="Sir George Strickland, 7th Baronet" label="Sir George Strickland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619120" start="15067" end="15088" title="Great Reform Act 1832" label="Great Reform Act 1832"/>
<link wikidata="Q333220" start="15387" end="15400" title="Henry Brougham, 1st Baron Brougham and Vaux" label="Lord Brougham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079517" start="15405" end="15421" title="George Howard, 7th Earl of Carlisle" label="Viscount Morpeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q217217" start="15569" end="15584" title="Lord Chancellor" label="Lord Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7528127" start="15728" end="15756" title="John Vanden-Bempde-Johnstone" label="John Vanden-Bempde-Johnstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q157259" start="15875" end="15892" title="Lord John Russell" label="Lord John Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q11797261" start="17539" end="17581" title="Leeds (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Leeds as a two-member borough constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q6246844" start="17640" end="17653" title="John Marshall (MP for Leeds, died 1836)" label="John Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6246859" start="17674" end="17687" title="John Marshall (industrialist)" label="John Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q315989" start="17788" end="17813" title="Thomas Babington Macaulay" label="Thomas Babington Macaulay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4404612" start="18051" end="18072" title="Michael Thomas Sadler" label="Michael Thomas Sadler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390816" start="18174" end="18188" title="Factory Acts" label="factory reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328152" start="18233" end="18248" title="Richard Oastler" label="Richard Oastler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7527597" start="19811" end="19827" title="Sir John Beckett, 2nd Baronet" label="Sir John Beckett"/>
<link wikidata="Q8014746" start="20198" end="20214" title="William Lowther, 1st Earl of Lonsdale" label="Earl of Lonsdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q6302471" start="20219" end="20241" title="Judge Advocate General of the Armed Forces" label="Judge Advocate-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139589" start="20291" end="20302" title="Cockermouth (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Cockermouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q573455" start="20336" end="20350" title="pocket borough" label="pocket borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q3131141" start="21216" end="21243" title="Poor Law Amendment Act 1834" label="Poor Law Amendment Act 1834"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309464" start="23405" end="23417" title="Regium Donum" label="Regium Donum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270193" start="23446" end="23470" title="Queen Anne&amp;#x27;s Bounty" label="Queen Anne&amp;#x27;s Bounty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5341716" start="24045" end="24062" title="Edward Baines (1800–1890)" label="Sir Edward Baines"/>
<link wikidata="Q11797261" start="24186" end="24191" title="Leeds (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q6791301" start="24449" end="24470" title="Matthew Talbot Baines" label="Matthew Talbot Baines"/>
<link wikidata="Q128147" start="24523" end="24541" title="Kingston upon Hull" label="Kingston upon Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q6413650" start="24562" end="24580" title="Kingston upon Hull (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Kingston upon Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q162754" start="24754" end="24790" title="Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster" label="Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7787314" start="24836" end="24849" title="Thomas Baines (journalist)" label="Thomas Baines"/>
<link wikidata="Q5081967" start="25042" end="25054" title="Charles Reed (British politician)" label="Charles Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q6627380" start="25145" end="25162" title="List of mayors and lord mayors of Adelaide" label="mayor of Adelaide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7781711" start="25164" end="25178" title="Theodore Bruce" label="Theodore Bruce"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143227" wikidata="Q1225719" url="?curid=143227" title="Giuseppe Baini">
<text>Abbate Giuseppe Baini (21 October 1775 – 21 May 1844) was an Italian priest, music critic, conductor, and composer of church music.

He was born in Rome. He was instructed in composition by his uncle, Lorenzo Baini, and afterwards by G. Jannaconi. In 1814, he was appointed musical director to the choir of the pontifical chapel, to which he had as early as 1802 gained admission because of his fine bass voice, which was said to be powerful, extending from low E♭ to high G. His compositions, of which very few were published, were considered favourable specimens of the severe ecclesiastical style; a ten-part Miserere of his, composed for Holy Week in 1821 by order of Pope Pius VII, has taken a permanent place in the services of the Sistine Chapel during Passion Week. Baini held a higher place, however, as a musical critic and historian than as a composer, and his &quot;Life of Palestrina&quot; (&quot;Memorie storico-critiche della vita e delle opere di Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina&quot;, 1828) was described by the &quot;1911 Encyclopædia Britannica&quot; as being &quot;one of the best works of its class&quot;. The phrase &quot;Il Principe della Musica&quot;, which has become firmly associated with the name of Palestrina, is found in the aforementioned biography.

Baini&#x27;s book on Palestrina established the 19th century attitude of hero worship towards the Renaissance master of counterpoint, and also named him as the &quot;savior of church music&quot; versus the alleged &quot;ban on counterpoint&quot; by the Council of Trent. Contemporary scholarship, while not claiming that this view was entirely false, tends to hold that it was highly exaggerated; Palestrina was one of many skilled composers working at the time, and the influence of the Council of Trent on musical composition was more limited than at first presumed (the composers of the Venetian School, for example, ignored it almost entirely, and Palestrina-style composers such as Lassus, working in Munich, were also quite free to write as they pleased). Regardless of its failings, however, Baini&#x27;s book was influential and did much to bring Renaissance music back into the attention of 19th century musicians as well as the general public.

Giuseppe Baini died in May 1844 in Rome.

==References==
== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1225719" start="0" end="21" title="Giuseppe Baini" label="Abbate Giuseppe Baini"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="148" end="152" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="201" end="214" title="Lorenzo Baini" label="Lorenzo Baini"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502625" start="234" end="246" title="G. Jannaconi" label="G. Jannaconi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236085" start="298" end="328" title="Sistine Chapel Choir" label="choir of the pontifical chapel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="612" end="620" title="Psalm 51#Musical settings" label="Miserere"/>
<link wikidata="Q124754" start="672" end="685" title="Pope Pius VII" label="Pope Pius VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q2943" start="738" end="752" title="Sistine Chapel" label="Sistine Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q131080" start="760" end="772" title="Passion Week" label="Passion Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q179277" start="886" end="896" title="Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina" label="Palestrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q867541" start="1036" end="1064" title="1911 Encyclopædia Britannica" label="1911 Encyclopædia Britannica"/>
<link wikidata="Q186393" start="1404" end="1416" title="counterpoint" label="counterpoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q172991" start="1537" end="1553" title="Council of Trent" label="Council of Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q612039" start="1874" end="1889" title="Venetian School (music)" label="Venetian School"/>
<link wikidata="Q154792" start="1971" end="1977" title="Orlande de Lassus" label="Lassus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="1990" end="1996" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q201405" start="2139" end="2156" title="Renaissance music" label="Renaissance music"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="2274" end="2278" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143228" wikidata="Q7081626" url="?curid=143228" title="Ojigi">
<text>Ojigi may refer to:

*Bowing in Japan
*Ojigi (Oyo), Yoruba king
*Ojiji (born 1955), Canadian musician</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q21664146" start="22" end="37" title="Bowing in Japan" label="Bowing in Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7081625" start="39" end="50" title="Ojigi (Oyo)" label="Ojigi (Oyo)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7081628" start="65" end="70" title="Ojiji" label="Ojiji"/>
</links>
</doc>
