<doc id="143229" wikidata="Q202161" url="?curid=143229" title="Gallic Wars">
<text>The Gallic Wars were waged between 58 and 50 BC by the Roman general Julius Caesar against the peoples of Gaul (present-day France, Belgium, and Switzerland). Gallic, Germanic, and Brittonic tribes fought to defend their homelands against an aggressive Roman campaign. The Wars culminated in the decisive Battle of Alesia in 52 BC, in which a complete Roman victory resulted in the expansion of the Roman Republic over the whole of Gaul. Though the collective Gallic armies were as strong as the Roman forces, the Gallic tribes&#x27; internal divisions eased victory for Caesar. Gallic chieftain Vercingetorix&#x27;s attempt to unite the Gauls under a single banner came too late. Caesar portrayed the invasion as being a preemptive and defensive action, but historians agree that he fought the wars primarily to boost his political career and to pay off his debts. Still, Gaul was of significant military importance to the Romans. Native tribes in the region, both Gallic and Germanic, had attacked Rome several times. Conquering Gaul allowed Rome to secure the natural border of the river Rhine.

The wars began with conflict over the migration of the Helvetii in 58 BC, which drew in neighboring tribes and the Germanic Suebi. By 57 BC, Caesar had resolved to conquer all of Gaul. He led campaigns in the east, where the Nervii almost defeated him. In 56 BC, Caesar defeated the Veneti in a naval battle and took most of northwest Gaul. In 55 BC, Caesar sought to boost his public image. He undertook first-of-their-kind expeditions across the Rhine and the English Channel. Rome hailed Caesar as a hero upon his return from Britain, though he had achieved little beyond landing because his army had been too small. The next year, he returned with a larger army and reached much further inland; he extracted tribute from the locals and returned to Gaul. Tribes rose up on the continent, and the Romans suffered a humiliating defeat. 53 BC saw a brutal pacification campaign. This failed, and Vercingetorix led a revolt in 52 BC. Gallic forces won a notable victory at the Battle of Gergovia, but the Romans&#x27; indomitable siege works at the Battle of Alesia crushed the Gallic coalition.

In 51 and 50 BC, there was limited resistance, and Caesar&#x27;s troops mainly engaged in mop-up operations. Gaul was conquered, although it would not become a Roman province until 27 BC, and resistance would continue until as late as 70 AD. There is no precise end date to the war, but the imminent Roman Civil War led to the withdrawal of Caesar&#x27;s troops in 50 BC. Caesar&#x27;s wild successes in the war had made him wealthy and provided a legendary reputation. The Gallic Wars were a key factor in Caesar&#x27;s ability to win the Civil War and make himself dictator, which culminated in the end of the Roman Republic and the establishment of the Roman Empire.

Julius Caesar described the Gallic Wars in his book &quot;Commentarii de Bello Gallico.&quot; It is the primary source for the conflict, but modern historians consider it propaganda and prone to exaggeration. Caesar makes impossible claims about the number of Gauls killed (over a million), while claiming almost zero Roman casualties. Modern historians believe that Gallic forces were far smaller than the Romans claimed, and that the Romans suffered significant casualties. Regardless of the accuracy of the &quot;Commentarii&quot;, the campaign was still exceptionally brutal. Untold numbers of Gauls were killed, enslaved, or mutilated, including large numbers of civilians.

==Background==
=== Sociopolitical ===
The tribes of Gaul were civilized and wealthy, constituting what is known to archeologists as the La Tène culture. Most had contact with Roman merchants and some, such as the Aedui, who were governed by republics, had enjoyed stable political alliances with Rome in the past. During the first century, parts of Gaul were becoming urbanized, which concentrated wealth and population centers, inadvertently making Roman conquest easier. Though the Romans considered the Gauls to be barbarians, their cities mirrored those of the Mediterranean. They struck coins and traded extensively with Rome, providing iron, grain, and many slaves. In exchange, the Gauls accumulated much wealth and developed a taste for Roman wine. The contemporary writer Diodoros explains that part of the conception of Gallic barbarity was because they drank their wine straight, unlike the supposedly civilized Romans who watered down their wine first. However, the Romans realized the Gauls were a powerful fighting force, and considered some of the most &quot;barbaric&quot; tribes to be the fiercest warriors, as they were supposedly uncorrupted by Roman luxuries.

=== Military ===
The Gauls and the Romans had significantly different military strategies. The Roman army was extremely disciplined, kept standing between conflicts, and made mostly of heavy infantry; any auxiliary units were fielded from the less disciplined Roman allies, which as the war progressed would include some Gauls. By comparison, the Gauls were an irregular and less disciplined fighting force. Individual Gauls outfitted themselves, as did Romans, a practice that continued into the early Empire. Wealthier soldiers had better equipment. Unlike the Romans, the Gauls were a warrior culture. They prized acts of bravery and individual courage; frequent raiding of neighboring tribes kept their fighting skills sharp. Compared to the Romans, the Gauls carried longer swords and had far superior cavalry. The Gauls were generally taller than the Romans (a fact that seems to have embarrassed the Romans) and this combined with their longer swords gave them a reach advantage in combat. Both sides used archers and slingers. Little is known about Gallic battle strategy, and the effectiveness of Gallic slingers and archers is unknown. What is known indicates that battle strategy varied between tribes, although engagement in pitched battle was frequent, to prove bravery. Not all tribes engaged the Romans directly, as Rome was a formidable enemy. The Gauls frequently used attrition warfare against them. While the Gauls had much more flair in combat (such as fighting in intricately decorated armor, or even in the nude), the superior discipline and formation of the Romans generally gave them an advantage in hand-to-hand fighting.

The Wars cemented the Roman use of the cohort instead of the maniple. First described by Polybius as an administrative unit that was used in a battle in 206 BC, it had become a tactical unit by the 130s. Typically a quarter the size of a cohort, the maniple had proved too small and ineffective. The cohort was an effective counterbalance to Gallic and Germanic tactics. The system diversified the ranks by combining men from different socio-economic ranks: unlike in the maniple system, rich and poor fought alongside each other in a single uniform unit, greatly increasing overall morale by removing resentment. A cohort held 480 men. Ten cohorts, combined with a small cavalry unit, engineers, and officers, made a legion of around 5,000 men.

The practices of the army&#x27;s baggage train would prove insufficient at times during the Wars. Following common practice of Roman generals as early as Scipio Aemilianus, each legionary was required to carry a substantial amount of his own gear, including weapons, and rations enough to operate independently of the baggage train for a few days. This reduced the size of the baggage train greatly and allowed for a legion to temporarily march well ahead of its baggage. Still, a legion usually had around a thousand beasts of burden to carry the tents, siege equipment, reserve food, entrenching tools, records, personal effects, and all other items a large army needed. While on march, the average legion with train stretched out for about . Such a large number of animals also required a great deal of grazing or fodder; this limited campaigning to times when there was grass or adequate supplies. The logistical challenges of the baggage train forced the Romans&#x27; hand many times during the wars.

The Romans respected and feared the Gallic tribes. In 390 BC, the Gauls had sacked Rome, which left an existential dread of barbarian conquest the Romans never forgot. In 121 BC, Rome conquered a group of southern Gauls, and established the province of Transalpine Gaul in the conquered lands. Only 50 years before the Gallic Wars, in 109 BC, Italy had been invaded from the north and saved by Gaius Marius (uncle and father figure to Julius Caesar) only after several bloody and costly battles. Around 63 BC, when a Roman client state, the Gallic Arverni, conspired with the Gallic Sequani and the Germanic Suebi nations east of the Rhine to attack the Gallic Aedui, a strong Roman ally, Rome turned a blind eye. The Sequani and the Arverni defeated the Aedui in 63 BC at the Battle of Magetobriga.

=== Julius Caesar ===

Rising politician and general Julius Caesar was the Roman commander and agonist of the war. As a result of the financial burdens of being consul (the highest office in the Roman Republic) in 59 BC, Caesar had incurred significant debts. To strengthen Rome&#x27;s position among the Gauls, he had paid substantial money to Ariovistus, king of the Suebi, to cement an alliance. Through his influence as part of the First Triumvirate (the political alliance which comprised Marcus Licinius Crassus, Pompey, and himself) during his consulship, Caesar had secured his assignment as proconsul (governor) to two provinces, Cisalpine Gaul and Illyricum, by passage of the &quot;Lex Vatinia&quot;. When the governor of Transalpine Gaul, Metellus Celer, died unexpectedly, the province was also awarded to Caesar at the suggestion of Pompey and Caesar&#x27;s father-in-law, Lucius Calpurnius Piso Caesoninus. In the law granting him command of the provinces, Caesar was given a five-year term as proconsul. This was longer than the traditional one-year term that consuls received, enabling him to engage in a military campaign without fear of command turnover.

Caesar had four veteran legions under his direct command initially: Legio VII, Legio VIII, Legio IX Hispana, and Legio X. As he had been governor of Hispania Ulterior in 61 BC and had campaigned successfully with them against the Lusitanians, Caesar knew most, perhaps even all, of the legions personally. He also had the legal authority to levy additional legions and auxiliary units as he saw fit. The assignment of the province that comprises what is now Northern Italy was helpful to his ambitions: the Po Valley and the adjoining regions had large numbers of Roman citizens, who could be enticed to sign up for legionary service.

His ambition was to conquer and plunder some territories to get himself out of debt. It is possible that Gaul was not his initial target; he may have been planning a campaign against the Kingdom of Dacia in the Balkans instead. However, a mass migration of Gallic tribes in 58 BC provided a convenient &quot;casus belli&quot;, and Caesar prepared for war.

==History==

===Beginning of the Wars – campaign against the Helvetii===

The Helvetii were a confederation of about five related Gallic tribes that lived on the Swiss plateau, hemmed in by the mountains and the rivers Rhine and Rhône. They had come under increased pressure from Germanic tribes to the north and the east and began planning for a migration around 61 BC. They intended to travel across Gaul to the Saintonge region of modern France, a route that would have taken them around the Alps and through lands of the Aedui (a Roman ally) into the Roman province of Transalpine Gaul. As word of the migration spread, neighboring tribes grew concerned, and Rome sent ambassadors to several tribes to convince them not to join the Helvetii. Concern grew in Rome that the Germanic tribes would fill in the lands vacated by the Helvetii. The Romans much preferred the Gauls to the Germanic tribes as neighbors. One of the consuls of 60 (Metellus) and one of 59 BC (Caesar) both wanted to lead a campaign against the Gauls, though neither had a &quot;casus belli&quot; at the time.

On 28 March in 58 BC, the Helvetii began their migration, bringing along all their peoples and livestock. They burned their villages and stores to ensure the migration could not be reversed. Upon reaching Transalpine Gaul, where Caesar was governor, they asked permission to cross the Roman lands. Caesar entertained the request but ultimately denied it. The Gauls turned north instead, entirely avoiding Roman lands. The threat to Rome was seemingly over, but Caesar led his army over the border and attacked the Helvetii unprovoked. So began what historian Kate Gilliver describes as &quot;an aggressive war of expansion led by a general who was seeking to advance his career&quot;.

Caesar&#x27;s consideration of the Gallic request to enter Rome was not indecision, but a play for time. He was in Rome when news of the migration arrived, and he rushed to Transalpine Gaul, raising two legions and some auxiliaries along the way. He delivered his refusal to the Gauls, and then promptly returned to Italy to gather the legions he had raised on his previous trip and three veteran legions. Caesar now had between 24,000 and 30,000 legionary troops, and some quantity of auxiliaries, many of whom were themselves Gauls. He marched north to the river Saône, where he caught the Helvetii in the middle of crossing. Some three-quarters had crossed; he slaughtered those who had not. Caesar then crossed the river in one day using a pontoon bridge. He followed the Helvetii, but chose not to engage in combat, waiting for ideal conditions. The Gauls attempted to negotiate, but Caesar&#x27;s terms were draconian (likely on purpose, as he may have used it as another delaying tactic). Caesar&#x27;s supplies ran thin on 20 June, forcing him to travel towards allied territory in Bibracte. While his army had easily crossed the Saône, his supply train still had not. The Helvetii could now outmaneuver the Romans and had time to pick up Boii and Tulingi allies. They used this moment to attack Caesar&#x27;s rearguard.

==== Battle of Bibracte ====
In the ensuing Battle of Bibracte, the Gauls and Romans fought for the better part of the day. After a hotly contested battle, the Romans eventually gained victory. Caesar had set up his legions on the slope of a hill, which put the Gauls at a disadvantage as they had to fight uphill. The Helvetii started the battle with a probable feint, which the Romans easily repulsed. However, the Boii and Tulingi then outmaneuvered the Romans and attacked their right flank. At this point, the Romans were surrounded. A heated battle ensued. The men in the legion&#x27;s last line were ordered to turn their backs around. They now fought on two fronts instead of just being attacked in the rear, which Gilliver describes as a brilliant tactical decision. Eventually, the Helvetii were routed and fled. The Romans chased the now outnumbered Boii and Tulingi back to their encampments, killing the fighters as well as slaying the women and children.

Caesar&#x27;s army rested for three days to tend to the wounded. They then gave chase to the Helvetii, who surrendered. Caesar ordered them back on their lands to provide a buffer between Rome and the even more feared Germanic tribes. In the captured Helvetian camp Caesar claims that a census written in Greek was found and studied: of a total of 368,000 Helvetii, of whom 92,000 were able-bodied men, only 110,000 survivors remained to return home. Historians believe the total was likely between 20,00050,000, with the excess exaggerated by Caesar for propaganda purposes. (See historiography section below for a detailed accounting).

Bibracte, then the commercial hub of the Gallic Aedui tribe, would again play a crucial role during the Gallic uprising of 52 BC. Vercingetorix himself met with other Gallic leaders there to plot the rebellion against Caesar and the Romans. After Vercingetorix&#x27;s revolt failed, Bibracte was slowly abandoned for other more prosperous settlements nearby.

====Campaign against the Suebi====
Caesar then turned his attention to the Germanic Suebi, whom he also wished to conquer. The Senate had declared Ariovistus, king of the Suebi, a &quot;friend and ally of the Roman people&quot; in 59 BC, so Caesar needed a convincing &quot;casus belli&quot; to betray the Suebi. He found his excuse following victory over the Helvetii. A group of Gallic tribes congratulated him and sought to meet in a general assembly, hoping to leverage the Romans against other Gauls. Diviciacus, the head of the Aeduan government and spokesmen for the Gallic delegation, expressed concern over Ariovistus&#x27; conquests and for the hostages he had taken. Not only did Caesar have a responsibility to protect the longstanding allegiance of the Aedui, but this proposition presented an opportunity to expand Rome&#x27;s borders, strengthen loyalty within Caesar&#x27;s army and establish him as the commander of Rome&#x27;s troops abroad. With the attack of the Harudes (an apparent Suebi ally) on the Aedui and the report that a hundred clans of Suebi were trying to cross the Rhine into Gaul, Caesar had the justification he needed to wage war against Ariovistus in 58 BC.

Learning that Ariovistus intended to seize Vesontio, the largest Sequani town, Caesar marched towards it and arrived before Ariovistus. Ariovistus sent emissaries to Caesar requesting a meeting. They met under a truce at a knoll outside of town. The truce was violated when Germanic horsemen edged towards the knoll and threw stones at Caesar&#x27;s mounted escort. Two days later, Ariovistus requested another meeting. Hesitant to send senior officials, Caesar dispatched Valerius Procillus, his trusted friend, and Caius Mettius, a merchant who had traded successfully with Ariovistus. Insulted, Ariovistus threw the envoys in chains. Ariovistus marched for two days and made camp behind Caesar, thus cutting off his communication and supply lines with the allied tribes. Unable to entice Ariovistus into battle, Caesar ordered a second smaller camp built near Ariovistus&#x27; position.

The next morning Caesar assembled his allied troops in front of the second camp and advanced his legions in towards Ariovistus. Each of Caesar&#x27;s five legates and his quaestor were given command of a legion. Caesar lined up on the right flank. Ariovistus countered by lining up his seven tribal formations. Caesar was victorious in the ensuing battle due in large part to the charge made by Publius Crassus, son of Marcus Crassus. As the Germanic tribesmen began to drive back the Roman left flank, Crassus led his cavalry in a charge to restore balance and ordered up the cohorts of the third line. As a result, the whole Germanic line broke and began to flee. Caesar claims that most of Ariovistus&#x27; one-hundred and twenty thousand men were killed. He and what remained of his troops escaped and crossed the Rhine, never to engage Rome in battle again. The Suebi camping near the Rhine returned home. Caesar was victorious. In one year he had defeated two of Rome&#x27;s most feared enemies. After this busy campaigning season, he returned to Transalpine Gaul to deal with the non-military aspects of his governorship. At this point it is possible he had already decided he would conquer all of Gaul.

=== 57 BC: Campaigns in the east ===
Caesar&#x27;s stunning victories in 58 BC had unsettled the Gallic tribes. Many rightly predicted Caesar would seek to conquer all of Gaul, and some sought alliance with Rome. As the campaigning season of 57 BC dawned, both sides were busy recruiting new soldiers. Caesar set off with two more legions than the year before, with 32,000 to 40,000 men, along with a contingent of auxiliaries. The exact number of men the Gauls raised is unknown, but Caesar claims he would fight 200,000.

Intervening again in an intra-Gallic conflict, Caesar marched against the Belgae tribal confederation, who inhabited the area roughly bounded by modern-day Belgium. They had recently attacked a tribe allied with Rome and before marching with his army to meet them, Caesar ordered the Remi and other neighboring Gauls to investigate the Belgae&#x27;s actions. The Belgae and the Romans encountered each other near Bibrax. The Belgae attempted to take the fortified &quot;oppidum&quot; (main settlement) from the Remi but were unsuccessful and chose instead to raid the nearby countryside. Each side tried to avoid battle, as both were short on supplies (a continuing theme for Caesar, who gambled and left his baggage train behind several times). Caesar ordered fortifications built, which the Belgae understood would give them a disadvantage. Instead of making battle, the Belgic army simply disbanded, as it could be re-assembled easily.

Caesar realized an opportunity was presenting itself: if he could beat the men from the army home, he could take their lands with ease. His armies&#x27; travel speed proved to be a crucial aspect of his ensuing victories. He rushed to the Belgic Suessiones&#x27; &quot;oppidum&quot; at what is now Villeneuve-Saint-Germain and laid siege to it. The Belgic army nullified Caesar&#x27;s advantage by sneaking back into the city under cover of darkness. The Roman siege preparations proved to be the decisive factor: grand Roman-style siege warfare was unknown to the Gauls, and the might of the Romans&#x27; preparations drove the Gauls to surrender promptly. This had a ripple effect: the nearby Bellovaci and Ambiones surrendered immediately afterward, realizing the Romans had defeated a powerful army without any combat. Not all the tribes were so cowed though. The Nervii allied with the Atrebates and Viromandui, and planned to ambush the Romans. The ensuing battle of the Sabis was nearly a humiliating defeat for Caesar, and the Roman victory was very hard-won.

====Nervii ambush: the battle of the Sabis====

The Nervii set up an ambush along the river Sambre, lying in wait for the Romans who arrived and started setting up camp. The Romans detected the Nervii, and the battle began with the Romans sending a light cavalry and infantry force across the river to keep the Nervii at bay while the main force fortified its camp. The Nervii easily repulsed the attack. In an uncharacteristic move for Caesar, he made a serious tactical error by not setting up an infantry screen to protect the entrenching force. The Nervii took ample advantage of this, and their entire force crossed the river quickly and caught the Romans off-guard and unprepared. As the battle began, two legions had not even arrived, whereas the Nervii had at least 60,000 fighters. The reserve legions were stuck at the end of the column, back, with the 8,000 animals of the baggage train. However, because the soldiers could operate independently of the train, the forwards legions were still ready for battle.

The Romans&#x27; superior discipline and experience came in use and they quickly formed lines of battle. Their center and left wings were successful and chased the Atrebates across the river. To the tribes&#x27; advantage, this exposed the half-built camp, and they took it easily. To make matters worse for the Romans, the right wing was in serious trouble. It had been outflanked, its line of battle had become too tight to swing a sword, and multiple officers were dead. The situation was so critical Caesar took up his shield and joined the front line of the legion. His mere presence greatly increased morale, and he ordered his men to form a defensive square to open the ranks and protect them from all sides. What turned the tide of battle was Caesar&#x27;s reinforcements, the X legion which returned from chasing the Atrebates, and the two straggler legions that finally arrived. The strong stand by the X legion and the timely arrival of reinforcements enabled Caesar to regroup, redeploy and eventually repulse the Nervii once the Atrebates and Viromandui were put to flight.

Caesar&#x27;s cockiness had nearly ended in defeat, but the legions&#x27; experience combined with his personal role in combat turned a disaster into an incredible victory. The Belgae were broken, and most of the Germanic tribes offered submission to Rome. The end of the campaigning season saw Caesar conquer tribes along the Atlantic coast, and deal with the Atuatuci, who were allies of the Nervii but had broken the terms of surrender. Caesar punished the Atuatuci by selling 53,000 of them into slavery. By law, the profits were Caesar&#x27;s alone. He saw a minor setback towards winter as he sent one of his officers to the Great St Bernard Pass, where local tribes fought back fiercely; he abandoned the campaign. But overall, Caesar had seen monumental success in 57 BC. He had accumulated great wealth to pay off his debts and increased his stature to heroic levels. Upon his return, the senate granted him a 15-day thanksgiving (&quot;supplicatio&quot;), longer than any before. His political reputation was now formidable. Again, he returned to Transalpine Gaul for the winter to see to the civil affairs of the province. He wintered his troops in northern Gaul, where the tribes were forced to house and feed them.

=== 56 BC: Campaign against the Veneti ===

The Gauls were embittered at being forced to feed the Roman troops over the winter. The Romans sent out officers to requisition grain from the Veneti, a group of tribes in northwest Gaul, but the Veneti had other ideas and captured the officers. This was a calculated move: they knew this would anger Rome and prepared by allying with the tribes of Armorica, fortifying their hill settlements, and preparing a fleet. The Veneti and the other peoples along the Atlantic coast were versed in sailing and had vessels suitable for the rough waters of the Atlantic. By comparison, the Romans were hardly prepared for naval warfare on the open ocean. The Veneti also had sails, whereas the Romans relied on oarsmen. Rome was a feared naval power in the Mediterranean, but there the waters were calm, and less sturdy ships could be used. Regardless, the Romans understood that to defeat the Veneti they would need a fleet: many of the Venetic settlements were isolated and best accessible by sea. Decimus Brutus was appointed prefect of the fleet.

Caesar wished to sail as soon as the weather permitted and ordered new boats and recruited oarsmen from the already conquered regions of Gaul to ensure the fleet would be ready as soon as possible. The legions were dispatched by land, but not as a single unit. Gilliver regards this as evidence that Caesar&#x27;s claims the prior year that Gaul was at peace were untrue, as the legions were apparently being dispatched to prevent or deal with rebellion. A cavalry force was sent to hold down the Germanic and Belgic tribes. Troops under Publius Crassus were sent to Aquitania, and Quintus Titurius Sabinus took forces to Normandy. Caesar led the remaining four legions overland to meet up with his recently raised fleet near the mouth of the river Loire.

The Veneti held the upper hand for much of the campaign. Their ships were well-suited to the region, and when their hill forts were under siege, they could simply evacuate them by sea. The less sturdy Roman fleet was stuck in harbor for much of the campaign. Despite having the superior army and great siege equipment, the Romans were making little progress. Caesar realized that the campaign could not be won on land and halted the campaign until the seas calmed enough for the Roman vessels to be most useful.

==== Battle of Morbihan====

At last, the Roman fleet sailed, and encountered the Venetic fleet off the coast of Brittany near Quiberon Bay. They engaged in a battle that lasted from late in the morning until sundown. On paper, the Veneti appeared to have the superior fleet. Their ships&#x27; sturdy oak beam construction meant they were effectively immune to ramming, and their high-profile protected their occupants from projectiles. The Veneti had some 220 ships, although Gilliver notes many were likely not much more than fishing boats. Caesar did not report the number of Roman ships. The Romans had one advantage—grappling hooks. These allowed them to shred the rigging and sails of the Venetic ships that got close enough rendering them inoperable. The hooks also allowed them to pull ships close enough to board. The Veneti realized the grappling hooks were an existential threat and retreated. However, the wind dropped, and the Roman fleet (which did not rely on sails) was able to catch up. The Romans could now use their superior soldiers to board ships &quot;en masse&quot; and overwhelm the Gauls at their leisure. Just as the Romans had beaten the superior forces of Carthage in the First Punic War by using the &quot;corvus&quot; boarding device, a simple technological advantage—the grappling hook—allowed them to defeat the superior Venetic fleet.

The Veneti, now without a navy, had been bested. They surrendered, and Caesar made an example of the tribal elders by executing them. He sold the rest of the Veneti into slavery. Caesar now turned his attention to the Morini and Menapii along the coast.

==== Caesar&#x27;s subordinates and mopping up ====

During the Venetic campaign, Caesar&#x27;s subordinates had been busy pacifying Normandy and Aquitania. A coalition of Lexovii, Coriosolites, and Venelli charged Sabinus while he was entrenched atop a hill. This was a poor tactical move by the tribes. By the time they had reached the top, they were exhausted, and Sabinus defeated them with ease. The tribes consequently surrendered, yielding up all of Normandy to the Romans. Crassus did not have such an easy time in facing the Aquitania. With only one legion and some cavalry, he was outnumbered. He raised additional forces from Provence and marched south to what is now the border of modern Spain and France. Along the way, he fought off the Sotiates, who attacked while the Romans were marching. Defeating the Vocates and Tarusates proved a tougher task. Having allied with the rebel Roman general Quintus Sertorius during his uprising in 70 BC, these tribes were well versed in Roman combat, and had learned guerilla tactics from the war. They avoided frontal battle and harassed supply lines and the marching Romans. Crassus realized he would have to force battle and located the Gallic encampment of some 50,000. However, they had only fortified the front of the camp, and Crassus simply circled it and attacked the rear. Taken by surprise, the Gauls attempted to flee. However, Crassus&#x27; cavalry pursued them. According to Crassus, only 12,000 survived the overwhelming Roman victory. The tribes surrendered, and Rome now controlled most of southwest Gaul.

Caesar finished the campaign season by trying to take out the coastal tribes who had allied with the Veneti. However, they outmaneuvered the Romans. Due to superior knowledge of the local terrain, which was heavily forested and marshy, and a strategy of withdrawing there, they avoided battle with the Romans. Poor weather worsened the situation, and Caesar could do little more than raid the countryside. Realizing he would not meet the Gauls in battle, he withdrew for the winter. This was a setback for Caesar, as not pacifying the tribes would slow his campaigns the next year. The legions overwintered between the rivers Saône and Loire on the lands which they had conquered during the year. This was Caesar&#x27;s punishment to the tribes for having fought against the Romans. Non-military business for Caesar during the year included the politically pivotal Luca Conference in April, which gave him another 5 years as governor, allowing time to finish his conquest of Gaul. In exchange, Pompey and Crassus would share the consulship for 55 BC, which further cemented the First Triumvirate.

=== 55 BC: Crossing the Rhine and the English Channel ===
A need for prestige more than tactical concerns likely determined Caesar&#x27;s campaigns in 55 BC, due to Pompey and Crassus&#x27; consulship. On the one hand, they were Caesar&#x27;s political allies, and Crassus&#x27;s son had fought under him the year before. But they were also his rivals, and had formidable reputations (Pompey was a great general, and Crassus was fabulously wealthy). Since the consuls could easily sway and buy public opinion, Caesar needed to stay in the public eye. His solution was to cross two water bodies no Roman army had attempted before: the Rhine and the English Channel. Crossing the Rhine was a consequence of Germanic/Celtic unrest. The Suebi had recently forced the Celtic Usipetes and Tencteri from their lands, who resultingly had crossed the Rhine in search of a new home. Caesar, however, had denied their earlier request to settle in Gaul, and the issue turned to war. The Celtic tribes sent out a cavalry force of 800 against a Roman auxiliary force of 5,000 made up of Gauls, and won a surprising victory. Caesar retaliated by attacking the defenseless Celtic camp, and slaughtering the men, women, and children. Caesar claims he killed 430,000 people in the camp. Modern historians find this number impossibly high (see historiography below), but it is apparent that Caesar killed a great many Celts. So cruel were his actions, his enemies in the Senate wished to prosecute him for war crimes once his tenure as governor was up and he was no longer immune from prosecution. After the massacre, Caesar led the first Roman army across the Rhine in a lightning campaign that lasted just 18 days.

Historian Kate Gilliver considers all of Caesar&#x27;s actions in 55 BC to be a &quot;publicity stunt&quot; and suggests that the basis for continuing the Celtic/Germanic campaign was a desire to gain prestige. This also explains the campaign&#x27;s brief time span. Caesar wanted to impress the Romans and scare the Germanic tribesmen, and he did this by crossing the Rhine in style. Instead of using boats or pontoons as he had in earlier campaigns, he built a timber bridge in a mere ten days. He walked across, raided the Suebic countryside, and retreated across the bridge before the Suebic army could mobilize. He then burned the bridge and turned his attentions to another feat no Roman army had accomplished before—landing in Britain. The nominal reason to attack Britain was the Britonic tribes had been assisting the Gauls, but like most of Caesar&#x27;s &quot;casus belli&quot; it was just an excuse to gain stature in the eyes of the Roman people.
Caesar&#x27;s first trip into Britain was less of a full scale invasion than an expedition. He took only two legions from his army; however, his cavalry auxiliaries were unable to make the crossing despite several attempts. Caesar crossed late in the season, and in great haste, leaving well after midnight on 23 August. Initially, he planned to land somewhere in Kent, but the Britons were waiting for him. He moved up the coast and landed—modern archeological finds suggest at Pegwell Bay—but the Britons had kept pace and fielded an impressive force, including cavalry and chariots. The legions were hesitant to go ashore. Eventually, the X legion&#x27;s standard bearer jumped into the sea and waded to shore. To have the legion&#x27;s standard fall in combat was the greatest humiliation, and the men disembarked to protect the standard bearer. After some delay, a battle line was finally formed, and the Britons withdrew. Because the Roman cavalry had not made the crossing, Caesar could not chase down the Britons. The Romans&#x27; luck did not improve, and a Roman foraging party was ambushed. The Britons took this as a sign of Roman weakness and amassed a large force to assault them. A short battle ensued, though Caesar provides no details beyond indicating the Romans prevailed. Again, the lack of cavalry to chase down the fleeing Britons prevented a decisive victory. The campaigning season was now nearly over, and the legions were in no condition to winter on the coast of Kent. Caesar withdrew back across the Channel.

Gilliver notes that Caesar once again narrowly escaped disaster. Taking an understrength army with few provisions to a far-off land was a poor tactical decision, which easily could have led to Caesar&#x27;s defeat—yet he survived. While he had achieved no significant gains in Britain, he had accomplished a monumental feat simply by landing there. It was a fabulous propaganda victory as well, which was chronicled in Caesar&#x27;s ongoing &quot;Commentarii de Bello Gallico&quot;. The writings in the &quot;Commentarii&quot; fed Rome a steady update of Caesar&#x27;s exploits (with his own personal spin on events). Caesar&#x27;s goal of prestige and publicity succeeded enormously: upon his return to Rome, he was hailed as a hero and given an unprecedented 20-day thanksgiving. He now began planning for a proper invasion of Britain.

=== 54 BC: Invading Britain, unrest in Gaul ===
Caesar&#x27;s approach towards Britain in 54 BC was far more comprehensive and successful than his initial expedition. New ships had been built over the winter, and Caesar now took five legions and 2,000 cavalry. He left the rest of his army in Gaul to keep order. Gilliver notes that Caesar took with him a good number of Gallic chiefs whom he considered untrustworthy so he could keep an eye on them, a further sign that he had not comprehensively conquered Gaul. A series of revolts there late in the year were proof of continued Gallic instability.

Caesar landed without resistance and immediately went to find the Britonic army. The Britons used guerilla tactics to avoid a direct confrontation. This allowed them to gather a formidable army under Cassivellaunus, king of the Catuvellauni. The Britonic army had superior mobility due to its cavalry and chariots, which easily allowed them to evade and harass the Romans. The Britons attacked a foraging party, hoping to pick off the isolated group, but the party fought back fiercely and thoroughly defeated the Britons. They mostly gave up resistance at this point, and a great many tribes surrendered and offered tribute. The Romans assaulted Cassivellaunus&#x27; stronghold (likely modern day Wheathampstead), and he surrendered. Caesar extracted payment of grain, slaves, and an annual tribute to Rome. However, Britain was not particularly rich at the time; Marcus Cicero summed up Roman sentiment by saying, &quot;It&#x27;s also been established that there isn&#x27;t a scrap of silver in the island and no hope of booty except for slavesand I don&#x27;t suppose you&#x27;re expecting them to know much about literature or music!&quot; Regardless, this second trip to Britain was a true invasion, and Caesar achieved his goals. He had beaten the Britons and extracted tribute; they were now effectively Roman subjects. Caesar was lenient towards the tribes as he needed to leave before the stormy season set in, which would make crossing the channel impossible.

==== Revolts in Gaul ====
Things did not run so smoothly back on the continent during 54 BC. Harvests had failed in Gaul that year, but Caesar still wintered his legions there, and expected the Gauls to feed his troops. He did at least realize harvests had failed and spread his troops out so they would not overburden one tribe. But this isolated his legions, making them easier to attack. Gallic anger boiled over shortly after the legions made camp for the winter, and tribes rebelled.

The Eburones, under the competent Ambiorix, had been forced to winter a legion and five cohorts under Quintus Titurius Sabinus and Lucius Aurunculeius Cotta. Ambiorix attacked the Roman camp and told Sabinus (falsely) that all of Gaul was revolting and that the Germanic tribes were also invading. He offered to give the Romans safe passage if they abandoned their camp and returned to Rome. In what Gilliver describes as an incredibly foolish move, Sabinus believed Ambiorix. As soon as Sabinus left the camp, his forces were ambushed in a steep valley. Sabinus had not chosen an appropriate formation for the terrain, and the green troops panicked. The Gauls won decisively, both Sabinus and Cotta were killed, and only a handful of Romans survived.

The total defeat of Sabinus spread revolutionary fervor, and the Atuatuci, Nervii, and their allies also rebelled. They attacked the camp of Quintus Cicero, brother to Marcus Cicero—the famed orator and a key political player whom Caesar wished to keep as a loyal ally. They also told Cicero the story that Ambiorix had related to Sabinus, but Cicero was not as gullible as Sabinus. He fortified the camp&#x27;s defenses and attempted to get a messenger to Caesar. The Gauls began a fierce siege. Having previously captured a number of Roman troops as prisoners, they used the knowledge of the Romans&#x27; tactics to build siege towers and earthworks. They then assaulted the Romans nearly continuously for more than two weeks. Cicero&#x27;s message finally reached Caesar, and he immediately took two legions and cavalry to relieve the siege. They went on a forced march through the lands of the Nervii, making some a day. Caesar defeated the 60,000 strong Gallic army and finally rescued Cicero&#x27;s legion. The siege resulted in a more than 90% casualty rate for Cicero&#x27;s men. Caesar&#x27;s praise of Quintus Cicero&#x27;s tenacity was unending.

=== 53 BC: Suppressing unrest ===

The winter uprising of 54 BC had been a fiasco for the Romans. One legion had been lost entirely, and another almost destroyed. The revolts had shown the Romans were not truly in command of Gaul. Caesar set out on a campaign to subjugate the Gauls completely and forestall future resistance. Down to seven legions, he needed more men. Two more legions were recruited, and one was borrowed from Pompey. The Romans now had 40,000–50,000 men. Caesar began the brutal campaign early, before the weather had warmed. He focused on a non-traditional campaign, demoralizing populations and attacking civilians. He assaulted the Nervii and focused his energy on raiding, burning villages, stealing livestock, and taking prisoners. This strategy worked, and the Nervii promptly surrendered. The legions returned to their wintering spots until the campaign season started fully. Once the weather warmed, Caesar pulled a surprise attack on the Senones. Having had no time to prepare for a siege or even withdraw to their &quot;oppidum&quot;, the Senones also surrendered. Attention turned to the Menapii, where Caesar followed the same strategy of raiding he had used on the Nervii. It worked just as well on the Menapii, who surrendered quickly.
Caesar&#x27;s legions had been split up to put down more tribes, and his lieutenant Titus Labienus had with him 25 cohorts (about 12,000 men) and a good deal of cavalry in the lands of the Treveri (led by Indutiomarus). The Germanic tribes had promised aid to the Treveri, and Labienus realized that his relatively small force would be at a serious disadvantage. Thus, he sought to bait the Treveri into an attack on his terms. He did so by feinting a withdrawal, and the Treveri took the bait. However, Labienus had made sure to feint up a hill, requiring the Treveri to run up it, so by the time they reached the top, they were exhausted. Labienus dropped the pretense of withdrawing and gave battle defeating the Treveri in minutes; the tribe surrendered shortly after. In the rest of Belgium, three legions raided the remaining tribes and forced widespread surrender, including the Eburones under Ambiorix.

Caesar now sought to punish the Germanic tribes for daring to help the Gauls. He took his legions over the Rhine once more by building a bridge. But again, Caesar&#x27;s supplies failed him, forcing him to withdraw to avoid engaging with the still mighty Suebi while short on supplies. Regardless, Caesar had exacted widespread surrender through a vicious retaliatory campaign that focused on destruction over battle. Northern Gaul was essentially flattened. At the end of the year, six legions were wintered, two each on the lands of the Senones, the Treveri, and the Lingones. Caesar aimed to prevent a repeat of the previous disastrous winter, but given the brutality of Caesar&#x27;s actions that year, an uprising could not be stopped by garrisons alone.

=== 52 BC: Vercingetorix&#x27;s revolt ===

Gallic existential concerns came to a head in 52 BC and caused the widespread revolt the Romans had long feared. The campaigns of 53 BC had been particularly harsh, and the Gauls feared for their prosperity. Previously, they had not been united, which had made them easy to conquer. But this changed in 53 BC, when Caesar announced that Gaul was now being treated as a Roman province, subject to Roman laws and religion. This was a subject of immense concern for the Gauls, who feared the Romans would destroy the Gallic holy land, which the Carnutes watched over. Each year the druids met there to mediate between the tribes on the lands considered the center of Gaul. A threat to their sacred lands was an issue that finally united the Gauls. Over the winter the charismatic king of the Arverni tribe, Vercingetorix, assembled an unprecedented grand coalition of Gauls.

Caesar was still in Rome when news of the revolt reached him. He rushed to Gaul in an attempt to prevent the revolt from spreading, heading first to Provence to see to its defense, and then to Agedincum to counter the Gallic forces. Caesar took a winding route to the Gallic army to capture several &quot;oppida&quot; for food. Vercingetorix was forced to withdraw from his siege of the Boii capital of Gorgobina (the Boii had been allied to Rome since their defeat at Roman hands in 58 BC). However, it was still winter, and he realized the reason Caesar had detoured was that the Romans were low on supplies. Thus, Vercingetorix set out a strategy to starve the Romans. He avoided attacking them outright and raided foraging parties and supply trains instead. Vercingetorix abandoned a great many , seeking only to defend the strongest, and to ensure the others and their supplies could not fall into Roman hands. Once again, a lack of supplies forced Caesar&#x27;s hand, and he besieged the of Avaricum where Vercingetorix had sought refuge.

Originally, Vercingetorix had been opposed to defending Avaricum, but the Bituriges Cubi had persuaded him otherwise. The Gallic army was camped outside the settlement. Even while defending, Vercingetorix wished to abandon the siege and outrun the Romans. But the warriors of Avaricum were unwilling to leave it. Upon his arrival, Caesar promptly began construction of a defensive fortification. The Gauls continuously harassed the Romans and their foraging parties while they built their camp and attempted to burn it down. But not even the fierce winter weather could stop the Romans, and they built a very sturdy camp in just 25 days. The Romans built siege engines, and Caesar waited for an opportunity to attack the heavily fortified &quot;oppidum&quot;. He chose to attack during a rainstorm when the sentries were distracted. Siege towers were used to assault the fort, and ballista artillery battered the walls. Eventually, the artillery broke a hole in a wall, and the Gauls could not stop the Romans from taking the settlement. The Romans then looted and pillaged Avaricum; Caesar took no prisoners and claims the Romans slew 40,000. That the Gallic coalition did not fall apart after this defeat is a testament to the leadership of Vercingetorix. Even after losing Avaricum, the Aedui were willing to revolt and join the coalition. This was yet another setback to Caesar&#x27;s supply lines, as he could no longer get supplies through the Aedui (though the taking of Avaricum had supplied the army for the moment).

Vercingetorix now withdrew to Gergovia, the capital of his own tribe, which he was eager to defend. Caesar arrived as the weather warmed, and fodder finally became available, which somewhat eased supply issues. As usual, Caesar promptly set about building a fortification for the Romans. He captured territory closer to the &quot;oppidum&quot;. What happened in the ensuing Battle of Gergovia remains somewhat unclear. Caesar claims that he had just ordered his men to take a hill near the &quot;oppidum&quot;, and that he then sounded a retreat. But no such retreat occurred, and the Romans assaulted the settlement directly. Gilliver finds it probable that Caesar did not actually sound a retreat, and that it was his plan all along to take the settlement. Caesar&#x27;s dubious claim was likely intended to distance himself from the ensuing and overwhelming Roman failure. Greatly outnumbered, the Roman assault ended in clear defeat. Caesar claims that 700 of his men died, including 46 centurions, although the actual numbers are likely much higher. Caesar withdrew from the siege, and Vercingetorix&#x27;s victory attracted many more Gallic tribes to his cause. Despite their loss, the Romans still convinced numerous Germanic tribes to join them after the battle.
==== Siege of Alesia, end of the revolt ====

Vercingetorix chose to defend the Mandubii &quot;oppidum&quot; of Alesia next, in what would become the siege of Alesia. He assembled some 70,000100,000 warriors. After the poor performance at Gergovia, Caesar felt a direct assault on the Gauls was no longer a viable solution, so he opted to simply besiege the settlement and starve out the defenders. Vercingetorix was fine with this, as he intended to use Alesia as a trap to lay a pincer attack on the Romans and sent a call for a relieving army at once. Vercingetorix likely did not expect the intensity of the Roman siege preparations. Although modern archeology suggests that Caesar&#x27;s preparations were not as complete as he describes, it is apparent that he laid some incredible siege works. Over the span of a month, the Romans built some of fortifications. These included a trench for soldiers, an anti-cavalry moat, towers at regular intervals, and booby traps in front of the trenches. The fortifications were dug in two lines, one to protect from the defenders and one to protect from the relievers. Archeological evidence suggests the lines were not continuous as Caesar claims, and made much use of the local terrain, but it is apparent that they worked. Vercingetorix&#x27;s relieving army arrived quickly, yet concerted coordinated attacks by both the defenders and relievers failed to oust the Romans.After numerous attacks, the Gauls realized they could not overcome the impressive Roman siege works. At this point, it became clear that the Romans would be able to outlast the defenders and that the revolt was doomed. The relieving army melted away. Vercingetorix surrendered and was held as a prisoner for the next six years until he was paraded through Rome and ceremonially garroted at the Tullianum in 46 BC.

Having crushed the revolt, Caesar set his legions to winter across the lands of the defeated tribes to prevent further rebellion. He sent troops to protect the Remi, who had been steadfast allies to the Romans throughout the campaign. But resistance was not entirely over: Caesar had not yet pacified southwest Gaul.

===51 and 50 BC: Pacification of the last Gauls===

The spring of 51 BC saw the legions campaign among the Belgic tribes to snuff out any thoughts of an uprising, and the Romans achieved peace. But two chiefs in southwest Gaul, Drappes and Lucterius, remained openly hostile to the Romans and had fortified the formidable Cadurci &quot;oppidum&quot; of Uxellodunum. Gaius Caninius Rebilus surrounded the &quot;oppidum&quot; and set the siege of Uxellodunum, focusing on building a series of camps, a circumvallation, and disrupting Gallic access to water. A series of tunnels (of which archeological evidence has been found) were dug to the spring that fed the city. The Gauls attempted to burn down the Roman siege works, but to no avail. Eventually, the Roman tunnels reached the spring and diverted the water supply. Not realizing the Roman action, the Gauls believed the spring going dry was a sign from the Gods and surrendered. Caesar chose not to slaughter the defenders, and instead just cut off their hands as an example.

The legions were again wintered in Gaul, but little unrest occurred. All of the tribes had surrendered to the Romans, and little campaigning took place in 50 BC.

==== Caesar victorious ====
In the span of eight years, Caesar had conquered all of Gaul and part of Britain. He had become fabulously wealthy and achieved a legendary reputation. The Gallic Wars provided enough gravitas to Caesar that subsequently he was able to wage a civil war and declare himself dictator, in a series of events that would eventually lead to the end of the Roman Republic.

The Gallic Wars lack a clear end date. Legions continued to be active in Gaul through 50 BC, when Aulus Hirtius took over the writing of Caesar&#x27;s reports on the war. The campaigns might have continued into Germanic lands, if not for the impending Roman civil war. The legions in Gaul were eventually pulled out in 50 BC as the civil war drew near, for Caesar would need them to defeat his enemies in Rome. The Gauls had not been entirely subjugated and were not yet a formal part of the empire. But that task was not Caesar&#x27;s, and he left that to his successors. Gaul would not be made formally into Roman provinces until the reign of Augustus in 27 BC. Several rebellions happened subsequently, and Roman troops were kept stationed throughout Gaul. Historian Gilliver thinks there could have been unrest in the region as late as 70 AD, but not to the level of Vercingetorix&#x27;s revolt.

The conquest of Gaul marked the beginning of almost five centuries of Roman rule, which would have profound cultural and historical impacts. Roman rule brought with it Latin, the language of the Romans. This would evolve into Old French, giving the modern French language its Latin roots. Conquering Gaul enabled further expansion of the Empire into Northwestern Europe. Augustus would push into Germania and reach the Elbe, though settled on the Rhine as the imperial border following the disastrous Battle of the Teutoburg Forest. In addition to facilitating the conquest of parts of Germania, the Roman conquest of Britain led in 43 AD by Claudius also built on Caesar&#x27;s invasions. The Roman hegemony would last, with only one interruption, until the Crossing of the Rhine in 406 AD.

== Historiography ==
Very few sources about the Gallic Wars survive. The Gauls did not record the history of their peoples and thus any Gallic perspective has been lost to time. The writings of Julius Caesar remain the main source of information, which complicates the task of historians as it is biased in his favor. Only a handful of other contemporary works refer to the conflict but none as in-depth as Caesar&#x27;s, and most rely on Caesar&#x27;s account. The fact that he conquered Gaul is certain. The details, however, are less clear.

=== The &quot;Commentarii&quot; ===

The main contemporary source for the conflict is Julius Caesar&#x27;s &quot;Commentarii de Bello Gallico&quot;, which was largely taken as truthful and accurate until the 20th century. As late as 1908, Camille Jullian wrote a comprehensive history of Gaul and took Caesar&#x27;s account as unerring. But after World War II, historians began to question if Caesar&#x27;s claims stood up.

Historian David Henige takes issue with the supposed population and warrior counts. Caesar claims that he could estimate the population of the Helvetii because in their camp there was a census, written in Greek on tablets, which would have showed 263,000 Helvetii and 105,000 allies, of whom exactly one quarter (92,000) were combatants. But Henige points out that such a census would have been difficult to achieve by the Gauls, that it made no sense to be written in Greek by non-Greek tribes, and that carrying such a large quantity of stone or wood tablets on their migration would have been a monumental feat. Henige finds it oddly convenient that exactly one quarter were combatants, suggesting that the numbers were more likely exaggerated by Caesar than counted by census. Contemporary authors also estimated the population of the Helvetii and their allies was lower; Livy surmised that there were 157,000 overall (though Henige still believes this number is inaccurate). Hans Delbrück estimates that there were at most 20,000 migrating Helvetii, of whom 12,000 were warriors. Gilliver thinks there were no more than 50,000 Helvetii and allies.
During the campaign against the Usipetes and the Tenceri, Caesar makes the incredible claim that the Romans attacked a camp of 430,000, their victory was total, they lost not a single soldier, and that upon losing the tribes committed mass suicide. Henige finds this entire story impossible, as did Ferdinand Lot, writing in 1947. Lot was one of the first modern authors who directly questioned the validity of these numbers, finding a fighting force of 430,000 to have been unbelievable for the time. Gilliver also considers 430,000 to be absurd, but does note that it was likely the Romans killed tens of thousands, and finds the claim of zero Roman losses possible. Still, the action to annihilate a non-combatant camp was exceptionally brutal, even by Roman standards. Ben Kiernan, while noting the 430,000 to be exaggerated, otherwise accepts Caesar&#x27;s account and describes the action as genocide.

Ultimately, modern scholars see the &quot;Commentarii&quot; as a very clever piece of propaganda written by Caesar, built to make Caesar appear far grander than he was. Henige notes that Caesar&#x27;s matter-of-fact tone and easy-to-read writing made it all the easier to accept his outlandish claims. He sought to portray his fight as a justified defense against the barbarity of the Gauls (which was important, as Caesar had been the aggressor contrary to his claims). By making it appear that he had won against overwhelming odds and suffered minimal casualties, he further reinforced the belief that he and the Romans were protected by the gods and destined to win against the heathen barbarians of Gaul. Overall, Henige concludes that, &quot;Julius Caesar must be considered one of history&#x27;s earliest—and most durably successful—&#x27;spin doctors. Gilliver also calls Caesar a &quot;spin-doctor&quot;, noting that he realized the importance of keeping up appearances in Rome.

Kurt Raaflaub argues, in contrast to Henige and Gilliver, that Caesar&#x27;s campaign was not in fact exceptionally brutal compared to the standards of the day, even if it is considered ghoulish by modern standards. Raaflaub notes that Caesar generally tried to avoid battle where it was unnecessary, and tried to be more lenient than most generals of his time. Whether true or not, Caesar seems to go to great lengths to appear as having the moral high ground. This allows Caesar to compare himself favorably to the &quot;barbarian&quot; Gauls, and present himself, as Raaflaub puts it, as the &quot;perfect Roman citizen&quot;. Raaflaub contends that Caesar&#x27;s work is certainly full of propaganda, but that it has more truth to it than most authors believe. Above all, he argues that it shows how Caesar envisioned himself, and how he thought a leader ought to rule. Raaflaub notes that Caesar&#x27;s subjugation of the Gauls would have been received favorably at home, and have been considered a just peace.

==In literature==
Caesar&#x27;s &quot;Commentarii de Bello Gallico,&quot; in Latin, is one of the best surviving examples of unadorned Latin prose. It has consequently been a subject of intense study for Latinists and is one of the classic prose sources traditionally used as a standard teaching text in modern Latin education. It begins with the oft-quoted phrase &quot;Gallia est omnis divisa in partes tres&quot;, meaning &quot;Gaul is a whole divided into three parts&quot;. The introduction is world-famed for its overview of Gaul. The Gallic Wars have become a popular setting in modern historical fiction, especially that of France and Italy. In addition, the comic &quot;Astérix&quot; is set shortly after the Gallic Wars, where the titular character&#x27;s village is the last holdout in Gaul against Caesar&#x27;s legions.

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Bibliography ==
=== Modern literature ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
=== Ancient sources ===
* 
* 

== External links ==
* GIS maps of the campaigns and battles at Dickinson College</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q202161" start="4" end="15" title="Gallic Wars" label="Gallic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="69" end="82" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q38060" start="106" end="110" title="Gaul" label="Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="124" end="130" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="132" end="139" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="145" end="156" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q273854" start="159" end="165" title="Gauls" label="Gallic"/>
<link wikidata="Q22633" start="167" end="175" title="Germanic peoples" label="Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q849967" start="181" end="190" title="Celtic Britons" label="Brittonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q831663" start="259" end="267" title="Military campaign" label="campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q131386" start="305" end="321" title="Battle of Alesia" label="Battle of Alesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="399" end="413" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q178953" start="596" end="609" title="Vercingetorix" label="Vercingetorix"/>
<link wikidata="Q22633" start="977" end="985" title="Germanic peoples" label="Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089244" start="1063" end="1077" title="Natural borders of France" label="natural border"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="1091" end="1096" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q48616" start="1154" end="1162" title="Helvetii" label="Helvetii"/>
<link wikidata="Q155085" start="1223" end="1228" title="Suebi" label="Suebi"/>
<link wikidata="Q756812" start="1324" end="1330" title="Nervii" label="Nervii"/>
<link wikidata="Q847760" start="1382" end="1388" title="Veneti (Gaul)" label="Veneti"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="1561" end="1576" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q280868" start="2075" end="2093" title="Battle of Gergovia" label="Battle of Gergovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238338" start="2486" end="2510" title="Caesar&amp;#x27;s Civil War" label="imminent Roman Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5273939" start="2762" end="2770" title="Dictator perpetuo" label="dictator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="2851" end="2863" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q106199" start="2924" end="2952" title="Commentarii de Bello Gallico" label="Commentarii de Bello Gallico"/>
<link wikidata="Q208247" start="3682" end="3697" title="La Tène culture" label="La Tène culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q677863" start="3759" end="3764" title="Aedui" label="Aedui"/>
<link wikidata="Q171241" start="4327" end="4335" title="Diodoros" label="Diodoros"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911083" start="4797" end="4816" title="Strategy of the Roman military" label="military strategies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114493" start="4822" end="4832" title="Roman army" label="Roman army"/>
<link wikidata="Q389373" start="4932" end="4947" title="Auxilia" label="auxiliary units"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701964" start="5268" end="5277" title="Roman military personal equipment" label="equipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q199771" start="5752" end="5760" title="Sling (weapon)" label="slingers"/>
<link wikidata="Q831550" start="6113" end="6130" title="attrition warfare" label="attrition warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q202167" start="6414" end="6420" title="Cohort (military unit)" label="cohort"/>
<link wikidata="Q593875" start="6436" end="6443" title="Maniple (military unit)" label="maniple"/>
<link wikidata="Q131169" start="6464" end="6472" title="Polybius" label="Polybius"/>
<link wikidata="Q163323" start="7093" end="7099" title="Roman legion" label="legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q13393124" start="7155" end="7168" title="baggage train" label="baggage train"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307" start="7276" end="7293" title="Scipio Aemilianus" label="Scipio Aemilianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2224737" start="7736" end="7752" title="Sarcina" label="personal effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q655777" start="8195" end="8216" title="Gallic sack of Rome" label="Gauls had sacked Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q26897" start="8382" end="8398" title="Transalpine" label="Transalpine Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q903199" start="8487" end="8509" title="Cimbrian War" label="invaded from the north"/>
<link wikidata="Q177975" start="8523" end="8535" title="Gaius Marius" label="Gaius Marius"/>
<link wikidata="Q382553" start="8677" end="8684" title="Arverni" label="Arverni"/>
<link wikidata="Q852935" start="8712" end="8719" title="Sequani" label="Sequani"/>
<link wikidata="Q155085" start="8737" end="8742" title="Suebi" label="Suebi"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="8763" end="8768" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628304" start="8906" end="8927" title="Battle of Magetobriga" label="Battle of Magetobriga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="8983" end="8996" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4489757" start="9091" end="9097" title="consul" label="consul"/>
<link wikidata="Q316833" start="9275" end="9285" title="Ariovistus" label="Ariovistus"/>
<link wikidata="Q715380" start="9366" end="9383" title="First Triumvirate" label="First Triumvirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q175121" start="9424" end="9447" title="Marcus Licinius Crassus" label="Marcus Licinius Crassus"/>
<link wikidata="Q125414" start="9449" end="9455" title="Pompey" label="Pompey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912782" start="9530" end="9539" title="proconsul" label="proconsul"/>
<link wikidata="Q199728" start="9569" end="9583" title="Cisalpine Gaul" label="Cisalpine Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q753824" start="9588" end="9597" title="Illyricum (Roman province)" label="Illyricum"/>
<link wikidata="Q16157997" start="9623" end="9634" title="Lex Vatinia" label="Lex Vatinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q26897" start="9663" end="9679" title="Transalpine Gaul" label="Transalpine Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q505341" start="9681" end="9695" title="Quintus Caecilius Metellus Celer" label="Metellus Celer"/>
<link wikidata="Q365840" start="9817" end="9850" title="Lucius Calpurnius Piso Caesoninus (consul 58 BC)" label="Lucius Calpurnius Piso Caesoninus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324310" start="10173" end="10182" title="Legio VII Claudia" label="Legio VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101126" start="10184" end="10194" title="Legio VIII Augusta" label="Legio VIII"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10196" end="10212" title="Legio IX Hispana" label="Legio IX Hispana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530135" start="10218" end="10225" title="Legio X Equestris" label="Legio X"/>
<link wikidata="Q747040" start="10254" end="10271" title="Hispania Ulterior" label="Hispania Ulterior"/>
<link wikidata="Q837549" start="10335" end="10346" title="Lusitanians" label="Lusitanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q389373" start="10474" end="10489" title="auxiliaries (Roman military)" label="auxiliary units"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345530" start="10563" end="10577" title="Northern Italy" label="Northern Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q202207" start="10612" end="10621" title="Po Valley" label="Po Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q173082" start="10939" end="10944" title="Dacia" label="Dacia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="10952" end="10959" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q45635" start="11049" end="11060" title="casus belli" label="casus belli"/>
<link wikidata="Q48616" start="11176" end="11184" title="Helvetii" label="Helvetii"/>
<link wikidata="Q602" start="11327" end="11332" title="Rhône" label="Rhône"/>
<link wikidata="Q110094988" start="11512" end="11521" title="Saintonge (region)" label="Saintonge"/>
<link wikidata="Q22633" start="11874" end="11889" title="Germanic peoples" label="Germanic tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q505341" start="12038" end="12046" title="Quintus Caecilius Metellus Celer" label="Metellus"/>
<link wikidata="Q187834" start="13434" end="13439" title="Saône" label="Saône"/>
<link wikidata="Q2104072" start="13613" end="13627" title="pontoon bridge" label="pontoon bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q650053" start="13959" end="13967" title="Bibracte" label="Bibracte"/>
<link wikidata="Q157676" start="14116" end="14120" title="Boii" label="Boii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401346" start="14125" end="14132" title="Tulingi" label="Tulingi"/>
<link wikidata="Q635028" start="14243" end="14261" title="Battle of Bibracte" label="Battle of Bibracte"/>
<link wikidata="Q125870673" start="14562" end="14567" title="feint" label="feint"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15750" end="15764" title="#Historiography" label="historiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q265757" start="16674" end="16684" title="Diviciacus (Aedui)" label="Diviciacus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034219" start="17151" end="17158" title="Harudes" label="Harudes"/>
<link wikidata="Q37776" start="17408" end="17416" title="Vesontio" label="Vesontio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5517482" start="17838" end="17856" title="Valerius Procillus" label="Valerius Procillus"/>
<link wikidata="Q189430" start="18427" end="18435" title="quaestor" label="quaestor"/>
<link wikidata="Q382280" start="18651" end="18666" title="Publius Licinius Crassus (son of triumvir)" label="Publius Crassus"/>
<link wikidata="Q337104" start="20066" end="20072" title="Belgae" label="Belgae"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="20148" end="20155" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q602017" start="20276" end="20280" title="Remi" label="Remi"/>
<link wikidata="Q856700" start="20405" end="20411" title="Bibrax" label="Bibrax"/>
<link wikidata="Q192601" start="20462" end="20469" title="oppidum" label="oppidum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196925" start="21178" end="21188" title="Suessiones" label="Suessiones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020361" start="21230" end="21254" title="Villeneuve-Saint-Germain" label="Villeneuve-Saint-Germain"/>
<link wikidata="Q581581" start="21627" end="21636" title="Bellovaci" label="Bellovaci"/>
<link wikidata="Q223581" start="21641" end="21649" title="Ambiani" label="Ambiones"/>
<link wikidata="Q756812" start="21800" end="21806" title="Nervii" label="Nervii"/>
<link wikidata="Q164811" start="21823" end="21832" title="Atrebates" label="Atrebates"/>
<link wikidata="Q761664" start="21837" end="21847" title="Viromandui" label="Viromandui"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268733" start="21895" end="21914" title="battle of the Sabis" label="battle of the Sabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q208267" start="22093" end="22099" title="Sambre" label="Sambre"/>
<link wikidata="Q264401" start="24472" end="24480" title="Atuatuci" label="Atuatuci"/>
<link wikidata="Q937798" start="24715" end="24734" title="Servius Sulpicius Galba (praetor 54 BC)" label="one of his officers"/>
<link wikidata="Q623424" start="24742" end="24763" title="Great St Bernard Pass" label="Great St Bernard Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606381" start="25057" end="25068" title="supplicatio" label="supplicatio"/>
<link wikidata="Q847760" start="25527" end="25533" title="Veneti (Gaul)" label="Veneti"/>
<link wikidata="Q641203" start="25733" end="25741" title="Armorica" label="Armorica"/>
<link wikidata="Q294846" start="26374" end="26388" title="Decimus Junius Brutus Albinus" label="Decimus Brutus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26403" end="26410" title="Prefect#Ancient Rome" label="prefect"/>
<link wikidata="Q715376" start="26993" end="27002" title="Aquitania" label="Aquitania"/>
<link wikidata="Q936673" start="27008" end="27032" title="Quintus Titurius Sabinus" label="Quintus Titurius Sabinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469" start="27175" end="27180" title="Loire" label="Loire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571760" start="27823" end="27835" title="Quiberon Bay" label="Quiberon Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287607" start="28317" end="28331" title="grappling hook" label="grappling hook"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="28880" end="28888" title="Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q6286" start="28896" end="28911" title="First Punic War" label="First Punic War"/>
<link wikidata="Q862113" start="28925" end="28943" title="Corvus (boarding device)" label="&amp;quot;corvus&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q250584" start="29283" end="29289" title="Morini" label="Morini"/>
<link wikidata="Q659921" start="29294" end="29301" title="Menapii" label="Menapii"/>
<link wikidata="Q289889" start="29492" end="29499" title="Lexovii" label="Lexovii"/>
<link wikidata="Q645010" start="29501" end="29513" title="Coriosolites" label="Coriosolites"/>
<link wikidata="Q733283" start="29519" end="29526" title="Venelli" label="Venelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165485" start="30071" end="30079" title="Sotiates" label="Sotiates"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30140" end="30147" title="Vocates (Gallic tribe)" label="Vocates"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30152" end="30161" title="Tarusates" label="Tarusates"/>
<link wikidata="Q296238" start="30228" end="30245" title="Quintus Sertorius" label="Quintus Sertorius"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778726" start="30253" end="30265" title="Sertorian War" label="his uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q6416967" start="31761" end="31776" title="Luca Conference" label="Luca Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="32642" end="32657" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517050" start="32764" end="32772" title="Usipetes" label="Usipetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143734" start="32777" end="32785" title="Tencteri" label="Tencteri"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33319" end="33333" title="#Historiography" label="historiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="35017" end="35021" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3425604" start="35132" end="35143" title="Pegwell Bay" label="Pegwell Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q106199" start="36638" end="36666" title="Commentarii de Bello Gallico" label="Commentarii de Bello Gallico"/>
<link wikidata="Q363623" start="37832" end="37846" title="Cassivellaunus" label="Cassivellaunus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051384" start="37860" end="37872" title="Catuvellauni" label="Catuvellauni"/>
<link wikidata="Q19947" start="38330" end="38344" title="Wheathampstead" label="Wheathampstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="38497" end="38510" title="Cicero" label="Marcus Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q323500" start="39597" end="39605" title="Eburones" label="Eburones"/>
<link wikidata="Q12847" start="39627" end="39635" title="Ambiorix" label="Ambiorix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232866" start="39724" end="39749" title="Lucius Aurunculeius Cotta" label="Lucius Aurunculeius Cotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q316054" start="40487" end="40501" title="Quintus Cicero" label="Quintus Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q622666" start="40970" end="40981" title="siege tower" label="siege tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q57821" start="40987" end="40997" title="Earthworks (military)" label="earthworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048883" start="42471" end="42478" title="Senones" label="Senones"/>
<link wikidata="Q311265" start="42858" end="42872" title="Titus Labienus" label="Titus Labienus"/>
<link wikidata="Q322168" start="42963" end="42970" title="Treveri" label="Treveri"/>
<link wikidata="Q683671" start="42979" end="42991" title="Indutiomarus" label="Indutiomarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5441540" start="43215" end="43236" title="feigned retreat" label="feinting a withdrawal"/>
<link wikidata="Q852944" start="45033" end="45041" title="Carnutes" label="Carnutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q131081" start="45070" end="45075" title="druid" label="druid"/>
<link wikidata="Q178953" start="45295" end="45308" title="Vercingetorix" label="Vercingetorix"/>
<link wikidata="Q101081" start="45513" end="45521" title="Provence" label="Provence"/>
<link wikidata="Q212420" start="45557" end="45566" title="Agedincum" label="Agedincum"/>
<link wikidata="Q192601" start="45669" end="45675" title="Oppidum" label="oppida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154148" start="45767" end="45776" title="Gorgobina" label="Gorgobina"/>
<link wikidata="Q281826" start="46361" end="46369" title="Avaricum" label="Avaricum"/>
<link wikidata="Q745145" start="46484" end="46498" title="Bituriges Cubi" label="Bituriges Cubi"/>
<link wikidata="Q665178" start="47065" end="47078" title="Roman siege engines" label="siege engines"/>
<link wikidata="Q219433" start="47291" end="47299" title="ballista" label="ballista"/>
<link wikidata="Q16840360" start="47300" end="47309" title="Greek and Roman artillery" label="artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q55950714" start="47967" end="47975" title="Gergovia" label="Gergovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q211439" start="48079" end="48085" title="fodder" label="fodder"/>
<link wikidata="Q280868" start="48311" end="48329" title="Battle of Gergovia" label="Battle of Gergovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q26409" start="48928" end="48937" title="centurion" label="centurion"/>
<link wikidata="Q948517" start="49288" end="49296" title="Mandubii" label="Mandubii"/>
<link wikidata="Q835966" start="49320" end="49326" title="Alesia (city)" label="Alesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131386" start="49358" end="49373" title="siege of Alesia" label="siege of Alesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q146889" start="49689" end="49702" title="Pincer movement" label="pincer attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q840649" start="51006" end="51013" title="garrote" label="garrote"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035634" start="51022" end="51031" title="Tullianum" label="Tullianum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51589" end="51596" title="Drappes" label="Drappes"/>
<link wikidata="Q964818" start="51601" end="51610" title="Lucterius" label="Lucterius"/>
<link wikidata="Q856927" start="51683" end="51690" title="Cadurci" label="Cadurci"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290232" start="51714" end="51725" title="Uxellodunum" label="Uxellodunum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345437" start="51727" end="51749" title="Gaius Caninius Rebilus (consul 45 BC)" label="Gaius Caninius Rebilus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12950513" start="51797" end="51817" title="siege of Uxellodunum" label="siege of Uxellodunum"/>
<link wikidata="Q88272" start="51861" end="51876" title="circumvallation" label="circumvallation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238338" start="52825" end="52836" title="Caesar&amp;#x27;s Civil War" label="a civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q354990" start="53049" end="53062" title="Aulus Hirtius" label="Aulus Hirtius"/>
<link wikidata="Q879466" start="53542" end="53576" title="Roman Gaul" label="made formally into Roman provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="53596" end="53604" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q35222" start="54078" end="54088" title="Old French" label="Old French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="54223" end="54231" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644" start="54271" end="54275" title="Elbe" label="Elbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q87779" start="54353" end="54383" title="Battle of the Teutoburg Forest" label="Battle of the Teutoburg Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258062" start="54452" end="54477" title="Roman conquest of Britain" label="Roman conquest of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411" start="54494" end="54502" title="Claudius" label="Claudius"/>
<link wikidata="Q273025" start="54583" end="54599" title="Gallic Empire" label="one interruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q684915" start="54611" end="54632" title="Crossing of the Rhine" label="Crossing of the Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q106199" start="55303" end="55331" title="Commentarii de Bello Gallico" label="Commentarii de Bello Gallico"/>
<link wikidata="Q333292" start="55429" end="55444" title="Camille Jullian" label="Camille Jullian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5234908" start="55625" end="55637" title="David Henige" label="David Henige"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039" start="56491" end="56495" title="Livy" label="Livy"/>
<link wikidata="Q76575" start="56595" end="56608" title="Hans Delbrück" label="Hans Delbrück"/>
<link wikidata="Q719696" start="57067" end="57080" title="Ferdinand Lot" label="Ferdinand Lot"/>
<link wikidata="Q41397" start="57666" end="57674" title="genocide" label="genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q12776523" start="58516" end="58534" title="Spin (propaganda)" label="&amp;#x27;spin doctors"/>
<link wikidata="Q121052" start="58665" end="58678" title="Kurt Raaflaub" label="Kurt Raaflaub"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="59817" end="59822" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196408" start="60275" end="60293" title="historical fiction" label="historical fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="60314" end="60320" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="60325" end="60330" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004" start="60349" end="60354" title="comic" label="comic"/>
<link wikidata="Q42490" start="60361" end="60368" title="Astérix" label="Astérix"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143230" wikidata="Q1261230" url="?curid=143230" title="Drum and bugle corps (modern)">
<text>A modern drum and bugle corps is a musical marching unit consisting of brass instruments, percussion instruments, electronic instruments, and color guard. Typically operating as independent non-profit organizations, corps perform in competitions, parades, festivals, and other civic functions. Participants of all ages are represented within the corps activity, but the majority are between the ages of 13 and 22 and are members of corps within Drum Corps International.

Competitive summer drum corps participate in summer touring circuits, such as Drum Corps International (DCI) and Drum Corps Associates (DCA). Corps prepare a new show each year, approximately 8–12 minutes in length, and refine it throughout the summer tour. Shows are performed on football fields and are judged in various musical and visual categories, or &quot;captions&quot;. Musical repertoires vary widely among corps and include symphonic, jazz, big band, contemporary, rock, wind band, vocal, rap, Broadway, and Latin music, among other genres. Competitive junior corps usually spend between 10 and 15 weeks on tour over the summer, practicing and performing full-time.

The term &quot;modern&quot; is used for the purposes of this article to differentiate it from classic drum and bugle corps, using the time period of the establishment of Drum Corps International as a dividing point in the timeline of the two types of drum and bugle corps.

== History ==

Modern drum and bugle corps stems from a rich American and Canadian military history, separate from other marching musical activities. Towards the end of World War I, advancements in radio technology rendered using drum and bugle corps for communication obsolete. When the war concluded in 1918, there was no longer a need for these instruments. The instruments were sold to veteran organizations such as the Veterans of Foreign Wars (VFW) and the newly founded American Legion (AL). These veteran organizations would become the first sponsors of civilian drum and bugle corps. The veteran&#x27;s initial goal was finding ways to engage with their communities while maintaining a connection to military traditions and values. Drum and bugle corps became the perfect vehicle for adapting military musical traditions to civilian life. Beginning after World War I through the 1970s, corps and competitions were often sponsored by the VFW, Boy Scout troops, churches, fire departments, Rotary clubs, the Royal Canadian Legion, and the American Legion. Owing to many of these groups&#x27; roots, corps were traditionally militaristic. By the late 1960s, many corps wanted more creative freedom and better financial compensation than was offered by their sponsoring organizations. Some felt the prize-money structures, based on competitive placement, were not fairly compensating all corps for their appearances. Additionally, some felt the current judging rules were stifling musical and theatrical possibilities. At the peak of North American drum corps participation (with perhaps a thousand active corps in the U.S. and nearly as many in Canada), several corps decided to &quot;unionize&quot;, as stated by Don Warren (founder of the Cavaliers). They formed their own organizations, which ultimately led to the formation of Drum Corps Associates (DCA) in 1965 and Drum Corps International (DCI) in 1972. By this time, many corps had already lost their church or community sponsors.

For the corps that remained, longer travel times were necessary to attend the shrinking numbers of contests, further adding to the financial and time demands on the organizations and their individual members. At the same time costs for the increasingly complex field shows mounted and creative and instructional demands rose leading many competitive corps to falter and become inactive. By the late 1990s only a fraction of the corps that existed in the 60s and 70s remained, although several new corps, some of which have become very successful, did start up along the way.

Freed from the traditional and more-restrictive judging rules of the late 1960s, corps began making innovative changes such as the use of B brass instruments, wide-ranging tempos, intricate asymmetric drill formations, elaborate guard costumes and props, and the use of stationary orchestral percussion instruments. A few corps still utilize the traditional G bugle which is very rarely found in DCI marching units.

== Musical program ==

=== Repertoire ===
A typical show usually revolves around one genre of music, or sometimes melds separate genres together. Modern corps&#x27; programs have become increasingly conceptual and programmatic, with overarching show themes rather than loosely related musical selections. Often, especially within classical selections, a single composer&#x27;s material is featured. Corps have performed virtually every genre of music that can be fit for on-field adaptation, including jazz, new age, classical, and rock music. It is becoming increasingly common to hear the corps performing original music, composed specifically for the corps by their musical staff or consultants.

=== Instrumentation ===

==== Brass ====


The exclusive use of bell-front brass instrumentation is a defining musical element of drum corps. Throughout the years, the horns used in drum corps have been changed from true, single-valved bugles to B brass instruments. While brass bugles in these competitive drum corps began as military signaling devices, successive modifications made them capable of greater ranges of music. These traditionally valveless, key-of-G bugles evolved to include pistons and rotors, gaining notes beyond a single harmonic series. Until 1999, drum and bugle corps horn lines within DCI were required to be pitched in the key of G. That year, the DCI rules congress passed a rule change to allow &quot;brass bell-front valve instruments in any key with the exception of sousaphones and trombones.&quot; In World Class, the rule did not go into effect until the 2000 season, while Open Class opted for a two-year moratorium prior to implementation in 2002; DCA followed suit in 2004. Hornlines are now most commonly pitched in B, with mellophones pitched in F. In 2014, the DCI Board of Directors passed a rule change that changed their definition of a bugle to allow the entire brass family, including trombones and concert French horns.

==== Percussion ====


The percussion section consists of two subsections: the front ensemble (also known as &quot;pit&quot;) and the battery (also known as the &quot;drumline&quot;).

Front ensemble members perform on orchestral percussion, electronic instruments, and a wide variety of other auxiliary instruments such as hammered dulcimer. Since the keyboard instruments do not project as well as brass or marching percussion, they are often amplified to produce adequate sound. Due to the size of these instruments, the pit typically remains stationary, positioned directly in front of the field and centered on or around the 50-yard line. However, some groups use the front ensemble in creative ways by moving them around the field or putting them in different locations. A full-size front ensemble typically features 10 to 15 members.

Members of the battery perform on marching percussion instruments, including snare drums, tenor drums (also known as &quot;quads&quot;, &quot;quints&quot;, or &quot;tenors&quot;), tonal bass drums, and cymbals. A full-size battery typically features 7–10 snare drummers, 3–6 tenor drummers, 5-6 bass drummers, and sometimes cymbal players, which tends to be 4-6 players in size.

== Visual program and other visual arts ==

=== Color guard ===
In modern drum corps, the color guard has become a crucial part of each group&#x27;s visual and thematic program. Standard equipment includes silk flags, non-functioning rifles, and sabres, and other objects like bare poles, hoops, balls, windsocks, and custom-made props are sometimes used to create visual effects that enhance the show.

The primary role of the color guard is to complement the corps&#x27; musical program by creating visual interpretations of the music through choreographed dance. The color guard can also enhance the overall drill design by marching in formations that integrate with the rest of the corps. However, the color guard most often performs as an ensemble that frames the rest of the corps or performs within the drill formations of the corps proper. Like all other sections of the corps, the guard often features solo work.
=== Drill formations ===
Drill formations refer to the formations made by the performers on the field. Modern drill formations are much more complex and dynamic than the drill formations of early drum corps. Traditional blocks, company fronts, and symmetrical formations — while still utilized occasionally for impactful moments — have largely given way to more abstract and artistic designs. Drill writing at large is meant to keep instrumental sections together, put featured members at the center of attention, and visually reinforce the choreography.

=== Marching technique ===
As visual programs have increased in complexity, corps have developed and formalized various movement techniques, the goal of each being the achievement of fluid, consistent movements that allow for precise musical technique at all tempos, step sizes, and directions. Given that instrument-wielding members most often face toward the audience (for maximum sound projection), marching technique must not affect the rigidity of members&#x27; upper torsos. Although most horn players are able to follow this technique, members of the battery must keep their entire bodies facing forward at all times due to the nature of their equipment. This has led to the invention of the &quot;crab walk&quot; or oblique, where the legs cross over one another to facilitate sideways motion; the technique is used mostly by battery, but in rare instances by the hornline. Being visually oriented, guard members are not as bound to facing the front sideline, and may face any direction at any time as dictated by choreography.

The most common backward marching technique requires balancing on one&#x27;s platform (visually seen as the &#x27;toes&#x27; and keeping the heels off the ground), which is especially effective at faster tempos. The reverse the heel–toe roll step, allowing for heel–ground contact is another technique used, most often at slower tempos. As an alternative, there are four major groups which utilize a bent leg technique (Santa Clara Vanguard, Madison Scouts, Pacific Crest, and Guardians), in which the feet come off of the ground and move in a bicycle type motion.

Marching technique programs have largely been inspired by dance technique. Terminology from ballet and high school band is used to describe foot placement and positioning, and members of the color guard and hornline often &quot;jazz run&quot; in order to maintain upper body stability when moving at fast tempos with large step sizes.

== Season ==
While performances and competitions only occur during the summer, preparation for the next season starts as soon as the last one ends. Corps activity of some sort goes on year-round. Months in advance of next season&#x27;s first camp, corps begin assembling their staffs, choosing their musical repertoires, writing drill, etc.

=== Camps ===
For junior corps, the season is a very intense process. Most corps begin having camps on or around Thanksgiving Day weekend and continue having monthly weekend camps throughout the winter. Potential members travel far and wide—literally from around the world—to attend the camps of their favorite corps. Membership in the top corps are highly competitive and are generally determined during the first few camps. By spring, the members have been chosen and camps are held more frequently as the beginning of the summer touring season approaches. Most junior corps require their non-local members to secure temporary housing (often with local members or a vacant dormitory) near the corps&#x27; rehearsals facilities around Memorial Day weekend. For most of May and into June (as college and high school classes end), full-day rehearsals are held virtually every day so members can finish learning the music and marching drill of the show. This pre-season &quot;spring training&quot; is usually 3–4 weeks long. It is not uncommon for members to rehearse 10–14 hours a day, 6–7 days a week throughout the entire pre-season. In mid to late June, corps leave to begin their summer tours.
For all-age (formerly senior) corps, the process is not quite as grueling. Since most members have lives outside of drum corps, senior corps rehearse on weekends and occasionally on weekday evenings. Rather than extensive tours, senior corps usually take weekend trips to perform in shows, and make longer trips only to regional championships and finals. Many smaller DCI corps and foreign corps have similar itineraries. Non-competitive corps, such as classic-style corps, alumni corps, or newly aspiring corps might not have a defined season at all. They practice and perform as they deem necessary or possible. Occasionally such corps make exhibition appearances at DCI or DCA shows.

=== Tour and competition ===


While on tour, junior corps travel mainly at night after leaving the performance venue. Members sleep on the buses and in sleeping bags on gym floors when the next housing destination is reached. Housing for the entire tour is secured in advance through local schools, churches, or other community facilities. Corps practice their shows for as long as possible each day before getting ready to leave for that night&#x27;s competition if scheduled. Not every day is a performance day; many days on tour are spent simply traveling to a distant location or entirely on the practice field.

A full-sized, adequately funded junior corps will have a fleet of vehicles, including three or more coach buses for members and staff, a truck or van to carry souvenirs that are sold at shows, and two semi-trucks, one for show equipment and one that serves as a kitchen on wheels. Most meals for all members and staff are provided by the cook truck, but occasionally corps have scheduled free days where there are no rehearsals or performances and the members are free to see some local sights and procure their own meals.

Competitions are not the only performances that corps partake in while on tour. Most corps also participate in parades and standstill performances throughout the summer to gain further public exposure and to supplement their budget with performance fees. On the Fourth of July weekend, corps often locate themselves in large metro areas so they can participate in more than one parade.

Competitions are usually held at college or high school football stadiums or similar venues, and are scored by circuit-approved judges. Most circuits follow the three-caption system of General Effect (GE), Visual, and Music, with GE carrying the most weight. This is the scoring system currently used by DCI (others are similar):

The timing and organization of contests varies significantly from circuit to circuit. Only large DCI corps typically have the funding and time commitment from members to participate in DCI&#x27;s touring circuit, where corps spend the majority of the summer traveling around the continent performing at different local and regional contests. In other circuits, and for smaller DCI corps, competitions are usually scheduled to allow corps to travel, perform, and return home within a weekend. For this reason, and to boost audience attendance, large competitions are more frequently scheduled on weekends.

A typical regular-season contest consists of fewer than 10 corps, with corps from one or more classes competing together but scored separately. In North America, DCI and DCA corps occasionally perform at the same shows. DCI also schedules larger contests interspersed throughout the latter half of its season. These are restricted to corps in specific classes and feature many (if not all) of the corps within each class. European circuits, such as DCUK, operate on a &quot;minimum performance and lot&quot; system: appearance at the first two shows of the year is determined by lot, and then the corps must appear in a minimum number of shows before the circuit&#x27;s championships. In such a system, the championships are often the only time all corps in a class compete together.

Some circuits also organize optional individual and ensemble (I&amp;E) competitions for individuals or groups from corps to showcase members&#x27; skills outside the field performance environment. These are usually held only once or twice per season at championships or a major regional contest. Members practice their routine(s) in their scant free time throughout the season.

== Corps organization ==
Most corps are operated as or by dedicated non-profit organizations; very few are associated with schools or for-profit entities. Some corps are even parts of larger non-profit performance arts organizations, which might also include theater groups, winter guards, winter drumlines, and other various musical or visual activities. In Europe, many are also registered charities, assisting with their fundraising aims.

=== Staff ===
Despite their non-profit status, a well-run corps is just like a well-run business. It requires many people to handle fiscal and operational responsibilities. There are four levels of staff operating a drum corps: Executive Management, Executive Staff, Instructional, and Volunteer. Each plays an essential role in creating a well-run corps.

The executive management consists of the board of directors and the executive director. Often the board are unpaid volunteers. This group is almost always long-standing within successful corps. They create the long-term vision and strategy for the organization, handling the financial, operational, and organizational issues to keep the corps running. The board of directors may be composed of alumni and other closely affiliated people. They hire the Executive (operational) Director who is responsible for hiring the executive staff, the instructional staff, and recruiting volunteers.

The executive staff usually includes the operational office staff, the program director(s) and tour director(s) who run the day-to-day operational needs of the organization.

The instructional staff puts the show on the field. They create the concept of the show, choose and arrange the music, write the drill, and instruct the members on their technique. The staff consists of brass, percussion, guard, and visual instructors who are most often alumni of the corps or other corps. A well-funded World Class corps usually has 15-20 full-time instructors. Just as members, they attend winter camps and travel with the corps all summer long.

Volunteers are the lifeblood of any corps. Parents, alumni, friends, and fans make the corps work on a day-to-day basis—driving buses and trucks, caring for the corps&#x27; uniforms, cooking meals for the corps and staff, and countless other peripheral duties. Corps on touring circuits particularly rely on volunteers due to the extra necessities which come with the tour: cooking and cleaning, providing mechanical maintenance, health and medical needs.

== See also ==
* Drum Corps International (DCI)
* Drum Corps Associates (DCA)
* List of DCI drum corps
* Drum and bugle corps (classic)

==References==
== External links ==
*Drum Corps International
*Halftime Magazine, &quot;the sights sounds and spirit of the marching arts&quot;
*Drum Corps Associates
*Drum Corps Historical Society (DCHS) </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1261230" start="9" end="29" title="Drum and bugle corps (modern)" label="drum and bugle corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q180744" start="71" end="87" title="brass instrument" label="brass instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q133163" start="90" end="111" title="percussion instrument" label="percussion instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327500" start="114" end="136" title="Electronic musical instrument" label="electronic instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q16827465" start="142" end="154" title="Color guard (flag spinning)" label="color guard."/>
<link wikidata="Q163740" start="190" end="213" title="non-profit organization" label="non-profit organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309050" start="550" end="580" title="Drum Corps International" label="Drum Corps International (DCI)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309048" start="585" end="612" title="Drum Corps Associates" label="Drum Corps Associates (DCA)"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="753" end="761" title="American football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="907" end="916" title="European classical music" label="symphonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="918" end="922" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q207378" start="924" end="932" title="big band" label="big band"/>
<link wikidata="Q8011523" start="934" end="946" title="contemporary music" label="contemporary"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="948" end="952" title="rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q762048" start="954" end="963" title="wind band" label="wind band"/>
<link wikidata="Q131186" start="965" end="970" title="choir" label="vocal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="972" end="975" title="hip hop music" label="rap"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="977" end="985" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q18345375" start="991" end="1002" title="Latin music (genre)" label="Latin music"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309077" start="1244" end="1272" title="Drum and bugle corps (classic)" label="classic drum and bugle corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q3556413" start="1848" end="1878" title="Veterans of Foreign Wars" label="Veterans of Foreign Wars (VFW)"/>
<link wikidata="Q468865" start="1901" end="1921" title="American Legion" label="American Legion (AL)"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2288" end="2299" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3933153" start="2375" end="2390" title="Scout troop" label="Boy Scout troop"/>
<link wikidata="Q109179" start="2421" end="2433" title="Rotary International" label="Rotary clubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270231" start="2439" end="2460" title="Royal Canadian Legion" label="Royal Canadian Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q468865" start="2470" end="2485" title="American Legion" label="American Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721773" start="3171" end="3180" title="The Cavaliers Drum and Bugle Corps" label="Cavaliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309048" start="3261" end="3288" title="Drum Corps Associates" label="Drum Corps Associates (DCA)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309050" start="3301" end="3331" title="Drum Corps International" label="Drum Corps International (DCI)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628293" start="4356" end="4361" title="bugle" label="bugle"/>
<link wikidata="Q180744" start="5188" end="5204" title="brass instrument" label="brass instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628293" start="5349" end="5354" title="Bugle (instrument)" label="bugle"/>
<link wikidata="Q730469" start="6052" end="6062" title="Moratorium (law)" label="moratorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309048" start="6096" end="6099" title="Drum Corps Associates" label="DCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q133163" start="6406" end="6416" title="Percussion instrument" label="percussion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505858" start="6458" end="6472" title="front ensemble" label="front ensemble"/>
<link wikidata="Q3980611" start="6513" end="6520" title="Marching percussion" label="battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640779" start="6598" end="6619" title="orchestral percussion" label="orchestral percussion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327500" start="6621" end="6643" title="electronic instruments" label="electronic instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588017" start="6703" end="6720" title="hammered dulcimer" label="hammered dulcimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6398234" start="6732" end="6752" title="Keyboard percussion instrument" label="keyboard instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q3980611" start="7255" end="7274" title="marching percussion" label="marching percussion"/>
<link wikidata="Q208421" start="7298" end="7308" title="snare drum" label="snare drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196937" start="7311" end="7321" title="tenor drum" label="tenor drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q211028" start="7407" end="7416" title="bass drum" label="bass drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419345" start="10536" end="10556" title="Santa Clara Vanguard Drum and Bugle Corps" label="Santa Clara Vanguard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6728080" start="10558" end="10572" title="Madison Scouts Drum and Bugle Corps" label="Madison Scouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7122421" start="10574" end="10587" title="Pacific Crest Drum and Bugle Corps" label="Pacific Crest"/>
<link wikidata="Q11639" start="10740" end="10745" title="dance" label="dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q41425" start="10774" end="10780" title="ballet" label="ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6168407" start="10910" end="10918" title="jazz run" label="jazz run"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913791" start="11473" end="11489" title="Thanksgiving (United States)" label="Thanksgiving Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q371781" start="12096" end="12108" title="Memorial Day" label="Memorial Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q86591" start="14649" end="14663" title="Independence Day (US)" label="Fourth of July"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026379" start="17150" end="17162" title="winter guard" label="winter guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6026468" start="17165" end="17180" title="winter drumline" label="winter drumline"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309050" start="19379" end="19409" title="Drum Corps International" label="Drum Corps International (DCI)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309048" start="19412" end="19439" title="Drum Corps Associates" label="Drum Corps Associates (DCA)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6568317" start="19442" end="19464" title="List of DCI drum corps" label="List of DCI drum corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309077" start="19467" end="19497" title="Drum and bugle corps (classic)" label="Drum and bugle corps (classic)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143231" wikidata="Q421975" url="?curid=143231" title="DCI">
<text>DCI may be an abbreviation for:
==Technology==
* D-chiro-inositol, an isomer of inositol
* Data, context and interaction, an architectural pattern in computer software development
* Digitally controlled impedance, a control function in FPGAs
* Display Control Interface, a computer graphics device driver standard developed using code from San Francisco Canyon Company
* Ductile cast iron, or ductile iron, a more flexible type of cast iron
* dCi (direct Common-rail Injection), Renault/Nissan&#x27;s common rail fuel injection technology for diesel engines

==Businesses==
* Digital Cinema Initiatives, a consortium to establish a specification for a standard digital cinema architecture
* Discovery Communications, an American global media and entertainment company
* Dynamic Cassette International, a Boston, Lincolnshire, UK company that produces products under the Jet Tec brand name
* DCI Cheese Company
* Dolphin Capital Investors, a real estate investment company
* Diners Club International, a global charge card
* Défense Conseil International, a French international services company in the field of defense and security

==Organizations ==
* DCI (Wizards of the Coast) (formerly Duelists&#x27; Convocation International, now Wizards Play Network), tournament sanctioning body for games including &quot;Magic: The Gathering&quot;
* Defence for Children International, a children&#x27;s rights organization
* Dental Council of India, an organisation regulating dental education
* Dialysis Clinic, Inc, a nonprofit medical organization
* Drum Corps International, the nonprofit organization governing modern junior drum and bugle corps
* DCI Global Partnerships, a Christian charity organization
* Distressed Children &amp; Infants International, a nonprofit organization

==Other==
* Dade Correctional Institution, a prison in Florida
* Development Cooperation Instrument, a financial construct of the European Union
* Director of Central Intelligence, formerly the head of the U.S. Intelligence Community and Central Intelligence Agency
* Detective chief inspector, a police rank in the United Kingdom
* Decompression illness, brought on by rapid decompression
* Defence Capabilities Initiative, a 1999 NATO plan to ensure the effectiveness of multinational operations
* DCI, the number 601 in Roman numerals
* District of Columbia International School, a charter school in the District of Columbia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q421975" start="0" end="3" title="DCI" label="DCI"/>
<link wikidata="Q3011024" start="49" end="65" title="D-chiro-inositol" label="D-chiro-inositol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172196" start="91" end="120" title="Data, context and interaction" label="Data, context and interaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164612" start="182" end="212" title="Digitally controlled impedance" label="Digitally controlled impedance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7413964" start="340" end="368" title="San Francisco Canyon Company" label="San Francisco Canyon Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q122490" start="393" end="405" title="ductile iron" label="ductile iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q747223" start="443" end="446" title="dCi" label="dCi"/>
<link wikidata="Q379094" start="576" end="602" title="Digital Cinema Initiatives" label="Digital Cinema Initiatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q621592" start="691" end="715" title="Discovery Communications" label="Discovery Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q5318897" start="770" end="800" title="Dynamic Cassette International" label="Dynamic Cassette International"/>
<link wikidata="Q5204510" start="891" end="909" title="DCI Cheese Company" label="DCI Cheese Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5289612" start="912" end="937" title="Dolphin Capital Investors" label="Dolphin Capital Investors"/>
<link wikidata="Q877332" start="974" end="999" title="Diners Club International" label="Diners Club International"/>
<link wikidata="Q3043077" start="1024" end="1053" title="Défense Conseil International" label="Défense Conseil International"/>
<link wikidata="Q5204511" start="1154" end="1180" title="DCI (Wizards of the Coast)" label="DCI (Wizards of the Coast)"/>
<link wikidata="Q663548" start="1343" end="1377" title="Defence for Children International" label="Defence for Children International"/>
<link wikidata="Q3633001" start="1419" end="1442" title="Dental Council of India" label="Dental Council of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q5270633" start="1490" end="1510" title="Dialysis Clinic, Inc" label="Dialysis Clinic, Inc"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309050" start="1547" end="1571" title="Drum Corps International" label="Drum Corps International"/>
<link wikidata="Q5204512" start="1647" end="1670" title="DCI Global Partnerships" label="DCI Global Partnerships"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283098" start="1707" end="1754" title="Distressed Children &amp;amp; Infants International" label="Distressed Children &amp;amp; Infants International"/>
<link wikidata="Q17284401" start="1794" end="1823" title="Dade Correctional Institution" label="Dade Correctional Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5266679" start="1847" end="1881" title="Development Cooperation Instrument" label="Development Cooperation Instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227524" start="1929" end="1961" title="Director of Central Intelligence" label="Director of Central Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589524" start="2050" end="2075" title="Detective chief inspector" label="Detective chief inspector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153171" start="2115" end="2136" title="Decompression illness" label="Decompression illness"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2174" end="2205" title="Defence Capabilities Initiative" label="Defence Capabilities Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q3397187" start="2209" end="2223" title="1999 Washington summit" label="1999 NATO plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q257138" start="2298" end="2301" title="601 (number)" label="601"/>
<link wikidata="Q60761506" start="2322" end="2363" title="District of Columbia International School" label="District of Columbia International School"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143232" wikidata="Q5725534" url="?curid=143232" title="Henry Martyn Baird">
<text>Henry Martyn Baird (January 17, 1832 – November 1906) was an American historian and educator. He is best known as a historian of the Huguenots.

==Life==
A son of Robert Baird (1798–1863), the Presbyterian preacher and author who worked both in the United States and in Europe for the cause of temperance, Henry Martyn Baird was born in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, on January 17, 1832. The younger Baird spent eight years of his early youth with his father in Paris and Geneva, and in 1850 graduated from New York University. He then lived for two years in Italy and Greece, was a student in the Union Theological Seminary in New York City from 1853 to 1855 and, in 1856, graduated from the Princeton Theological Seminary.

Employed for four years as a tutor at the College of New Jersey (now Princeton University), Henry Martyn Baird was then employed as a professor of Greek language and literature at New York University from 1859 until his death.

==Works==
Henry Martyn Baird&#x27;s research and writing regarding the Huguenots appeared in three parts, entitled respectively &quot;History of the Rise of the Huguenots of France&quot; (2 vols, 1879), &quot;The Huguenots and Henry of Navarre&quot; (2 vols, 1886), and &quot;The Huguenots and the Revocation of the Edict of Nantes&quot; (2 vols, 1895), and was described by the &quot;1911 Encyclopædia Britannica&quot; as being &quot;characterized by painstaking thoroughness, by a judicial temper, and by scholarship of a high order&quot;.

He also published &quot;Modern Greece, A Narrative of a Residence and Travels in that Country&quot; (1856); a biography of his father, &quot;The Life of the Rev. Robert Baird, D.D.&quot; (1866); and &quot;Theodore Beza, the Counsellor of the French Reformation&quot; (1899).

Baird was elected as a member to the American Philosophical Society in 1884. He died in New York City in November 1906.

==References==
==External links==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5725534" start="0" end="18" title="Henry Martyn Baird" label="Henry Martyn Baird"/>
<link wikidata="Q201788" start="70" end="79" title="historian" label="historian"/>
<link wikidata="Q101935" start="133" end="142" title="Huguenots" label="Huguenots"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341800" start="163" end="175" title="Robert Baird (clergyman)" label="Robert Baird"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="193" end="205" title="Presbyterian" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="249" end="262" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="270" end="276" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="337" end="363" title="Philadelphia, Pennsylvania" label="Philadelphia, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="460" end="465" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="470" end="476" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q49210" start="505" end="524" title="New York University" label="New York University"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="557" end="562" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="567" end="573" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196251" start="596" end="622" title="Union Theological Seminary in the City of New York" label="Union Theological Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="626" end="639" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q909696" start="691" end="721" title="Princeton Theological Seminary" label="Princeton Theological Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="766" end="787" title="Princeton University" label="College of New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="871" end="885" title="Greek language" label="Greek language"/>
<link wikidata="Q867541" start="1337" end="1365" title="1911 Encyclopædia Britannica" label="1911 Encyclopædia Britannica"/>
<link wikidata="Q314981" start="1700" end="1713" title="Theodore Beza" label="Theodore Beza"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="1808" end="1838" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143237" wikidata="Q119243" url="?curid=143237" title="Johann Georg Baiter">
<text>Johann Georg Baiter (31 May 1801 – 10 October 1877) was a Swiss philologist and textual critic.

==Life==
He was born at Zürich, where he received his early education. He went on in 1818 to the University of Tübingen, but could not afford to stay there, and had to return to Zürich, where for several years he was a private tutor. From 1824 to 1829 he studied at Munich under Friedrich Thiersch; at Göttingen, under Georg Ludolf Dissen; at Königsberg, under Christian Lobeck. From 1833 to 1876 he was &quot;Oberlehrer&quot; at the gymnasium in Zürich, where he died.

==Work==
Baiter&#x27;s strong point was textual criticism, applied chiefly to Cicero and the Attic orators; he was very successful in finding the best manuscript authorities, and his collations were made with the greatest accuracy. Most of his works were produced in collaboration with other scholars, such as Johann Caspar von Orelli, who regarded him as his right-hand man. He edited Isocrates, Panegyricus (1831); with Hermann Sauppe, Lycurgus&#x27; &quot;Leocracea&quot; (1834) and &quot;Oratores Atticae&quot; (1838–1850); with Orelli and Winckelmann, a critical edition of Plato (1839–1842), which marked a distinct advance in the text, two new manuscripts being laid under contribution; with Orelli, &quot;Babrius, Fabellae Iambicae nuper repertae&quot; (1845); &quot;Isocrates&quot;, in the Didot collection of classics (1846).

==Collaborators==
He had been associated with Orelli in his great work on Cicero, and assisted in &quot;Ciceronis Scholiastae&quot; (1833) and &quot;Onomasticon Tullianum&quot; (1836–1838). The &quot;Fasti Consulares&quot; and &quot;Triumphales&quot; were all his own work. With Orelli and (after his death) Karl Felix Halm, he assisted in the second edition of the Cicero, and, with Carl Ludwig Kayser, edited the same author for the Tauchnitz series (1860–1869). New editions of Orelli&#x27;s Tacitus and Horace were also due to him. With Sauppe, he translated William Martin Leake&#x27;s &quot;Topography of Athens&quot;.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q119243" start="0" end="19" title="Johann Georg Baiter" label="Johann Georg Baiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="58" end="63" title="Switzerland" label="Swiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q40634" start="64" end="75" title="philologist" label="philologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q72" start="121" end="127" title="Zürich" label="Zürich"/>
<link wikidata="Q153978" start="194" end="216" title="University of Tübingen" label="University of Tübingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="363" end="369" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q73076" start="376" end="394" title="Friedrich Thiersch" label="Friedrich Thiersch"/>
<link wikidata="Q152838" start="399" end="408" title="university of Göttingen" label="Göttingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q99713" start="416" end="435" title="Georg Ludolf Dissen" label="Georg Ludolf Dissen"/>
<link wikidata="Q672420" start="440" end="450" title="university of Königsberg" label="Königsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q84734" start="458" end="474" title="Christian Lobeck" label="Christian Lobeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q275456" start="608" end="625" title="textual criticism" label="textual criticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="646" end="652" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q119310" start="878" end="902" title="Johann Caspar von Orelli" label="Johann Caspar von Orelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q221182" start="954" end="963" title="Isocrates" label="Isocrates"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="965" end="976" title="Panegyricus (Isocrates)" label="Panegyricus"/>
<link wikidata="Q70084" start="990" end="1004" title="Hermann Sauppe" label="Hermann Sauppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q373685" start="1006" end="1014" title="Lycurgus of Athens" label="Lycurgus"/>
<link wikidata="Q57280" start="1112" end="1123" title="Johann Joachim Winckelmann" label="Winckelmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="1147" end="1152" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298285" start="1367" end="1372" title="Didot family" label="Didot"/>
<link wikidata="Q96389" start="1713" end="1728" title="Karl Felix Halm" label="Karl Felix Halm"/>
<link wikidata="Q109478843" start="1840" end="1849" title="Tauchnitz" label="Tauchnitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2161" start="1900" end="1907" title="Gaius Cornelius Tacitus" label="Tacitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6197" start="1912" end="1918" title="Horace" label="Horace"/>
<link wikidata="Q687153" start="1968" end="1988" title="William Martin Leake" label="William Martin Leake"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143240" wikidata="Q219721" url="?curid=143240" title="Robert Mundell">
<text>Robert Alexander Mundell (October 24, 1932 – April 4, 2021) was a Canadian economist. He was a professor of economics at Columbia University and the Chinese University of Hong Kong. He received the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences in 1999 for his pioneering work in monetary dynamics and optimum currency areas.

Mundell is known as the &quot;father&quot; of the euro, as he laid the groundwork for its introduction through this work and helped to start the movement known as supply-side economics. Mundell was also known for the Mundell–Fleming model and Mundell–Tobin effect.

== Early life ==
Mundell was born Robert Alexander Mundell on October 24, 1932, in Kingston, Ontario, Canada, to Lila Teresa (née Hamilton) and William Mundell. His mother was an heiress while his father was a military officer and taught at the Royal Military College of Canada. He spent his early years in a farm in Ontario and moved to British Columbia with his family when his father retired at the end of World War II. He completed his high school education in British Columbia where he was known to have participated in boxing and chess events during this time.

He earned his Bachelor of Arts in economics and Russian at the Vancouver School of Economics of the University of British Columbia, and went on a scholarship to the University of Washington in Seattle. He went on to complete his PhD from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology while continuing to study at the London School of Economics.

In 2006 Mundell earned an honorary Doctor of Laws degree from the University of Waterloo. He was Professor of Economics and Editor of the Journal of Political Economy at the University of Chicago from 1965 to 1972, Chairman of the Department of Economics at the University of Waterloo 1972 to 1974 and since 1974 he had been Professor of Economics at Columbia University. He also held the post of Repap Professor of Economics at McGill University.

== Career ==
From 1974 until his death he had been a professor in the Economics department at Columbia University; and from 2001 he had held Columbia&#x27;s highest academic rank – University Professor. After completing his post-doctoral fellowship at the University of Chicago in 1957, he began teaching economics at Stanford University, and then Paul H. Nitze School of Advanced International Studies at Johns Hopkins University during 1959–1961. In 1961, he went on to staff the International Monetary Fund. Mundell returned to academics as professor of economics at the University of Chicago from 1966 to 1971, and then served as professor during summers at the Graduate Institute of International Studies in Geneva until 1975. In 1989, he was appointed to the post of Repap Professor of Economics at McGill University. In the 1970s, he laid the groundwork for the introduction of the euro through his pioneering work in monetary dynamics and optimum currency forms for which he won the 1999 Nobel Prize in Economics. During this time he continued to serve as an economic adviser to the United Nations, the IMF, the World Bank, the European Commission, the Federal Reserve Board, the United States Department of Treasury and the governments of Canada and other countries. He was the Distinguished Professor-at-Large of The Chinese University of Hong Kong. His 1971 Princeton tract &quot;The dollar and the policy mix&quot; is credited with founding supply-side economics (Bartlett 1971, p 101).

Among his major contributions are:
* Theoretical work on optimum currency areas
* Contributions to the development of the euro
* Helped start the movement known as supply-side economics
* Historical research on the operation of the gold standard in different eras
* Predicted the inflation of the 1970s
* Mundell–Fleming model
* Mundell–Tobin effect

== International monetary flows ==
Mundell is best known in politics for his support of tax cuts and supply-side economics; however, in economics it is for his work on currency areas and international exchange rates that he was awarded the Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel by the Bank of Sweden (Sveriges Riksbank). Nevertheless, supply-side economics featured prominently in his Bank of Sweden prize speech.

In the 1960s, Mundell&#x27;s native Canada floated its exchange rate: this caused Mundell to begin investigating the results of floating exchange rates, a phenomenon not widely seen since the 1930s &quot;Stockholm School&quot; successfully lobbied Sweden to leave the gold standard.

In 1962, along with Marcus Fleming, he co-authored the Mundell–Fleming model of exchange rates, and noted that it was impossible to have domestic autonomy, fixed exchange rates, &quot;and&quot; free capital flows: no more than two of those objectives could be met. The model is, in effect, an extension of the IS/LM model applied to currency rates.

According to Mundell&#x27;s analysis:
* Discipline under the Bretton Woods system was more due to the US Federal Reserve than to the discipline of gold.
* Demand side fiscal policy would be ineffective in restraining central banks under a floating exchange rate system.
* Single currency zones relied, therefore, on similar levels of price stability, where a single monetary policy would suffice for all.

His analysis led to his conclusion that it was a disagreement between Europe and the United States over the rate of inflation, partially to finance the Vietnam War, and that Bretton Woods disintegrated because of the undervaluing of gold and the consequent monetary discipline breakdown. There is a famous point/counterpoint over this issue between Mundell and Milton Friedman.

This work later led to the creation of the euro and his prediction that leaving the Bretton Woods system would lead to &quot;stagflation&quot; so long as highly progressive income tax rates applied. In 1974, he advocated a drastic tax reduction and a flattening of income tax rates.

Mundell, though lionized by some conservatives, has many of his harshest critics from the right: he denied the need for a fixed gold-based currency or currency board (he still often recommended this as a policy in hyperinflationary environments) and he was both a fiscal and balance of payments deficit hawk. He is well known for stating that in a floating exchange rate system, expansion of the money supply can come about only by a positive balance of payments.

In 2000, Mundell recommended that Canada permanently tie its dollar&#x27;s value to the U.S. dollar.

== Father of the euro ==

Robert Mundell was considered the &quot;father of the euro&quot; for his early work encouraging a European monetary union. Starting in the 1960s, Mundell supported the constitution of a European Economic and Monetary Union and pushed for the creation of the euro.

In 2000, he predicted that before 2010, the eurozone would expand to cover 50 countries, while the U.S. dollar would spread throughout Latin America, and much of Asia would look towards the yen. Such predictions have proved highly inaccurate.

In his 2012 article &quot;Robert Mundell, evil genius of the euro&quot;, Greg Palast affirms that Mundell advocated for the euro because its implementation would have the effect of removing democratic control over monetary policy. As such, when a crisis hits, eurozone governments would not be able to stimulate the economy by creating money, as is prescribed by Keynesian economics. They would thus be forced to resort to other means to curtail unemployment, such as deregulating businesses, privatizing state industries, cutting taxes, and weakening the social safety net.

In 2014, Mundell voiced his opposition to proposals of a fiscal union between the European states. He declared that &quot;it would be insane to have a central European authority that controls all the taxes and duties of the states ... controlled in the Union. This transfer of sovereignty is far too big&quot;. He also voiced his opposition to the prospect that countries could be liable for other countries&#x27; debt.

== Awards and honours ==
Mundell was awarded the Guggenheim Fellowship in 1971 and the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economics in 1999. In 2002 he was made a Companion of the Order of Canada.

In 1992, Mundell received a Docteur Honoris Causa from the University of Paris. Mundell&#x27;s honorary professorships and fellowships were from Brookings Institution, the University of Chicago, the University of Southern California, McGill University, the University of Pennsylvania, the Bologna Center and Renmin University of China. He became a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1998. In June 2005 he was awarded the Global Economics Prize World Economics Institute in Kiel, Germany, and in September 2005 he was made a &quot;Cavaliere di Gran Croce del Reale Ordine del Merito sotto il Titolo di San Ludovico&quot; by Principe Don Carlo Ugo di Borbone Parma.

The Mundell International University of Entrepreneurship in the Zhongguancun district of Beijing, People&#x27;s Republic of China, is named in his honour.

Mundell won the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Science in 1999 and gave as his prize lecture a speech titled &quot;A Reconsideration of the Twentieth Century&quot;. According to the Nobel Prize Committee, he got the honour for &quot;his analysis of monetary and fiscal policy under different exchange rate regimes and his analysis of optimum currency areas&quot;.

Mundell concluded in that lecture that &quot;the international monetary system depends only on the power configuration of the countries that make it up&quot;. He divided the entire twentieth century into three parts by different periods of time:
* The first third of the century, from its beginning to the Great Depression of the 1930s, economics was dominated by the confrontation of the Federal Reserve System with the gold standard.
* The second third of the century was from World War II to 1973, when the international monetary system was dominated by fixing the price of gold with the US dollar.
* The last third of the century started with the destruction of the old monetary system due to the problem of inflation.

With the destruction of the old monetary system, a new international monetary system was finally founded. Controlling inflation by each country became a main topic during this era.

== Television appearances ==
Mundell appeared on CBS&#x27;s &quot;Late Show with David Letterman&quot;. His first appearance was on October 17, 2002, where he gave The Top 10 List on &quot;Ways My Life has Changed Since Winning the Nobel Prize.&quot; In March 2004 he told &quot;You might be a redneck&quot; jokes, followed in May 2004 with &quot;Yo Mama&quot; jokes. In September 2004 he appeared again, this time to read excerpts from Paris Hilton&#x27;s memoir at random moments throughout the show. In November 2005 he told a series of Rodney Dangerfield&#x27;s jokes. On February 7, 2006, he read Grammy Award nominated song lyrics, the night before CBS aired the 48th Grammy Awards.

Mundell also appeared on Bloomberg Television many times, mainly speaking on euro-related topics and other European financial issues.

Mundell has also appeared on China Central Television&#x27;s popular &quot;Lecture Room&quot; series. He was also a special guest making the ceremonial first move in Game Five of the 2010 World Chess Championship between Viswanathan Anand and Veselin Topalov. He also played the opening move at the Pearl Spring Chess Tournament.

== Personal life ==
Mundell was married to Valerie Natsios-Mundell. The couple had a son and lived in Monteriggioni, Siena, Tuscany, Italy, starting the late 1970s. He had two sons and a daughter from an earlier marriage. One of his sons had predeceased him in a car accident. Mundell died on April 4, 2021, from cholangiocarcinoma, a cancer of the bile duct. He was aged 89.

== See also ==
* Redundancy problem - suggested by Robert Mundell.
* List of economists
* Acmetal
* List of University of Waterloo people

== References ==
==Selected publications==
*
*

== External links ==

* Robert Mundell&#x27;s homepage
* Single Global Currency Association – Bretton Woods 2024 
* his analysis of monetary and fiscal policy under different exchange rate regimes and his analysis of optimum currency areas.
* Economista canadiense. Profesor en la Columbia University de New York.
* The Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences
* The Kiel Institute Global Economy Prize
* 
* IDEAS/RePEc</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q219721" start="0" end="24" title="Robert Mundell" label="Robert Alexander Mundell"/>
<link wikidata="Q188094" start="75" end="84" title="economist" label="economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="121" end="140" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q15570" start="149" end="180" title="Chinese University of Hong Kong" label="Chinese University of Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q47170" start="198" end="239" title="Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences" label="Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q391903" start="297" end="318" title="optimum currency area" label="optimum currency area"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="372" end="376" title="euro" label="euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q531186" start="485" end="506" title="supply-side economics" label="supply-side economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151902" start="539" end="560" title="Mundell–Fleming model" label="Mundell–Fleming model"/>
<link wikidata="Q6935778" start="565" end="585" title="Mundell–Tobin effect" label="Mundell–Tobin effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q202973" start="671" end="688" title="Kingston, Ontario" label="Kingston, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565941" start="833" end="865" title="Royal Military College of Canada" label="Royal Military College of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="997" end="1009" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="1170" end="1186" title="Bachelor of Arts" label="Bachelor of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7863812" start="1219" end="1248" title="Vancouver School of Economics" label="Vancouver School of Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q391028" start="1256" end="1286" title="University of British Columbia" label="University of British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q219563" start="1321" end="1345" title="University of Washington" label="University of Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="1385" end="1388" title="PhD" label="PhD"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="1398" end="1435" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="Massachusetts Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q174570" start="1469" end="1495" title="London School of Economics" label="London School of Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049470" start="1564" end="1586" title="University of Waterloo" label="University of Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q783630" start="1636" end="1664" title="Journal of Political Economy" label="Journal of Political Economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="1672" end="1693" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049470" start="1760" end="1782" title="University of Waterloo" label="University of Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="1849" end="1868" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q201492" start="1927" end="1944" title="McGill University" label="McGill University"/>
<link wikidata="Q121594" start="2128" end="2148" title="University Professor" label="University Professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="2203" end="2224" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="2265" end="2284" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352632" start="2295" end="2349" title="Paul H. Nitze School of Advanced International Studies" label="Paul H. Nitze School of Advanced International Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q193727" start="2353" end="2377" title="Johns Hopkins University" label="Johns Hopkins University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="2429" end="2456" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q691686" start="2613" end="2656" title="Graduate Institute of International Studies" label="Graduate Institute of International Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="2660" end="2666" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q201492" start="2752" end="2769" title="McGill University" label="McGill University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="2836" end="2840" title="euro" label="euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="3038" end="3052" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="3067" end="3077" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="3083" end="3102" title="European Commission" label="European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440396" start="3108" end="3129" title="Federal Reserve Board" label="Federal Reserve Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q648666" start="3135" end="3171" title="United States Department of Treasury" label="United States Department of Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q15570" start="3270" end="3305" title="The Chinese University of Hong Kong" label="The Chinese University of Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q531186" start="3400" end="3421" title="supply-side economics" label="supply-side economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q391903" start="3504" end="3525" title="optimum currency area" label="optimum currency area"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="3569" end="3573" title="euro" label="euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q531186" start="3611" end="3632" title="supply-side economics" label="supply-side economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q173509" start="3679" end="3692" title="gold standard" label="gold standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q35865" start="3727" end="3736" title="inflation" label="inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151902" start="3752" end="3773" title="Mundell–Fleming model" label="Mundell–Fleming model"/>
<link wikidata="Q6935778" start="3776" end="3796" title="Mundell–Tobin effect" label="Mundell–Tobin effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689423" start="3886" end="3893" title="tax cut" label="tax cut"/>
<link wikidata="Q531186" start="3899" end="3920" title="supply-side economics" label="supply-side economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q66100" start="3999" end="4012" title="exchange rate" label="exchange rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q47170" start="4038" end="4108" title="Nobel Prize in Economics" label="Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel"/>
<link wikidata="Q564652" start="4132" end="4149" title="Sveriges Riksbank" label="Sveriges Riksbank"/>
<link wikidata="Q594063" start="4374" end="4396" title="floating exchange rate" label="floating exchange rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857641" start="4450" end="4466" title="Stockholm school (economics)" label="Stockholm School"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="4494" end="4500" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q173509" start="4514" end="4527" title="gold standard" label="gold standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q376336" start="4550" end="4564" title="Marcus Fleming" label="Marcus Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151902" start="4585" end="4606" title="Mundell–Fleming model" label="Mundell–Fleming model"/>
<link wikidata="Q214270" start="4840" end="4851" title="IS/LM model" label="IS/LM model"/>
<link wikidata="Q188532" start="4941" end="4961" title="Bretton Woods system" label="Bretton Woods system"/>
<link wikidata="Q53536" start="4985" end="5000" title="Federal Reserve System" label="Federal Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q187021" start="5047" end="5060" title="fiscal policy" label="fiscal policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q66344" start="5097" end="5109" title="central bank" label="central bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="5356" end="5362" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="5371" end="5384" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="5438" end="5449" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q47426" start="5647" end="5662" title="Milton Friedman" label="Milton Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="5708" end="5712" title="euro" label="euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q185245" start="5790" end="5801" title="stagflation" label="stagflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q185565" start="6163" end="6177" title="hyperinflation" label="hyperinflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q140845" start="6224" end="6243" title="balance of payments" label="balance of payments"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="6448" end="6454" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104069" start="6471" end="6481" title="Canadian dollar" label="its dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="6502" end="6513" title="American dollar" label="U.S. dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="6596" end="6600" title="euro" label="euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q212141" start="6728" end="6764" title="Economic and Monetary Union of the European Union" label="European Economic and Monetary Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q8268" start="6851" end="6859" title="eurozone" label="eurozone"/>
<link wikidata="Q968193" start="7124" end="7135" title="Greg Palast" label="Greg Palast"/>
<link wikidata="Q178476" start="7265" end="7280" title="monetary policy" label="monetary policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q83937" start="7414" end="7433" title="Keynesian economics" label="Keynesian economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7551358" start="7607" end="7624" title="social safety net" label="social safety net"/>
<link wikidata="Q651677" start="7684" end="7696" title="fiscal union" label="fiscal union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316544" start="8097" end="8118" title="Guggenheim Fellowship" label="Guggenheim Fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q47170" start="8135" end="8168" title="Nobel Memorial Prize in Economics" label="Nobel Memorial Prize in Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q99700" start="8217" end="8232" title="Order of Canada" label="Order of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q209896" start="8263" end="8284" title="Docteur Honoris Causa" label="Docteur Honoris Causa"/>
<link wikidata="Q209842" start="8294" end="8313" title="University of Paris" label="University of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q929154" start="8380" end="8401" title="Brookings Institution" label="Brookings Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614" start="8434" end="8467" title="University of Southern California" label="University of Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q201492" start="8469" end="8486" title="McGill University" label="McGill University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49117" start="8492" end="8518" title="University of Pennsylvania" label="University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7743414" start="8524" end="8538" title="Bologna Center" label="Bologna Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074117" start="8543" end="8569" title="Renmin University of China" label="Renmin University of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q463303" start="8597" end="8634" title="American Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="American Academy of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707" start="8728" end="8732" title="Kiel" label="Kiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="8734" end="8741" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8924" end="8976" title="Mundell International University of Entrepreneurship" label="Mundell International University of Entrepreneurship"/>
<link wikidata="Q197834" start="8984" end="8996" title="Zhongguancun" label="Zhongguancun"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="9009" end="9016" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="9018" end="9049" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="10398" end="10401" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q858778" start="10415" end="10445" title="Late Show with David Letterman" label="Late Show with David Letterman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6495351" start="10513" end="10528" title="Top 10 list (David Letterman)" label="The Top 10 List"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449557" start="10628" end="10650" title="Jeff Foxworthy" label="You might be a redneck"/>
<link wikidata="Q846411" start="10696" end="10703" title="Mother insult" label="Yo Mama"/>
<link wikidata="Q47899" start="10786" end="10798" title="Paris Hilton" label="Paris Hilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q436386" start="10889" end="10907" title="Rodney Dangerfield" label="Rodney Dangerfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="10951" end="10963" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542334" start="11018" end="11036" title="48th Grammy Awards" label="48th Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q13975" start="11064" end="11084" title="Bloomberg Television" label="Bloomberg Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q207936" start="11203" end="11227" title="China Central Television" label="China Central Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q264056" start="11249" end="11261" title="Lecture Room" label="Lecture Room"/>
<link wikidata="Q45747" start="11395" end="11412" title="Viswanathan Anand" label="Viswanathan Anand"/>
<link wikidata="Q172798" start="11417" end="11432" title="Veselin Topalov" label="Veselin Topalov"/>
<link wikidata="Q3134275" start="11473" end="11502" title="Pearl Spring Chess Tournament" label="Pearl Spring Chess Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q91228" start="11607" end="11620" title="Monteriggioni" label="Monteriggioni"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751" start="11622" end="11627" title="Siena" label="Siena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273" start="11629" end="11636" title="Tuscany" label="Tuscany"/>
<link wikidata="Q124292" start="11818" end="11836" title="cholangiocarcinoma" label="cholangiocarcinoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q19992037" start="11899" end="11917" title="Redundancy problem" label="Redundancy problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q857180" start="11951" end="11969" title="List of economists" label="List of economists"/>
<link wikidata="Q4674415" start="11972" end="11979" title="Acmetal" label="Acmetal"/>
<link wikidata="Q17079758" start="11982" end="12019" title="List of University of Waterloo people" label="List of University of Waterloo people"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143244" wikidata="Q283227" url="?curid=143244" title="Brian Friel">
<text>Brian Patrick Friel (c. 9 January 1929 – 2 October 2015) was an Irish dramatist, short story writer and founder of the Field Day Theatre Company. He had been considered one of the greatest living English-language dramatists. He has been likened to an &quot;Irish Chekhov&quot; and described as &quot;the universally accented voice of Ireland&quot;. His plays have been compared favourably to those of contemporaries such as Samuel Beckett, Arthur Miller, Harold Pinter and Tennessee Williams.

Recognised for early works such as &quot;Philadelphia, Here I Come!&quot; and &quot;Faith Healer&quot;, Friel had 24 plays published in a career of more than a half-century. He was elected to the honorary position of Saoi of Aosdána. His plays were commonly produced on Broadway in New York City throughout this time, as well as in Ireland and the UK. In 1980 Friel co-founded Field Day Theatre Company and his play &quot;Translations&quot; was the company&#x27;s first production. With Field Day, Friel collaborated with Seamus Heaney, 1995 recipient of the Nobel Prize in Literature. Heaney and Friel first became friends after Friel sent the young poet a letter following publication of his book &quot;Death of a Naturalist&quot;.

Friel was a member of the American Academy of Arts and Letters, the British Royal Society of Literature and the Irish Academy of Letters. He was appointed to Seanad Éireann in 1987 and served until 1989. In later years, &quot;Dancing at Lughnasa&quot; reinvigorated Friel&#x27;s oeuvre, bringing him Tony Awards (including Best Play), the Laurence Olivier Award for Best New Play and the New York Drama Critics Circle Award for Best Play. It was also adapted into a film, starring Meryl Streep, directed by Pat O&#x27;Connor, script by Frank McGuinness.

==Personal life==

Friel was born in 1929 at Knockmoyle, Northern Ireland, before the family moved to nearby Killyclogher, both places close to Omagh in County Tyrone. His exact birth date and name are ambiguous. The parish register lists a birth name of Brian Patrick Ó&#x27;Friel and a birth date of 9 January. Elsewhere his birth name is given as Bernard Patrick Friel (allegedly on the grounds that &quot;Brian&quot; was not recognised by the registrar as an acceptable forename), and he had a second birth certificate which gave his birth date as 10 January. In life, he was known simply as Brian Friel and celebrated his birthday on 9 January. His father was Patrick Friel, a primary school teacher and later a councillor on Londonderry Corporation, the local city council in Derry. Friel&#x27;s mother was Mary (née McLoone), postmistress of Glenties, County Donegal. The family moved to Derry when Friel was ten years old. There he attended St Columb&#x27;s College (the same school attended by Seamus Heaney, John Hume, Seamus Deane, Phil Coulter, Eamonn McCann and Paul Brady).

Friel received his B.A. from St Patrick&#x27;s College, Maynooth (1945–1948), and qualified as a teacher at St. Joseph&#x27;s Training College, Belfast in Belfast, 1949–1950. He married Anne Morrison in 1954; they had four daughters and one son. Between 1950 and 1960, he worked as a maths teacher in the Derry primary and intermediate school system, taking leave in 1960 to pursue a career as a writer, living off his savings. In the late 1960s, the Friels moved from Derry to Muff, County Donegal, before settling outside Greencastle, County Donegal.

Friel supported Irish nationalism and was a member of the Nationalist Party. Taoiseach Charles Haughey nominated Friel to serve as a member of Seanad Éireann (the Irish Senate) in 1987, where he served until 1989. 

After a long illness, Friel died on 2 October 2015 in Greencastle and is buried in the cemetery in Glenties, also in Donegal. He was survived by his wife Anne and children Mary, Judy, Sally and David. Another daughter, Patricia (&quot;Paddy&quot;), predeceased him. While leaving the bulk of his estate to his wife, he bequeathed a house or apartment to each of his living children, and shared his literary estate between them and the children of Patricia. His literary executors were his wife and a friend, the former director for literature at the Arts Council of England, Paul McKeone.

==Literary career==
A common setting for Friel&#x27;s plays is in or around the fictional town of &quot;Ballybeg&quot; (from the Irish &quot;Baile Beag&quot;, meaning &quot;Small Town&quot;). There are fourteen such plays: &quot;Philadelphia, Here I Come!&quot;, &quot;Crystal and Fox&quot;, &quot;The Gentle Island&quot;, &quot;Living Quarters&quot;, &quot;Faith Healer&quot;, &quot;Aristocrats&quot;, &quot;Translations&quot;, &quot;The Communication Cord&quot;, &quot;Dancing at Lughnasa&quot;, &quot;Wonderful Tennessee&quot;, &quot;Molly Sweeney&quot;, &quot;Give Me Your Answer Do!&quot; and &quot;The Home Place&quot;, while the seminal event of &quot;Faith Healer&quot; takes place in the town. These plays present an extended history of this imagined community, with &quot;Translations&quot; and &quot;The Home Place&quot; set in the nineteenth century, and &quot;Dancing at Lughnasa&quot; in the 1930s. With the other plays set in &quot;the present&quot; but written throughout the playwright&#x27;s career from the early 1960s through the late 1990s, the audience is presented with the evolution of rural Irish society, from the isolated and backward town that Gar flees in the 1964 &quot;Philadelphia, Here I Come!&quot; to the prosperous and multicultural small city of &quot;Molly Sweeney&quot; (1994) and &quot;Give Me Your Answer Do!&quot; (1997), where the characters have health clubs, ethnic restaurants, and regular flights to the world&#x27;s major cities.

===1959 – 1975===

Friel&#x27;s first radio plays were produced by Ronald Mason for the BBC Northern Ireland Home Service in 1958: &quot;A Sort of Freedom&quot; (16 January 1958) and &quot;To This Hard House&quot; (24 April 1958). Friel began writing short stories for &quot;The New Yorker&quot; in 1959 and subsequently published two well-received collections: &quot;The Saucer of Larks&quot; (1962) and &quot;The Gold in the Sea&quot; (1966). These were followed by &quot;A Doubtful Paradise,&quot; his first stage play, produced by the Ulster Group Theatre in late August 1960. Friel also wrote 59 articles for &quot;The Irish Press,&quot; a Dublin-based party-political newspaper, from April 1962 to August 1963; this series included short stories, political editorials on life in Northern Ireland and Donegal, his travels to Dublin and New York City, and his childhood memories of Derry, Omagh, Belfast, and Donegal.

Early in Friel&#x27;s career, the Irish journalist Sean Ward even referred to him in an &quot;Irish Press&quot; article as one of the Abbey Theatre&#x27;s &quot;rejects&quot;. Friel&#x27;s play, &quot;The Enemy Within&quot; (1962) enjoyed success, despite only being on the Abbey stage for 9 performances. Belfast&#x27;s Lyric Theatre revived it in September 1963 and the BBC Northern Ireland Home Service and Radio Éireann both aired it in 1963. Although Friel later withdrew &quot;The Blind Mice&quot; (1963), it was by far the most successful play of his very early period, playing for 6 weeks at Dublin&#x27;s Eblana Theatre, revived by the Lyric, and broadcast by Radio Éireann and the BBC Home Service almost ten times by 1967. Friel had a short stint as &quot;observer&quot; at Tyrone Guthrie&#x27;s theater in early-1960s Minneapolis; he remarked on it as &quot;enabling&quot; in that it gave him &quot;courage and daring to attempt things&quot;.

Shortly after returning from his time at the Tyrone Guthrie Theatre, Friel wrote &quot;Philadelphia Here I Come!&quot; (1964). The play made him instantly famous in Dublin, London, and New York. &quot;The Loves of Cass McGuire&quot; (1966), and &quot;Lovers&quot; (1967) were both successful in Ireland, with &quot;Lovers&quot; also popular in The United States. Despite Friel&#x27;s successes in playwriting&quot;,&quot; Friel in the period saw himself as primarily a short story writer, in a 1965 interview stating, &quot;I don&#x27;t concentrate on the theatre at all. I live on short stories.&quot;

Friel then turned his attention to contemporary Irish political issues, writing &quot;The Mundy Scheme&quot; (1969) and &quot;Volunteers&quot; (1975). Both plays heavily satirised the government of Ireland. The latter depicted an archaeological excavation on the day before the site was turned over to a hotel developer, using Dublin&#x27;s Wood Quay controversy as its contemporary point of reference. The play&#x27;s title refers to a group of Irish Republican Army detainees who have been indefinitely interned by the Irish government, and the term &quot;Volunteer&quot; is both ironic, in that as prisoners they have no free will, and political, in that the IRA used the term to refer to its members. Using the site as a physical metaphor for the nation&#x27;s history, the play&#x27;s action examines how Irish history has been commodified, sanitized, and oversimplified to fit the political needs of society.

By 1968, Friel was again living in Derry, a hotbed of the Northern Ireland civil rights movement, where incidents such as the Battle of the Bogside inspired Friel&#x27;s choice to write a new play set in the city. The play Friel began drafting in Derry would eventually become &quot;The Freedom of the City&quot; (1973). Defying a government ban, Friel marched with members of the Northern Ireland Civil Rights Association against the policy of internment on 13 January 1972, an event that would become known as Bloody Sunday. During the march, British troops from the 1st Battalion, Parachute Regiment opened fire on the marchers, killing 14 people and wounding a further 26. His personal experience of being fired at by soldiers during the march greatly affected the drafting of &quot;The Freedom of the City&quot; as a heavily political play. In the interview, Friel recalled: &quot;It was really a shattering experience that the British army, this disciplined instrument, would go in as they did that time and shoot thirteen people... to have to throw yourself on the ground because people are firing at you is really a terrifying experience.&quot;

===1976 – 1989===
By the mid-1970s, Friel had moved away from overtly political plays to examine family dynamics in a manner that has attracted many comparisons to the work of Chekhov. &quot;Living Quarters&quot; (1977), a play that examines the suicide of a domineering father, is a retelling of the Theseus/Hippolytus myth in a contemporary Irish setting. This play, with its focus on several sisters and their ne&#x27;er-do-well brother, serves as a type of preparation for Friel&#x27;s more successful &quot;Aristocrats&quot; (1979), a Chekhovian study of a once-influential family&#x27;s financial collapse and, perhaps, social liberation from the aristocratic myths that have constrained the children. &quot;Aristocrats&quot; was the first of three plays premiered over a period of eighteen months which would come to define Friel&#x27;s career as a dramatist, the others being &quot;Faith Healer&quot; (1979) and &quot;Translations&quot; (1980).

&quot;Faith Healer&quot; is a series of four conflicting monologues delivered by dead and living characters who struggle to understand the life and death of Frank Hardy, the play&#x27;s itinerant healer who can neither understand nor command his unreliable powers, and the lives sacrificed to his destructive charismatic life. Many of Friel&#x27;s earlier plays had incorporated assertively avant garde techniques: splitting the main character Gar into two actors in &quot;Philadelphia, Here I Come!&quot;, portraying dead characters in &quot;Winners&quot; of &quot;Lovers,&quot; &quot;Freedom&quot;, and &quot;Living Quarters&quot;, a Brechtian structural alienation and choric figures in &quot;Freedom of the City&quot;, metacharacters existing in a collective unconscious Limbo in &quot;Living Quarters&quot;. These experiments came to fruition in &quot;Faith Healer&quot;. Later in Friel&#x27;s career, such experimental aspects became buried beneath the surface of more seemingly realist plays like &quot;Translations&quot; (1980) and &quot;Dancing at Lughnasa&quot; (1990); however, avant-garde techniques remain a fundamental aspect of Friel&#x27;s work into his late career.

&quot;Translations&quot; was premiered in 1980 at Guildhall, Derry by the Field Day Theatre Company, with Stephen Rea, Liam Neeson, and Ray MacAnally. Set in 1833, it is a play about language, the meeting of English and Irish cultures, the looming Great Famine, the coming of a free national school system that will eliminate the traditional hedge schools, the English expedition to convert all Irish place names into English, and the crossed love between an Irish woman who speaks no English and an English soldier who speaks no Irish. It was an instant success. The innovative conceit of the play is to stage two language communities (the Gaelic and the English), which have few and very limited ways to speak to each other, for the English know no Irish, while only a few of the Irish know English. &quot;Translations&quot; went on to be one of the most translated and staged of all plays in the latter 20th century, performed in Estonia, Iceland, France, Spain, Germany, Belgium, Norway, Ukraine, the Czech Republic, Hungary, and Poland, along with most of the world&#x27;s English-speaking countries (including South Africa, Canada, the U.S. and Australia). It won the Christopher Ewart-Biggs Memorial Prize for 1985. Neil Jordan completed a screenplay for a film version of &quot;Translations&quot; that was never produced. Friel commented on &quot;Translations&quot;: &quot;The play has to do with language and only language. And if it becomes overwhelmed by that political element, it is lost.&quot;

Despite growing fame and success, the 1980s is considered Friel&#x27;s artistic &quot;Gap&quot; as he published so few original works for the stage: &quot;Translations&quot; in 1980, &quot;The Communication Cord&quot; in 1982, and &quot;Making History&quot; in 1988. Privately, Friel complained both of the work required managing Field Day (granting written and live interviews, casting, arranging tours, etc.) and of his fear that he was &quot;trying to impose a &#x27;Field Day&#x27; political atmosphere&quot; on his work. However, this is also a period during which he worked on several minor projects that filled out the decade: a translation of Chekhov&#x27;s &quot;Three Sisters&quot; (1981), an adaptation of Turgenev&#x27;s novel &quot;Fathers and Sons&quot; (1987), an edition of Charles McGlinchey&#x27;s memoirs entitled &quot;The Last of the Name&quot; for Blackstaff Press (1986), and Charles Macklin&#x27;s play &quot;The London Vertigo&quot; in 1990. Friel&#x27;s decision to premiere &quot;Dancing at Lughnasa&quot; at the Abbey Theatre rather than as a Field Day production initiated his evolution away from involvement with Field Day, and he formally resigned as a director in 1994.

===1990 – 2005===
Friel returned to a position of Irish theatrical dominance during the 1990s, particularly with the release of &quot;Dancing at Lughnasa&quot; at the turn of the decade. Partly modelled on &quot;The Glass Menagerie&quot; by Tennessee Williams, it is set in the late summer of 1936 and loosely based on the lives of Friel&#x27;s mother and aunts who lived in Glenties, on the west coast of Donegal. Probably Friel&#x27;s most successful play, it premiered at the Abbey Theatre, transferred to London&#x27;s West End, and went on to Broadway. On Broadway, it won three Tony Awards in 1992, including Best Play. A film version, starring Meryl Streep, soon followed.

Friel had been thinking about writing a &quot;Lough Derg&quot; play for several years, and his &quot;Wonderful Tennessee&quot; (less of a critical success after its premiere in 1993 when compared to other plays from this time) portrays three couples in their failed attempt to return to a pilgrimage sit to a small island off the Ballybeg coast, though they intend to return not to revive the religious rite but to celebrate the birthday of one of their members with alcohol and culinary delicacies. &quot;Give Me Your Answer Do!&quot; premiered in 1997 and recounts the lives and careers of two novelists and friends who pursued different paths; one writing shallow, popular works, the other writing works that refuse to conform to popular tastes. After an American university pays a small fortune for the popular writer&#x27;s papers, the same collector arrives to review the manuscripts of his friend. The collector prepares to announce his findings at a dinner party when the existence of two &quot;hard-core&quot; pornographic novels based upon the writer&#x27;s daughter forces all present to reassess.

Entering his eighth decade, Friel found it difficult to maintain the writing pace that he returned to in the 1990s; indeed, between 1997 and 2003 he produced only the very short one-act plays &quot;The Bear&quot; (2002), &quot;The Yalta Game&quot; (2001), and &quot;Afterplay&quot; (2002), all published under the title &quot;Three Plays After&quot; (2002). The latter two plays stage Friel&#x27;s continued fascination with Chekhov&#x27;s work. &quot;The Yalta Game&quot; is concerned with Chekhov&#x27;s story &quot;The Lady with the Lapdog,&quot; &quot;Afterplay&quot; is an imagining of a near-romantic meeting between Andrey Prozorov of Chekhov&#x27;s &quot;Three Sisters&quot; and Sonya Serebriakova of his &quot;Uncle Vanya&quot;. It has been revived several times (including being part of the Friel/Gate Festival in September 2009) and had its world premiere at the Gate Theatre in Dublin.

The most innovative work of Friel&#x27;s late period is &quot;Performances&quot; (2003). A graduate researching the impact of Leoš Janáček&#x27;s platonic love for Kamila Stosslova on his work playfully and passionately argues with the composer, who appears to host her at his artistic retreat more than 70 years after his death; all the while, the Alba String Quartet&#x27;s players intrude on the dialogue, warm up, then perform the first two movements of Janáček&#x27;s Second String Quartet in a tableau that ends the play. &quot;The Home Place&quot; (2005), focusing on the ageing Christopher Gore and the last of Friel&#x27;s plays set in Ballybeg, was also his final full-scale work. Although Friel had written plays about the Catholic gentry, this is his first play directly considering the Protestant experience. In this work, he considers the first hints of the waning of Ascendancy authority during the summer of 1878, the year before Charles Stuart Parnell became president of the Land League and initiated the Land Wars. After a sold-out season at the Gate Theatre in Dublin, it transferred to London&#x27;s West End on 25 May 2005, making its American premiere at the Guthrie Theater in September 2007.

==List of works==
* &quot;A Sort of Freedom&quot; (unpublished radio play, 1958)
* &quot;To This Hard House&quot; (unpublished radio play, 1958)
* &quot;A Doubtful Paradise&quot; (unpublished, 1960)
* &quot;The Enemy Within&quot; (1962)
* &quot;The Blind Mice&quot; (unpublished, 1963)
* &quot;Philadelphia, Here I Come!&quot; (1964)
* &quot;The Founder Members&quot; (unpublished TV play, 1964)
* &quot;Three Fathers, Three Sons&quot; (unpublished TV play, 1964)
* &quot;The Loves of Cass McGuire&quot; (1966)
* &quot;Lovers: Winners and Losers&quot; (1967)
* &quot;Crystal and Fox&quot; (1968)
* &quot;The Mundy Scheme&quot; (1969)
* &quot;Winners&quot; (1970)
* &quot;The Gentle Island&quot; (1971)
* &quot;The Freedom of the City&quot; (1973)
* &quot;Volunteers&quot; (1975)
* &quot;Farewell to Ardstraw&quot; (unpublished BBC TV play, 1976)
* &quot;The Next Parish&quot; (unpublished BBC TV play, 1976)
* &quot;Living Quarters&quot; (1977)
* &quot;Faith Healer&quot; (1979)
* &quot;Aristocrats&quot; (1979)
* &quot;Translations&quot; (1980)
* &quot;Three Sisters&quot; (Anton Chekhov translation, 1981)
* &quot;American Welcome&quot; (7-minute one-act play, 1981)
* &quot;The Communication Cord&quot; (1982)
* &quot;The Diviner: The Best Short Stories of Brian Friel&quot; (1983)
* &quot;Fathers and Sons&quot; (Ivan Turgenev adaptation, 1987)
* &quot;Making History&quot; (1988)
* &quot;Dancing at Lughnasa&quot; (1990)
* &quot;The London Vertigo&quot; (Charles Macklin adaptation, 1991)
* &quot;A Month in the Country&quot; (Turgenev adaptation, 1992)
* &quot;Wonderful Tennessee&quot; (1993)
* &quot;Molly Sweeney&quot; (1994)
* &quot;Give Me Your Answer, Do!&quot; (1997)
* &quot;Uncle Vanya&quot; (Chekhov adaptation, 1998)
* &quot;The Yalta Game&quot; (one-act Chekhov adaptation, 2001)
* &quot;The Bear&quot; (one-act Chekhov adaptation, 2002)
* &quot;Afterplay&quot; (one-act play, 2002)
* &quot;Performances&quot; (70-minute one-act play, 2003)
* &quot;The Home Place&quot; (2005)
* &quot;Hedda Gabler&quot; (Henrik Ibsen adaptation, 2008)
==Reviews==
* Fionnlagh, Uilleam, (1983), &quot;Celtic Omphalos&quot;, a review of &quot;Translations&quot;, in Hearn, Sheila G. (ed.), &quot;Cencrastus&quot; No. 12, Spring 1983, pp 43 &amp; 44, 
* Ritchie, Harry (1984), &quot;Recollecting Friel&quot;, a review of &quot;The Diviner&quot;, in Parker, Geoff (ed.), &quot;Cencrastus&quot; No. 17, Summer 1984, p. 50, 

==Major prizes and honours==
In 1989, BBC Radio launched a &quot;Brian Friel Season&quot;, a six-play series devoted to his work; he was the first living playwright to receive such an honour. In 1999 (April–August), Friel&#x27;s 70th birthday was celebrated in Dublin with the Friel Festival, during which ten of his plays were staged or presented as dramatic readings throughout Dublin. A conference, National Library exhibition, film screenings, pre-show talks, and the launching of a special issue of &quot;The Irish University Review&quot; devoted to the playwright ran in conjunction with the festival. Also in 1999, &quot;The Irish Times&quot; extended him the honour of a lifetime achievement award.

On 22 February 2006, President Mary McAleese presented Friel with a gold torc in recognition of his election to the position of Saoi by his fellow members of Aosdána. On acceptance of the gold Torc, Friel quipped: &quot;I knew that being made a Saoi, really getting this award, is extreme unction; it is a final anointment—Aosdana&#x27;s last rites.&quot; Only five members of Aosdána could hold this honour at the time, and Friel joined fellow Saoithe Louis le Brocquy, Benedict Kiely, Seamus Heaney and Anthony Cronin. In August 2006, Heaney (also a friend of the Friels) who had been in attendance at the 75th birthday of Friel&#x27;s wife in County Donegal, suffered a stroke on the morning after the celebration.

In November 2008, The Queen&#x27;s University of Belfast announced its intention to build a new theatre complex and research centre, to be named The Brian Friel Theatre and Centre for Theatre Research. Friel attended its opening in 2009.

Friel&#x27;s 80th birthday fell in 2009. The journal &quot;Irish Theatre International&quot; published a Special Issue to commemorate the occasion with seven articles devoted to the playwright. The Gate Theatre staged three plays (&quot;Faith Healer,&quot; &quot;The Yalta Game,&quot; and &quot;Afterplay&quot;) for several weeks in September. In the midst of the Gate&#x27;s productions, the Abbey Theatre presented &quot;A Birthday Celebration for Brian Friel,&quot; on 13 September 2009. Although not inclined to seek publicity, Friel attended the performance amid regular seating, received a cake while the audience sang &quot;Happy Birthday,&quot; and mingled with well-wishers afterwards. The Abbey event was an evening of staged readings (excerpts from &quot;Philadelphia, Here I Come!&quot;, &quot;Translations,&quot; and &quot;Dancing at Lughnasa&quot;), the performance of Friel-specific songs and nocturnes, and readings by Thomas Kilroy and Seamus Heaney.

===Selected awards===
* 1988 Evening Standard Theatre Award for Best Play – &quot;Aristocrats&quot;
* 1989 New York Drama Critics Circle Award for Best Foreign Play – &quot;Aristocrats&quot;
* 1991 Laurence Olivier Award for Best Play – &quot;Dancing at Lughnasa&quot;
* 1992 New York Drama Critics Circle award for best play– &quot;Dancing at Lughnasa&quot;
* 1992 Tony Award for Best Play – &quot;Dancing at Lughnasa&quot;
* 1995 New York Drama Critics Circle Award for Best Foreign Play – &quot;Molly Sweeney&quot;
* 2006 Induction into the American Theater Hall of Fame
* 2009 UCD Ulysses Medal
* 2010 Donegal Person of the Year
*Member of the American Academy of Arts and Letters
*Member of the British Royal Society of Literature
*Member of the Irish Academy of Letters
*Visiting Writer at Magee College (1970–71 academic year)
*Honorary doctorate from Rosary College, River Forest, Illinois (1974)

==Legacy==

The National Library of Ireland houses the 160 boxes of The Brian Friel papers, containing notebooks, manuscripts, playbills, correspondence, contracts, unpublished manuscripts, programmes, production photos, articles, uncollected essays, and a vast collection of ephemera relating to Friel&#x27;s career and creative process from 1959 through 2000. It does not contain his &quot;Irish Press&quot; articles, which can be found in the Dublin and Belfast newspaper libraries.

In 2011, an additional set of Friel&#x27;s papers were made available in the National Library of Ireland. These additional papers consist mainly of archival materials dating between 2000 and 2010.

==See also==
* List of Irish writers

==Further reading==
* &quot;Brian Friel: Essays, Diaries, Interviews, 1964–1999&quot; (ed. Christopher Murray). Faber &amp; Faber, 1999.
* Andrews, Elmer, &quot;The Art of Brian Friel&quot;. St. Martin&#x27;s, 1995.
* Bertha, C., Kurdi, M., Morse, D.E., &quot;&quot;The Work has Value&quot;: The Dramatic Artistry of Brian Friel&quot;. Carysfort Press, 2006.
* Boltwood, Scott, &quot;Brian Friel, Ireland, and The North&quot;. Cambridge University Press, 2007.
* Corbett, Tony, &quot;Brian Friel: Decoding the Language of the Tribe&quot;. The Liffey Press, 2002.
* Dantanus, Ulf, &quot;Brian Friel: A Study&quot;. Faber &amp; Faber, 1989.
* Friel, Brian, &quot;Selected Plays of Brian Friel&quot;. The Catholic University of America Press, 1986.
* Maxwell, D.E.S., &quot;Brian Friel&quot;. Bucknell University Press, 1973.
* McGrath, F.C., &quot;Brian Friel&#x27;s (Post)Colonial Drama&quot;. Syracuse University Press, 1999.
* McMinn, Joe, &quot;Cultural Politics and the Ulster Crisis&quot;, in Parker, Geoff (ed.), &quot;Cencrastus&quot; No. 23, Summer 1986, pp. 35 - 39, 
* O&#x27;Brien, George, &quot;Brian Friel&quot;. Gill &amp; Macmillan, 1989.
* O&#x27;Malley, Aidan, &quot;Field Day and the Translation of Irish Identities: Performing Contradictions&quot;. Basingstoke and New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2011.
* Pelletier, Martine, &quot;Le théâtre de Brian Friel: Histoire et histoires&quot;. Septentrion, 1997.
* Richard, Pine, &quot;Brian Friel and Ireland&#x27;s Drama&quot;. Routledge, 1990
* Richard, Pine, &quot;The Diviner: the Art of Brian Friel&quot;. University College Dublin Press, 1999
* Roche, Anthony, &quot;Brian Friel: Theatre and Politics&quot;. Palgrave Macmillan, 2012

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
* 
* Brian Friel at Aosdána
* Faber and Faber – UK publisher of Brian Friel&#x27;s plays

===Books and articles===
* About Friel: The Playwright and the Work ed. by Tony Coult
* Brian Friel in Conversation ed. by Paul Delaney
* The Diviner: The Art of Brian Friel by Richard Pine
* Brian Friel, Ireland, and The North by Scott Boltwood
* Le Sujet et Les Je(ux) de Discours dans L&#x27;Oeuvre de Brian Friel by Noel Fitzpatrick
* Timeline: the life of Brian
* Brian Friel at &quot;The Irish Times&quot;
* Funeral photos from &quot;The Irish Times&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q283227" start="0" end="19" title="Brian Friel" label="Brian Patrick Friel"/>
<link wikidata="Q16257411" start="119" end="144" title="Field Day Theatre Company" label="Field Day Theatre Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5685" start="263" end="270" title="Anton Chekhov" label="Chekhov"/>
<link wikidata="Q37327" start="424" end="438" title="Samuel Beckett" label="Samuel Beckett"/>
<link wikidata="Q80596" start="440" end="453" title="Arthur Miller" label="Arthur Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q41042" start="455" end="468" title="Harold Pinter" label="Harold Pinter"/>
<link wikidata="Q134262" start="473" end="491" title="Tennessee Williams" label="Tennessee Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7182597" start="535" end="561" title="Philadelphia, Here I Come!" label="Philadelphia, Here I Come!"/>
<link wikidata="Q5431193" start="578" end="590" title="Faith Healer" label="Faith Healer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4822142" start="711" end="715" title="Saoi" label="Saoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q201947" start="719" end="726" title="Aosdána" label="Aosdána"/>
<link wikidata="Q16257411" start="871" end="896" title="Field Day Theatre Company" label="Field Day Theatre Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q288092" start="916" end="928" title="Translations (play)" label="Translations"/>
<link wikidata="Q93356" start="1016" end="1029" title="Seamus Heaney" label="Seamus Heaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="1053" end="1078" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel Prize in Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q463281" start="1255" end="1291" title="American Academy of Arts and Letters" label="American Academy of Arts and Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468277" start="1305" end="1332" title="Royal Society of Literature" label="Royal Society of Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127591" start="1387" end="1401" title="Seanad Éireann" label="Seanad Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q21051525" start="1455" end="1474" title="Dancing at Lughnasa" label="Dancing at Lughnasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="1529" end="1539" title="Tony Award" label="Tony Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799442" start="1552" end="1561" title="Tony Award for Best Play" label="Best Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500798" start="1568" end="1608" title="Laurence Olivier Award for Best New Play" label="Laurence Olivier Award for Best New Play"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1617" end="1666" title="New York Drama Critics&amp;#x27; Circle#Best Play" label="New York Drama Critics Circle Award for Best Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q599188" start="1680" end="1699" title="Dancing at Lughnasa (film)" label="adapted into a film"/>
<link wikidata="Q873" start="1710" end="1722" title="Meryl Streep" label="Meryl Streep"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106742" start="1736" end="1753" title="Pat O&amp;#x27;Connor (director)" label="Pat O&amp;#x27;Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q370940" start="1765" end="1781" title="Frank McGuinness" label="Frank McGuinness"/>
<link wikidata="Q6422891" start="1829" end="1839" title="Knockmoyle" label="Knockmoyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q510513" start="1928" end="1933" title="Omagh" label="Omagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q163584" start="2566" end="2571" title="Derry" label="Derry"/>
<link wikidata="Q667646" start="2633" end="2641" title="Glenties" label="Glenties"/>
<link wikidata="Q179424" start="2643" end="2657" title="County Donegal" label="County Donegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q163584" start="2679" end="2684" title="Derry" label="Derry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7592850" start="2733" end="2757" title="St Columb&amp;#x27;s College" label="St Columb&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q93356" start="2787" end="2800" title="Seamus Heaney" label="Seamus Heaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q193630" start="2802" end="2811" title="John Hume" label="John Hume"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937782" start="2813" end="2825" title="Seamus Deane" label="Seamus Deane"/>
<link wikidata="Q715859" start="2827" end="2839" title="Phil Coulter" label="Phil Coulter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904605" start="2841" end="2854" title="Eamonn McCann" label="Eamonn McCann"/>
<link wikidata="Q648789" start="2859" end="2869" title="Paul Brady" label="Paul Brady"/>
<link wikidata="Q4556206" start="2902" end="2937" title="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, Maynooth" label="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, Maynooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590448" start="2981" end="3024" title="St Mary&amp;#x27;s University College, Belfast" label="St. Joseph&amp;#x27;s Training College, Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q10686" start="3028" end="3035" title="Belfast" label="Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q2247517" start="3397" end="3408" title="Greencastle, County Donegal" label="Greencastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021987" start="3443" end="3460" title="Irish nationalism" label="Irish nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979785" start="3485" end="3502" title="Nationalist Party (Northern Ireland)" label="Nationalist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q191827" start="3504" end="3513" title="Taoiseach" label="Taoiseach"/>
<link wikidata="Q333735" start="3514" end="3529" title="Charles Haughey" label="Charles Haughey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127591" start="3570" end="3584" title="Seanad Éireann" label="Seanad Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q667646" start="3742" end="3750" title="Glenties" label="Glenties"/>
<link wikidata="Q85745084" start="4337" end="4345" title="Ballybeg (fictional town)" label="Ballybeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7182597" start="4462" end="4488" title="Philadelphia, Here I Come!" label="Philadelphia, Here I Come!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4502" end="4517" title="Crystal and Fox" label="Crystal and Fox"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4531" end="4548" title="The Gentle Island" label="The Gentle Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q6659260" start="4562" end="4577" title="Living Quarters" label="Living Quarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q5431193" start="4591" end="4603" title="Faith Healer" label="Faith Healer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4617" end="4628" title="Aristocrats (play)" label="Aristocrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q288092" start="4642" end="4654" title="Translations (play)" label="Translations"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4668" end="4690" title="The Communication Cord" label="The Communication Cord"/>
<link wikidata="Q21051525" start="4704" end="4723" title="Dancing at Lughnasa" label="Dancing at Lughnasa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4737" end="4756" title="Wonderful Tennessee" label="Wonderful Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6896687" start="4770" end="4783" title="Molly Sweeney" label="Molly Sweeney"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4797" end="4820" title="Give Me Your Answer Do!" label="Give Me Your Answer Do!"/>
<link wikidata="Q16386072" start="4837" end="4851" title="The Home Place" label="The Home Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q5431193" start="4892" end="4904" title="Faith Healer" label="Faith Healer"/>
<link wikidata="Q21051525" start="5106" end="5125" title="Dancing at Lughnasa" label="Dancing at Lughnasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q19594736" start="5779" end="5791" title="Ronald Mason (drama)" label="Ronald Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="5800" end="5803" title="British Broadcasting Corporation" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5849" end="5866" title="A Sort of Freedom" label="A Sort of Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5901" end="5919" title="To This Hard House" label="To This Hard House"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="5987" end="6001" title="The New Yorker" label="The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6186" end="6205" title="A Doubtful Paradise" label="A Doubtful Paradise"/>
<link wikidata="Q958406" start="6332" end="6347" title="The Irish Press" label="The Irish Press"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6836" end="6852" title="The Enemy Within (play)" label="The Enemy Within"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7118" end="7132" title="The Blind Mice" label="The Blind Mice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027239" start="7420" end="7449" title="Guthrie Theater" label="Tyrone Guthrie&amp;#x27;s theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q7182597" start="7678" end="7703" title="Philadelphia Here I Come!" label="Philadelphia Here I Come!"/>
<link wikidata="Q6692421" start="7842" end="7848" title="Lovers (play)" label="Lovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672817" start="8379" end="8400" title="government of Ireland" label="government of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q175284" start="8641" end="8662" title="Irish Republican Army" label="Irish Republican Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q24928442" start="9169" end="9207" title="Northern Ireland civil rights movement" label="Northern Ireland civil rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890741" start="9237" end="9258" title="Battle of the Bogside" label="Battle of the Bogside"/>
<link wikidata="Q7735228" start="9394" end="9417" title="The Freedom of the City" label="The Freedom of the City"/>
<link wikidata="Q3121855" start="9492" end="9533" title="Northern Ireland Civil Rights Association" label="Northern Ireland Civil Rights Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q190819" start="9623" end="9636" title="Bloody Sunday (1972)" label="Bloody Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q4596176" start="9680" end="9713" title="1st Battalion, Parachute Regiment" label="1st Battalion, Parachute Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="10044" end="10056" title="British Army" label="British army"/>
<link wikidata="Q6659260" start="10456" end="10471" title="Living Quarters" label="Living Quarters"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10777" end="10788" title="Aristocrats (play)" label="Aristocrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q5431193" start="11155" end="11167" title="Faith Healer" label="Faith Healer"/>
<link wikidata="Q288092" start="11191" end="11203" title="Translations (play)" label="Translations"/>
<link wikidata="Q288092" start="12229" end="12241" title="Translations (play)" label="Translations"/>
<link wikidata="Q21051525" start="12265" end="12284" title="Dancing at Lughnasa" label="Dancing at Lughnasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5615871" start="12453" end="12462" title="Guildhall, Derry" label="Guildhall"/>
<link wikidata="Q188371" start="12651" end="12663" title="Great Famine (Ireland)" label="Great Famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112298" start="13577" end="13615" title="Christopher Ewart-Biggs Memorial Prize" label="Christopher Ewart-Biggs Memorial Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q55428" start="13626" end="13637" title="Neil Jordan" label="Neil Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14101" end="14123" title="The Communication Cord" label="The Communication Cord"/>
<link wikidata="Q16386857" start="14149" end="14163" title="Making History (play)" label="Making History"/>
<link wikidata="Q477823" start="14584" end="14597" title="Three Sisters (play)" label="Three Sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q17984510" start="14612" end="14625" title="Fathers and Sons (play)" label="an adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q29424" start="14657" end="14673" title="Fathers and Sons (novel)" label="Fathers and Sons"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14751" end="14771" title="The Last of the Name" label="The Last of the Name"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14845" end="14863" title="The London Vertigo" label="The London Vertigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q21051525" start="14919" end="14938" title="Dancing at Lughnasa" label="Dancing at Lughnasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q21051525" start="15249" end="15268" title="Dancing at Lughnasa" label="Dancing at Lughnasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q678832" start="15327" end="15346" title="The Glass Menagerie" label="The Glass Menagerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q134262" start="15356" end="15374" title="Tennessee Williams" label="Tennessee Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q306434" start="15594" end="15607" title="Abbey Theatre" label="Abbey Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q460735" start="15624" end="15646" title="West End of London" label="London&amp;#x27;s West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="15699" end="15710" title="Tony Awards" label="Tony Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q873" start="15766" end="15778" title="Meryl Streep" label="Meryl Streep"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445543" start="15842" end="15852" title="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s Purgatory" label="Lough Derg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15897" end="15916" title="Wonderful Tennessee" label="Wonderful Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16302" end="16325" title="Give Me Your Answer Do!" label="Give Me Your Answer Do!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17232" end="17249" title="Three Plays After" label="Three Plays After"/>
<link wikidata="Q477823" start="17569" end="17582" title="Three Sisters (play)" label="Three Sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q753298" start="17625" end="17636" title="Uncle Vanya" label="Uncle Vanya"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17867" end="17879" title="Performances (play)" label="Performances"/>
<link wikidata="Q184933" start="17931" end="17943" title="Leoš Janáček" label="Leoš Janáček"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18154" end="18173" title="Alba String Quartet" label="Alba String Quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623927" start="18263" end="18299" title="String Quartet No. 2 (Janáček)" label="Janáček&amp;#x27;s Second String Quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q16386072" start="18339" end="18353" title="The Home Place" label="The Home Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q728893" start="18870" end="18882" title="Gate Theatre" label="Gate Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027239" start="18987" end="19002" title="Guthrie Theater" label="Guthrie Theater"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19049" end="19066" title="A Sort of Freedom" label="A Sort of Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19112" end="19130" title="To This Hard House" label="To This Hard House"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19176" end="19195" title="A Doubtful Paradise" label="A Doubtful Paradise"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19230" end="19246" title="The Enemy Within (play)" label="The Enemy Within"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19268" end="19282" title="The Blind Mice" label="The Blind Mice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7182597" start="19317" end="19343" title="Philadelphia, Here I Come!" label="Philadelphia, Here I Come!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19365" end="19384" title="The Founder Members" label="The Founder Members"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19427" end="19452" title="Three Fathers, Three Sons" label="Three Fathers, Three Sons"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19495" end="19520" title="The Loves of Cass McGuire" label="The Loves of Cass McGuire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6692421" start="19542" end="19568" title="Lovers (play)" label="Lovers: Winners and Losers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19590" end="19605" title="Crystal and Fox" label="Crystal and Fox"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19627" end="19643" title="The Mundy Scheme" label="The Mundy Scheme"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19694" end="19711" title="The Gentle Island" label="The Gentle Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7735228" start="19733" end="19756" title="The Freedom of the City" label="The Freedom of the City"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19778" end="19788" title="Volunteers (play)" label="Volunteers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19810" end="19830" title="Farewell to Ardstraw" label="Farewell to Ardstraw"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19877" end="19892" title="The Next Parish" label="The Next Parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q6659260" start="19939" end="19954" title="Living Quarters" label="Living Quarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q5431193" start="19976" end="19988" title="Faith Healer" label="Faith Healer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20010" end="20021" title="Aristocrats (play)" label="Aristocrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q288092" start="20043" end="20055" title="Translations (play)" label="Translations"/>
<link wikidata="Q477823" start="20077" end="20090" title="Three Sisters (play)" label="Three Sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q5685" start="20098" end="20111" title="Anton Chekhov" label="Anton Chekhov"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20139" end="20155" title="American Welcome" label="American Welcome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20200" end="20222" title="The Communication Cord" label="The Communication Cord"/>
<link wikidata="Q17984510" start="20316" end="20332" title="Fathers and Sons (play)" label="Fathers and Sons"/>
<link wikidata="Q42831" start="20340" end="20353" title="Ivan Turgenev" label="Ivan Turgenev"/>
<link wikidata="Q16386857" start="20380" end="20394" title="Making History (play)" label="Making History"/>
<link wikidata="Q21051525" start="20416" end="20435" title="Dancing at Lughnasa" label="Dancing at Lughnasa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20457" end="20475" title="The London Vertigo" label="The London Vertigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3548839" start="20525" end="20547" title="A Month in the Country (play)" label="A Month in the Country"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20590" end="20609" title="Wonderful Tennessee" label="Wonderful Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6896687" start="20631" end="20644" title="Molly Sweeney" label="Molly Sweeney"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20666" end="20690" title="Give Me Your Answer, Do!" label="Give Me Your Answer, Do!"/>
<link wikidata="Q753298" start="20712" end="20723" title="Uncle Vanya" label="Uncle Vanya"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20765" end="20779" title="The Yalta Game" label="The Yalta Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q16058177" start="20887" end="20896" title="Afterplay (play)" label="Afterplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q16386072" start="20990" end="21004" title="The Home Place" label="The Home Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q176465" start="21026" end="21038" title="Hedda Gabler" label="Hedda Gabler"/>
<link wikidata="Q36661" start="21046" end="21058" title="Henrik Ibsen" label="Henrik Ibsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q106988714" start="21091" end="21109" title="Bill Findlay (writer)" label="Fionnlagh, Uilleam"/>
<link wikidata="Q761739" start="21132" end="21140" title="Omphalos" label="Omphalos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058809" start="21219" end="21229" title="Cencrastus" label="Cencrastus"/>
<link wikidata="Q16192900" start="21276" end="21290" title="Harry Ritchie" label="Ritchie, Harry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058809" start="21398" end="21408" title="Cencrastus" label="Cencrastus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191294" start="21483" end="21492" title="BBC Radio" label="BBC Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134208" start="22073" end="22088" title="The Irish Times" label="The Irish Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q174662" start="22184" end="22197" title="Mary McAleese" label="Mary McAleese"/>
<link wikidata="Q397447" start="22226" end="22230" title="torc" label="torc"/>
<link wikidata="Q4822142" start="22281" end="22285" title="Saoi" label="Saoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q201947" start="22311" end="22318" title="Aosdána" label="Aosdána"/>
<link wikidata="Q1872117" start="22606" end="22622" title="Louis le Brocquy" label="Louis le Brocquy"/>
<link wikidata="Q816879" start="22624" end="22638" title="Benedict Kiely" label="Benedict Kiely"/>
<link wikidata="Q93356" start="22640" end="22653" title="Seamus Heaney" label="Seamus Heaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q434322" start="22658" end="22672" title="Anthony Cronin" label="Anthony Cronin"/>
<link wikidata="Q877925" start="22890" end="22928" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s University of Belfast" label="The Queen&amp;#x27;s University of Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q4963794" start="23017" end="23072" title="Brian Friel Theatre" label="The Brian Friel Theatre and Centre for Theatre Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q109536934" start="24109" end="24153" title="Evening Standard Theatre Award for Best Play" label="Evening Standard Theatre Award for Best Play"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24162" end="24173" title="Aristocrats (play)" label="Aristocrats"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24253" end="24264" title="Aristocrats (play)" label="Aristocrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500798" start="24278" end="24314" title="Laurence Olivier Award for Best New Play" label="Laurence Olivier Award for Best Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q21051525" start="24323" end="24342" title="Dancing at Lughnasa" label="Dancing at Lughnasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q21051525" start="24413" end="24432" title="Dancing at Lughnasa" label="Dancing at Lughnasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799442" start="24446" end="24470" title="Tony Award for Best Play" label="Tony Award for Best Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q21051525" start="24479" end="24498" title="Dancing at Lughnasa" label="Dancing at Lughnasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6896687" start="24578" end="24591" title="Molly Sweeney" label="Molly Sweeney"/>
<link wikidata="Q467050" start="24624" end="24653" title="American Theater Hall of Fame" label="American Theater Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q463281" start="24728" end="24764" title="American Academy of Arts and Letters" label="American Academy of Arts and Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468277" start="24780" end="24815" title="Royal Society of Literature" label="British Royal Society of Literature"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24831" end="24855" title="Irish Academy of Letters" label="Irish Academy of Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q6730059" start="24876" end="24889" title="Magee College" label="Magee College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299339" start="24955" end="24977" title="River Forest, Illinois" label="River Forest, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672830" start="25002" end="25029" title="National Library of Ireland" label="National Library of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414788" start="25686" end="25707" title="List of Irish writers" label="List of Irish writers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5053259" start="26411" end="26447" title="Catholic University of America Press" label="Catholic University of America Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q93195" start="26682" end="26688" title="Ulster" label="Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058809" start="26733" end="26743" title="Cencrastus" label="Cencrastus"/>
<link wikidata="Q201947" start="27473" end="27480" title="Aosdána" label="Aosdána"/>
<link wikidata="Q17386557" start="27720" end="27732" title="Richard Pine" label="Richard Pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134208" start="27933" end="27948" title="The Irish Times" label="The Irish Times"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143245" wikidata="Q131546" url="?curid=143245" title="Gospel of Thomas">
<text>The Gospel of Thomas (also known as the Coptic Gospel of Thomas) is a non-canonical sayings gospel. It was discovered near Nag Hammadi, Egypt, in 1945 among a group of books known as the Nag Hammadi library. Scholars speculate the works were buried in response to a letter from Bishop Athanasius declaring a strict canon of Christian scripture. Most scholars place the composition during the second century, while others have proposed dates as late as 250 AD with signs of origins perhaps dating back to 60 AD. Many scholars have seen it as evidence of the existence of a &quot;Q source&quot; that might have been similar in its form as a collection of sayings of Jesus, without any accounts of his deeds or his life and death, referred to as a sayings gospel, though most conclude that Thomas depends on or harmonizes the Synoptics.

The Coptic-language text, the second of seven contained in what scholars have designated as Nag Hammadi Codex II, is composed of 114 sayings attributed to Jesus. Almost two-thirds of these sayings resemble those found in the canonical gospels and its &quot;editio princeps&quot; counts more than 80% of parallels, while it is speculated that the other sayings were added from Gnostic tradition. Its place of origin may have been Syria, where Thomasine traditions were strong. Other scholars have suggested an Alexandrian origin.

The introduction states: &quot;These are the hidden words that the living Jesus spoke and Didymos Judas Thomas wrote them down.&quot; Didymus (Koine Greek) and Thomas (Aramaic) both mean &quot;twin&quot;. Most scholars do not consider the Apostle Thomas the author of this document; the author remains unknown. Because of its discovery with the Nag Hammadi library, and the cryptic nature, it was widely thought the document originated within a school of early Christians, proto-Gnostics. By contrast, critics have questioned whether the description of Thomas as an entirely gnostic gospel is based solely on the fact it was found along with gnostic texts at Nag Hammadi.

The Gospel of Thomas is very different in tone and structure from other New Testament apocrypha and the four canonical Gospels. Unlike the canonical Gospels, it is not a narrative account of Jesus&#x27; life; instead, it consists of &quot;logia&quot; (sayings) attributed to Jesus, sometimes stand-alone, sometimes embedded in short dialogues or parables; 13 of its 16 parables are also found in the Synoptic Gospels. The text contains a possible allusion to the death of Jesus in logion 65 (Parable of the Wicked Husbandmen), but does not mention his crucifixion, his resurrection, or the Last Judgment; nor does it mention a messianic understanding of Jesus.

==Finds and publication==
The manuscript of the Coptic text (CG II), found in 1945 at Nag Hammadi in Egypt, is dated at around 340 AD. It was first published in a photographic edition in 1956. This was followed three years later (1959) by the first English-language translation, with Coptic transcription. In 1977, James M. Robinson edited the first complete collection of English translations of the Nag Hammadi texts. The Gospel of Thomas has been translated and annotated worldwide in many languages.

The original Coptic manuscript is now the property of the Coptic Museum in Cairo, Egypt, Department of Manuscripts.

===Oxyrhynchus papyrus fragments===
After the Coptic version of the complete text was discovered in 1945 at Nag Hammadi, scholars soon realized that three different Greek text fragments previously found at Oxyrhynchus (the Oxyrhynchus Papyri), also in Egypt, were part of the Gospel of Thomas. These three papyrus fragments of Thomas date to between 130 and 250 AD.

Prior to the Nag Hammadi library discovery, the sayings of Jesus found in Oxyrhynchus were known simply as Logia Iesu. The corresponding Uncial script Greek fragments of the Gospel of Thomas, found in Oxyrhynchus are:
* P. Oxy. 1: fragments of logia 26 through 33, with the last two sentences of logion 77 in the Coptic version included at the end of logion 30 herein.
* P. Oxy. 654: fragments of the beginning through logion 7, logion 24 and logion 36 on the flip side of a papyrus containing surveying data.
* P. Oxy. 655: fragments of logia 36 through 39. 8 fragments designated &quot;a&quot; through &quot;h&quot;, whereof &quot;f&quot; and &quot;h&quot; have since been lost.

The wording of the Coptic sometimes differs markedly from the earlier Greek Oxyrhynchus texts, the extreme case being that the last portion of logion 30 in the Greek is found at the end of logion 77 in the Coptic. This fact, along with the quite different wording Hippolytus uses when apparently quoting it (see below), suggests that the Gospel of Thomas &quot;may have circulated in more than one form and passed through several stages of redaction.&quot;

Although it is generally thought that the Gospel of Thomas was first composed in Greek, there is evidence that the Coptic Nag Hammadi text is a translation from Syriac (see Syriac origin).

===Attestation===
The earliest surviving written references to the Gospel of Thomas are found in the writings of Hippolytus of Rome () and Origen of Alexandria (). Hippolytus wrote in his &quot;Refutation of All Heresies&quot; 5.7.20:
This appears to be a reference to saying 4 of Thomas, although the wording differs significantly. As translated by Thomas O. Lambdin, saying 4 reads: &quot;Jesus said, &#x27;the man old in days will not hesitate to ask a small child seven days old about the place of life, and he will live. For many who are first will become last, and they will become one and the same&quot;. In this context, the preceding reference to the &quot;sought-after reign of the heavens within a person&quot; appears to be a reference to sayings 2 and 3. Hippolytus also appears to quote saying 11 in &quot;Refutation&quot; 5.8.32, but without attribution.

Origen listed the &quot;Gospel according to Thomas&quot; as being among the heterodox apocryphal gospels known to him (&quot;Hom. in Luc.&quot; 1). He condemned a book called &quot;Gospel of Thomas&quot; as heretical; it is not clear that it is the same gospel of Thomas, however, as he possibly meant the Infancy Gospel of Thomas.

In the 4th and 5th centuries, various Church Fathers wrote that the Gospel of Thomas was highly valued by Mani. In the 4th century, Cyril of Jerusalem mentioned a &quot;Gospel of Thomas&quot; twice in his &quot;Catechesis&quot;: &quot;The Manichaeans also wrote a Gospel according to Thomas, which being tinctured with the fragrance of the evangelic title corrupts the souls of the simple sort.&quot; and &quot;Let none read the Gospel according to Thomas: for it is the work not of one of the twelve Apostles, but of one of the three wicked disciples of Manes.&quot; The 5th-century &quot;Decretum Gelasianum&quot; includes &quot;A Gospel attributed to Thomas which the Manichaean use&quot; in its list of heretical books.

==Date of composition==
Richard Valantasis writes:

Valantasis and other scholars argue that it is difficult to date Thomas because, as a collection of &quot;logia&quot; without a narrative framework, individual sayings could have been added to it gradually over time. Valantasis dates Thomas to 100–110 AD, with some of the material certainly coming from the first stratum, which is dated to 30–60 AD. J. R. Porter dates the Gospel of Thomas to 250 AD.

Scholars generally fall into one of two main camps: an &quot;early camp&quot; favoring a date for the core &quot;before the end of the first century,&quot; prior to or approximately contemporary with the composition of the canonical gospels; and a more common &quot;late camp&quot; favoring a date in the 2nd century, after composition of the canonical gospels.

In August 2023, the Egypt Exploration Society published the second century Papyrus Oxyrhynchus 5575, which includes the earliest extant fragment from the Gospel of Thomas.

=== Argument for early composition ===

====Form of the gospel====
Theissen and Merz argue the genre of a collection of sayings was one of the earliest forms in which material about Jesus was handed down. They assert that other collections of sayings, such as the Q source and the collection underlying Mark 4, were absorbed into larger narratives and no longer survive as independent documents, and that no later collections in this form survive. Marvin Meyer also asserted that the genre of a &quot;sayings collection&quot; is indicative of the 1st century, and that in particular the &quot;use of parables without allegorical amplification&quot; seems to antedate the canonical gospels. 

====Independence from synoptic gospels====
Stevan L. Davies argues that the apparent independence of the ordering of sayings in Thomas from that of their parallels in the synoptics shows that Thomas was not evidently reliant upon the canonical gospels and probably predated them. Some authors argue that Thomas was a source for Mark, usually considered the earliest of the synoptic gospels. Several authors argue that when the logia in Thomas do have parallels in the synoptics, the version in Thomas often seems closer to the source. Theissen and Merz give sayings 31 (Rejection at Nazareth) and 65 (Parable of the Wicked Husbandmen) as examples of this. Koester agrees, citing especially the parables contained in sayings 8, 9, 57, 63, 64 and 65. In the few instances where the version in Thomas seems to be dependent on the synoptics, Koester suggests, this may be due to the influence of the person who translated the text from Greek into Coptic.

Koester also argues that the absence of narrative materials, such as those found in the canonical gospels, in Thomas makes it unlikely that the gospel is &quot;an eclectic excerpt from the gospels of the New Testament&quot;. He also cites the absence of the eschatological sayings considered characteristic of Q source to show the independence of Thomas from that source.

====Intertextuality with the Gospel of John====

Another argument for an early date is what some scholars have suggested is an interplay between the Gospel of John and the &quot;logia&quot; of Thomas. Parallels between the two have been taken to suggest that Thomas&#x27; &quot;logia&quot; preceded John&#x27;s work, and that the latter was making a point-by-point riposte to Thomas, either in real or mock conflict. This seeming dialectic has been pointed out by several New Testament scholars, notably Gregory J. Riley, April DeConick, and Elaine Pagels. Though differing in approach, they argue that several verses in the Gospel of John are best understood as responses to a Thomasine community and its beliefs. Pagels, for example, says that the Gospel of John states that Jesus contains the divine light, while several of Thomas&#x27; sayings refer to the light born &#x27;within&#x27;.

The Gospel of John is the only canonical one that gives Thomas the Apostle a dramatic role and spoken part, and Thomas is the only character therein described as being (), despite the failings of virtually all the Johannine characters to live up to the author&#x27;s standards of belief. With respect to the famous story of &quot;Doubting Thomas&quot;, it is suggested that the author of John may have been denigrating or ridiculing a rival school of thought. In another apparent contrast, John&#x27;s text matter-of-factly presents a bodily resurrection as if this is a &quot;sine qua non&quot; of the faith; in contrast, Thomas&#x27; insights about the spirit-and-body are more nuanced. For Thomas, resurrection seems more a cognitive event of spiritual attainment, one even involving a certain discipline or asceticism. Again, an apparently denigrating portrayal in the &quot;Doubting Thomas&quot; story may either be taken literally, or as a kind of mock &quot;comeback&quot; to Thomas&#x27; logia: not as an outright censuring of Thomas, but an improving gloss, as Thomas&#x27; thoughts about the spirit and body are not dissimilar from those presented elsewhere in John. John portrays Thomas as physically touching the risen Jesus, inserting fingers and hands into his body, and ending with a shout. Pagels interprets this as signifying one-upmanship by John, who is forcing Thomas to acknowledge Jesus&#x27; bodily nature. She writes that &quot;he shows Thomas giving up his search for experiential truthhis &#x27;unbelief&#x27;to confess what John sees as the truth&quot;. The point of these examples, as used by Riley and Pagels, is to support the argument that the text of Thomas must have existed and have gained a following at the time of the writing of the Gospel of John, and that the importance of the Thomasine logia was great enough that the author of John felt the necessity of weaving them into their own narrative.

As this scholarly debate continued, theologian Christopher W. Skinner disagreed with Riley, DeConick, and Pagels over any possible John–Thomas interplay, and concluded that in the book of John, Thomas the disciple &quot;is merely one stitch in a wider literary pattern where uncomprehending characters serve as foils for Jesus&#x27;s words and deeds.&quot;

====Role of James====
Albert Hogeterp argues that the Gospel&#x27;s saying 12, which attributes leadership of the community to James the Just rather than to Peter, agrees with the description of the early Jerusalem church by Paul in Galatians 2:1–14 and may reflect a tradition predating 70 AD. Meyer also lists &quot;uncertainty about James the righteous, the brother of Jesus&quot; as characteristic of a 1st-century origin.

In later traditions (most notably in the Acts of Thomas, Book of Thomas the Contender, etc.), Thomas is regarded as the twin brother of Jesus.

====Depiction of Peter and Matthew====
In saying 13, Peter and Matthew are depicted as unable to understand the true significance or identity of Jesus. Patterson argues that this can be interpreted as a criticism against the school of Christianity associated with the Gospel of Matthew, and that &quot;[t]his sort of rivalry seems more at home in the first century than later&quot;, when all the apostles had become revered figures.

====Parallel with Paul====
According to Meyer, Thomas&#x27;s saying 17&quot;I shall give you what no eye has seen, what no ear has heard and no hand has touched, and what has not come into the human heart&quot;is strikingly similar to what Paul wrote in 1 Corinthians 2:9, which was itself an allusion to Isaiah 64:4. 

=== Argument for late composition ===
The late camp dates Thomas some time after 100 AD, generally in the early second century. They generally believe that although the text was composed around the mid-second century, it contains earlier sayings such as those originally found in the New Testament gospels of which Thomas was in some sense dependent in addition to inauthentic and possibly authentic independent sayings not found in any other extant text. J. R. Porter dates Thomas much later, to the mid-third century.

====Dependence on the New Testament====
Several scholars have argued that the sayings in Thomas reflect conflations and harmonisations dependent on the canonical gospels. For example, saying 10 and 16 appear to contain a redacted harmonisation of Luke 12:49, 12:51–52 and Matthew 10:34–35. In this case it has been suggested that the dependence is best explained by the author of Thomas making use of an earlier harmonised oral tradition based on Matthew and Luke. Biblical scholar Craig A. Evans also subscribes to this view and notes that &quot;Over half of the New Testament writings are quoted, paralleled, or alluded to in Thomas... I&#x27;m not aware of a Christian writing prior to 150 AD that references this much of the New Testament.&quot; Mark Goodacre also argues that Thomas is dependent on the Synoptics. 

Another argument made for the late dating of Thomas is based upon the fact that saying 5 in the original Greek (Papyrus Oxyrhynchus 654) seems to follow the vocabulary used in the Gospel of Luke (Luke 8:17), and not the vocabulary used in the Gospel of Mark (Mark 4:22). According to this argumentwhich presupposes firstly the rectitude of the two-source hypothesis (widely held among current New Testament scholars), in which the author of Luke is seen as having used the pre-existing gospel according to Mark plus a lost Q source to compose their gospelif the author of Thomas did, as saying 5 suggests, refer to a pre-existing Gospel of Luke, rather than Mark&#x27;s vocabulary, then the Gospel of Thomas must have been composed after both Mark and Luke, the latter of which is dated to between 60 and 90 AD.

Another saying that employs similar vocabulary to that used in Luke rather than Mark is saying 31 in the original Greek (Papyrus Oxyrhynchus 1), where Luke 4:24&#x27;s term () is employed rather than Mark 6:4&#x27;s (). The word (in all its cases and genders) is clearly typical of Luke, since it is only employed by the author in the canonical gospels Luke 4:19, 4:24, and Acts 10:35. Thus, the argument runs, the Greek Thomas has clearly been at least influenced by Luke&#x27;s characteristic vocabulary.

J. R. Porter states that, because around half of the sayings in Thomas have parallels in the synoptic gospels, it is &quot;possible that the sayings in the Gospel of Thomas were selected directly from the canonical gospels and were either reproduced more or less exactly or amended to fit the author&#x27;s distinctive theological outlook.&quot; According to John P. Meier, scholars predominantly conclude that Thomas depends on or harmonizes the Synoptics.

====Syriac origin====
Several scholars argue that Thomas is dependent on Syriac writings, including unique versions of the canonical gospels. They contend that many sayings of the Gospel of Thomas are more similar to Syriac translations of the canonical gospels than their record in the original Greek. Craig A. Evans states that saying 54 in Thomas, which speaks of the poor and the kingdom of heaven, is more similar to the Syriac version of Matthew 5:3 than the Greek version of that passage or the parallel in Luke 6:20.

Klyne Snodgrass notes that saying 65–66 of Thomas containing the Parable of the Wicked Tenants appears to be dependent on the early harmonisation of Mark and Luke found in the old Syriac gospels. He concludes that, &quot;&quot;Thomas&quot;, rather than representing the earliest form, has been shaped by this harmonizing tendency in Syria. If the &quot;Gospel of Thomas&quot; were the earliest, we would have to imagine that each of the evangelists or the traditions behind them expanded the parable in different directions and then that in the process of transmission the text was trimmed back to the form it has in the Syriac Gospels. It is much more likely that Thomas, which has a Syrian provenance, is dependent on the tradition of the canonical Gospels that has been abbreviated and harmonized by oral transmission.&quot;

Nicholas Perrin argues that Thomas is dependent on the &quot;Diatessaron&quot;, which was composed shortly after 172 by Tatian in Syria. Perrin explains the order of the sayings by attempting to demonstrate that almost all adjacent sayings are connected by Syriac catchwords, whereas in Coptic or Greek, catchwords have been found for only less than half of the pairs of adjacent sayings. Peter J. Williams analyzed Perrin&#x27;s alleged Syriac catchwords and found them implausible. Robert F. Shedinger wrote that since Perrin attempts to reconstruct an Old Syriac version of Thomas without first establishing Thomas&#x27; reliance on the &quot;Diatessaron&quot;, Perrin&#x27;s logic seems circular.

====Lack of apocalyptic themes====
Bart D. Ehrman argues that the historical Jesus was an apocalyptic preacher, and that his apocalyptic beliefs are recorded in the earliest Christian documents: Mark and the authentic Pauline epistles. The earliest Christians believed Jesus would soon return, and their beliefs are echoed in the earliest Christian writings. The Gospel of Thomas proclaims that the Kingdom of God is already present for those who understand the secret message of Jesus (saying 113), and lacks apocalyptic themes. Because of this, Ehrman argues, the Gospel of Thomas was probably composed by a Gnostic some time in the early 2nd century. Ehrman also argued against the authenticity of the sayings the Gospel of Thomas attributes to Jesus.

Elaine Pagels points out the Gospel of Thomas promulgates the Kingdom of God not as a final destination but a state of self-discovery. Additionally, the Gospel of Thomas conveys that Jesus ridiculed those who thought of the Kingdom of God in literal terms, as if it were a specific place. Pagels goes on to argue that, through saying 22, readers are to believe the &quot;Kingdom&quot; symbolizes a state of transformed consciousness.

John P. Meier has repeatedly argued against the historicity of the Gospel of Thomas, stating that it cannot be a reliable source for the quest of the historical Jesus and also considers it a Gnostic text. He has also argued against the authenticity of the parables found exclusively in the Gospel of Thomas. Bentley Layton included the Gospel of Thomas into his list of Gnostic scriptures.

Craig A. Evans has argued that the Gospel of Thomas represents the theological motives of 2nd century Egyptian Christianity and is dependent on the Synoptic Gospels and the Diatesseron.

N.T. Wright, Anglican bishop and professor of New Testament history, also sees the dating of Thomas in the 2nd or 3rd century. Wright&#x27;s reasoning for this dating is that the &quot;narrative framework&quot; of 1st-century Judaism and the New Testament is radically different from the worldview expressed in the sayings collected in the Gospel of Thomas. Thomas makes an anachronistic mistake by turning Jesus the Jewish prophet into a Hellenistic/Cynic philosopher. Wright concludes his section on the Gospel of Thomas in his book &quot;The New Testament and the People of God&quot; in this way:

==Relation to the New Testament canon==

Although arguments about some potential New Testament books, such as &quot;The Shepherd of Hermas&quot; and the Book of Revelation, continued well into the 4th century, four canonical gospels, attributed to Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, were accepted among proto-orthodox Christians at least as early as the mid-2nd century. Tatian&#x27;s widely used &quot;Diatessaron&quot;, compiled between 160 and 175 AD, utilized the four gospels without any consideration of others. Irenaeus of Lyons wrote in the late 2nd century that: &quot;since there are four-quarters of the earth[...] it is fitting that the church should have four pillars[...] the four Gospels.&quot; and then shortly thereafter made the first known quotation from a fourth gospel – the now-canonical version of the Gospel of John. The late 2nd-century Muratorian fragment also recognizes only the three synoptic gospels and John.

Bible scholar Bruce Metzger wrote regarding the formation of the New Testament canon:
==Relation to the Thomasine milieu==
The question also arises as to various sects&#x27; usage of other works attributed to Thomas and their relation to this work.

The Book of Thomas the Contender, also from Nag Hammadi, is foremost among these, but the extensive Acts of Thomas provides the mythological connections. The short and comparatively straightforward Apocalypse of Thomas has no immediate connection with the synoptic gospels, while the canonical Jude – if the name can be taken to refer to Judas Thomas Didymus – certainly attests to early intra-Christian conflict.

The Infancy Gospel of Thomas, shorn of its mythological connections, is difficult to connect specifically to the Gospel of Thomas, but the Acts of Thomas contains the Hymn of the Pearl whose content is reflected in the Psalms of Thomas found in Manichaean literature. These psalms, which otherwise reveal Mandaean connections, also contain material overlapping with the Gospel of Thomas.

==Relation to other Christian texts==
Scholars such as Sellew (2018) have also noted striking parallels between the Gospel of Thomas and &quot;Apophthegmata Patrum&quot;.

==Importance and author==

Considered by some as one of the earliest accounts of the teachings of Jesus, the Gospel of Thomas is regarded by some scholars as one of the most important texts in understanding early Christianity outside the New Testament. In terms of faith, however, no major Christian group accepts this gospel as canonical or authoritative. It is an important work for scholars working on the Q document, which itself is thought to be a collection of sayings or teachings upon which the gospels of Matthew and Luke are partly based. Although no copy of Q has ever been discovered, the fact that Thomas is similarly a &quot;sayings&quot; gospel is viewed by some scholars as an indication that the early Christians did write collections of the sayings of Jesus, bolstering the Q hypothesis.

Modern scholars do not consider Thomas the Apostle the author of this document and the author remains unknown. J. Menard produced a summary of the academic consensus in the mid-1970s that stated that the gospel was probably a very late text written by a Gnostic author, thus having very little relevance to the study of the early development of Christianity. Scholarly views of Gnosticism and the Gospel of Thomas have since become more nuanced and diverse. Paterson Brown, for example, has argued forcefully that the three Coptic Gospels of Thomas, Philip and Truth are demonstrably not Gnostic writings, since all three explicitly affirm the basic reality and sanctity of incarnate life, which Gnosticism by definition considers illusory and evil.

In the 4th century Cyril of Jerusalem considered the author a disciple of Mani who was also called Thomas. Cyril stated:
Many scholars consider the Gospel of Thomas to be a gnostic text, since it was found in a library among others, it contains Gnostic themes, and perhaps presupposes a Gnostic worldview. Others reject this interpretation, because Thomas lacks the full-blown mythology of Gnosticism as described by Irenaeus of Lyons (), and because Gnostics frequently appropriated and used a large &quot;range of scripture from Genesis to the Psalms to Homer, from the Synoptics to John to the letters of Paul.&quot; The mysticism of the Gospel of Thomas also lacks many themes found in second century Gnosticism, including any allusion to a fallen Sophia or an evil Demiurge. According to David W. Kim, the association of the Thomasines and Gnosticism is anachronistic and the book seems to predate the Gnostic movements.

==The historical Jesus==
Some modern scholars (most notably those belonging to the Jesus Seminar) believe that the Gospel of Thomas was written independently of the canonical gospels, and therefore is a useful guide to historical Jesus research. Scholars may utilize one of several critical tools in biblical scholarship, the criterion of multiple attestation, to help build cases for historical reliability of the sayings of Jesus. By finding those sayings in the Gospel of Thomas that overlap with the Gospel of the Hebrews, Q, Mark, Matthew, Luke, John, and Paul, scholars feel such sayings represent &quot;multiple attestations&quot; and therefore are more likely to come from a historical Jesus than sayings that are only singly attested. However, Bart Ehrman states that the Gospel of Thomas has very little value in historical Jesus research, because the author placed no importance on the physical experiences of Jesus (e.g. his crucifixion) or the physical existence of believers.

== Representation of women ==
Interpretations of the Gospel of Thomas&#x27;s view of women vary widely, with some arguing that it is chauvinistic, while others view it as comparatively positive.

=== Women disciples ===
The Gospel of Thomas names six people who are close to Jesus and, of these, two are the women disciples Mary Magdalene and Salome. Professor Antti Marjanen suggests that their inclusion is significant and purposeful because of how few people are named. He argues that, in logio 61 and 21, their discussions with Jesus clarify the nature of discipleship. They are shown not as &quot;ones who misunderstand, but as ones who do not quite understand enough.&quot; This is shown to be the case for all of the disciples and Marjanen states that &quot;Mary Magdalene&#x27;s or Salome&#x27;s lack of understanding should not be overemphasized.&quot;

=== Logion 114 ===
The final saying of the Gospel of Thomas is one of the most controversial and has been highly debated by academics. It has been criticised for implying that women are spiritually inferior, but some scholars argue that it is symbolic, with &quot;male&quot; representing the prelapsarian state. Jorunn Jacobsen Buckley argued that Logion 114 represents a process with females becoming male before achieving the prelapsarian state, a reversal of the Genesis story in which women were made from men. Melissa Harl Sellew&#x27;s trans-centred reading emphasizes the idea that the outer appearance must be transformed to reflect the inner reality.

==Comparison of the major gospels==
The material in the comparison chart is from &quot;Gospel Parallels&quot; by B. H. Throckmorton, &quot;The Five Gospels&quot; by R. W. Funk, &quot;The Gospel According to the Hebrews&quot; by E. B. Nicholson and &quot;The Hebrew Gospel and the&quot; &quot;Development of the Synoptic Tradition&quot; by J. R. Edwards.

==See also==
* British Library Or 4926
* Common Sayings Source
* Five Trees
* List of Gospels
* Psalms of Thomas

==References==

===Notes===
===Quotes===
===Citations===
===Works cited===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* - &quot;Standard edition of the Coptic text.&quot;
* 
* 
* Plates 80, line 10–99, line 28.
* - &quot;The critical edition of the seven texts of Codex II, including the Gospel of Thomas.&quot;
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

* Interactive Coptic-English Thomas translation. With hyperlinear translation of every single word linked to online KELLIA Coptic Dictionary, 2020. Contains verified representation of facsimile, including corrections to all previous translations such as those of Guillaumont, Quispel, Layton, Lambdin, and Patterson / Meyer / Robinson
* The Gospel of Thomas. With hyperlinear translation linked to Crum&#x27;s &quot;Coptic Dictionary&quot; and Plumley&#x27;s &quot;Coptic Grammar&quot;. Ecumenical Coptic Project online edition, 1998 ff.
* Ecumenical Coptic Project at Internet Archive.
* Gospel of Thomas Collection at The Gnosis Archive
* Gospel of Thomas at Early Christian Writings
* Gospel of Thomas Collection Commentary and Essays by Hugh McGregor Ross
* Michael Grondin&#x27;s Coptic–English Interlinear Translation of the Gospel of Thomas
* Why is the Gospel of Thomas not in the canon. Online essay by Simonas Kiela
* The Gospel of Thomas English translation of the text, by Wim van den Dungen
* Gospel of Thomas, bibliography</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q131546" start="4" end="20" title="Gospel of Thomas" label="Gospel of Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q131546" start="40" end="63" title="Gospel of Thomas" label="Coptic Gospel of Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1868072" start="84" end="98" title="Logia" label="sayings gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q270754" start="123" end="134" title="Nag Hammadi" label="Nag Hammadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="136" end="141" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q222999" start="187" end="206" title="Nag Hammadi library" label="Nag Hammadi library"/>
<link wikidata="Q44024" start="285" end="295" title="Athanasius of Alexandria" label="Athanasius"/>
<link wikidata="Q111065" start="578" end="586" title="Q source" label="Q source"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="664" end="669" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q36155" start="839" end="854" title="Coptic language" label="Coptic-language"/>
<link wikidata="Q34274" start="1060" end="1077" title="canonical gospels" label="canonical gospels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249682" start="1092" end="1107" title="editio princeps" label="editio princeps"/>
<link wikidata="Q48420" start="1211" end="1218" title="Gnostic" label="Gnostic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13415123" start="1264" end="1269" title="Syria (region)" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q111949450" start="1277" end="1286" title="Thomasines" label="Thomasine"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="1344" end="1354" title="Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q107358" start="1508" end="1519" title="Koine Greek" label="Koine Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q28602" start="1533" end="1540" title="Aramaic" label="Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q43669" start="1604" end="1618" title="Apostle Thomas" label="Apostle Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387659" start="1810" end="1816" title="School of thought" label="school"/>
<link wikidata="Q111949187" start="1838" end="1852" title="Proto-Gnosticism" label="proto-Gnostics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6718887" start="2110" end="2133" title="New Testament apocrypha" label="New Testament apocrypha"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2208" end="2217" title="Narrative#Literary theory" label="narrative"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2371" end="2380" title="Dialogue#Literary and philosophical genre" label="dialogues"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2384" end="2392" title="Parable#Parables of Jesus" label="parables"/>
<link wikidata="Q106046" start="2438" end="2454" title="Synoptic Gospels" label="Synoptic Gospels"/>
<link wikidata="Q654574" start="2530" end="2562" title="Parable of the Wicked Husbandmen" label="Parable of the Wicked Husbandmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q51636" start="2590" end="2601" title="crucifixion of Jesus" label="crucifixion"/>
<link wikidata="Q51624" start="2607" end="2619" title="resurrection of Jesus" label="resurrection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821239" start="2628" end="2641" title="Last Judgment" label="Last Judgment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6958256" start="2761" end="2766" title="Nag Hammadi Codex II" label="CG II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1916843" start="3015" end="3032" title="James M. Robinson" label="James M. Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784177" start="3263" end="3276" title="Coptic Museum" label="Coptic Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q622640" start="3528" end="3539" title="Oxyrhynchus" label="Oxyrhynchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249435" start="3545" end="3563" title="Oxyrhynchus Papyri" label="Oxyrhynchus Papyri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1868072" start="3796" end="3806" title="Logia" label="Logia Iesu"/>
<link wikidata="Q784235" start="3826" end="3839" title="Uncial script" label="Uncial script"/>
<link wikidata="Q7133298" start="3909" end="3918" title="Papyrus Oxyrhynchus 1" label="P. Oxy. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q4891443" start="4060" end="4071" title="Papyrus Oxyrhynchus 654" label="P. Oxy. 654"/>
<link wikidata="Q816425" start="4183" end="4192" title="surveying" label="surveying"/>
<link wikidata="Q7133511" start="4201" end="4212" title="Papyrus Oxyrhynchus 655" label="P. Oxy. 655"/>
<link wikidata="Q33538" start="4990" end="4996" title="Syriac language" label="Syriac"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5002" end="5015" title="#Syriac origin" label="Syriac origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q207113" start="5132" end="5150" title="Hippolytus (writer)" label="Hippolytus of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q170472" start="5158" end="5178" title="Origen of Alexandria" label="Origen of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q966546" start="5213" end="5239" title="Refutation of All Heresies" label="Refutation of All Heresies"/>
<link wikidata="Q170472" start="5890" end="5896" title="Origen" label="Origen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992247" start="5966" end="5975" title="heterodoxy" label="heterodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q210709" start="6196" end="6220" title="Infancy Gospel of Thomas" label="Infancy Gospel of Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q203922" start="6329" end="6333" title="Mani (prophet)" label="Mani"/>
<link wikidata="Q298654" start="6355" end="6373" title="Cyril of Jerusalem" label="Cyril of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735729" start="6434" end="6444" title="Catechesis" label="Catechesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182112" start="6813" end="6832" title="Decretum Gelasianum" label="Decretum Gelasianum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299166" start="7786" end="7811" title="Egypt Exploration Society" label="Egypt Exploration Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q123535810" start="7841" end="7865" title="Papyrus Oxyrhynchus 5575" label="Papyrus Oxyrhynchus 5575"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766423" start="8242" end="8248" title="Mark 4" label="Mark 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q6778424" start="8387" end="8399" title="Marvin Meyer" label="Marvin Meyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q23023760" start="8674" end="8690" title="Stevan L. Davies" label="Stevan L. Davies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9201" end="9222" title="Rejection_of_Jesus#Hometown_rejection" label="Rejection at Nazareth"/>
<link wikidata="Q654574" start="9232" end="9264" title="Parable of the Wicked Husbandmen" label="Parable of the Wicked Husbandmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q36766" start="10105" end="10119" title="Gospel of John" label="Gospel of John"/>
<link wikidata="Q16728461" start="10478" end="10492" title="April DeConick" label="April DeConick"/>
<link wikidata="Q263099" start="10498" end="10511" title="Elaine Pagels" label="Elaine Pagels"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924861" start="11179" end="11194" title="Doubting Thomas" label="Doubting Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q316560" start="11426" end="11438" title="sine qua non" label="sine qua non"/>
<link wikidata="Q5563727" start="13096" end="13101" title="Foil (literature)" label="foils"/>
<link wikidata="Q26925" start="13270" end="13284" title="James the Just" label="James the Just"/>
<link wikidata="Q33923" start="13300" end="13305" title="Saint Peter" label="Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="14389" end="14393" title="Paul of Tarsus" label="Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q5180674" start="15472" end="15486" title="Craig A. Evans" label="Craig A. Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900063" start="15740" end="15753" title="Mark Goodacre" label="Mark Goodacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2548382" start="17491" end="17504" title="John P. Meier" label="John P. Meier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5180674" start="17894" end="17908" title="Craig A. Evans" label="Craig A. Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6421564" start="18117" end="18132" title="Klyne Snodgrass" label="Klyne Snodgrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q654574" start="18182" end="18211" title="Parable of the Wicked Tenants" label="Parable of the Wicked Tenants"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026041" start="18946" end="18961" title="Nicholas Perrin" label="Nicholas Perrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q932676" start="19007" end="19018" title="Diatessaron" label="Diatessaron"/>
<link wikidata="Q272087" start="19066" end="19072" title="Tatian" label="Tatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q76183676" start="19430" end="19449" title="Robert F. Shedinger" label="Robert F. Shedinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q33538" start="19501" end="19511" title="Syriac language" label="Old Syriac"/>
<link wikidata="Q6011160" start="19637" end="19645" title="Circular reasoning" label="circular"/>
<link wikidata="Q127876" start="19683" end="19697" title="Bart D. Ehrman" label="Bart D. Ehrman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19714" end="19730" title="Historical Jesus#Apocalyptic prophet" label="historical Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q696203" start="19738" end="19749" title="apocalypse" label="apocalyptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q265283" start="19866" end="19882" title="Pauline epistles" label="Pauline epistles"/>
<link wikidata="Q263099" start="20404" end="20417" title="Elaine Pagels" label="Elaine Pagels"/>
<link wikidata="Q2548382" start="20839" end="20852" title="John P. Meier" label="John P. Meier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7759060" start="20972" end="21005" title="The Quest of the Historical Jesus" label="the quest of the historical Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4890483" start="21147" end="21161" title="Bentley Layton" label="Bentley Layton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5180674" start="21230" end="21244" title="Craig A. Evans" label="Craig A. Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q335125" start="21417" end="21428" title="N.T. Wright" label="N.T. Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q898808" start="22134" end="22156" title="The Shepherd of Hermas" label="The Shepherd of Hermas"/>
<link wikidata="Q42040" start="22171" end="22189" title="Book of Revelation" label="Book of Revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543814" start="22317" end="22342" title="proto-orthodox Christians" label="proto-orthodox Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q932676" start="22417" end="22428" title="Diatessaron" label="Diatessaron"/>
<link wikidata="Q182123" start="22532" end="22549" title="Irenaeus of Lyons" label="Irenaeus of Lyons"/>
<link wikidata="Q692665" start="22876" end="22895" title="Muratorian fragment" label="Muratorian fragment"/>
<link wikidata="Q643210" start="22969" end="22982" title="Bruce Metzger" label="Bruce Metzger"/>
<link wikidata="Q648936" start="23209" end="23237" title="Book of Thomas the Contender" label="Book of Thomas the Contender"/>
<link wikidata="Q766852" start="23305" end="23319" title="Acts of Thomas" label="Acts of Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221829" start="23403" end="23423" title="Apocalypse of Thomas" label="Apocalypse of Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q131466" start="23499" end="23503" title="Epistle of Jude" label="Jude"/>
<link wikidata="Q210709" start="23624" end="23648" title="Infancy Gospel of Thomas" label="Infancy Gospel of Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q575736" start="23787" end="23804" title="Hymn of the Pearl" label="Hymn of the Pearl"/>
<link wikidata="Q7253952" start="23839" end="23855" title="Psalms of Thomas" label="Psalms of Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q131165" start="23865" end="23875" title="Manichaean" label="Manichaean"/>
<link wikidata="Q205754" start="23925" end="23933" title="Mandaeism" label="Mandaean"/>
<link wikidata="Q619665" start="24152" end="24172" title="Apophthegmata Patrum" label="Apophthegmata Patrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q51644" start="24388" end="24406" title="early Christianity" label="early Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="24419" end="24432" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q60867" start="25538" end="25544" title="Gospel of Philip" label="Philip"/>
<link wikidata="Q734504" start="25549" end="25554" title="Gospel of Truth" label="Truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q298654" start="25758" end="25776" title="Cyril of Jerusalem" label="Cyril of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q203922" start="25813" end="25817" title="Mani (prophet)" label="Mani"/>
<link wikidata="Q182123" start="26156" end="26173" title="Irenaeus of Lyons" label="Irenaeus of Lyons"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932135" start="26491" end="26497" title="Sophia (Gnosticism)" label="Sophia"/>
<link wikidata="Q183488" start="26509" end="26517" title="Demiurge" label="Demiurge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095565" start="26749" end="26762" title="Jesus Seminar" label="Jesus Seminar"/>
<link wikidata="Q51666" start="26885" end="26901" title="historical Jesus" label="historical Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q373665" start="26966" end="26986" title="biblical criticism" label="biblical scholarship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119175" start="26992" end="27025" title="criterion of multiple attestation" label="criterion of multiple attestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231372" start="27170" end="27191" title="Gospel of the Hebrews" label="Gospel of the Hebrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q127876" start="27419" end="27430" title="Bart Ehrman" label="Bart Ehrman"/>
<link wikidata="Q63070" start="27981" end="27995" title="Mary Magdalene" label="Mary Magdalene"/>
<link wikidata="Q233067" start="28000" end="28006" title="Salome (disciple)" label="Salome"/>
<link wikidata="Q96630735" start="28832" end="28855" title="Jorunn Jacobsen Buckley" label="Jorunn Jacobsen Buckley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970288" start="29551" end="29574" title="British Library Or 4926" label="British Library Or 4926"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153467" start="29577" end="29598" title="Common Sayings Source" label="Common Sayings Source"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456174" start="29601" end="29611" title="Five Trees" label="Five Trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q910136" start="29614" end="29629" title="List of Gospels" label="List of Gospels"/>
<link wikidata="Q7253952" start="29632" end="29648" title="Psalms of Thomas" label="Psalms of Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="30637" end="30653" title="Internet Archive" label="Internet Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142291" start="30809" end="30827" title="Hugh McGregor Ross" label="Hugh McGregor Ross"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143247" wikidata="Q24958" url="?curid=143247" title="The War of the Worlds (1938 radio drama)">
<text>&quot;The War of the Worlds&quot; was a Halloween episode of the radio series &quot;The Mercury Theatre on the Air&quot; directed and narrated by Orson Welles as an adaptation of H. G. Wells&#x27;s novel &quot;The War of the Worlds&quot; (1898) that was performed and broadcast live at 8 pm ET on October 30, 1938, over the CBS Radio Network. The episode is infamous for inciting a panic by convincing some members of the listening audience that a Martian invasion was taking place, though the scale of panic is disputed, as the program had relatively few listeners.

The first half of Welles&#x27;s broadcast had a &quot;breaking news&quot; style of storytelling which, alongside the &quot;Mercury Theatre on the Air&quot; lack of commercial interruptions, meant that the first break in the drama came after all of the alarming &quot;news&quot; reports had taken place. Popular legend holds that some of the radio audience may have been listening to &quot;The Chase and Sanborn Hour&quot; with Edgar Bergen on NBC and tuned in to &quot;The War of the Worlds&quot; during a musical interlude, thereby missing the clear introduction indicating that the show was a work of science fiction. Modern research suggests that this happened only in rare instances.

In the days after the adaptation, widespread outrage was expressed in the media. The program&#x27;s news-bulletin format was described as deceptive by some newspapers and public figures, leading to an outcry against the broadcasters and calls for regulation by the FCC. Welles apologized at a hastily-called news conference the next morning, and no punitive action was taken. The broadcast and subsequent publicity brought the 23-year-old Welles to the attention of the general public and gave him the reputation of an innovative storyteller and &quot;trickster&quot;.

==Synopsis==
The episode begins with an introductory monologue based closely on the opening of the source novel, after which the program takes on the format of an evening of typical radio programming being periodically interrupted by news bulletins.

The first few bulletins interrupt a program of live music and are relatively calm reports of unusual explosions on Mars followed by a seemingly unrelated report of an unknown object falling on a farm in Grovers Mill, New Jersey. The crisis escalates dramatically when an on-scene reporter at Grovers Mill describes creatures emerging from what is evidently an alien spacecraft. The aliens employ a heat ray against police and onlookers, and the radio correspondent describes the attack in increasing panic until his audio feed abruptly goes dead.

This is followed by a rapid series of news updates detailing the beginning of a devastating alien invasion and the US military&#x27;s futile efforts to stop it. The first portion of the episode climaxes with a live report from a rooftop in Manhattan, from where a correspondent describes citizens fleeing from poison smoke released by towering Martian &quot;war machines&quot; until he coughs and falls silent. Only then does the program take its first break, about thirty minutes after Welles&#x27;s introduction.

The second portion of the show shifts to a more conventional radio drama format that follows a survivor (played by Welles) dealing with the aftermath of the invasion and the ongoing Martian occupation of Earth. The final segment lasts for about sixteen minutes, and like the original novel, concludes with the revelation that the Martians have been defeated by microbes rather than by humans. The broadcast ends with a brief &quot;out of character&quot; announcement by Welles in which he compares the show to &quot;dressing up in a sheet and jumping out of a bush and saying &#x27;boo!

==Production==
&quot;The War of the Worlds&quot; was the 17th episode of the CBS Radio series &quot;The Mercury Theatre on the Air,&quot; and was broadcast at 8 pm ET on October 30, 1938. H. G. Wells&#x27; original novel tells the story of a Martian invasion of Earth. The novel was adapted for radio by Howard Koch, who changed the primary setting from 19th-century England to the 20th-century United States, with the landing point of the first Martian spacecraft changed to rural Grovers Mill, an unincorporated village in West Windsor, New Jersey.

The program&#x27;s format is a simulated live newscast of developing events. The first two-thirds of the hour-long play is a contemporary retelling of events of the novel, presented as news bulletins interrupting programs of dance music. &quot;I had conceived the idea of doing a radio broadcast in such a manner that a crisis would actually seem to be happening,&quot; said Welles, &quot;and would be broadcast in such a dramatized form as to appear to be a real event taking place at that time, rather than a mere radio play.&quot; This approach was similar to Ronald Knox&#x27;s radio hoax &quot;Broadcasting the Barricades&quot; that was broadcast by the BBC in 1926, which Welles later said gave him the idea for &quot;The War of the Worlds&quot;. A 1927 drama aired by Adelaide station 5CL depicted an invasion of Australia using the same techniques and inspired reactions similar to those of the Welles broadcast.

Welles was also influenced by the &quot;Columbia Workshop&quot; presentations &quot;The Fall of the City&quot;, a 1937 radio play in which Welles played the role of an omniscient announcer, and &quot;Air Raid&quot;, an as-it-happens drama starring Ray Collins that aired October 27, 1938. Welles had previously used a newscast format for &quot;Julius Caesar&quot; (September 11, 1938), with H. V. Kaltenborn providing historical commentary throughout the story.

&quot;The War of the Worlds&quot; broadcast used techniques similar to those of &quot;The March of Time,&quot; the CBS news documentary and dramatization radio series. Welles was a member of the program&#x27;s regular cast, having first performed on it in March 1935. &quot;The Mercury Theatre on the Air&quot; and &quot;The March of Time&quot; shared many cast members and sound effects chief Ora D. Nichols.

Welles discussed his fake newscast idea with producer John Houseman and associate producer Paul Stewart; together, they decided to adapt a work of science fiction. They considered adapting M. P. Shiel&#x27;s &quot;The Purple Cloud&quot; and Arthur Conan Doyle&#x27;s &quot;The Lost World&quot; before purchasing the radio rights to &quot;The War of the Worlds&quot;. Houseman later suspected Welles had never read it.

Koch worked on adapting novels and wrote the first drafts for the Mercury Theatre broadcasts &quot;Hell on Ice&quot; (October 9), &quot;Seventeen&quot; (October 16), and &quot;Around the World in 80 Days&quot; (October 23). On October 24, he was assigned to adapt &quot;The War of the Worlds&quot; for broadcast the following Sunday night.

On the night of October 25, 36 hours before rehearsals were to begin, Koch telephoned Houseman in what the producer characterized as &quot;deep distress&quot;: Koch said he could not make &quot;The War of the Worlds&quot; interesting or credible as a radio play, a conviction echoed by his secretary Anne Froelick, a typist and aspiring writer whom Houseman had hired to assist him. With only his own abandoned script for &quot;Lorna Doone&quot; to fall back on, Houseman told Koch to continue adapting the Wells fantasy. He joined Koch and Froelick to work on the script through the night. On the night of October 26, the first draft was finished on schedule.

On October 27, Stewart held a cast reading of the script, with Koch and Houseman making necessary changes. That afternoon, Stewart made an acetate recording without music or sound effects. Welles, immersed in rehearsing the Mercury stage production of &quot;Danton&#x27;s Death&quot; scheduled to open the following week, played the record at an editorial meeting that night in his suite at the St. Regis Hotel. After hearing &quot;Air Raid&quot; on the &quot;Columbia Workshop&quot; earlier that same evening, Welles thought the &quot;War of the Worlds&quot; script was dull, and he advised the writers to add more news flashes and eyewitness accounts to create a stronger sense of urgency and excitement.

Houseman, Koch, and Stewart reworked the script that night, increasing the number of news bulletins and using the names of real places and people whenever possible. On October 28, the script was sent to Davidson Taylor, executive producer for CBS, and the network legal department. Their response was that the script was &quot;too&quot; credible and its realism had to be toned down. As using the names of actual institutions could be actionable, CBS insisted on about 28 changes in phrasing. &quot;Under protest and with a deep sense of grievance we changed the Hotel Biltmore to a nonexistent &quot;Park Plaza&quot;, &quot;Transamerica Radio News&quot; to &quot;Inter-Continental Radio News&quot;, the &quot;Columbia Broadcasting Building&quot; to &quot;Broadcasting Building&quot;,&quot; Houseman wrote. &quot;The United States Weather Bureau in Washington, D.C.&quot; was changed to &quot;The Government Weather Bureau&quot;, &quot;Princeton University Observatory&quot; to &quot;Princeton Observatory&quot;, &quot;McGill University&quot; in Montreal to &quot;Macmillan University&quot; in Toronto, &quot;New Jersey National Guard&quot; to &quot;State Militia&quot;, &quot;United States Signal Corps&quot; to &quot;Signal Corps&quot;, &quot;Langley Field&quot; to &quot;Langham Field&quot;, and &quot;St. Patrick&#x27;s Cathedral&quot; to &quot;the cathedral&quot;.

On October 29, Stewart rehearsed the show with the sound effects team and gave special attention to crowd scenes, the echo of cannon fire, and the sound of boat horns in New York Harbor.

In the early afternoon of October 30, Bernard Herrmann and his orchestra arrived in the studio, where Welles had taken over production of that evening&#x27;s program.

To create the role of reporter Carl Phillips, Frank Readick went to the record library and repeatedly played the recording of Herbert Morrison&#x27;s dramatic radio report of the &quot;Hindenburg&quot; disaster. Stewart worked with Herrmann and the orchestra to sound like a dance band, and became the person Welles later credited as being largely responsible for the quality of &quot;The War of the Worlds&quot; broadcast.

Welles wanted the music to play for unbearably long stretches of time. The studio&#x27;s emergency fill-in, a solo piano playing Debussy and Chopin, was heard several times. &quot;As it played on and on,&quot; Houseman wrote, &quot;its effect became increasingly sinister—a thin band of suspense stretched almost beyond endurance. That piano was the neatest trick of the show.&quot; The dress rehearsal was scheduled for 6 pm.

&quot;Our actual broadcasting time, from the first mention of the meteorites to the fall of New York City, was less than forty minutes,&quot; wrote Houseman. &quot;During that time, men travelled long distances, large bodies of troops were mobilized, cabinet meetings were held, savage battles fought on land and in the air. And millions of people accepted it—emotionally if not logically.&quot;

===Cast===
The cast of &quot;The War of the Worlds&quot; appears in order as first heard in the broadcast.
* Announcer – Dan Seymour
* Narrator – Orson Welles
* First studio announcer – Paul Stewart
* Meridian Room announcer – William Alland
* Reporter Carl Phillips – Frank Readick
* Professor Richard Pierson – Orson Welles
* Second studio announcer – Carl Frank
* Mr. Wilmuth – Ray Collins
* Policeman at Wilmuth farm – Kenny Delmar
* Brigadier General Montgomery Smith – Richard Wilson
* Mr. Harry McDonald, vice president in charge of radio operations – Ray Collins
* Captain Lansing of the Signal Corps – Kenny Delmar
* Third studio announcer – Paul Stewart
* Secretary of the Interior – Kenny Delmar
* 22nd Field Artillery Officer – Richard Wilson
* Field artillery gunner – William Alland
* Field artillery observer – Stefan Schnabel
* Lieutenant Voght, bombing commander – Howard Smith
* Bayonne radio operator – Kenny Delmar
* Langham Field radio operator – Richard Wilson
* Newark radio operator – William Herz
* 2X2L radio operator – Frank Readick
* 8X3R radio operator – William Herz
* Fourth studio announcer, from roof of Broadcasting Building – Ray Collins
* Fascist stranger – Carl Frank
* Himself – Orson Welles

==Broadcast==
===Plot summary===
&quot;The War of the Worlds&quot; begins with a paraphrase of , updated to contemporary times. The announcer introduces Orson Welles:

We know now that in the early years of the 20th century, this world was being watched closely by intelligences greater than man&#x27;s and yet as mortal as his own. We know now that as human beings busied themselves about their various concerns, they were scrutinized and studied, perhaps almost as narrowly as a man with a microscope might scrutinize the transient creatures that swarm and multiply in a drop of water. With infinite complacence, people went to and fro over the earth about their little affairs, serene in the assurance of their dominion over this small spinning fragment of solar driftwood which by chance or design man has inherited out of the dark mystery of Time and Space. Yet across an immense ethereal gulf, minds that are to our minds as ours are to the beasts in the jungle, intellects vast, cool and unsympathetic, regarded this earth with envious eyes and slowly and surely drew their plans against us. In the 39th year of the 20th century came the great disillusionment. It was near the end of October. Business was better. The war scare was over. More men were back at work. Sales were picking up. On this particular evening, October 30th, the Crossley service estimated that 32 million people were listening in on radios...

The radio program begins as a simulation of a normal evening radio broadcast featuring a weather report and music by &quot;Ramon Raquello and His Orchestra&quot; live from a local hotel ballroom. After a few minutes, the music is interrupted by several news flashes about strange gas explosions on Mars. An interview is arranged with reporter Carl Phillips and Princeton-based astronomy professor Richard Pierson, who dismisses speculation about life on Mars. The musical program returns temporarily but is interrupted again by news of a strange meteorite landing in Grovers Mill, New Jersey. Phillips and Pierson are dispatched to the site, where a large crowd has gathered. Philips describes the chaotic atmosphere around the strange cylindrical object, and Pierson admits that he does not know exactly what it is, but that it seems to be made of an extraterrestrial metal. The cylinder unscrews, and Phillips describes the tentacled, horrific &quot;monster&quot; that emerges from inside. Police officers approach the Martian waving a flag of truce, but it and its companions respond by firing a heat ray, which incinerates the delegation and ignites the nearby woods and cars as the crowd screams. Phillips&#x27;s shouts about incoming flames are cut off mid-sentence, and after a moment of dead air, an announcer explains that the remote broadcast was interrupted due to &quot;some difficulty with [their] field transmission&quot;.

After a brief &quot;piano interlude&quot;, regular programming breaks down as the studio struggles with casualty and fire-fighting updates. A shaken Pierson speculates about Martian technology. The New Jersey state militia declares martial law and attacks the cylinder; a captain from their field headquarters lectures about the overwhelming force of properly-equipped infantry and the helplessness of the Martians until a tripod rises from the pit, which obliterates the militia. The studio returns and describes the Martians as an invading army. Emergency response bulletins give way to damage and evacuation reports as thousands of refugees clog the highways. Three Martian tripods from the cylinder destroy power stations and uproot bridges and railroads, reinforced by three others from a second cylinder that landed in the Great Swamp near Morristown. The Secretary of the Interior reads a brief statement trying to reassure a panicked nation, after which it is reported that more explosions have been observed on Mars, indicating that more war machines are on the way.

A live connection is established to a field artillery battery in the Watchung Mountains. Its gun crew damages a machine, resulting in a release of poisonous black smoke, before fading into the sound of coughing. The lead plane of a wing of bombers from Langham Field broadcasts its approach and remains on the air as their engines are burned by the heat ray and the plane dives on the invaders in a last-ditch suicide attack. Radio operators go active and fall silent: although the bombers manage to destroy one machine, the remaining five spread black smoke across the Jersey Marshes into Newark.

Eventually, a news reporter transmitting from atop the Broadcasting Building describes the Martian invasion of New York City – &quot;five great machines&quot; wading the Hudson &quot;like [men] wading through a brook&quot;, black smoke drifting over the city, people diving into the East River &quot;like rats&quot;, others in Times Square &quot;falling like flies&quot;. He reads a final bulletin stating that Martian cylinders have fallen all over the country, then describes the smoke approaching his location until he coughs and apparently collapses, leaving only the sounds of the panicked city in the background. A ham radio operator is heard calling, &quot;2X2L calling CQ, New York. Isn&#x27;t there anyone on the air? Isn&#x27;t there anyone on the air? Isn&#x27;t there... anyone?&quot;

After a few seconds of silence, announcer Dan Seymour breaks in with a standard programming statement:

You are listening to a CBS presentation of Orson Welles and the &quot;Mercury Theatre on the Air&quot;, in an original dramatization of &quot;The War of the Worlds&quot; by H. G. Wells. The performance will continue after a brief intermission. This is the Columbia Broadcasting System.

After the break, the remainder of the program is performed in a more conventional radio drama format of dialogue and monologue. It focuses on Professor Pierson, who has survived the attack on Grovers Mill and attempts to make contact with other humans. In Newark, he encounters an opportunistic militiaman who holds fascistic ideals and declares his intent to use Martian weaponry to take control of both the invaders and their human slaves; saying that he wants no part of &quot;his world&quot;, Pierson leaves the stranger with his delusions. His journey ends in the ruins of New York City, where he discovers that the Martians have died – as with the novel, they fell victim to earthly pathogenic germs, to which they had no immunity. Life returns to normal, and Pierson finishes writing his recollections of the invasion and its aftermath.

====Closing statement====
After the conclusion of the play, Welles reassumed his role as host and told listeners that the broadcast was intended to be merely a &quot;holiday offering&quot;, the equivalent of the Mercury Theater &quot;dressing up in a sheet, jumping out of a bush and saying, &#x27;Boo!&#x27;&quot; and stated that while they had &quot;annihilated the world and utterly destroyed CBS before your very ears... you will be relieved I hope to hear that both institutions are still open for business.&quot; He ended the program by assuring listeners that, &quot;If your doorbell rings and there&#x27;s nobody there, that was no Martian; it&#x27;s Halloween.&quot; Popular mythology holds that the disclaimer was hastily added to the broadcast at the insistence of CBS executives to quell the supposed panic inspired by the program, but it was actually added by Welles at the last minute, and he delivered it over Taylor&#x27;s objections, who feared that reading it on the air would expose the network to legal liability.

===Announcements===
Radio programming charts in Sunday newspapers listed &quot;The War of the Worlds&quot;. On October 30, 1938, &quot;The New York Times&quot; included the show in its &quot;Leading Events of the Week&quot; (&quot;Tonight – Play: H. G. Wells&#x27; &#x27;War of the Worlds&#x27;&quot;) and published a photograph of Welles with some of the Mercury players, captioned, &quot;Tonight&#x27;s show is H. G. Wells&#x27; &#x27;War of the Worlds&#x27;&quot;.

Announcements that &quot;The War of the Worlds&quot; is a dramatization of a work of fiction were made on the full CBS network at four points during the broadcast: at the beginning, before the middle break, after the middle break, and at the end. The middle break was delayed 10 minutes to accommodate the dramatic content.

Another announcement was repeated on the full CBS network that same evening at 10:30 pm, 11:30 pm, and midnight: &quot;For those listeners who tuned in to Orson Welles&#x27;s &quot;Mercury Theatre on the Air&quot; broadcast from 8 to 9 pm Eastern Standard Time tonight and did not realize that the program was merely a modernized adaptation of H. G. Wells&#x27; famous novel &quot;War of the Worlds&quot;, we are repeating the fact which was made clear four times on the program, that, while the names of some American cities were used, as in all novels and dramatizations, the entire story and all of its incidents were fictitious.&quot;

==Public reaction==

The show went on the air shortly after 8:00 pm ET. At 8:32, Houseman noticed Taylor step out of the studio to take a telephone call in the control room, who returned four minutes later looking &quot;pale as death&quot;, as he had been ordered to immediately interrupt &quot;The War of the Worlds&quot; broadcast with an announcement of the program&#x27;s fictional content. By the time the order was given, the fictional news reporter played by Ray Collins was choking on poison gas as the Martians overwhelmed New York and the program was less than a minute away from its first scheduled break, which proceeded as previously planned.

Actor Stefan Schnabel recalled sitting in the anteroom after finishing his on-air performance. &quot;A few policemen trickled in, then a few more. Soon, the room was full of policemen and a massive struggle was going on between the police, page boys, and CBS executives, who were trying to prevent the cops from busting in and stopping the show. It was a show to witness.&quot;

During the sign-off theme, the phone began ringing. Houseman picked it up and the furious caller announced he was mayor of a Midwestern town, where mobs were in the streets. Houseman hung up quickly, &quot;[f]or we were off the air now and the studio door had burst open.&quot;

The following hours were a nightmare. The building was suddenly full of people and dark-blue uniforms. Hustled out of the studio, we were locked into a small back office on another floor. Here we sat incommunicado while network employees were busily collecting, destroying, or locking up all scripts and records of the broadcast. Finally, the Press was let loose upon us, ravening for horror. How many deaths had &quot;we&quot; heard of? (Implying they knew of thousands.) What did &quot;we&quot; know of the fatal stampede in a Jersey hall? (Implying it was one of many.) What traffic deaths? (The ditches must be choked with corpses.) The suicides? (Haven&#x27;t you heard about the one on Riverside Drive?) It is all quite vague in my memory and quite terrible.

Paul White, head of CBS News, was quickly summoned to the office, &quot;and there bedlam reigned&quot;, he wrote:

The telephone switchboard, a vast sea of light, could handle only a fraction of incoming calls. The haggard Welles sat alone and despondent. &quot;I&#x27;m through,&quot; he lamented, &quot;washed up.&quot; I didn&#x27;t bother to reply to this highly inaccurate self-appraisal. I was too busy writing explanations to put on the air, reassuring the audience that it was safe. I also answered my share of incessant telephone calls, many of them from as far away as the Pacific Coast.
Because of the crowd of newspaper reporters, photographers, and police, the cast left the CBS building by the rear entrance. Aware of the sensation the broadcast had made, but not its extent, Welles went to the Mercury Theatre where an all-night rehearsal of &quot;Danton&#x27;s Death&quot; was in progress. Shortly after midnight, one of the cast, a late arrival, told Welles that news about &quot;The War of the Worlds&quot; was being flashed in Times Square. They immediately left the theatre, and standing on the corner of Broadway and 42nd Street, they read the lighted bulletin that circled the &quot;New York Times&quot; building: ORSON WELLES CAUSES PANIC.

Some listeners heard only a portion of the broadcast and, in the tension and anxiety prior to World War II, mistook it for a genuine news broadcast. Thousands of them shared the false reports with others or called CBS, newspapers, or the police to ask if the broadcast was real. Many newspapers assumed that the large number of phone calls and the scattered reports of listeners rushing about or fleeing their homes proved the existence of a mass panic, but such behavior was never widespread.

Future &quot;Tonight Show&quot; host Jack Paar had announcing duties that night for Cleveland CBS affiliate WGAR. As panicked listeners called the studio, he attempted to calm them on the phone and on air by saying: &quot;The world is not coming to an end. Trust me. When have I ever lied to you?&quot; When the listeners started to accuse Paar with &quot;covering up the truth&quot;, he called WGAR&#x27;s station manager for help. Oblivious to the situation, the manager advised Paar to calm down and said that it was &quot;all a tempest in a teapot&quot;.

In a 1975 interview with radio historian Chuck Schaden, radio actor Alan Reed recalled being one of several actors recruited to answer phone calls at CBS&#x27;s New York headquarters.

In Concrete, Washington, phone lines and electricity suffered a short circuit at the Superior Portland Cement Company&#x27;s substation. Residents were unable to call neighbors, family, or friends to calm their fears. Reporters who heard of the coincidental blackout sent the story over the newswire, and Concrete was known worldwide.

Welles continued with the rehearsal of &quot;Danton&#x27;s Death&quot;, leaving shortly after the dawn of October 31. He was operating on three hours of sleep when CBS called him to a press conference. He read a statement that was later printed in newspapers nationwide and took questions from reporters:

:Question: Were you aware of the terror such a broadcast would stir up?&lt;br&gt;Welles: Definitely not. The technique I used was not original with me. It was not even new. I anticipated nothing unusual.
:Question: Should you have toned down the language of the drama?&lt;br&gt;Welles: No, you don&#x27;t play murder in soft words.
:Question: Why was the story changed to put in names of American cities and government officers?&lt;br&gt;Welles: H. G. Wells used real cities in Europe, and to make the play more acceptable to American listeners we used real cities in America. Of course, I&#x27;m terribly sorry now.

In its October 31, 1938, edition, the &quot;Tucson Citizen&quot; reported that three Arizona affiliates of CBS (KOY in Phoenix, KTUC in Tucson and KSUN in Bisbee) had originally scheduled a delayed broadcast of &quot;The War of the Worlds&quot; that night; CBS had shifted &quot;The Mercury Theater on the Air&quot; from Monday nights to Sunday nights on September 11, but the three affiliates preferred to keep the series in its original Monday slot so that it would not compete with NBC&#x27;s top-rated &quot;Chase and Sanborn Hour&quot;. However, late that night, CBS contacted KOY and KTUC owner Burridge Butler and instructed him not to air the program the following night.

Within three weeks, newspapers had published at least 12,500 articles about the broadcast and its impact, but the story dropped from the front pages after a few days. Adolf Hitler referenced the broadcast in a speech in Munich on November 8, 1938. Welles later remarked that Hitler cited the effect of the broadcast on the American public as evidence of &quot;the corrupt condition and decadent state of affairs in democracy&quot;.

Bob Sanders recalled looking outside the window and seeing a traffic jam in the normally quiet Grovers Mill, New Jersey, at the intersection of Cranbury and Clarksville Roads.

===Causes===
Later popular legend held that many people missed the repeated notices about the broadcast being fictional partly because &quot;The Mercury Theatre on the Air&quot;, an unsponsored CBS cultural program with a relatively small audience, ran at the same time as the NBC Red Network&#x27;s popular &quot;Chase and Sanborn Hour&quot; featuring ventriloquist Edgar Bergen. The legend had it that a significant number of &quot;Chase and Sanborn&quot; listeners changed stations when the first comic sketch ended and a musical number by Nelson Eddy began, tuning in to &quot;The War of the Worlds&quot; after the opening announcements. Historian A. Brad Schwartz, after studying hundreds of letters from people who heard &quot;The War of the Worlds&quot; as well as contemporary audience surveys, concluded that very few people frightened by Welles&#x27;s broadcast had tuned out from Bergen&#x27;s program. &quot;All the hard evidence suggests that &quot;The Chase &amp; Sanborn Hour&quot; was only a minor contributing factor to the Martian hysteria,&quot; he wrote. &quot;...in truth, there was no mass exodus from Charlie McCarthy to Orson Welles that night.&quot;

A study by the Radio Project discovered that less than one third of panicked listeners understood the invaders to be aliens; most thought that they were listening to reports of a German invasion or of a natural catastrophe. &quot;People were on edge&quot;, wrote Welles biographer Frank Brady. &quot;For the entire month prior to &#x27;The War of the Worlds&#x27;, radio had kept the American public alert to the ominous happenings throughout the world. The Munich crisis was at its height... For the first time in history, the public could tune into their radios every night and hear, boot by boot, accusation by accusation, threat by threat, the rumblings that seemed inevitably leading to a world war.&quot;

CBS News chief Paul White wrote that he was convinced that the panic induced by the broadcast was a result of the public suspense generated before the Munich Pact. &quot;Radio listeners had had their emotions played upon for days... Thus they believed the Welles production even though it was specifically stated that the whole thing was fiction&quot;.

Newspapers at the time perceived the new technology of radio as a threat to their business. Newspapers exaggerated the rare cases of actual fear and confusion to play up the idea of a nationwide panic as a means of discrediting radio. As &quot;Slate&quot; reports:

&quot;The supposed panic was so tiny as to be practically immeasurable on the night of the broadcast. ... Radio had siphoned off advertising revenue from print during the Depression, badly damaging the newspaper industry. So the papers seized the opportunity presented by Welles&#x27; program to discredit radio as a source of news. The newspaper industry sensationalized the panic to prove to advertisers, and regulators, that radio management was irresponsible and not to be trusted.&quot;

===Extent===
Historical research suggests the panic was significantly less widespread than newspapers had indicated at the time. &quot;[T]he panic and mass hysteria so readily associated with &#x27;The War of the Worlds&#x27; did not occur on anything approaching a nationwide dimension&quot;, American University media historian W. Joseph Campbell wrote in 2003. He quoted Robert E. Bartholomew, an authority on mass panic outbreaks, as having said that &quot;there is a growing consensus among sociologists that the extent of the panic... was greatly exaggerated&quot;.
That position is supported by contemporary accounts. &quot;In the first place, most people didn&#x27;t hear [the show],&quot; said Frank Stanton, later president of CBS. Of the nearly 2,000 letters mailed to Welles and the Federal Communications Commission after &quot;The War of the Worlds&quot;, currently held by the University of Michigan and the National Archives and Records Administration, roughly 27% came from frightened listeners or people who witnessed any panic. After analyzing those letters, Schwartz concluded that although the broadcast briefly misled a significant portion of its audience, not many of them fled their homes or otherwise panicked. The total number of protest letters sent to Welles and the FCC was also low in comparison with other controversial radio broadcasts of the period, suggesting that the audience was small and the fright severely limited.

Five thousand households were telephoned that night in a survey conducted by the C. E. Hooper company, the main radio ratings service at the time. Two percent of the respondents said they were listening to the radio play, and no one stated they were listening to a news broadcast. About 98% of respondents said they were listening to other radio programming (&quot;The Chase and Sanborn Hour&quot; was by far the most popular program in that timeslot) or not listening to the radio at all. Further shrinking the potential audience, some CBS network affiliates, including some in large markets such as Boston&#x27;s WEEI, had pre-empted &quot;The Mercury Theatre on the Air&quot;, in favor of local commercial programming.

Ben Gross, radio editor for the &quot;New York Daily News&quot;, wrote in his 1954 memoir that the streets were nearly deserted as he made his way to the studio for the end of the program. Houseman reported that the Mercury Theatre staff was surprised when they were finally released from the CBS studios to find life going on as usual in the streets of New York. The writer of a letter that &quot;The Washington Post&quot; published later likewise recalled no panicked mobs in the capital&#x27;s downtown streets at the time. &quot;The supposed panic was so tiny as to be practically immeasurable on the night of the broadcast&quot;, media historians Jefferson Pooley and Michael J. Socolow wrote in &quot;Slate&quot; on its 75th anniversary in 2013; &quot;Almost nobody was fooled&quot;.

According to Campbell, the most common response said to indicate a panic was calling the local newspaper or police to confirm the story or seek additional information. That, he writes, is an indicator that people were not generally panicking or hysterical. &quot;The call volume perhaps is best understood as an altogether &quot;rational&quot; response...&quot; Some New Jersey media and law enforcement agencies received up to 40% more telephone calls than normal during the broadcast. AT&amp;T Corporation telephone operators in New York City recalled in 1988 that &quot;every light&quot; on the &quot;half block long&quot; switchboard lit up after the broadcast stated that the Martians were crossing the George Washington Bridge, while operators in Princeton and Missoula, Montana were asked what the invaders looked like. They described callers &quot;crying and screaming&quot;, asking whether dead bodies were near the operators, &quot;begging us to get connections to their families ... before the world came to an end&quot;. &quot;The people believed it. They really believed it that night&quot;, one concluded.

===Newspaper coverage and response===

As it was late on a Sunday night in the Eastern Time Zone, where the broadcast originated, few reporters and other staff were present in newsrooms. Most newspaper coverage thus took the form of Associated Press stories, which were largely anecdotal aggregates of reporting from its various bureaus, giving the impression that panic had indeed been widespread. Many newspapers led with the Associated Press&#x27;s story the next day.

The &quot;Twin City Sentinel&quot; of Winston-Salem, North Carolina, pointed out that the situation could have been even worse if most people had not been listening to Bergen&#x27;s show: &quot;Charlie McCarthy last night saved the United States from a sudden and panicky death by hysteria.&quot;

On November 2, 1938, the Australian newspaper &quot;The Age&quot; characterized the incident as &quot;mass hysteria&quot; and stated that &quot;never in the history of the United States had such a wave of terror and panic swept the continent&quot;. Unnamed observers quoted by &quot;The Age&quot; commented that &quot;the panic could have only happened in America.&quot;

Editorialists chastised the radio industry for allowing that to happen. The response may have reflected newspaper publishers&#x27; fears that radio, to which they had lost some of the advertising revenue that was scarce enough during the Great Depression, would render them obsolete. In &quot;The War of the Worlds&quot;, they saw an opportunity to cast aspersions on the newer medium: &quot;The nation as a whole continues to face the danger of incomplete, misunderstood news over a medium which has yet to prove that it is competent to perform the news job,&quot; wrote &quot;Editor &amp; Publisher&quot;, the newspaper industry&#x27;s trade journal.

William Randolph Hearst&#x27;s papers called on broadcasters to police themselves, lest the government step in, as Iowa senator Clyde L. Herring proposed a bill that would have required all programming to be reviewed by the FCC prior to broadcast – it was never introduced. Others blamed the radio audience for its gullibility. Noting that any intelligent listener would have realized the broadcast was fictional, the &quot;Chicago Tribune&quot; opined, &quot;it would be more tactful to say that some members of the radio audience are a trifle retarded mentally, and that many a program is prepared for their consumption.&quot; Other newspapers noted that anxious listeners had called their offices to learn if Martians were really attacking.

Few contemporary accounts exist outside newspaper coverage of the mass panic and hysteria supposedly induced by the broadcast. Justin Levine, a producer at KFI in Los Angeles, wrote that &quot;the anecdotal nature of such reporting makes it difficult to objectively assess the true extent and intensity of the panic&quot;. Bartholomew saw it as more evidence that the panic was predominantly a creation of the newspaper industry.

===Research===
In a study, published as &quot;The Invasion from Mars&quot; (1940), Princeton professor Hadley Cantril calculated around six million people heard &quot;The War of the Worlds&quot; broadcast. He estimated that 1.7 million listeners believed the broadcast was a news bulletin and, of those, 1.2 million people were frightened or disturbed. Pooley and Socolow have concluded that Cantril&#x27;s study had serious flaws. Its estimate of the program&#x27;s audience is more than twice as high as any other at the time. Cantril conceded that, but argued that unlike Hooper, his estimate had attempted to capture the significant portion of the audience that did not have home telephones at that time. Since those respondents were contacted only after the media frenzy, Cantril admitted that their recollections could have been influenced by what they read in the newspapers. Claims that &quot;Chase and Sanborn&quot; listeners, who missed the disclaimer at the beginning when they turned to CBS during a commercial break or musical performance on that show and thus mistook &quot;The War of the Worlds&quot; for a real broadcast inflated the show&#x27;s audience and the ensuing panic, are impossible to substantiate.

Apart from his imperfect methods of estimating the audience and assessing the authenticity of their response, Pooley and Socolow found Cantril made another error in typing audience reaction. Respondents had indicated a variety of reactions to the program, among them &quot;excited&quot;, &quot;disturbed&quot;, and &quot;frightened&quot;. He included all of them with &quot;panicked&quot;, failing to account for the possibility that despite their reaction, they were still aware the broadcast was staged. &quot;[T]hose who did hear it, looked at it as a prank and accepted it that way&quot;, recalled researcher Frank Stanton.

Bartholomew admitted that hundreds of thousands were frightened, but called evidence of people taking action based on their fear &quot;scant&quot; and &quot;anecdotal&quot;. Contemporary news articles indicated that police received hundreds of calls in numerous locations, but stories of people doing anything more than calling authorities involved mostly only small groups; such stories were often reported by people who were panicking.

Later investigations found many of the panicked responses to have been exaggerated or mistaken. Cantril&#x27;s researchers found that contrary to what had been claimed, no admissions for shock were made at a Newark hospital during the broadcast; hospitals in New York City similarly reported no extra admissions that night. A few suicide attempts seem to have been prevented when friends or family intervened, but no record of a successful one exists. A &quot;Washington Post&quot; claim that a man died of a heart attack brought on by listening to the program could not be verified. One woman filed a lawsuit against CBS, but it was soon dismissed.

The FCC also received letters from the public that advised against taking reprisals. Singer Eddie Cantor urged the commission not to overreact, as &quot;censorship would retard radio immeasurably&quot;. The FCC decided to not punish Welles or CBS, and also barred complaints about &quot;The War of the Worlds&quot; from being brought up during license renewals. &quot;Janet Jackson&#x27;s 2004 &#x27;wardrobe malfunction&#x27; remains far more significant in the history of broadcast regulation than Orson Welles&#x27; trickery,&quot; wrote Pooley and Socolow.

===Meeting of Welles and Wells===
H. G. Wells and Orson Welles met for the first and only time in late October 1940, shortly before the second anniversary of the &quot;Mercury Theatre&quot; broadcast, when they were both lecturing in San Antonio, Texas. On October 28, 1940, the two men visited the KTSA studio for an interview by Charles C. Shaw, who introduced them by characterizing the panic generated by &quot;The War of the Worlds&quot;.

Wells was skeptical about the actual extent of the panic caused by &quot;this sensational Halloween spree&quot;, saying: &quot;Are you sure there was such a panic in America or wasn&#x27;t it your Halloween fun?&quot; Welles replied that &quot;[i]t&#x27;s supposed to show the corrupt condition and decadent state of affairs in democracy, that &#x27;The War of the Worlds&#x27; went over as well as it did.&quot;

When Shaw mentioned that there was &quot;some excitement&quot; that he did not wish to belittle, Welles replied, &quot;What kind of excitement? Mr. H. G. Wells wants to know if the excitement wasn&#x27;t the same kind of excitement that we extract from a practical joke in which somebody puts a sheet over his head and says &#x27;Boo!&#x27; I don&#x27;t think anybody believes that that individual is a ghost, but we do scream and yell and rush down the hall. And that&#x27;s just about what happened.&quot;

==Authorship==
As the Mercury Theatre&#x27;s second season began in 1938, Welles and Houseman were unable to write the &quot;Mercury Theatre on the Air&quot; broadcasts by themselves. They hired Koch, whose experience in having a play performed by the Federal Theatre Project in Chicago led him to leave his law practice and move to New York to become a writer. Koch was put to work at $50 a week, raised to $60 after he proved himself. &quot;The Mercury Theatre on the Air&quot; was a sustaining show, so in lieu of a more substantial salary, Houseman gave Koch the rights to any script he worked on.

A condensed version of the script for &quot;The War of the Worlds&quot; appeared in the debut issue of &quot;Radio Digest&quot; magazine (February 1939), in an article on the broadcast that credited &quot;Orson Welles and his Mercury Theatre players&quot;. The complete script appeared in &quot;The Invasion from Mars: A Study in the Psychology of Panic&quot; (1940), the book publication of a Princeton University study directed by Cantril. Welles strongly protested Koch being listed as sole author since many others contributed to the script, but by the time the book was published, he had decided to end the dispute.

Welles sought legal redress after the CBS TV series &quot;Studio One&quot; presented its top-rated broadcast, &quot;The Night America Trembled&quot;, on September 9, 1957. The live presentation of Nelson S. Bond&#x27;s documentary play recreated the 1938 performance of &quot;The War of the Worlds&quot; in the CBS studio, using the script as a framework for a series of factual narratives about a cross-section of radio listeners. No member of the &quot;Mercury Theatre&quot; was named. The courts ruled against Welles, who was found to have abandoned any rights to the script after it was published in Cantril&#x27;s book. Koch had granted CBS the right to use the script in its program.

&quot;As it developed over the years, Koch took some cash and some credit,&quot; wrote biographer Frank Brady. &quot;He wrote the story of how he created the adaptation, with a copy of his script being made into a paperback book enjoying large printings and an album of the broadcast selling over 500,000 copies, part of the income also going to him as copyright owner.&quot; Since his death in 1995, Koch&#x27;s family has received royalties from adaptations or broadcasts.

The book, &quot;The Panic Broadcast&quot;, was first published in 1970. The best-selling album was a sound recording of the broadcast titled &quot;Orson Welles&#x27; War of the Worlds&quot;, &quot;released by arrangement with Manheim Fox Enterprises, Inc.&quot; The source discs for the recording are unknown. Welles told Peter Bogdanovich that it was a poor-quality recording taken off the air at the time of broadcast – &quot;a pirated record which people have made fortunes of money and have no right to play&quot;. Welles did not receive any compensation.

==Legacy==
Initially apologetic about the supposed panic his broadcast had caused, and privately fuming that newspaper reports of lawsuits were either greatly exaggerated or totally fabricated, Welles later embraced the story as part of his personal myth: &quot;Houses were emptying, churches were filling up; from Nashville to Minneapolis there was wailing in the streets and the rending of garments,&quot; he told Bogdanovich.

CBS also found reports ultimately useful in promoting the strength of its influence. It presented a fictionalized account of the panic in &quot;The Night America Trembled&quot;, and included it prominently in its 2003 celebrations of CBS&#x27;s 75th anniversary as a television broadcaster. &quot;The legend of the panic,&quot; according to Jefferson and Socolow, &quot;grew exponentially over the following years ... [It] persists because it so perfectly captures our unease with the media&#x27;s power over our lives.&quot;

In 1975, ABC aired the television movie &quot;The Night That Panicked America&quot;, depicting the effect the radio drama had on the public using fictional, but typical American families of the time.

West Windsor, New Jersey, where Grovers Mill is located, commemorated the 50th anniversary of the broadcast in 1988 with four days of festivities including art and planetarium shows, a panel discussion, a parade, burial of a time capsule, a dinner dance, film festivals devoted to H. G. Wells and Orson Welles, and the dedication of a bronze monument to the fictional Martian landings. Koch attended the 49th anniversary celebration as an honored guest.

The 75th anniversary of &quot;The War of the Worlds&quot; was marked by an episode of the PBS documentary series &quot;American Experience&quot;.

===Awards===
Welles and &quot;Mercury Theatre on the Air&quot; were inducted into the Radio Hall of Fame in 1988. On January 27, 2003, &quot;The War of the Worlds&quot; was selected as one of the first 50 recordings to be added to the National Recording Registry of the Library of Congress. At the 72nd World Science Fiction Convention in August 2014, a Retrospective Hugo Award for &quot;Best Dramatic Presentation, Short Form – 1938&quot; was bestowed upon the broadcast.

===Notable re-airings and adaptations===
Since the original &quot;Mercury Theatre on the Air&quot; broadcast of &quot;The War of the Worlds&quot;, many re-airings, remakes, re-enactments, parodies, and new dramatizations have occurred. Many American radio stations, particularly those that regularly air old-time radio programs, re-air the original program as a Halloween tradition.

The first Spanish language version was produced and aired on November 12, 1944, by William Steele, and Raúl Zenteno in Radio Cooperativa Vitalicia, a radio station in Santiago, Chile. Even though the fictional nature of the drama was reported twice during the broadcast and once again in the end, &quot;Newsweek&quot; reported that an electrician named José Villaroel was so frightened that he died of a heart attack.

A second Spanish-language version produced in February 1949 by Leonardo Páez and Eduardo Alcaraz for Radio Quito in Quito, Ecuador, reportedly set off panic in the city. Police and fire brigades rushed out of town to engage the supposed alien invasion force. After it was revealed that the broadcast was fiction, the panic transformed into a riot. Hundreds of people attacked Radio Quito and &quot;El Comercio&quot;, a local newspaper owner of the radio station that had participated in the hoax by publishing false reports of unidentified objects in the skies above Ecuador in the days preceding the broadcast. The riot resulted in at least seven deaths, including those of Páez&#x27;s girlfriend and nephew. Radio Quito was off the air for two years until 1951. After the incident, Páez self-exiled to Venezuela, where he lived in Mérida until his death in 1991.

An updated version of the radio drama aired several times between 1968 and 1975 on WKBW radio in Buffalo, New York.

A Portuguese-language version was aired in October 1971, by Rádio Difusora, from the Northeast state of Maranhão. This version remained faithful to Welles&#x27; adaptation, changing several American city names to Brazilian state capitals. Also, foreign cities such as Los Angeles and Chicago were reported as engulfed by a poisonous smoke after several cylinders have fallen and tripods were defeating all human resistance.
During the transmission, the director of the radio station (also performing) proceeded to explain that many of the station employees were allowed to go home and join their families, but his speech is frequently interrupted by strange noises, which he explains as being result of a worldwide radio interference that was disturbing all transmissions on Earth (presumably caused by Martian machines).
Finally, a street reporter announces that gigantic machines were crossing Rio de Janeiro, before the city is also attacked by the poison fog. Like in 1938, some listeners took the broadcast for a real news bulletin and shortly after, the Brazilian Army (the event took place during the Brazilian military dictatorship) shut down the radio station, only allowing it back on the air a few days later.

On the 50th anniversary of the radio play, on October 30, 1988, a remake was aired by WGBH and picked up by 150 National Public Radio stations. It was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word or Nonmusical Recording.

In 1994, L.A. Theatre Works and Pasadena, California, public radio station KPCC broadcast the original play before a live audience. Most of the cast for this production had appeared in one or more incarnations of &quot;Star Trek&quot;, including Leonard Nimoy, John de Lancie, Dwight Schultz, Wil Wheaton, Gates McFadden, Brent Spiner, Armin Shimerman, Jerry Hardin, and Tom Virtue. It was accompanied by an original sequel called &quot;When Welles Collide&quot;, co-written by de Lancie and Nat Segaloff featuring the same cast as themselves.

On October 30, 2002, XM Satellite Radio collaborated with conservative talk-show host Glenn Beck (who named his production company, Mercury Radio Arts, after Welles&#x27; Mercury Theatre) for a live recreation of the broadcast, using Koch&#x27;s original script and airing on the Buzz XM channel, as well as on Beck&#x27;s 100 AM/FM affiliates. In 2003, the parties were sued for copyright infringement by Koch&#x27;s widow, but settled under undisclosed terms.

On October 30, 2013, KPCC re-aired the show, introduced by George Takei with a documentary on the 1938 radio show&#x27;s production.

On November 12, 2017, a new opera based on &quot;War of the Worlds&quot; premiered at Walt Disney Concert Hall and outdoors in Los Angeles. The music was composed by Annie Gosfield, commissioned by the Los Angeles Philharmonic, directed by Yuval Sharon, and narrated by Sigourney Weaver.

The radio drama is referenced in &quot;Radio Ga Ga&quot; by &quot;Queen&quot; &quot;...through Wars of Worlds, invaded by Mars&quot;.

The widespread panic caused by the radio drama was parodied by &quot;The Simpsons&quot;, in the segment &quot;The Day the Earth Looked Stupid&quot; of the episode &quot;Treehouse of Horror XVII&quot;.

==See also==
* Mockumentary
* &quot;Ghostwatch&quot;, a 1992 British horror pseudo-documentary that was presented as if it were a live broadcast on its initial viewing, resulting in a variety of psychological effects being observed in its audience.
* &quot;Without Warning (1994 film)&quot;, a 1994 American television film influenced by this radio drama that follows a duo of real-life reporters covering breaking news about three meteor fragments crashing into the Northern Hemisphere. Just like this radio drama, this film also caused nationwide panic.
* Jafr alien invasion
* &quot;Brave New Jersey&quot;

==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* The Martian Panic Sixty Years Later: What Have We Learned? from CSICOP
* describes instances of panic, outcry over the panic and the responses by the FCC and CBS
* BBC report on the 1926 Knox riot hoax

==External links==


* &quot;The War of the Worlds&quot; (October 30, 1938) on &quot;The Mercury Theatre on the Air&quot; (Indiana University Bloomington)
* Remastered MP3 &amp; FLAC download from the Internet Archive
* The NPR broadcast of &quot;The War of the Worlds 50th Anniversary Production&quot; (October 30, 1988) from the Internet Archive
* War of the Worlds Invasion: The Complete &quot;War of the Worlds&quot; Website (John Gosling)
* mp3 of King Daevid MacKenzie&#x27;s &quot;Echoes of a Century&quot; 2005 program which contains sections of the &quot;Chase &amp; Sanborn&quot; and &quot;Mercury Theatre&quot; broadcasts of October 30, 1938, edited together in a manner approximating the sequence believed to have generated the reported panic
* &quot;The War of the Worlds&quot; – A Radio Program and A Film Score 
* &quot;Who&#x27;s Out There?&quot; NASA film with commentary on the 1938 broadcast and extraterrestrial life (1975)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q24958" start="6" end="27" title="The War of the Worlds (1938 radio drama)" label="The War of the Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q251868" start="40" end="49" title="Halloween" label="Halloween"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635894" start="65" end="77" title="radio drama" label="radio series"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855378" start="84" end="114" title="The Mercury Theatre on the Air" label="The Mercury Theatre on the Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q24829" start="146" end="158" title="Orson Welles" label="Orson Welles"/>
<link wikidata="Q42511" start="179" end="190" title="H. G. Wells" label="H. G. Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q213019" start="210" end="231" title="The War of the Worlds" label="The War of the Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q941023" start="291" end="293" title="Eastern Time Zone" label="ET"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931046" start="324" end="341" title="CBS News Radio" label="CBS Radio Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q6774723" start="448" end="464" title="Martian (The War of the Worlds)" label="Martian invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7722237" start="957" end="983" title="The Chase and Sanborn Hour" label="The Chase and Sanborn Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q721957" start="995" end="1007" title="Edgar Bergen" label="Edgar Bergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="2193" end="2197" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477514" start="2281" end="2305" title="Grovers Mill, New Jersey" label="Grovers Mill, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022995" start="3807" end="3816" title="CBS Radio" label="CBS Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855378" start="3830" end="3860" title="The Mercury Theatre on the Air" label="The Mercury Theatre on the Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q213019" start="3918" end="3950" title="The War of the Worlds" label="H. G. Wells&amp;#x27; original novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343692" start="4034" end="4045" title="Howard Koch (screenwriter)" label="Howard Koch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477514" start="4212" end="4224" title="Grovers Mill, New Jersey" label="Grovers Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073777" start="4255" end="4279" title="West Windsor, New Jersey" label="West Windsor, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q707945" start="4845" end="4856" title="Ronald Knox" label="Ronald Knox"/>
<link wikidata="Q707945" start="4864" end="4874" title="Broadcasting from the Barricades" label="radio hoax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756495" start="4941" end="4944" title="British Broadcasting Company" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149917" start="5244" end="5261" title="Columbia Workshop" label="Columbia Workshop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733218" start="5288" end="5308" title="The Fall of the City" label="The Fall of the City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550341" start="5452" end="5463" title="Ray Collins (actor)" label="Ray Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5628619" start="5595" end="5611" title="H. V. Kaltenborn" label="H. V. Kaltenborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q23020002" start="5753" end="5770" title="The March of Time (radio program)" label="The March of Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931046" start="5782" end="5785" title="CBS Radio News" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q315734" start="6132" end="6145" title="John Houseman" label="John Houseman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385381" start="6169" end="6181" title="Paul Stewart (actor)" label="Paul Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517956" start="6267" end="6278" title="M. P. Shiel" label="M. P. Shiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q368566" start="6292" end="6308" title="The Purple Cloud" label="The Purple Cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q35610" start="6319" end="6337" title="Arthur Conan Doyle" label="Arthur Conan Doyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q785255" start="6351" end="6365" title="The Lost World (Doyle novel)" label="The Lost World"/>
<link wikidata="Q442909" start="6563" end="6578" title="Mercury Theatre" label="Mercury Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4768358" start="7138" end="7151" title="Anne Froelick" label="Anne Froelick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400981" start="7266" end="7277" title="Lorna Doone" label="Lorna Doone"/>
<link wikidata="Q920590" start="7758" end="7777" title="Danton&amp;#x27;s Death" label="Danton&amp;#x27;s Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q30715430" start="7895" end="7910" title="St. Regis Hotel" label="St. Regis Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768566" start="8643" end="8653" title="actionable" label="actionable"/>
<link wikidata="Q14707071" start="8771" end="8785" title="New York Biltmore Hotel" label="Hotel Biltmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835349" start="8833" end="8856" title="Transradio Press Service" label="Transamerica Radio News"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066823" start="9025" end="9053" title="National Weather Service" label="United States Weather Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="9144" end="9164" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q201492" start="9227" end="9244" title="McGill University" label="McGill University"/>
<link wikidata="Q11884279" start="9317" end="9342" title="New Jersey Army National Guard" label="New Jersey National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q736213" start="9385" end="9411" title="Signal Corps (United States Army)" label="United States Signal Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q650056" start="9453" end="9466" title="Langley Field" label="Langley Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q624556" start="9513" end="9541" title="St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s Cathedral (Manhattan)" label="St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q296804" start="9805" end="9821" title="Bernard Herrmann" label="Bernard Herrmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q11859917" start="9981" end="9994" title="Frank Readick" label="Frank Readick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231332" start="10061" end="10077" title="Herbert Morrison (announcer)" label="Herbert Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182723" start="10114" end="10145" title="Hindenburg disaster" label="&amp;quot;Hindenburg&amp;quot; disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367599" start="10489" end="10496" title="Suite bergamasque" label="Debussy"/>
<link wikidata="Q147619" start="10501" end="10507" title="Fantaisie-Impromptu" label="Chopin"/>
<link wikidata="Q24845774" start="11306" end="11317" title="Dan Seymour (announcer)" label="Dan Seymour"/>
<link wikidata="Q24829" start="11331" end="11343" title="Orson Welles" label="Orson Welles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385381" start="11371" end="11383" title="Paul Stewart (actor)" label="Paul Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q925872" start="11412" end="11426" title="William Alland" label="William Alland"/>
<link wikidata="Q11859917" start="11454" end="11467" title="Frank Readick" label="Frank Readick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550341" start="11566" end="11577" title="Ray Collins (actor)" label="Ray Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195222" start="11608" end="11620" title="Kenny Delmar" label="Kenny Delmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q16740205" start="11660" end="11674" title="Richard Wilson (producer)" label="Richard Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q87336" start="12011" end="12026" title="Stefan Schnabel" label="Stefan Schnabel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3162845" start="12067" end="12079" title="Howard Smith (actor)" label="Howard Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q720389" start="13641" end="13650" title="timeline of events preceding World War II" label="war scare"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188715" start="13758" end="13774" title="Crossley ratings" label="Crossley service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304122" start="14093" end="14103" title="news flash" label="news flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="14138" end="14142" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q6774723" start="14861" end="14868" title="Martian (War of the Worlds)" label="Martian"/>
<link wikidata="Q252661" start="14878" end="14891" title="flag of truce" label="flag of truce"/>
<link wikidata="Q6774723" start="14939" end="14947" title="Heat-Ray" label="heat ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q5245448" start="15135" end="15143" title="dead air" label="dead air"/>
<link wikidata="Q928670" start="15487" end="15500" title="National Guard of the United States" label="state militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q715625" start="15510" end="15521" title="martial law" label="martial law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2103398" start="15699" end="15707" title="Tripod (The War of the Worlds)" label="a tripod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544372" start="16107" end="16118" title="Great Swamp National Wildlife Refuge" label="Great Swamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q962499" start="16124" end="16134" title="Morristown, New Jersey" label="Morristown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287650" start="16140" end="16165" title="United States Secretary of the Interior" label="Secretary of the Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402493" start="16393" end="16408" title="field artillery" label="field artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7973197" start="16424" end="16442" title="Watchung Mountains" label="Watchung Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q6774723" start="16512" end="16523" title="Black smoke (The War of the Worlds)" label="black smoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q217327" start="16765" end="16779" title="suicide attack" label="suicide attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q3853432" start="16925" end="16939" title="New Jersey Meadowlands" label="Jersey Marshes"/>
<link wikidata="Q25395" start="16945" end="16951" title="Newark, New Jersey" label="Newark"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140" start="17124" end="17130" title="Hudson River" label="Hudson"/>
<link wikidata="Q212862" start="17237" end="17247" title="East River" label="East River"/>
<link wikidata="Q11259" start="17281" end="17293" title="Times Square" label="Times Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q185727" start="17575" end="17584" title="ham radio" label="ham radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="18459" end="18468" title="fascistic" label="fascistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q170065" start="18832" end="18842" title="pathogenic" label="pathogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q39833" start="18843" end="18848" title="Microorganism" label="germs"/>
<link wikidata="Q182581" start="18871" end="18879" title="Immunity (medical)" label="immunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="20158" end="20176" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q941023" start="21525" end="21527" title="Eastern Time Zone" label="ET"/>
<link wikidata="Q87336" start="22120" end="22135" title="Stefan Schnabel" label="Stefan Schnabel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7154340" start="23538" end="23548" title="Paul White (journalist)" label="Paul White"/>
<link wikidata="Q861764" start="23558" end="23566" title="CBS News" label="CBS News"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="24896" end="24908" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338655" start="25310" end="25322" title="The Tonight Show" label="Tonight Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587581" start="25334" end="25343" title="Jack Paar" label="Jack Paar"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="25381" end="25390" title="Cleveland" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950244" start="25405" end="25409" title="WHKW" label="WGAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385438" start="25829" end="25848" title="tempest in a teapot" label="tempest in a teapot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5115701" start="25898" end="25911" title="Chuck Schaden" label="Chuck Schaden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068226" start="25925" end="25934" title="Alan Reed" label="Alan Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q919672" start="26045" end="26065" title="Concrete, Washington" label="Concrete, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q174814" start="26167" end="26177" title="electrical substation" label="substation"/>
<link wikidata="Q192283" start="26333" end="26341" title="newswire" label="newswire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851148" start="27346" end="27360" title="Tucson Citizen" label="Tucson Citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6329397" start="27414" end="27417" title="KFYI" label="KOY"/>
<link wikidata="Q16556" start="27421" end="27428" title="Phoenix, Arizona" label="Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q6339213" start="27430" end="27434" title="KTUC" label="KTUC"/>
<link wikidata="Q18575" start="27438" end="27444" title="Tucson, Arizona" label="Tucson"/>
<link wikidata="Q79720" start="27457" end="27463" title="Bisbee, Arizona" label="Bisbee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7722237" start="27814" end="27836" title="Chase and Sanborn Hour" label="Chase and Sanborn Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="28150" end="28162" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q58037172" start="28874" end="28885" title="Red Network" label="Red Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q721957" start="28960" end="28972" title="Edgar Bergen" label="Edgar Bergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q562641" start="29136" end="29147" title="Nelson Eddy" label="Nelson Eddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8345006" start="29717" end="29733" title="Charlie McCarthy" label="Charlie McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280982" start="29784" end="29797" title="Radio Project" label="Radio Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q15497952" start="30050" end="30061" title="Frank Brady (writer)" label="Frank Brady"/>
<link wikidata="Q154255" start="30227" end="30240" title="Munich Agreement" label="Munich crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q168000" start="31888" end="31907" title="American University" label="American University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195372" start="32297" end="32310" title="Frank Stanton (executive)" label="Frank Stanton"/>
<link wikidata="Q128831" start="32389" end="32422" title="Federal Communications Commission" label="Federal Communications Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q230492" start="32486" end="32508" title="University of Michigan" label="University of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q518155" start="32517" end="32561" title="National Archives and Records Administration" label="National Archives and Records Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5006413" start="33131" end="33143" title="C. E. Hooper" label="C. E. Hooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190137" start="33651" end="33657" title="Boston metropolitan area" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949131" start="33665" end="33669" title="WEZE" label="WEEI"/>
<link wikidata="Q627827" start="33811" end="33830" title="New York Daily News" label="New York Daily News"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="34171" end="34190" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q59830153" start="34446" end="34464" title="Michael J. Socolow" label="Michael J. Socolow"/>
<link wikidata="Q60497" start="34480" end="34485" title="Slate (website)" label="Slate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843047" start="35051" end="35071" title="AT&amp;amp;T Corporation" label="AT&amp;amp;T Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q125821" start="35272" end="35296" title="George Washington Bridge" label="George Washington Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q189602" start="35331" end="35348" title="Missoula, Montana" label="Missoula, Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="35918" end="35934" title="Associated Press" label="Associated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q962388" start="36168" end="36186" title="Winston-Salem Journal" label="Twin City Sentinel"/>
<link wikidata="Q49227" start="36196" end="36225" title="Winston-Salem, North Carolina" label="Winston-Salem, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q631893" start="36508" end="36515" title="The Age" label="The Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="37066" end="37082" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q5338723" start="37406" end="37428" title="Editor &amp;amp; Publisher" label="Editor &amp;amp; Publisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q294931" start="37482" end="37505" title="William Randolph Hearst" label="William Randolph Hearst"/>
<link wikidata="Q886150" start="37610" end="37626" title="Clyde L. Herring" label="Clyde L. Herring"/>
<link wikidata="Q47596" start="37906" end="37921" title="Chicago Tribune" label="Chicago Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q6328988" start="38383" end="38386" title="KFI" label="KFI"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354221" start="38761" end="38775" title="Hadley Cantril" label="Hadley Cantril"/>
<link wikidata="Q350472" start="41696" end="41708" title="Eddie Cantor" label="Eddie Cantor"/>
<link wikidata="Q131324" start="41972" end="41985" title="Janet Jackson" label="Janet Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q541283" start="42004" end="42024" title="Super Bowl XXXVIII halftime show controversy" label="wardrobe malfunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q42511" start="42200" end="42211" title="H. G. Wells" label="H. G. Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="42400" end="42411" title="San Antonio" label="San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6339128" start="42465" end="42469" title="KTSA" label="KTSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440463" start="43786" end="43809" title="Federal Theatre Project" label="Federal Theatre Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248101" start="44817" end="44827" title="Studio One (U.S. TV series)" label="Studio One"/>
<link wikidata="Q28059570" start="44875" end="44901" title="The Night America Trembled" label="The Night America Trembled"/>
<link wikidata="Q717071" start="44956" end="44970" title="Nelson S. Bond" label="Nelson S. Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q728265" start="45883" end="45892" title="royalties" label="royalties"/>
<link wikidata="Q158250" start="46248" end="46265" title="Peter Bogdanovich" label="Peter Bogdanovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q23197" start="46802" end="46811" title="Nashville, Tennessee" label="Nashville"/>
<link wikidata="Q36091" start="46815" end="46826" title="Minneapolis" label="Minneapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="47453" end="47456" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5414189" start="47490" end="47521" title="The Night That Panicked America" label="The Night That Panicked America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073777" start="47645" end="47669" title="West Windsor, New Jersey" label="West Windsor, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477514" start="47677" end="47689" title="Grovers Mill, New Jersey" label="Grovers Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="48190" end="48193" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842919" start="48219" end="48238" title="American Experience" label="American Experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q253299" start="48482" end="48509" title="National Recording Registry" label="National Recording Registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="48517" end="48536" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q4353903" start="49026" end="49040" title="old-time radio" label="old-time radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887" start="49273" end="49281" title="Santiago" label="Santiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="49283" end="49288" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="49534" end="49550" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish-language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900" start="49641" end="49646" title="Quito" label="Quito"/>
<link wikidata="Q736" start="49648" end="49655" title="Ecuador" label="Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q124757" start="49867" end="49871" title="riot" label="riot"/>
<link wikidata="Q909209" start="49923" end="49934" title="El Comercio (Ecuador)" label="El Comercio"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="50329" end="50338" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q23551" start="50358" end="50364" title="Mérida, Mérida" label="Mérida"/>
<link wikidata="Q7773522" start="50394" end="50428" title="The War of the Worlds (radio 1968)" label="updated version of the radio drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957333" start="50474" end="50478" title="WWKB" label="WKBW"/>
<link wikidata="Q42362" start="50612" end="50620" title="Maranhão" label="Maranhão"/>
<link wikidata="Q8678" start="51404" end="51418" title="Rio de Janeiro" label="Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292358" start="51568" end="51582" title="Brazilian Army" label="Brazilian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370527" start="51616" end="51647" title="Military dictatorship in Brazil" label="Brazilian military dictatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949667" start="51816" end="51820" title="WGBH (FM)" label="WGBH"/>
<link wikidata="Q671510" start="51842" end="51863" title="National Public Radio" label="National Public Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="51897" end="51909" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q6456238" start="51966" end="51984" title="L.A. Theatre Works" label="L.A. Theatre Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q485176" start="51989" end="52009" title="Pasadena, California" label="Pasadena, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q26398" start="52011" end="52023" title="public radio" label="public radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6335477" start="52032" end="52036" title="KPCC (radio station)" label="KPCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092" start="52176" end="52185" title="Star Trek" label="Star Trek"/>
<link wikidata="Q16345" start="52203" end="52216" title="Leonard Nimoy" label="Leonard Nimoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q550778" start="52218" end="52232" title="John de Lancie" label="John de Lancie"/>
<link wikidata="Q355344" start="52234" end="52248" title="Dwight Schultz" label="Dwight Schultz"/>
<link wikidata="Q264699" start="52250" end="52261" title="Wil Wheaton" label="Wil Wheaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q253764" start="52263" end="52277" title="Gates McFadden" label="Gates McFadden"/>
<link wikidata="Q311453" start="52279" end="52291" title="Brent Spiner" label="Brent Spiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q353101" start="52293" end="52308" title="Armin Shimerman" label="Armin Shimerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733992" start="52310" end="52322" title="Jerry Hardin" label="Jerry Hardin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093067" start="52328" end="52338" title="Tom Virtue" label="Tom Virtue"/>
<link wikidata="Q492058" start="52523" end="52541" title="XM Satellite Radio" label="XM Satellite Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q310618" start="52588" end="52598" title="Glenn Beck" label="Glenn Beck"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="52782" end="52789" title="Sirius XM Patriot#Buzz XM (2001–2004)" label="Buzz XM"/>
<link wikidata="Q647578" start="52882" end="52904" title="copyright infringement" label="copyright infringement"/>
<link wikidata="Q110154" start="53024" end="53036" title="George Takei" label="George Takei"/>
<link wikidata="Q474326" start="53185" end="53209" title="Walt Disney Concert Hall" label="Walt Disney Concert Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="53226" end="53237" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4769296" start="53265" end="53279" title="Annie Gosfield" label="Annie Gosfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q315715" start="53301" end="53325" title="Los Angeles Philharmonic" label="Los Angeles Philharmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q21595656" start="53339" end="53351" title="Yuval Sharon" label="Yuval Sharon"/>
<link wikidata="Q102124" start="53369" end="53385" title="Sigourney Weaver" label="Sigourney Weaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q605031" start="53427" end="53438" title="Radio Ga Ga" label="Radio Ga Ga"/>
<link wikidata="Q15862" start="53454" end="53459" title="Queen (band)" label="Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q886" start="53592" end="53604" title="The Simpsons" label="The Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657047" start="53692" end="53716" title="Treehouse of Horror XVII" label="Treehouse of Horror XVII"/>
<link wikidata="Q459435" start="53740" end="53752" title="Mockumentary" label="Mockumentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q12124503" start="53761" end="53771" title="Ghostwatch" label="Ghostwatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q8812380" start="53801" end="53819" title="pseudo-documentary" label="pseudo-documentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q8028248" start="53982" end="54009" title="Without Warning (1994 film)" label="Without Warning (1994 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304122" start="54131" end="54144" title="breaking news" label="breaking news"/>
<link wikidata="Q39061" start="54192" end="54211" title="Northern Hemisphere" label="Northern Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q6121997" start="54283" end="54302" title="Jafr alien invasion" label="Jafr alien invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q35775538" start="54311" end="54327" title="Brave New Jersey" label="Brave New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855378" start="54679" end="54709" title="The Mercury Theatre on the Air" label="The Mercury Theatre on the Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079140" start="54717" end="54747" title="Indiana University Bloomington" label="Indiana University Bloomington"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="54795" end="54811" title="Internet Archive" label="Internet Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="54925" end="54941" title="Internet Archive" label="Internet Archive"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143251" wikidata="Q1636272" url="?curid=143251" title="Jeff Wayne's Musical Version of The War of the Worlds">
<text>Jeff Wayne&#x27;s Musical Version of The War of the Worlds is a studio double album by American-born British musician, composer, and record producer Jeff Wayne, released on 9 June 1978 by CBS Records. It is an album musical adapted from the science-fiction novel &quot;The War of the Worlds&quot; by H. G. Wells in a rock opera style with a rock band, orchestra, narrator, and leitmotifs to carry the story and lyrics that express the feelings of the various characters. The album features guest artists David Essex, Justin Hayward, Phil Lynott, Chris Thompson, and Julie Covington, with actor Richard Burton as the narrator.

The album became a commercial success in the UK, debuting at No. 5 on the UK Albums Chart. It won two Ivor Novello Awards, including one for Wayne and main lyricist Gary Osborne for Best Instrumental or Popular Orchestral Work. The album has enjoyed enduring popularity since its release and attracted critical acclaim. It has sold over 2.7 million copies in the UK, and an estimated 15 million copies worldwide. In 2018, it was the UK&#x27;s 32nd best-selling studio album of all time.

Wayne&#x27;s adaptation has spawned multiple versions including video games, DVDs, and live stage shows. In 2012, Wayne released a rearrangement of the album, subtitled &quot;The New Generation&quot;, incorporating more synthesisers and new compositions and dialogue.

==Plot summary==
===Sides one and two: The Coming of the Martians===

In a prologue, the Journalist notes that in the late 19th century few people had even considered the possible existence of extraterrestrial life, yet planet Earth had in fact long been enviously observed by advanced beings.

The Journalist&#x27;s account begins later that year, with the sighting of several bursts of green gas which, for ten consecutive nights, erupt from the surface of Mars and appear to approach Earth. Ogilvy, an astronomer convinced that no life could exist on Mars, assures the Journalist there is no danger. Eventually, something crashes onto Horsell Common, and in the resulting crater Ogilvy discovers a glowing cylinder, the top of which begins to unscrew. When this lid falls off, a Martian creature emerges. By now a crowd has gathered on the common, and when a group of inquisitive men approaches the cylinder they are incinerated by the Heat-Ray—an advanced weapon of the Martians. The Journalist flees with the crowd. Later, hammering sounds are heard from the pit. A company of soldiers is deployed at the common, and that evening an injured and exhausted Artilleryman wanders into the Journalist&#x27;s house and tells him his comrades have been killed by fighting machines—tripod vehicles built and controlled by the Martians, each armed with its own Heat-Ray. They set off for London—the Journalist to ensure his lover Carrie is safe, the Artilleryman to report to headquarters—but are soon caught in a crossfire between soldiers and Martians and are separated. Three days later the Journalist arrives at Carrie&#x27;s house but finds it empty. He resolves to escape London by boat and later catches sight of Carrie aboard a steamer, but the gangplank is raised before he can join her. Fighting machines then approach, threatening the steamer, but they are engaged by the Royal Navy battleship &quot;Thunder Child&quot; and two are destroyed. The steamer escapes, but &quot;Thunder Child&quot; is destroyed and her crew are lost by the Martian heat-rays, leaving England defenceless against the invasion.

===Sides three and four: The Earth Under the Martians===
The wandering Journalist discovers that red weed—the vegetation that gives Mars its color—has taken root on Earth and spread rapidly across the landscape. In a churchyard, he encounters the Parson Nathaniel and his wife Beth. The trio takes refuge in a nearby cottage that is soon surrounded by black smoke—a Martian chemical weapon. Nathaniel, driven mad by his horrific experiences of the Martian attacks, blames himself for the invasion and believes the invaders are demons arising from human evil. As Beth attempts to restore his faith in humanity, a Martian cylinder crashes into the cottage; Beth is buried under the rubble and killed. The newly arrived Martians construct a handling machine: a squat, spider-like vehicle used to capture and collect humans. After nine days of hiding in the ruins, the Journalist and Nathaniel see the Martians &#x27;eating&#x27;—harvesting human blood and injecting it into their own veins. Nathaniel resolves to confront the &#x27;demons&#x27;, believing that he has been chosen to destroy them with his prayers and holy cross. The Journalist knocks him unconscious to silence his ravings, but the Martians are already alerted. A mechanical claw explores the cottage and drags Nathaniel away. Eventually, the Martians abandon their camp and the Journalist continues his journey to London.
He again encounters the Artilleryman, who is planning a new life underground that would allow humans to evade the Martians and ultimately strike back with reverse-engineered fighting machines. The Journalist, however, realizing the Artilleryman&#x27;s ambitions far exceed his abilities, soon leaves. Upon reaching London, he finds the city desolate and empty. Driven to suicide by intense despair and loneliness, he surrenders to a fighting machine but realizes it is inert, the Martian inside dead.

In the first epilogue, the Journalist reports that the Martians were defeated by Earth&#x27;s bacteria—to which they had no resistance—and that, as humanity recovered from the invasion, he was reunited with Carrie. But, he says, the question remains: is Earth now safe, or are the Martians learning from their failures and preparing for a second invasion?

In the second epilogue, set 80 years later, a NASA mission to Mars flounders when the control centre from Pasadena loses contact with the uncrewed spacecraft. The controller sees a green flare erupt from Mars&#x27; surface. The controller tries to contact NASA, but all communication seems to have been blocked. The album ends with the fate of the Earth ambiguous, with the possibility of a second Martian invasion.

===Character differences from Wells&#x27; novel===
*The Journalist is an amalgam of two of Wells&#x27; characters: a writer of speculative philosophy, who narrates much of the novel, and his younger brother who is a medical student and narrates the flight from London and HMS Thunder Child sequences.
*Carrie, The Journalist&#x27;s fiancée, does not exist in the novel, where the narrator has an unnamed wife.
*The character of the curate, who is not given a name in the novel, is changed to Parson Nathaniel, who is introduced in the second act instead of prior to the Thunder Child sequence.
*Beth, Parson Nathaniel&#x27;s wife, also does not exist in the novel.
*The handling machines are not used for collecting humans in the novel. They are instead used for assembling fighting machines.

==Production==
===Background and writing===

The album originated when Wayne was touring with singer-songwriter David Essex, for whom he also worked as producer and musical director. Wayne felt the composing side of his career &quot;had diminished&quot; by this time, and started looking for a story &quot;to get passionate about&quot; and interpret musically, to which his father Jerry suggested the science-fiction novel &quot;The War of the Worlds&quot; by H. G. Wells. The story instantly caught Wayne&#x27;s imagination, and he finished the book in a single read. He later said that a musical adaptation of other books was possible, and recalled being impressed by &quot;Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas&quot; by Jules Verne, &quot;The Day of the Triffids&quot; by John Wyndham, and &quot;Brave New World&quot; by Aldous Huxley. However, Wayne went on to read Wells&#x27;s book &quot;three or four times&quot; and saw the 1953 film adaption, and decided it was the most suitable for a musical adaptation.

In January 1975, Wayne and his father acquired the rights to adapt the work from Wells&#x27;s estate, which at the time was overseen by Wells&#x27;s son Frank. Wayne spent three months locating Frank Wells, and found his ideas were well received because it was the first adaptation that stayed true to the story. Wayne was aware of the famous 1938 radio drama adaptation directed and narrated by Orson Welles, but he wanted to stay close to the original story and set his version in Victorian England. From the start Wayne saw his adaptation as an opera, with &quot;story, leitmotifs, musical phrases, sounds and compositions that relate to the whole.&quot; He wanted the music to have a &quot;big, symphonic&quot; sound when humans were telling the story, and a more aggressive and electric-based sound when the Martians were in action. Wayne started by &quot;organising a cast of characters&quot;, while having the book adapted to fit the content of the songs he had outlined for it by Doreen Wayne, his future stepmother who at the time was an established script writer and journalist. Wayne used artistic licence to create a love interest by replacing The Journalist&#x27;s brother with Carrie, his wife. At the same time, Wayne started to write the score and record demos in the studio, paying particular attention to how Wells originally wrote the story as a series of episodes with multiple cliff hangers to each chapter. Wayne recalled that he &quot;wanted to have a bit of pressure&quot; applied to the project in January 1976, so he booked studio time at Advision Studios in Fitzrovia, London for May of that year. The idea proved to be productive for Wayne, who completed a draft of the entire work in six weeks.

The disco influence on &quot;The Eve of the War&quot; was Wayne&#x27;s intention of wanting the album to be entertaining for people. &quot;The Red Weed&quot; was the most difficult piece for Wayne to compose, and wanted to create &quot;a beautiful melody, and a beautiful dissonance.&quot; &quot;Forever Autumn&quot; originated as a jingle for a Lego commercial sung by Gary Osborne and Paul Vigrass. Upon learning that the journalist discovers that his fiancée is missing, Wayne reminded himself of the Lego tune and because it received a positive reception as a commercial, Wayne adapted it into a complete song with lyrics. The piece is the only part of the album that derived from pre-existing material. Wayne lived close to Primrose Hill at the time of writing, which is where the Martians come to their demise in the novel. While walking his dog in the morning he often sat at the top of the hill, which inspired him to envisage what Wells was describing and in turn his score, which was particularly the case for &quot;Dead London&quot;. &quot;Epilogue (Part 2)&quot; was influenced by the Viking program, which saw two space probes land on Mars in 1976. It originally featured Wayne sharing the dialogue with his father Jerry, but &quot;the gulf between his performance and mine was too great, so we sacked me!&quot; Effects were applied to Jerry&#x27;s voice to make it sound more individual.

===Casting===

Because Wayne wanted to keep his adaptation set in Victorian England, this eliminated the possibility of hiring American people in the main cast. In the early stages, he realised the importance of finding the right person to narrate the story, and actor Richard Burton was at the top of &quot;a very short list&quot; of candidates, and compared his voice to a musical instrument. Upon learning that Burton was in a production of the play &quot;Equus&quot; in New York City, Wayne delivered a letter with a copy of the album&#x27;s script to the stage doorman and hoped for him to read it. After two or three days, Burton agreed to take part. Burton had already committed to start work on &quot;Exorcist II: The Heretic&quot; (1977) in Los Angeles after the &quot;Equus&quot; run, so Wayne organised to record the narration there to avoid further delays. Burton originally signed on for five days of recording for a maximum of 12 hours for each, but he finished his parts in just one day, except for an additional three-hour session held several months after for what Wayne described as &quot;some repair work&quot;. Essex, who was present at the recording session, said that Burton insisted on narrating without hearing the music, which became &quot;a bit of a nuisance&quot; since Wayne and he had recorded their shared vocals in time with the background tracks. &quot;So we had to do it wild.&quot;

It was important for Wayne that the different voices on the album sounded &quot;convincing and believable&quot;. Having become a good friend of Wayne&#x27;s, David Essex is the voice of the artilleryman. He had previously starred in a production of the musical &quot;Godspell&quot;, which also featured Julie Covington, who subsequently met Wayne and agreed to voice Beth. Although Wayne had not previously met the other voice actors: Thin Lizzy frontman Phil Lynott as Parson Nathaniel, Moody Blues vocalist Justin Hayward singing the Journalist&#x27;s thoughts, and Manfred Mann&#x27;s Earth Band guitarist and vocalist Chris Thompson as the Voice of Humanity, he was &quot;thrilled&quot; that they took part &quot;because they each brought their own sort of magic, their style and performance and singing.&quot; Wayne had to convince the guest artists that they were the right performers for their role, and got them keen to carry out their parts. Wayne thought Hayward was the right singer for &quot;Forever Autumn&quot; and sent him a demo with the invitation to participate, but Hayward was unconvinced. He changed his mind when a &quot;young lad&quot; and employee of The Moody Blues&#x27; record shop in Cobham, heard the demo and told Hayward it was an ideal song for him. Lynott was on a Canadian tour with Thin Lizzy when it was time to record his parts, so Wayne organised for his vocals recorded there.

Initially Wayne had Carlos Santana record guitar riffs and hooks to interpret the Martian&#x27;s heat-ray, but his involvement ended after one day when Santana&#x27;s manager spotted an issue in the contract and certain requests could not be met. The role of Parson Nathaniel was originally given to Free and Bad Company singer Paul Rodgers, and although Wayne thought he delivered &quot;fantastic&quot; vocals, Rodgers was reluctant to take on the speaking part and dropped out. Wayne has these early recordings on his original multitrack tapes, but has no interest in releasing them. The Who frontman Roger Daltrey was to also make an appearance.

===Recording and finalising CBS deal===
The album was recorded at Advision from 18 May 1976 to 30 June 1977. Wayne is credited as the album&#x27;s sole producer, with Geoff Young as recording engineer with Laurence Diana assisting. The album was one of the first recorded on 48-track, which was achieved by Maglink, a prototype system that allowed the synchronisation of two 24-track Studer A80 machines with a SMPTE timecode reserved on two of the available 48 tracks. Wayne recalled that Maglink malfunctioned often and the lack of expertise to fix problems resulted in delays in recording. When recording finished, 77 reels of multitrack tapes had been used. Mixing was done in sections, as little as 30 seconds or two minutes at a time. Soon after mixing was complete, the tape operator accidentally slashed through the tape containing side four as he thought it was a reel of unwanted outtakes. Wayne was subsequently offered free studio time to produce another mix. Wayne&#x27;s initial version of the work was a little over two hours, which had to be refined in order to fit four sides of a vinyl record. The final version runs at 95 minutes. The album&#x27;s packaging includes a 16-page colour booklet with artwork and a synopsis of the tracks.

The album features Ken Freeman on synthesisers, who started with a Minimoog and ARP Odyssey. Later in production, a Yamaha CS-80 was brought in which was used to re-record various overdubs, including the horns. Freeman was able to create various sound effects from scratch, including a military drum sound on &quot;The Artilleryman and the Fighting Machine&quot;. Among the synthesisers used was the Thunderchild SZ3540, a custom made monophonic model built by JWM Electronics after Wayne sought for a fatter, bassy sound. Wayne wanted to create the Martian war-cry of &quot;ooll-la&quot; (which they chant before destroying their foes with their heat-rays) with a synthesiser, but he and Freeman could only create sounds that resemble &quot;ooo&quot; and &quot;ahhh&quot; and not the &quot;l&quot;. The final effect was achieved with a multitrack &quot;voicebox guitar effect&quot; devised and voiced by Jo Partridge, who plays guitar on the album and made the sound &quot;as dramatic as possible.&quot; (Partridge is consequently credited on the record as &quot;the Heat Ray&quot;.) All but one of the foley sound effects heard on the record were created by Wayne&#x27;s wife Geraldine. Wayne said the one that he is asked about the most is the sound of the cylinder unscrewing when the Martians emerge from their spaceship, which he achieved by turning and scraping two kitchen saucepans together that Young then amplified and captured in stereo. Most of the musicians on the album had also played on Essex&#x27;s debut studio album &quot;Rock On&quot; (1973). Wayne wrote out the various parts of the score for the band, which was performed live in the studio without any click tracks, leaving the group &quot;to groove together, and then move onto the next tune.&quot; It took one week to record almost an entire side of the album. The string section consisted of violins, violas, cellos, and double basses, totalling 50 players and led by violinist Patrick Halling. It was recorded in the course of two evenings at Abbey Road Studios.

Wayne&#x27;s original budget estimate for the album was £34,500. Later he secured a £70,000 recording deal with Dick Asher of CBS Records during an American tour with Essex. Initially the deal involved a single album of &quot;thematic pieces&quot; and without any guest artists, but his idea for the album had grown to produce a full-scale musical adaptation of Wells&#x27;s novel which could not fit on one record, and the idea expanded into a double album with CBS agreeing to fund an additional £34,500 and cover a part of Burton&#x27;s fees. Although his contract with CBS did not guarantee a public release, Wayne consulted his wife and parents who encouraged him to continue and finish the album despite the substantial costs involved in its production. When the album was finished, its cost totalled £240,000, half of which was paid by CBS. Wayne was &quot;too chicken&quot; to deliver the finished product to CBS himself, so he had his future wife Geraldine, then an assistant to the label&#x27;s business affairs director, to hand it in. After reviewing the album for thirty days, CBS praised its strong story, songs, guest artists, and uniqueness, but doubted if people were willing to listen to a double album of continuous material, and believed its chance of success would suffer with Wayne, an American, producing an adaptation of an English novel. However, the label was unaware that Wayne had also produced an alternate version of the album with the songs reduced to three or four minutes and with new introductions and endings, making it easier to get the album on the radio. Wayne agreed to give CBS another month to decide, after which its UK division gave it the green-light for release.

===Artwork===
Wayne originally commissioned Roger Dean, best known for his work for the progressive rock band Yes, to produce the artwork for the album. After Dean produced some designs, Wayne felt the work did not quite fit for what he had in mind, and proceeded to look elsewhere. He approached John Pasche, who went on to design the logo on the front cover, and direct the overall design of the record&#x27;s sleeve which features paintings from three artists: Geoff Taylor, Mike Trim, and Peter Goodfellow. Dean adapted his unused designs for the album for the packaging of the 1987 shooting video game &quot;Terrorpods&quot;.

==Cast==
===Performers===

===Black Smoke Band===
Current members (until 2022)
* Jeff Wayne – composer, conductor
* Olivia Jageurs – harp, percussion
* Accy Yeats – drums
* Pete Hunt – bass
* Thomas Gandey – keyboards, synthesisers
* Neil Angilley – keyboards
* Chris Spedding – electric guitar, acoustic guitar
* Laurie Wisefield – guitars, mandolin, autoharp, tar
* Paul Bond - electric guitar, acoustic guitar, keyboards, backing vocals
*ULLAdubULLA Orchestra

Past members
==Release==
The album premiered at a launch party at the London Planetarium on 1 June 1978, and featured a playback accompanied by a laser show. The event was attended by over 500 people. The album was released on 9 June; four weeks later, Wayne said he was able to repay CBS its share of the album&#x27;s costs due to strong sales. In September 1978, the album reached its peak position of No. 5 on the UK Albums Chart, during a 20-week stay in the top ten. It has since been in the UK top 100 albums for 240 weeks, and has sold over 2.7 million copies in the country. In 2018, it was the UK&#x27;s 32nd best-selling studio album of all time. Elsewhere, it charted in 22 countries and reached number one in 11 of them including Australia, where it was top for seven weeks. In April 1979, the album exceeded platinum status in the Netherlands, New Zealand, and Australia, and gold certification in Canada, Spain, Israel, and Belgium. The album has earned gold and platinum and multi-platinum sales certifications in 17 countries. The album has sold an estimated 15 million copies worldwide.

The album spawned two singles. On 2 June 1978, an edited version of &quot;Forever Autumn&quot; was released which went to No. 5 on the UK Singles Chart. This was followed by &quot;The Eve of the War&quot;, released in September 1978. Some of the North American and European pressings featured new lead vocals from Thompson. In 1979, a seven-minute disco remix of &quot;The Eve of the War&quot; was released.

The album won two Ivor Novello Awards, including one for Wayne and Osborne for Best Instrumental or Popular Orchestral Work. In 1979, the album was named Best Recording in Science Fiction and Fantasy, in a panel of judges that included George Lucas, Steven Spielberg, and Alfred Hitchcock.

==Reception==

The album had a positive review in &quot;Record Mirror&quot;, with reviewer Bev Briggs declaring it as &quot;four sides of sheer excellence&quot; and after reading the novel and watching the feature film, the album is &quot;the most easily stomachable of the lot.&quot; She praised the music, ideas, script, and voices, all of which complement each other, but thought the continuous, 95-minute structure forces the listener to digest it straight through. A positive review was published by Ben Ostrander in the science-fiction magazine &quot;The Space Gamer&quot;, who thought the album was &quot;magnificent&quot; and despite some differences between the record and the original novel, it &quot;is a kind of rock/radio play with modern interpretations&quot; and is &quot;better than most crap on TV, and makes for a fun evening around the stereo.&quot; &quot;Music Week&quot; commented that the album is &quot;superb&quot; and predicted it will become &quot;one of the biggest sellers.&quot;

In 2020, writing for &quot;Prog&quot;, Alex Burrows described the record as &quot;the ultimate concept album and best-selling prog soundtrack of all time&quot;, concluding &quot;it&#x27;s still an album that certainly ticks all the boxes of the true definition of &#x27;progressive&#x27;: groundbreaking, cutting-edge and seminal.&quot;

==Reissues and other versions==
Wayne&#x27;s alternate version of the album with the songs edited for radio airplay was distributed to stations to promote the original concept album. It became a success in its own right, prompting Wayne to prepare a full commercial release. The set, entitled &quot;Highlights from Jeff Wayne&#x27;s Musical Version of The War of the Worlds&quot;, was released in 1981 by Columbia Records.

In addition to English, the album has been released in Spanish and German. The first Spanish edition featured Anthony Quinn re-recording the Journalist&#x27;s narration and other dialogue originally voiced by Essex, Covington, and Lynott. The songs and the background music were not altered. Following its release in November 1978, Wayne had to re-do the album because Quinn&#x27;s script was in Mexican Spanish and not Peninsular Spanish. The second edition features narration by Teófilo Martínez, and released in 1979. Wayne found it amusing as the Spanish division of CBS had recommended him to use Quinn for the role. A German album followed in 1981 featuring Curd Jürgens as the Journalist, plus radio broadcasts in Dutch and Hebrew. Although plans for versions in Japanese, Russian, French, and Italian were planned, none of them came into fruition.

A 1989 version of &quot;The Eve of the War&quot; remixed by Ben Liebrand reached number 3 in the UK singles chart.

A 1995 edition of the album featured additional remixes of some tracks and additional conceptual art. On 23 June 2005, the original album was re-released in two forms: one in a remastered 2-disc hybrid multichannel Super Audio CD set; another in a 7-disc &quot;Collector&#x27;s Edition&quot; featuring additional remixes, outtakes, the actors reading from the unabridged script, excerpts from the Quinn and Jürgens performances, as well as a seventh disc being a DVD showing the making of the album, produced by Phoenix Film &amp; Television Productions. This release went to No. 7 in the UK. Both contained new stereo and 5.1 surround sound mixes by Gaëtan Schurrer and Gary Langan, who had access to Wayne&#x27;s tape archive and discovered 372 quarter-inch master tapes that were identified, digitised,and pieced back together from the original tracking sheets. The process involved a re-fit of Wayne&#x27;s home studio, including the installation of a high end Pro Tools rig and a surround sound monitoring system. Wayne bought a Magilink machine at auction for 50p in order to read the original Magilink timecode, but could not get it to work, so Schurrer used the blips and beeps produced by the timecode on the waveform display in Pro Tools as a guide.

In 2000, a collection of remixes of tracks from the original album—including several used in the 1998 computer game—were released on a double CD titled &quot;The War of the Worlds: ULLAdubULLA—the Remix Album&quot;. While most of the contributors are relatively unknown, the album includes two versions of a remix of &quot;Dead London&quot; by Apollo 440 and other remixes by house-music pioneer Todd Terry. Following the success of the 2005 re-release of the original album, &quot;ULLAdubULLA II&quot; was released on 17 April 2006. This single CD release was largely made of tracks from the original remix album, with some additional new remixes by Tom Middleton and DJ Keltech, and hip-hop versions of two tracks by DJ Zube. Middleton&#x27;s remixes of &quot;The Eve of the War&quot; were also released on CD and vinyl.

===&quot;The New Generation&quot;===
In 2011, Wayne held a press conference in London to announce the release of a new arrangement of the original album, subtitled &quot;The New Generation&quot;. Wayne explained that the idea was to return to the original album and explore the characters in more detail, and develop the love story between Herbert and his fiancée Carrie. The project also gave Wayne the opportunity to reinterpret his compositions with contemporary production techniques. The album replaces all of the original cast, including actor Liam Neeson as the Narrator and Kaiser Chiefs frontman Ricky Wilson as the Artilleryman. The album was released in November 2012 by Sony Music Entertainment, and peaked at No. 13 in the UK chart. It was supported by an arena tour, followed by a stage show adaptation, running at the Dominion Theatre in London&#x27;s West End from February to April 2016.

==Tours==
In September 1978, Wayne had entered negotiations with Paramount Pictures over the film rights and with two concert producers, one of which being Showco, to present a live stage version of the album. The idea came to nothing, and it took Wayne until 2006 to stage a concert tour of the album.

==Related works in other media==
===Video games===
In 1984 CRL Group PLC released &quot;Jeff Wayne&#x27;s Video Game Version of The War of the Worlds&quot; for the Sinclair ZX Spectrum home computer. This was released in Germany as &quot;Jeff Wayne&#x27;s Video Version von Der Krieg der Welten&quot;.

In 1998, a real-time strategy game, &quot;Jeff Wayne&#x27;s The War of the Worlds&quot;, was created by Rage Software for personal computers. Wayne produced the musical arrangements for the game, consisting of 45 minutes of material rescored and remixed in a newer electronica style with techno beats. The game&#x27;s artwork was based on the Michael Trim, Geoff Taylor and Peter Goodfellow illustrations from the original album booklet. Some of Richard Burton&#x27;s dialogue as the journalist is used in the opening and closing scenes. Nigel Hawthorne and Lewis MacLeod voiced the human and Martian generals respectively.

In 1999, a third-person shooter, also entitled &quot;Jeff Wayne&#x27;s The War of the Worlds&quot;, was developed by Pixelogic and released for the Sony PlayStation. It used much of the 1998 game&#x27;s music and graphical elements, but featured an entirely different campaign with a focus on vehicular combat.

===Unrealized animated film===
In late 2004 the ULLAdubULLA II production had been commissioned for an animated CGI film version. Test footage of some Martian machines was released, but the film itself never materialised.

===DVD===
A two disc Region 2 DVD of the 2006 Wembley Arena, London show was released 6 November 2006 by Universal. Disc 1 contains the live show and Disc 2 contains extras and a documentary of the making of the live show. It is titled &quot;Jeff Wayne&#x27;s Musical Version of The War of The Worlds – Live on Stage&quot;.

===&quot;The Musical Drama&quot;===
On 15 October 2018 it was announced on the album&#x27;s official Facebook page and website that after over a year in work, an audiobook rendition would be available on Audible.com on 29 November 2018. This five hour-long Audible Original Production featured new story and musical content. The cast included Michael Sheen as the journalist, Taron Egerton as the artilleryman, Ade Edmondson as Ogilvy, Theo James as Parson Nathaniel and Jeff Wayne&#x27;s granddaughter Anna Marie Wayne as Carrie, the wife of the journalist.

===&quot;The Immersive Experience&quot;===
In May 2019, &quot;Jeff Wayne&#x27;s The War of The Worlds: The Immersive Experience &quot;opened to the public in London. Set across 22,000 sq. ft of space, the 2-hour production combined music from the album, immersive theatre and virtual reality, holograms, and other techniques. The cast includes Tom Brittney, Anna Marie Wayne, Carrie Hope Fletcher, and David Burnett, joined by a live cast of twelve actors.

==Track listing==
All music was written by Jeff Wayne, and all lyrics were written by Wayne, Paul Vigrass and Gary Osborne. All tracks (except for “Epilogue (Part 2) (NASA)”) feature narration by Richard Burton, with dialogue written by Doreen Wayne.


==Personnel==
Credits adapted from the 1978 LP and 2005 CD liner notes.

The Players
* Richard Burton – George Herbert, The Journalist
* Justin Hayward – The Sung Thoughts of The Journalist
* David Essex – The Artilleryman
* Chris Thompson – The Voice of Humanity
* Phil Lynott – Parson Nathaniel
* Julie Covington – Beth (Parson Nathaniel&#x27;s wife)
* Jo Partridge – The Heat Ray
* Jerry Wayne – The Voices of NASA

The Musicians
* Chris Spedding – guitars
* Jo Partridge – guitars, mandolin
* Herbie Flowers – bass guitar
* Barry Morgan – drums
* Barry de Souza – percussion
* Roy Jones – percussion
* Ray Cooper – percussion
* Ken &quot;Prof&quot; Freeman – synthesisers, organ, electric piano
* Jeff Wayne – piano, jangle piano, harpsichord, conductor
* Paul Hart – piano on &quot;The Red Weed&quot;
* George Fenton – tar, santoor, zither
* Billy Lawrie – backing vocals
* Gary Osborne – backing vocals
* Chris Thompson – backing vocals
* Paul Vigrass – backing vocals
* Geraldine &quot;Pest&quot; Wayne – sound effects

Production
* Jeff Wayne – composer, orchestrator, producer
* Jerry Wayne – director of &quot;dramatic and narrative sections&quot;
* Doreen Wayne – script
* Charles Dubin – director of &quot;dramatic and narrative sections&quot;
* John Pasche – art direction, logo design
* Geoff Taylor – painting
* Mike Trim – painting, pencil sketches
* Peter Goodfellow – painting
* Denis &quot;BilBo&quot; Blackham – lacquer cut on side one
* Geoff Young – recording
* Laurence Diana – recording assistant
* Bill Foster – mastering at Tape One, London

==Charts==

===Weekly charts===



===Year-end charts===


==Certifications==




==References==
Bibliography
* Miller, Thomas Kent. &quot;Mars in the Movies: A History&quot;. Jefferson, North Carolina: McFarland &amp; Company, 2016. .

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q354954" start="149" end="159" title="Jeff Wayne" label="Jeff Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009264" start="188" end="199" title="CBS Records International" label="CBS Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q4712779" start="210" end="223" title="album musical" label="album musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q213019" start="269" end="290" title="The War of the Worlds" label="The War of the Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q42511" start="300" end="311" title="H. G. Wells" label="H. G. Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q253137" start="317" end="327" title="rock opera" label="rock opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q221117" start="377" end="386" title="leitmotif" label="leitmotif"/>
<link wikidata="Q951726" start="504" end="515" title="David Essex" label="David Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q968014" start="517" end="531" title="Justin Hayward" label="Justin Hayward"/>
<link wikidata="Q298930" start="533" end="544" title="Phil Lynott" label="Phil Lynott"/>
<link wikidata="Q322288" start="546" end="560" title="Chris Thompson (English musician)" label="Chris Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q443422" start="566" end="581" title="Julie Covington" label="Julie Covington"/>
<link wikidata="Q151973" start="594" end="608" title="Richard Burton" label="Richard Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q719415" start="701" end="716" title="UK Albums Chart" label="UK Albums Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q61116" start="729" end="748" title="Ivor Novello Awards" label="Ivor Novello Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3758535" start="792" end="804" title="Gary Osborne" label="Gary Osborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6175237" start="1290" end="1308" title="Jeff Wayne&amp;#x27;s Musical Version of The War of the Worlds – The New Generation" label="The New Generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7848" start="1502" end="1519" title="1898" label="late 19th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q181508" start="1661" end="1676" title="Extraterrestrial life" label="advanced beings"/>
<link wikidata="Q5905821" start="2022" end="2036" title="Horsell Common" label="Horsell Common"/>
<link wikidata="Q6774723" start="2166" end="2173" title="Martian (The War of the Worlds)" label="Martian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6774723" start="2323" end="2331" title="Heat-Ray" label="Heat-Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q2103398" start="2645" end="2662" title="fighting machine (The War of the Worlds)" label="fighting machines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6774723" start="2741" end="2749" title="Heat-Ray" label="Heat-Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q178193" start="3116" end="3123" title="steamboat" label="steamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="3263" end="3273" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051067" start="3274" end="3284" title="pre-dreadnought battleship" label="battleship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657761" start="3291" end="3304" title="HMS Thunder Child" label="Thunder Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q6774723" start="3594" end="3602" title="red weed" label="red weed"/>
<link wikidata="Q6774723" start="3849" end="3860" title="Black smoke (The War of the Worlds)" label="black smoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q485176" start="5849" end="5857" title="Pasadena, California" label="Pasadena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528166" start="5881" end="5900" title="uncrewed spacecraft" label="uncrewed spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753370" start="6592" end="6598" title="curate" label="curate"/>
<link wikidata="Q951726" start="7066" end="7077" title="David Essex" label="David Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q213019" start="7383" end="7404" title="The War of the Worlds" label="The War of the Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q42511" start="7414" end="7425" title="H. G. Wells" label="H. G. Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q183565" start="7630" end="7668" title="Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas" label="Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas"/>
<link wikidata="Q33977" start="7678" end="7689" title="Jules Verne" label="Jules Verne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216940" start="7697" end="7720" title="The Day of the Triffids" label="The Day of the Triffids"/>
<link wikidata="Q313673" start="7730" end="7742" title="John Wyndham" label="John Wyndham"/>
<link wikidata="Q191949" start="7754" end="7769" title="Brave New World" label="Brave New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q81447" start="7779" end="7792" title="Aldous Huxley" label="Aldous Huxley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113303" start="7887" end="7905" title="The War of the Worlds (1953 film)" label="1953 film adaption"/>
<link wikidata="Q24958" start="8314" end="8330" title="The War of the Worlds (1938 radio drama)" label="1938 radio drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q24829" start="8367" end="8379" title="Orson Welles" label="Orson Welles"/>
<link wikidata="Q922131" start="9071" end="9087" title="artistic licence" label="artistic licence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686815" start="9536" end="9552" title="Advision Studios" label="Advision Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q121663" start="9556" end="9565" title="Fitzrovia" label="Fitzrovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469370" start="9992" end="10006" title="Forever Autumn (song)" label="Forever Autumn"/>
<link wikidata="Q170484" start="10042" end="10046" title="Lego" label="Lego"/>
<link wikidata="Q3758535" start="10066" end="10078" title="Gary Osborne" label="Gary Osborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3758535" start="10083" end="10095" title="Paul Vigrass" label="Paul Vigrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q149942" start="10425" end="10438" title="Primrose Hill" label="Primrose Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q233708" start="10793" end="10807" title="Viking program" label="Viking program"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="10844" end="10848" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q151973" start="11368" end="11382" title="Richard Burton" label="Richard Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347946" start="11558" end="11563" title="Equus (play)" label="Equus"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11808" end="11832" title="Exorcist II: The Heretic" label="Exorcist II: The Heretic"/>
<link wikidata="Q951726" start="12674" end="12685" title="David Essex" label="David Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533927" start="12783" end="12791" title="Godspell" label="Godspell"/>
<link wikidata="Q443422" start="12819" end="12834" title="Julie Covington" label="Julie Covington"/>
<link wikidata="Q202314" start="12951" end="12961" title="Thin Lizzy" label="Thin Lizzy"/>
<link wikidata="Q298930" start="12971" end="12982" title="Phil Lynott" label="Phil Lynott"/>
<link wikidata="Q211965" start="13004" end="13015" title="Moody Blues" label="Moody Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q968014" start="13025" end="13039" title="Justin Hayward" label="Justin Hayward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1926913" start="13084" end="13114" title="Manfred Mann&amp;#x27;s Earth Band" label="Manfred Mann&amp;#x27;s Earth Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q322288" start="13138" end="13152" title="Chris Thompson (English musician)" label="Chris Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006990" start="13728" end="13734" title="Cobham, Surrey" label="Cobham"/>
<link wikidata="Q202314" start="13833" end="13843" title="Thin Lizzy" label="Thin Lizzy"/>
<link wikidata="Q819016" start="13953" end="13967" title="Carlos Santana" label="Carlos Santana"/>
<link wikidata="Q45650" start="14233" end="14237" title="Free (band)" label="Free"/>
<link wikidata="Q745517" start="14242" end="14253" title="Bad Company" label="Bad Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q313098" start="14261" end="14273" title="Paul Rodgers" label="Paul Rodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q93346" start="14519" end="14526" title="The Who" label="The Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q311672" start="14536" end="14549" title="Roger Daltrey" label="Roger Daltrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500925" start="14967" end="14973" title="Studer" label="Studer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390415" start="14994" end="15008" title="SMPTE timecode" label="SMPTE timecode"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387642" start="15857" end="15868" title="Ken Freeman (composer)" label="Ken Freeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q734687" start="15905" end="15913" title="Minimoog" label="Minimoog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638169" start="15918" end="15929" title="ARP Odyssey" label="ARP Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q366063" start="15954" end="15966" title="Yamaha CS-80" label="Yamaha CS-80"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323979" start="16273" end="16283" title="monophonic" label="monophonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778683" start="16692" end="16700" title="Talk box" label="voicebox"/>
<link wikidata="Q762316" start="16942" end="16961" title="Foley (filmmaking)" label="foley sound effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q7354612" start="17380" end="17387" title="Rock On (David Essex album)" label="Rock On"/>
<link wikidata="Q5132441" start="17514" end="17525" title="click track" label="click track"/>
<link wikidata="Q209651" start="17859" end="17877" title="Abbey Road Studios" label="Abbey Road Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q29966118" start="17992" end="18002" title="Dick Asher" label="Dick Asher"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009264" start="18006" end="18017" title="CBS Records International" label="CBS Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336758" start="19563" end="19574" title="green-light" label="green-light"/>
<link wikidata="Q444399" start="19633" end="19643" title="Roger Dean (artist)" label="Roger Dean"/>
<link wikidata="Q49451" start="19677" end="19693" title="progressive rock" label="progressive rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q184386" start="19699" end="19702" title="Yes (band)" label="Yes"/>
<link wikidata="Q197621" start="19886" end="19897" title="John Pasche" label="John Pasche"/>
<link wikidata="Q5534340" start="20053" end="20065" title="Geoff Taylor (illustrator)" label="Geoff Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6849092" start="20067" end="20076" title="Mike Trim" label="Mike Trim"/>
<link wikidata="Q106474665" start="20082" end="20098" title="Peter Goodfellow (artist)" label="Peter Goodfellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518878" start="20202" end="20212" title="Terrorpods" label="Terrorpods"/>
<link wikidata="Q18160229" start="20413" end="20426" title="Thomas Gandey" label="Thomas Gandey"/>
<link wikidata="Q370915" start="20573" end="20581" title="autoharp" label="autoharp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561816" start="20755" end="20773" title="London Planetarium" label="London Planetarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q719415" start="21102" end="21117" title="UK Albums Chart" label="UK Albums Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="21925" end="21941" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q61116" start="22217" end="22236" title="Ivor Novello Awards" label="Ivor Novello Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q38222" start="22435" end="22447" title="George Lucas" label="George Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q8877" start="22449" end="22465" title="Steven Spielberg" label="Steven Spielberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374" start="22471" end="22487" title="Alfred Hitchcock" label="Alfred Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q844480" start="22546" end="22559" title="Record Mirror" label="Record Mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118748" start="23047" end="23062" title="The Space Gamer" label="The Space Gamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3328489" start="23365" end="23375" title="Music Week" label="Music Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q25351734" start="23526" end="23530" title="Prog (magazine)" label="Prog"/>
<link wikidata="Q207393" start="23594" end="23607" title="concept album" label="concept album"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536996" start="24136" end="24210" title="Highlights from Jeff Wayne&amp;#x27;s Musical Version of The War of the Worlds" label="Highlights from Jeff Wayne&amp;#x27;s Musical Version of The War of the Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="24242" end="24258" title="Columbia Records" label="Columbia Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q83484" start="24371" end="24384" title="Anthony Quinn" label="Anthony Quinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q616620" start="24657" end="24672" title="Mexican Spanish" label="Mexican Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162990" start="24681" end="24699" title="Peninsular Spanish" label="Peninsular Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708663" start="24742" end="24758" title="Teófilo Martínez" label="Teófilo Martínez"/>
<link wikidata="Q57584" start="24925" end="24937" title="Curd Jürgens" label="Curd Jürgens"/>
<link wikidata="Q712250" start="25178" end="25190" title="Ben Liebrand" label="Ben Liebrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q212960" start="25449" end="25463" title="Super Audio CD" label="Super Audio CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q7186846" start="25746" end="25787" title="Phoenix Film &amp;amp; Television Productions" label="Phoenix Film &amp;amp; Television Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q710459" start="25905" end="25916" title="Gary Langan" label="Gary Langan"/>
<link wikidata="Q247670" start="26199" end="26208" title="Pro Tools" label="Pro Tools"/>
<link wikidata="Q619067" start="26839" end="26849" title="Apollo 440" label="Apollo 440"/>
<link wikidata="Q20502" start="26871" end="26882" title="House music" label="house-music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253645" start="26891" end="26901" title="Todd Terry" label="Todd Terry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750041" start="27146" end="27159" title="Tom Middleton" label="Tom Middleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6175237" start="27489" end="27507" title="Jeff Wayne&amp;#x27;s Musical Version of The War of the Worlds – The New Generation" label="The New Generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q58444" start="27869" end="27880" title="Liam Neeson" label="Liam Neeson"/>
<link wikidata="Q192308" start="27901" end="27914" title="Kaiser Chiefs" label="Kaiser Chiefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297319" start="27924" end="27936" title="Ricky Wilson (British musician)" label="Ricky Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q56760250" start="28001" end="28025" title="Sony Music Entertainment" label="Sony Music Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2173732" start="28152" end="28168" title="Dominion Theatre" label="Dominion Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359589" start="28186" end="28194" title="West End theatre" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q159846" start="28290" end="28308" title="Paramount Pictures" label="Paramount Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q7503179" start="28381" end="28387" title="Showco" label="Showco"/>
<link wikidata="Q5013911" start="28588" end="28601" title="CRL Group PLC" label="CRL Group PLC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3219236" start="28617" end="28678" title="The War of the Worlds (1984 video game)" label="Jeff Wayne&amp;#x27;s Video Game Version of The War of the Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q4409" start="28693" end="28701" title="Sinclair Research" label="Sinclair"/>
<link wikidata="Q23882" start="28702" end="28713" title="ZX Spectrum" label="ZX Spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q473708" start="28714" end="28727" title="home computer" label="home computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="28750" end="28757" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q208189" start="28843" end="28861" title="real-time strategy" label="real-time strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3494344" start="28874" end="28913" title="Jeff Wayne&amp;#x27;s The War of the Worlds (1998 video game)" label="Jeff Wayne&amp;#x27;s The War of the Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986442" start="28936" end="28949" title="Rage Software Limited" label="Rage Software"/>
<link wikidata="Q16338" start="28954" end="28971" title="personal computer" label="personal computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q817138" start="29097" end="29108" title="electronica" label="electronica"/>
<link wikidata="Q170611" start="29120" end="29126" title="techno" label="techno"/>
<link wikidata="Q269589" start="29370" end="29385" title="Nigel Hawthorne" label="Nigel Hawthorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6536830" start="29390" end="29403" title="Lewis MacLeod (actor)" label="Lewis MacLeod"/>
<link wikidata="Q380266" start="29468" end="29488" title="third-person shooter" label="third-person shooter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6175239" start="29510" end="29549" title="Jeff Wayne&amp;#x27;s The War of the Worlds (1999 video game)" label="Jeff Wayne&amp;#x27;s The War of the Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q10677" start="29605" end="29621" title="PlayStation (console)" label="Sony PlayStation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070892" start="29750" end="29766" title="vehicular combat game" label="vehicular combat"/>
<link wikidata="Q6002306" start="29881" end="29884" title="Computer-generated imagery" label="CGI"/>
<link wikidata="Q746611" start="30013" end="30025" title="Region 2 DVD" label="Region 2 DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q815571" start="30038" end="30051" title="Wembley Arena" label="Wembley Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q298276" start="30660" end="30673" title="Michael Sheen" label="Michael Sheen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16239385" start="30693" end="30706" title="Taron Egerton" label="Taron Egerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2160202" start="30728" end="30741" title="Ade Edmondson" label="Ade Edmondson"/>
<link wikidata="Q568509" start="30753" end="30763" title="Theo James" label="Theo James"/>
<link wikidata="Q55647935" start="31131" end="31148" title="immersive theatre" label="immersive theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q170519" start="31153" end="31168" title="virtual reality" label="virtual reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q18221462" start="31221" end="31233" title="Tom Brittney" label="Tom Brittney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2940241" start="31253" end="31273" title="Carrie Hope Fletcher" label="Carrie Hope Fletcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q354954" start="31378" end="31388" title="Jeff Wayne" label="Jeff Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3758535" start="31445" end="31457" title="Gary Osborne" label="Gary Osborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q151973" start="31675" end="31689" title="Richard Burton" label="Richard Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q968014" start="31725" end="31739" title="Justin Hayward" label="Justin Hayward"/>
<link wikidata="Q951726" start="31780" end="31791" title="David Essex" label="David Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q322288" start="31813" end="31827" title="Chris Thompson (English musician)" label="Chris Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q298930" start="31854" end="31865" title="Phil Lynott" label="Phil Lynott"/>
<link wikidata="Q443422" start="31887" end="31902" title="Julie Covington" label="Julie Covington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077761" start="32023" end="32037" title="Chris Spedding" label="Chris Spedding"/>
<link wikidata="Q302497" start="32074" end="32082" title="mandolin" label="mandolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1609413" start="32085" end="32099" title="Herbie Flowers" label="Herbie Flowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4864540" start="32116" end="32128" title="Barry Morgan (musician)" label="Barry Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385135" start="32194" end="32204" title="Ray Cooper" label="Ray Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387642" start="32220" end="32248" title="Ken Freeman (composer)" label="Ken &amp;quot;Prof&amp;quot; Freeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q354954" start="32289" end="32299" title="Jeff Wayne" label="Jeff Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7673920" start="32309" end="32321" title="jangle piano" label="jangle piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q920167" start="32396" end="32409" title="George Fenton" label="George Fenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q546936" start="32412" end="32415" title="tar (string instrument)" label="tar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912399" start="32417" end="32424" title="santoor" label="santoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q76239" start="32426" end="32432" title="zither" label="zither"/>
<link wikidata="Q3758535" start="32467" end="32479" title="Gary Osborne" label="Gary Osborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3758535" start="32533" end="32545" title="Paul Vigrass" label="Paul Vigrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q197621" start="32846" end="32857" title="John Pasche" label="John Pasche"/>
<link wikidata="Q5534340" start="32889" end="32901" title="Geoff Taylor (illustrator)" label="Geoff Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6849092" start="32915" end="32924" title="Mike Trim" label="Mike Trim"/>
<link wikidata="Q106474665" start="32955" end="32971" title="Peter Goodfellow (artist)" label="Peter Goodfellow"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143253" wikidata="Q357027" url="?curid=143253" title="Synesius">
<text>Synesius of Cyrene (; ; c. 373 – c. 414) was a Greek bishop of Ptolemais in ancient Libya, a part of the Western Pentapolis of Cyrenaica after 410. He was born of wealthy parents at Balagrae (now Bayda, Libya) near Cyrene between 370 and 375.

== Life ==
While still a youth (in 393), he went with his brother Euoptius to Alexandria, where he became an enthusiastic Neoplatonist and disciple of Hypatia. Between 395 and 399, he spent some time in Athens.

In 398 he was chosen as an envoy to the imperial court in Constantinople by Cyrene and the whole Pentapolis. He went to the capital on the occasion of the delivery of the &quot;aurum coronarium&quot; and his task was to obtain tax remissions for his country. In Constantinople he obtained the patronage of the powerful praetorian prefect Aurelianus. Synesius composed and addressed to Emperor Arcadius a speech entitled &quot;De regno&quot;, full of topical advice as to the studies of a wise ruler, but also containing a bold statement that the emperor&#x27;s first priority must be a war on corruption and a war on the interpenetration of barbarians into the Roman army.

His three years&#x27; stay in Constantinople was wearisome and otherwise disagreeable; the leisure it forced upon him he devoted in part to literary composition. Aurelianus succeeded in granting him the tax remission for Cyrene and the Pentapolis and the exemption from curial obligations for him, but then he fell in disgrace and Synesius lost everything. Later Aurelian returned in power, restoring his own grants to Synesius. The poet, then, composed &quot;Aegyptus sive de providentia&quot;, an allegory in which the good Osiris and the evil Typhon, who represent Aurelian and the Goth Gainas (ministers under Arcadius), strive for mastery, and the question of the divine permission of evil is handled.

In 402, during an earthquake, Synesius left Constantinople to return to Cyrene. Along the road he passed through Alexandria, where he returned in 403; it was in the Egyptian city that he married and lived, before returning at Cyrene in 405. The following years were busy for Synesius. His major concern was the organisation of the defence of the Pentapolis from the yearly attacks of neighbouring tribes.

In 410 Synesius, whose Christianity had until then been by no means very pronounced, was popularly chosen to be bishop of Ptolemais, and, after long hesitation on personal and doctrinal grounds, he ultimately accepted the office thus thrust upon him, being consecrated by Theophilus at Alexandria. One personal difficulty at least was obviated by his being allowed to retain his wife, to whom he was much attached; but as regarded orthodoxy he expressly stipulated for personal freedom to dissent on the questions of the soul&#x27;s creation, a literal resurrection, and the final destruction of the world, while at the same time he agreed to make some concession to popular views in his public teaching.

His tenure of the bishopric was troubled not only by domestic bereavements (his three sons died, the first two in 411 and the third in 413) but also by the Libyan invasions of the country who destroyed Cyrenaica and led him to exile, and by conflicts with the &quot;praeses&quot; Andronicus, whom he excommunicated for interfering with the Church&#x27;s right of asylum. The date of his death is unknown, but it is most likely in 413, as he wrote a farewell letter to Hypatia that year from his death bed.

His many-sided activity, as shown especially in his letters, and his loosely mediating position between Neoplatonism and Christianity, make him a subject of fascinating interest. His scientific interests are attested by his letter to Hypatia, in which occurs the earliest known reference to a hydrometer, and by a work on alchemy in the form of a commentary on Pseudo-Democritus.

== Works ==
*A speech before the emperor Arcadius, &quot;De regno&quot; (On Kingship)
*&quot;Dio, sive de suo ipsius instituto&quot;, in which he signifies his purpose to devote himself to true philosophy
*&quot;Encomium calvitii&quot;, a literary &quot;jeu d&#x27;esprit&quot;, suggested by Dio Chrysostom&#x27;s &quot;Praise of Hair&quot;
*&quot;Aegyptus sive de providentia&quot;, in two parts, also known as &quot;The Egyptian Tale&quot;, about the war against the Goth Gainas and the conflict between the two brothers Aurelianus and Caesarius
*&quot;De insomniis&quot;, a treatise on dreams
*&quot;Constitutio&quot;
*&quot;Catastasis&quot;, a description of the end of Roman Cyrenaica
*159 &quot;Epistolae&quot; (letters, including one text, Letter 57, that is in fact a speech)
*9 &quot;Hymni&quot;, of a contemplative, Neoplatonic character
*Two homilies
*An essay on making an astrolabe

*A book on dog breeding (no longer extant)
*Poems, mentioned in Synesius&#x27; letters (no longer extant)

=== Editions ===
* &quot;Editio princeps&quot;, Turnebus (Paris, 1553)
* Antonio Garzya, (ed.), &quot;Opere di Sinesio di Cirene&quot;, Classici greci, Torino: UTET, 1989 (with Italian translation)
* Lacombrade, Garzya, and Lamoureux (eds.), &quot;Synésios de Cyrène&quot;, Collection Budé, 6 vols., 1978–2008 (with French translation by Lacombrade, Roques, and Aujoulat)

=== Translations ===
* McAlhany, J. (2024) &quot;Beards &amp; Baldness in the Middle Ages: Three Texts&quot;. Brooklyn, NY: Leverhill, 2024 (translation of &quot;Encomium calvitii&quot;, with notes). 
* Fitzgerald, A. &quot;The Essays and Hymns of Synesius of Cyrene&quot;. 2 vols. Oxford, 1930.

== Legacy ==
A number of traditional Christian hymns, including &quot;Lord Jesus, Think On Me&quot;, are based on his writings.

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* T.D. Barnes, &quot;Synesius in Constantinople&quot;, &quot;Greek, Roman, and Byzantine Studies&quot; 27 (1986): 93–112.
* A.J. Bregman, &quot;Synesius of Cyrene, Philosopher-Bishop&quot; (Berkeley, 1982).
* A. Cameron and J. Long, &quot;Barbarians and Politics at the Court of Arcadius&quot; (Berkeley, 1993).
* A. de Francisco Heredero, &quot;Bárbaros en la Cirenaica a través dela obra de Sinesio de Cirene&quot; in: D. Álvarez Jiménez, R. Sanz Serrano and D. Hernández de la Fuente, El Espejismo del bárbaro : ciudadanos y extranjeros al final de la Antigüedad (Castellón, 2013) 
* A. de Francisco Heredero, &quot;Synesios of Cyrene and the Defence of Cyrenaica&quot; in: A. de Francisco, D. Hernández y S. Torres (eds.), New Perspectives on Late Antiquity in the Eastern Roman Empire (Cambridge, 2014) 
*Chr. Lacombrade, &quot;Synesios de Cyrène. Hellène et Chrétien&quot; (1951)
*J. H. W. G. Liebeschuetz, &quot;Barbarians and Bishops: Army, Church and State in the Age of Arcadius and Chrysostom&quot; (Oxford 1990).
*J. H. W. G. Liebeschuetz, &#x27;Why Did Synesius Become Bishop of Ptolemais?&#x27;, &quot;Byzantion&quot; 56 (1986): 180–195.
*D. Roques, &quot;Etudes sur la correspondance de Synesios de Cyrene&quot; (Brussels, 1989).
*T. Schmitt, &quot;Die Bekehrung des Synesios von Kyrene&quot; (2001).
* Hartwin Brandt, &quot;Die Rede peri basileias des Synesios von Kyrene – ein ungewoehnlicher Fuerstenspiegel&quot;, in Francois Chausson et Etienne Wolff (edd.), &quot;Consuetudinis amor. Fragments d&#x27;histoire romaine (IIe-VIe siecles) offerts a Jean-Pierre Callu&quot; (Roma: &quot;L&#x27;Erma&quot; di Bretschneider, 2003) (Saggi di storia antica, 19), 57–70.
* Ilinca Tanaseanu-Doebler, &quot;Konversion zur Philosophie in der Spaetantike. Kaiser Julian und Synesios von Kyrene&quot; (Stuttgart: Steiner, 2005) (Potsdamer altertumswissenschaftliche Beitraege, 23).
* Dimitar Y. Dimitrov, &quot;Sinesius of Cyrene and the Christian Neoplatonism: Patterns of Religious and Cultural Symbiosis&quot;, in Mostafa El-Abbadi and Omnia Fathallah (eds), &quot;What Happened to the Ancient Library of Alexandria?&quot; (Leiden, Brill, 2008) (Library of the Written Word, 3).
* Synesius is portrayed in Ki Longfellow&#x27;s &quot;Flow Down Like Silver, Hypatia of Alexandria&quot; in a highly imaginative way.
* &quot;Heresy: the Life of Pelagius&quot; (2012) by David Lovejoy though fictional contains a portrait of Synesius based on his letters

== External links ==

* Synesius of Cyrene at livius.org (introduction by Jona Lendering and translations of all epistles, all speeches, all hymns, both homilies, all treatises)
* D. Roques, Études sur la correspondance de Synésios de Cyrène reviewed by John Vanderspoel, University of Calgary, in Bryn Mawr Classical Review 02.01.16
* Cameron and Long reviewed by R.W. Burgess in BMCR
* Catholic Encyclopedia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q357027" start="0" end="18" title="Synesius" label="Synesius of Cyrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="47" end="52" title="Greeks" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q45829" start="63" end="72" title="Ptolemais, Cyrenaica" label="Ptolemais"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370577" start="76" end="89" title="ancient Libya" label="ancient Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q165198" start="127" end="136" title="Cyrenaica" label="Cyrenaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q35784" start="196" end="208" title="Bayda, Libya" label="Bayda, Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q44112" start="215" end="221" title="Cyrene, Libya" label="Cyrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="322" end="332" title="Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q162145" start="366" end="378" title="Neoplatonism" label="Neoplatonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q11903" start="395" end="402" title="Hypatia of Alexandria" label="Hypatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="447" end="453" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131436" start="794" end="804" title="Aurelianus (consul 400)" label="Aurelianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q159369" start="849" end="857" title="Arcadius" label="Arcadius"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="1160" end="1174" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q46491" start="1656" end="1662" title="Osiris" label="Osiris"/>
<link wikidata="Q180237" start="1676" end="1682" title="Typhon" label="Typhon"/>
<link wikidata="Q42193" start="1715" end="1719" title="Goths" label="Goth"/>
<link wikidata="Q531278" start="1720" end="1726" title="Gainas" label="Gainas"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="1951" end="1961" title="Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q365941" start="2516" end="2526" title="Theophilus I of Alexandria" label="Theophilus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248771" start="3216" end="3223" title="praeses" label="praeses"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3230" end="3240" title="Andronicus (governor)" label="Andronicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q184846" start="3750" end="3760" title="hydrometer" label="hydrometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q39689" start="3779" end="3786" title="alchemy" label="alchemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409585" start="3818" end="3835" title="Pseudo-Democritus" label="Pseudo-Democritus"/>
<link wikidata="Q334457" start="4130" end="4144" title="Dio Chrysostom" label="Dio Chrysostom"/>
<link wikidata="Q531278" start="4312" end="4318" title="Gainas" label="Gainas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131436" start="4361" end="4371" title="Aurelianus (consul 400)" label="Aurelianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158209" start="4376" end="4385" title="Caesarius (consul 398)" label="Caesarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q164992" start="4723" end="4732" title="astrolabe" label="astrolabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249682" start="4866" end="4881" title="Editio princeps" label="Editio princeps"/>
<link wikidata="Q376210" start="4889" end="4897" title="Adrianus Turnebus" label="Turnebus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246422" start="5115" end="5130" title="Collection Budé" label="Collection Budé"/>
<link wikidata="Q484692" start="5548" end="5562" title="Christian hymn" label="Christian hymn"/>
<link wikidata="Q15436767" start="6566" end="6590" title="Wolf Liebeschuetz" label="J. H. W. G. Liebeschuetz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587795" start="6997" end="7011" title="Hartwin Brandt" label="Hartwin Brandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q14946840" start="7703" end="7720" title="Mostafa El-Abbadi" label="Mostafa El-Abbadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6403615" start="7895" end="7908" title="Ki Longfellow" label="Ki Longfellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2695034" start="8214" end="8228" title="Jona Lendering" label="Jona Lendering"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143256" wikidata="Q8036869" url="?curid=143256" title="Wormhole switching">
<text>Wormhole flow control, also called wormhole switching or wormhole routing, is a system of simple flow control in computer networking based on known fixed links. It is a subset of flow control methods called &quot;flit-buffer flow control&quot;.

Switching is a more appropriate term than routing, as &quot;routing&quot; defines the route or path taken to reach the destination. The wormhole technique does not dictate the route to the destination but decides when the packet moves forward from a router.

Wormhole switching is widely used in multicomputers because of its low latency and small requirements at the nodes.

Wormhole routing supports very low-latency, high-speed, guaranteed delivery of packets suitable for real-time communication.

== Mechanism principle ==
In the wormhole flow control, each packet is broken into small pieces called flits (flow control units or flow control digits).

Commonly, the first flits, called the header flits, holds information about this packet&#x27;s route (for example, the destination address) and sets up the routing behavior for all subsequent flits associated with the packet. The header flits are followed by zero or more body flits which contain the actual payload of data. Some final flits, called the tail flits, perform some bookkeeping to close the connection between the two nodes.

In wormhole switching, each buffer is either idle, or allocated to one packet. A header flit can be forwarded to a buffer if this buffer is idle. This allocates the buffer to the packet. A body or trailer flit can be forwarded to a buffer if this buffer is allocated to its packet and is not full. The last flit frees the buffer. If the header flit is blocked in the network, the buffer fills up, and once full, no more flits can be sent: this effect is called &quot;back-pressure&quot; and can be propagated back to the source.

The name &quot;wormhole&quot; plays on the way packets are sent over the links: the address is so short that it can be translated before the message itself arrives. This allows the router to quickly set up the routing of the actual message and then &quot;bow out&quot; of the rest of the conversation. Since a packet is transmitted flit by flit, it may occupy several flit buffers along its path, creating a worm-like image.

This behaviour is quite similar to cut-through switching, commonly called &quot;virtual cut-through,&quot; the major difference being that cut-through flow control allocates buffers and channel bandwidth on a packet level, while wormhole flow control does this on the flit level.

In case of circular dependency, this back-pressure can lead to deadlock.

In most respects, wormhole is very similar to ATM or MPLS forwarding, with the exception that the &quot;cell&quot; does not have to be queued.

One thing special about wormhole flow control is the implementation of virtual channels:

A virtual channel holds the state needed to coordinate the handling of the flits of a packet over a channel. At a minimum, this state identifies the output channel of the current node for the next hop of the route and the state of the virtual channel (idle, waiting for resources, or active). The virtual channel may also include pointers to the flits of the packet that are buffered on the current node and the number of flit buffers available on the next node.
== Example ==

 Consider the 2x2 network of the figure on the right, with 3 packets to be sent: a pink one, made of 4 flits, &#x27;UVWX&#x27;, from C to D; a blue one, made of 4 flits &#x27;abcd&#x27;, from A to F; and a green one, made of 4 flits &#x27;ijkl&#x27;, from E to H. We assume that the routing has been computed, as drawn, and implies a conflict of a buffer, in the bottom-left router. The throughput is of one flit per time unit.

First, consider the pink flow: at time 1, the flit &#x27;U&#x27; is sent to the first buffer; at time 2, the flit &#x27;U&#x27; goes through the next buffer (assuming the computation of the route takes no time), and the flit &#x27;V&#x27; is sent to the first buffer, and so on.

The blue and green flows requires a step by step presentation:
* Time 1: Both the blue and green flows send theirs first flits, &#x27;i&#x27; and &#x27;a&#x27;.
* Time 2: The flit &#x27;i&#x27; can go on into the next buffer. But a buffer is dedicated to a packet from its first to its last flit, and so, the &#x27;a&#x27; flit can not be forwarded. This is the start of a &quot;back-pressure&quot; effect. The &#x27;j&#x27; flit can replace the &#x27;i&#x27; flit. The &#x27;b&#x27; flit can be sent. 
* Time 3: The green packet goes on. The blue &#x27;c&#x27; flit can not be forwarded (the buffer is occupied with the &#x27;b&#x27; and &#x27;a&#x27; flits): this back-pressure effect reaches the packet source.
* Time 4: As in time 3
* Time 5: The green packet no longer uses the left-down buffer. The blue packet is unblocked and can be forwarded (assuming that the &#x27;unblocked&#x27; information can be forwarded in null time)
* Time 6-10: The blue packet goes through the network.

== Advantages ==

* Wormhole flow control makes more efficient use of buffers than cut-through. Where cut-through requires many packets worth of buffer space, the wormhole method needs very few flit buffers (comparatively).
* An entire packet need not be buffered to move on to the next node, decreasing network latency compared to store-and-forward switching.
* Bandwidth and channel allocation are decoupled

== Usage ==

Wormhole techniques are primarily used in multiprocessor systems, notably hypercubes. In a hypercube computer each CPU is attached to several neighbours in a fixed pattern, which reduces the number of hops from one CPU to another. Each CPU is given a number (typically only 8-bit to 16-bit), which is its network address, and packets to CPUs are sent with this number in the header. When the packet arrives at an intermediate router for forwarding, the router examines the header (very quickly), sets up a circuit to the next router, and then bows out of the conversation. This reduces latency (delay) noticeably compared to store-and-forward switching that waits for the whole packet before forwarding. More recently, wormhole flow control has found its way to applications in network-on-chip systems (NOCs), of which multi-core processors are one flavor. Here, many processor cores, or on a lower level, even functional units can be connected in a network on a single IC package. As wire delays and many other non-scalable constraints on linked processing elements become the dominating factor for design, engineers are looking to simplify organized interconnection networks, in which flow control methods play an important role.

The IEEE 1355 and SpaceWire technologies use wormhole.

== Virtual channels ==

An extension of worm-hole flow control is Virtual-Channel flow control, where several virtual channels may be multiplexed across one physical channel. Each unidirectional virtual channel is realized by an independently managed pair of (flit) buffers. Different packets can then share the physical channel on a flit-by-flit basis. 
Virtual channels were originally introduced to avoid the deadlock problem, but they can be also used to reduce wormhole blocking, improving network latency and throughput. Wormhole blocking occurs when a packet acquires a channel, thus preventing other packets from using the channel and forcing them to stall. 
Suppose a packet P0 has acquired the channel between two routers. In absence of virtual channels, a packet P1 arriving later would be blocked until the transmission of P0 has been completed. 
If virtual channels are implemented, the following improvements are possible:

* Upon arrival of P1, the physical channel can be multiplexed between them on a flit-by-flit basis, so that both packets proceed with half speed (depending on the arbitration scheme).
* If P0 is a full-length packet whereas P1 is only a small control packet of size of few flits, then this scheme allows P1 pass through both routers while P0 is slowed down for a short time corresponding to the transmission of few packets. This reduces latency for P1.
* Assume that P0 is temporarily blocked downstream from the current router. Throughput is increased by allowing P1 to proceed at the full speed of the physical channel. Without virtual channels, P0 would be occupying the channel, without actually using the available bandwidth (since it is being blocked).

Using virtual channels to reduce wormhole blocking has many similarities to using virtual output queueing to reduce head-of-line blocking.

== Routing ==

A mix of source routing and logical routing may be used in the same wormhole-switched packet.
The value of the first byte of a Myrinet or SpaceWire packet is the address of the packet.
Each SpaceWire switch uses the address to decide how to route the packet.

=== Source routing ===
With source routing, the packet sender chooses how the packet is routed through the switch.

If the first byte of an incoming SpaceWire packet is in the range 1 to 31,
it indicates the corresponding port 1 to 31 of the Spacewire switch.
The SpaceWire switch then discards that routing character and sends the rest of the packet out that port.
This exposes the next byte of the original packet to the next SpaceWire switch.
The packet sender may choose to use source routing to explicitly specify the complete path through the network to the final destination in this fashion.

=== Logical routing ===

With logical routing, the Spacewire switch itself decides how to route the packet.

If the address (the first byte) of an incoming SpaceWire packet is in the range 32 to 255,
the SpaceWire switch uses that value as an index into an internal routing table that indicates which port(s) to send the packet and whether to delete or retain that first byte.

Address 0 is used to communicate directly with the switch, and may be used to set the routing table entries for that switch.

== See also ==
*IEEE 1355
*SpaceWire

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8036869" start="0" end="21" title="Wormhole switching" label="Wormhole flow control"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036869" start="35" end="53" title="Wormhole switching" label="wormhole switching"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036869" start="57" end="73" title="Wormhole switching" label="wormhole routing"/>
<link wikidata="Q612457" start="97" end="109" title="flow control (data)" label="flow control"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301371" start="113" end="129" title="computer network" label="computer network"/>
<link wikidata="Q436417" start="653" end="664" title="Network delay" label="low-latency"/>
<link wikidata="Q63178895" start="722" end="745" title="real-time communication" label="real-time communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428972" start="851" end="856" title="flits (computer networking)" label="flits"/>
<link wikidata="Q383791" start="2333" end="2354" title="cut-through switching" label="cut-through switching"/>
<link wikidata="Q206047" start="2699" end="2702" title="Asynchronous Transfer Mode" label="ATM"/>
<link wikidata="Q677023" start="2706" end="2710" title="Multiprotocol Label Switching" label="MPLS"/>
<link wikidata="Q220543" start="2788" end="2793" title="queue (data structure)" label="queue"/>
<link wikidata="Q436417" start="5369" end="5384" title="network latency" label="network latency"/>
<link wikidata="Q603357" start="5397" end="5414" title="store-and-forward" label="store-and-forward"/>
<link wikidata="Q846651" start="5531" end="5545" title="multiprocessor" label="multiprocessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126252" start="5563" end="5572" title="Connection Machine" label="hypercube"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="5604" end="5607" title="Central processing unit" label="CPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q270159" start="5763" end="5768" title="8-bit" label="8-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q194368" start="5772" end="5778" title="16-bit" label="16-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q603357" start="6114" end="6131" title="store and forward" label="store-and-forward"/>
<link wikidata="Q339554" start="6267" end="6282" title="Network on a chip" label="network-on-chip"/>
<link wikidata="Q80831" start="6459" end="6461" title="Integrated Circuit" label="IC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653434" start="6726" end="6735" title="IEEE 1355" label="IEEE 1355"/>
<link wikidata="Q674249" start="6740" end="6749" title="SpaceWire" label="SpaceWire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6844" end="6859" title="Virtual-Channel" label="Virtual-Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q612457" start="6860" end="6872" title="flow control (data)" label="flow control"/>
<link wikidata="Q7935011" start="8558" end="8581" title="virtual output queueing" label="virtual output queueing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689070" start="8592" end="8613" title="head-of-line blocking" label="head-of-line blocking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1863181" start="8758" end="8765" title="Myrinet" label="Myrinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q674249" start="8821" end="8830" title="SpaceWire" label="SpaceWire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422567" start="9373" end="9387" title="source routing" label="source routing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653434" start="10011" end="10020" title="IEEE 1355" label="IEEE 1355"/>
<link wikidata="Q674249" start="10022" end="10031" title="SpaceWire" label="SpaceWire"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143258" wikidata="Q376210" url="?curid=143258" title="Adrianus Turnebus">
<text>Adrianus Turnebus ( or &quot;Tournebeuf&quot;; 151212 June 1565) was a French classical scholar.

==Life==
Turnebus was born in Les Andelys in Normandy. At the age of twelve he was sent to Paris to study, and attracted great notice by his remarkable abilities. After having held the post of professor of &quot;belles-lettres&quot; in the University of Toulouse, in 1547 he returned to Paris as professor (or royal reader) of Greek at the College Royal. In 1562 he exchanged this post for a professorship in Greek philosophy.

In 1552 he was entrusted with the printing of the Greek books at the royal press, in which he was assisted by his friend, Guillaume Morel. Joseph Justus Scaliger was his pupil. He died of tuberculosis on 12 June 1565 in Paris.

Montaigne wrote that he &quot;knew more and better, what he knew, than any man in his age or of many ages past&quot;.

He was the father of Odet de Turnèbe.

==Works==
His works chiefly consist of philological dissertations, commentaries (on Aeschylus, Sophocles, Theophrastus, Philo and portions of Cicero), and translations of Greek authors into Latin and French. His son Étienne published his complete works in three volumes (Strassburg, 1600), and his son Adrien published his &quot;Adversaria&quot;, containing explanations and emendations of numerous passages by classical authors.

==Notes==
==References==

*&quot;Oratio funebris&quot; by Léger du Chesne (Leodegarius a Quercu) prefixed to the Strassburg edition. 
*L. Clement, &quot;De Adriani Turnebi praefationibus et poematis&quot; (1899).
*J.E. Sandys, &quot;A History of Classical Scholarship&quot; (Cambridge, 1908) iii. 
*Michael Mattaire, &quot;Historia Typographorum Aliquot Parisiensium&quot; (London, 1817) 
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q376210" start="0" end="17" title="Adrianus Turnebus" label="Adrianus Turnebus"/>
<link wikidata="Q209770" start="128" end="139" title="Les Andelys" label="Les Andelys"/>
<link wikidata="Q15878" start="143" end="151" title="Normandy" label="Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q578023" start="338" end="360" title="University of Toulouse" label="University of Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089547" start="425" end="430" title="Greek literature" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q202660" start="438" end="451" title="Collège de France" label="College Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q999259" start="507" end="523" title="Greek philosophy" label="Greek philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3120097" start="648" end="663" title="Guillaume Morel" label="Guillaume Morel"/>
<link wikidata="Q315163" start="665" end="687" title="Joseph Justus Scaliger" label="Joseph Justus Scaliger"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="714" end="726" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q41568" start="754" end="763" title="Montaigne" label="Montaigne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100336" start="894" end="909" title="Odet de Turnèbe" label="Odet de Turnèbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q40634" start="951" end="963" title="philology" label="philological"/>
<link wikidata="Q40939" start="996" end="1005" title="Aeschylus" label="Aeschylus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235" start="1007" end="1016" title="Sophocles" label="Sophocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q160362" start="1018" end="1030" title="Theophrastus" label="Theophrastus"/>
<link wikidata="Q189597" start="1032" end="1037" title="Philo Judaeus" label="Philo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="1054" end="1060" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="1102" end="1107" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="1112" end="1118" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q518403" start="1401" end="1416" title="André Duchesne" label="Léger du Chesne"/>
<link wikidata="Q320892" start="1557" end="1568" title="John Edwin Sandys" label="J.E. Sandys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478736" start="1642" end="1658" title="Michael Mattaire" label="Michael Mattaire"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143259" wikidata="Q328442" url="?curid=143259" title="Santa Claus Conquers the Martians">
<text>Santa Claus Conquers the Martians is a 1964 American Christmas science fiction comedy film. It was directed by Nicholas Webster, produced and written by Paul L. Jacobson, and based on a story by Glenville Mareth. John Call stars as Santa Claus, ten-year-old Pia Zadora as Girmar the Martian girl, and Doris Rich in the first documented motion picture role of Mrs. Claus.

&quot;Santa Claus Conquers the Martians&quot; regularly appears on lists of the worst films ever made and in the &quot;bottom 100&quot; list on IMDb. It is featured in series episodes of &quot;Canned Film Festival&quot; in 1986, &quot;Mystery Science Theater 3000&quot; in 1991, and &quot;Elvira&#x27;s Movie Macabre&quot;.

==Plot==
The Martians Momar (Mom Martian) and Kimar (King Martian) are worried that their children Girmar (Girl Martian) and Bomar (Boy Martian) are watching too much Earth television, most notably station KID-TV&#x27;s interview with Santa Claus in his workshop at Earth&#x27;s North Pole.

, an 800-year-old Martian sage, advises them that the children of Mars are growing distracted due to the society&#x27;s overly rigid structure. From infancy, all their education is fed into their brains through machines and they are not allowed individuality or freedom of thought.

Chochem notes that he had seen this coming &quot;for centuries&quot; and says that the only way to help the children is to allow them their freedom and be allowed to have fun. To do this, Mars needs a Santa Claus figure, like on Earth. Leaving Chochem&#x27;s cave, the Martian leaders decide to abduct Santa Claus from Earth and bring him to Mars.

Struggling to distinguish between various Santa impersonators, the Martians decide to kidnap two Earth children to find the real one. Once this is accomplished, one Martian, Voldar, who strongly disagrees with the idea, repeatedly tries to kill Santa, believing that he is corrupting the children of Mars and turning them away from the planet&#x27;s original glory.

When they arrive on Mars, Santa and the children build a factory to make toys for the Martian children. However, Voldar and his assistants, Stobo and Shim, sabotage the factory and change its programming so that it makes the toys incorrectly. Meanwhile, Dropo, Kimar&#x27;s assistant, who has taken a great liking to Santa Claus and Christmas, puts on one of Santa&#x27;s spare suits and starts acting like him. After arriving at the toy factory, Voldar mistakes Dropo for the real Santa and kidnaps him.

When Santa and the children come back to the factory to make more toys, they discover that someone has tampered with the machines. Voldar and Stobo come back to the factory to make a deal with Kimar, but when they see the real Santa Claus, they realize that their plan has been foiled. Dropo, held hostage in a cave, tricks his guard Shim and escapes. Kimar then arrests Voldar, Stobo, and Shim. Santa notices that Dropo acts like him and says that Dropo would make a good Martian Santa Claus. Kimar agrees and sends Santa and the children back to Earth.

==Cast==
==Production==
The film was the idea of producer Paul Jacobson, who worked in video production and wanted to move into features. He hired writer Glenville Mareth to develop the idea and Nicholas Webster to direct and made the film through his own Jalor Productions. Jacobson called the film a &quot;yuletide science fiction fantasy&quot; and said he made it because of a perceived gap in the market. &quot;Except for the Disney&#x27;s, there&#x27;s very little in film houses that children recognize as their own&quot;.

Jacobson succeeded in selling the film&#x27;s distribution rights to Joseph E. Levine. Filming took place over two weeks from July to August 1964, at the Michael Myerberg Studios on Long Island.

Jacobson said &quot;at this particular studio, with a group of wonderfully cooperative technicians, we&#x27;ve been able to get a lot of production value from our low budget. We&#x27;re also shooting in color to get full, picturesque effects with our toy factors and Martian and North Pole backgrounds&quot;. Cast members John Call and Victor Stiles were appearing on stage in &quot;Oliver!&quot; while Donna Conforti was appearing in &quot;Here&#x27;s Love&quot; on Broadway.

In an interview in June 1966, Levine said he had made 15 &quot;family type pictures&quot; in 18 months &quot;but don&#x27;t let it get around. I don&#x27;t want anybody to know because families don&#x27;t go to see them – they just talk about them. But I make them anyway because I have the protection of the television. Money in the bank, the television&quot;.

==Release==

The film was released in time for Christmas 1964. After that, it was regularly re-released around Christmas for matinees.

===Home media===
Due to its public domain status in the United States, &quot;Santa Claus Conquers the Martians&quot; has been released on many different bargain bin price labels. StudioCanal holds ancillary rights to the film.

* Originally broadcast on The Comedy Channel on December 21, 1991, the &quot;Mystery Science Theater 3000&quot; version of the film was released on DVD by Rhino Home Video as part of &quot;MST3K: The Essentials&quot; on August 31, 2004.
* Mill Creek Entertainment released the film on DVD as part of their &quot;Holiday Family Collection&quot; in 2006.
* &quot;Cinematic Titanic&quot; riffed the film on DVD, released in November 2008.
* The &quot;Cinema Insomnia&quot; version was released by Apprehensive Films as part of their &quot;Slime Line&quot; series.
* The bonus content of the DVD &quot;Rare Exports: A Christmas Tale&quot; includes the film.
* E1 Entertainment&#x27;s version from the 2010-11 syndicated television series, &quot;Elvira&#x27;s Movie Macabre&quot;, was released on DVD on December 6, 2011.
* Kino Lorber planned to release a &quot;Santa Claus Conquers the Martians: Kino Classics Special Edition&quot; on Blu-ray and DVD on October 30, 2012. However, it was discovered that the discs had been pressed using a severely truncated master copy, running only 69 minutes. A new version was released on December 4, 2012, with the original running time intact.
* &quot;RiffTrax&quot;, a production of several former &quot;MST3K&quot; writers and performers, selected the film for riffing in a live event held on December 5, 2013, and broadcast to movie theaters around the country. The live show became available as a digital download on August 1, 2014 and was released on DVD on November 24, 2015. The show was presented as a double feature with &quot;Christmas Shorts-stravaganza!&quot;, a RiffTrax collection of holiday shorts, on December 1, 2016.
* It&#x27;s also part of &quot;Weird Christmas&quot; on Fandor.

==Reception==
===Box office===
In February 1965, the &quot;New York Times&quot; said on its release that the film &quot;reaped a box office bonanza in a regular, multi theatre booking&quot;.

===Critical===
&quot;Santa Claus Conquers the Martians&quot; received mostly negative reviews, with most of its positive feedback coming in the form of the film being &quot;so bad it&#x27;s good&quot;. On the film review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, the film has score, based on reviews, with an average rating of . The site&#x27;s critical consensus reads, &quot;The endearingly cheesy &quot;Santa Claus Conquers the Martians&quot; might just be so naughty it&#x27;s nice for viewers seeking a sub-competent sci-fi holiday adventure.&quot; The film has since been viewed as a cult film.

==Legacy==
The theme from the film was released on record in November 1964 by &quot;Milton Delugg and the Little Eskimos&quot; on Four Corners Records, a subsidiary of Kapp Records. Its catalog number is FC 4-114. It did not reach the charts. The trumpeter Al Hirt that year released a singles version of the theme, with the other side of the record being &quot;White Christmas&quot;.

A single-issue comic book adaptation and read-along of the film was published by Dell Comics in March 1966.

The film was featured in season 3 episode 21 of &quot;Mystery Science Theater 3000&quot; in 1991.

A theatrical production of &quot;Santa Claus Conquers the Martians: The Musical&quot; premiered in 1993 at the Factory Theatre in Chicago, adapted and directed by Sean Abley.

Beginning in February 1998, a remake was rumored with David Zucker as producer, and Jim Carrey attached to play Dropo. An estimated release date was announced as 2002, though the film was then believed to have gone into development hell. As of December 2020, IMDb lists a remake with a projected 2021 release date, directed by Cynthia Webster, the daughter of the original film&#x27;s director.
It spawned a tongue-in-cheek novelization by Lou Harry, released in 2005 by Penguin Books/Chamberlain Bros. The book, which includes a DVD of the original film, presents the story from the perspective of a now-adult Girmar, who has not only succeeded her father as the ruler of Mars but also narrates the tale in a valley girl type of language.

In 2006, a second theatrical production premiered at the Maverick Theater in Fullerton, California. This version was adapted by Brian Newell and Nick McGee. The Maverick&#x27;s production has become a comedic success and a local tradition that has been performed there every holiday season since 2006, with a 10th-anniversary production being performed in December 2015.

In 2016, a third theatrical adaptation premiered at The Red Curtain Foundation for the Arts in Marysville, Washington, this version written and directed by Nick Poling. Like the film, the script for this adaptation is in the public domain.

Sloppy Seconds covered the theme song in 1992.

==See also==
* Santa Claus in film
* List of Christmas films
* List of cult films
* List of films set on Mars
* List of films considered the worst
* List of American films of 1964
* Public domain film
* List of films in the public domain in the United States

==References==
==External links==
* 
* 
* 
* &quot;Orange County Register&quot; review of &quot;Santa Claus Conquers the Martians&quot; at the Maverick Theater 2006
*Said MST3K episode on ShoutFactoryTV</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q19809" start="53" end="62" title="Christmas" label="Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q471839" start="63" end="78" title="Science fiction film" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q157443" start="79" end="90" title="comedy film" label="comedy film"/>
<link wikidata="Q15493753" start="111" end="127" title="Nicholas Webster" label="Nicholas Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q315796" start="232" end="243" title="Santa Claus" label="Santa Claus"/>
<link wikidata="Q437039" start="258" end="268" title="Pia Zadora" label="Pia Zadora"/>
<link wikidata="Q2152981" start="359" end="369" title="Mrs. Claus" label="Mrs. Claus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="452" end="473" title="List of films considered the worst#Santa Claus Conquers the Martians (1964)" label="worst films ever made"/>
<link wikidata="Q37312" start="516" end="520" title="IMDb" label="IMDb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2936396" start="565" end="585" title="Canned Film Festival" label="Canned Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894972" start="607" end="635" title="Mystery Science Theater 3000" label="Mystery Science Theater 3000"/>
<link wikidata="Q5368107" start="661" end="688" title="Elvira&amp;#x27;s Movie Macabre" label="Elvira&amp;#x27;s Movie Macabre"/>
<link wikidata="Q315796" start="932" end="943" title="Santa Claus" label="Santa Claus"/>
<link wikidata="Q315796" start="1574" end="1585" title="Santa Claus" label="Santa Claus"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809" start="2321" end="2330" title="Christmas" label="Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975783" start="3649" end="3665" title="Joseph E. Levine" label="Joseph E. Levine"/>
<link wikidata="Q19652" start="4781" end="4794" title="public domain" label="public domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2450848" start="4932" end="4943" title="StudioCanal" label="StudioCanal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7726921" start="5007" end="5025" title="The Comedy Channel (American TV channel)" label="The Comedy Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894972" start="5058" end="5086" title="Mystery Science Theater 3000" label="Mystery Science Theater 3000"/>
<link wikidata="Q627091" start="5136" end="5152" title="Rhino Entertainment" label="Rhino Home Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q2206919" start="5342" end="5359" title="Cinematic Titanic" label="Cinematic Titanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120734" start="5429" end="5444" title="Cinema Insomnia" label="Cinema Insomnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781692" start="5475" end="5493" title="Apprehensive Films" label="Apprehensive Films"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5579" end="5609" title="Rare Exports: A Christmas Tale" label="Rare Exports: A Christmas Tale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5368107" start="5722" end="5749" title="Elvira&amp;#x27;s Movie Macabre" label="Elvira&amp;#x27;s Movie Macabre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414157" start="5800" end="5811" title="Kino Lorber" label="Kino Lorber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985929" start="6169" end="6177" title="RiffTrax" label="RiffTrax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251417" start="6527" end="6541" title="double feature" label="double feature"/>
<link wikidata="Q17053201" start="6708" end="6714" title="Fandor" label="Fandor"/>
<link wikidata="Q219557" start="7082" end="7103" title="so bad it&amp;#x27;s good" label="so bad it&amp;#x27;s good"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491832" start="7123" end="7140" title="review aggregator" label="review aggregator"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="7149" end="7164" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q219557" start="7493" end="7502" title="cult film" label="cult film"/>
<link wikidata="Q336605" start="7589" end="7602" title="Milton Delugg" label="Milton Delugg"/>
<link wikidata="Q8565064" start="7635" end="7655" title="Four Corners Records" label="Four Corners Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728690" start="7673" end="7685" title="Kapp Records" label="Kapp Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q658636" start="7762" end="7769" title="Al Hirt" label="Al Hirt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289818" start="7972" end="7983" title="Dell Comics" label="Dell Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894972" start="8054" end="8082" title="Mystery Science Theater 3000" label="Mystery Science Theater 3000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="8229" end="8236" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q452794" start="8329" end="8341" title="David Zucker (filmmaker)" label="David Zucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q40504" start="8359" end="8369" title="Jim Carrey" label="Jim Carrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081312" start="8495" end="8511" title="development hell" label="development hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q64748800" start="8602" end="8617" title="Cynthia Webster" label="Cynthia Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6685542" start="8715" end="8724" title="Lou Harry" label="Lou Harry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336200" start="8746" end="8759" title="Penguin Books" label="Penguin Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q3129796" start="8985" end="8996" title="valley girl" label="valley girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q494723" start="9073" end="9089" title="Maverick Theater" label="Maverick Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q970001" start="9483" end="9505" title="Marysville, Washington" label="Marysville, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7541379" start="9629" end="9643" title="Sloppy Seconds (band)" label="Sloppy Seconds"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419368" start="9692" end="9711" title="Santa Claus in film" label="Santa Claus in film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1580173" start="9714" end="9737" title="List of Christmas films" label="List of Christmas films"/>
<link wikidata="Q6614871" start="9740" end="9758" title="List of cult films" label="List of cult films"/>
<link wikidata="Q21027951" start="9761" end="9786" title="List of films set on Mars" label="List of films set on Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776408" start="9789" end="9823" title="List of films considered the worst" label="List of films considered the worst"/>
<link wikidata="Q6561522" start="9826" end="9856" title="List of American films of 1964" label="List of American films of 1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257728" start="9859" end="9877" title="Public domain film" label="Public domain film"/>
<link wikidata="Q2762611" start="9880" end="9935" title="List of films in the public domain in the United States" label="List of films in the public domain in the United States"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143261" wikidata="Q475517" url="?curid=143261" title="Take Off Your Pants and Jacket">
<text>Take Off Your Pants and Jacket is the fourth studio album by American rock band Blink-182, released on June 12, 2001, by MCA Records. The band had spent much of the previous year traveling and supporting their previous album &quot;Enema of the State&quot; (1999), which launched their mainstream career. The album&#x27;s title is a tongue-in-cheek pun on male masturbation (&quot;take off your pants and jack it&quot;), and its cover art has icons for each member of the trio: an airplane (&quot;take off&quot;), a pair of pants, and a jacket. It is the band&#x27;s final release through MCA before the label was absorbed into Geffen.

The album was recorded over three months at Signature Sound in San Diego with producer Jerry Finn. During the sessions, MCA executives pressured the band to retain the sound that helped their previous album sell millions. As such, &quot;Take Off Your Pants and Jacket&quot; continues the pop-punk tone that Blink-182 had honed and made famous, albeit with a heavier post-hardcore sound inspired by bands such as Fugazi and Refused. Regarding its lyrical content, it has been referred to as a concept album chronicling adolescence, with songs dedicated to first dates, fighting authority, and teenage parties. Due to differing opinions on direction, the trio worked in opposition to one another for the first time, and the sessions sometimes became contentious.

The album had near-immediate success, becoming the first punk rock record to debut at number one on the US &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 and achieving double platinum certification in May 2002. It produced three hit singles—&quot;The Rock Show&quot;, &quot;Stay Together for the Kids&quot;, and &quot;First Date&quot;—that were top-ten hits on modern rock charts. Critical impressions of the album were generally positive, commending its expansion on teenage themes, although others viewed this as its weakness. To support the album, the band co-headlined the Pop Disaster Tour with Green Day. &quot;Take Off Your Pants and Jacket&quot; has sold over 14 million copies worldwide.

==Background==
At the onset of the millennium, Blink-182 became one of the biggest international rock acts with the release of their third album, the fast-paced, melodic &quot;Enema of the State&quot; (1999). It became an enormous worldwide success, moving over fifteen million copies. Singles &quot;What&#x27;s My Age Again?&quot;, &quot;All the Small Things&quot;, and &quot;Adam&#x27;s Song&quot; became radio staples, with their music videos and relationship with MTV cementing their stardom. It marked the beginning of their friendship with producer Jerry Finn, a key architect of their &quot;polished&quot; pop-punk rhythm; according to journalist James Montgomery, writing for MTV News, the veteran engineer &quot;served as an invaluable member of the Blink team: part adviser, part impartial observer, he helped smooth out tensions and hone their multiplatinum sound.&quot; The glossy production set Blink-182 apart from the other crossover punk acts of the era, such as Green Day, and this style and sound made for an extensive impact on pop punk, igniting a new wave of the genre.

Behind the scenes, the three were adjusting to this new lifestyle. &quot;After years of hard work, promotion, and nonstop touring, people knew who we were, and listened to what we were saying ... it scared the shit out of us,&quot; said bassist Mark Hoppus. Each musician was now wealthy and famous, which brought both comfort and challenges: drummer Travis Barker dealt with stalkers at his home. It became a transitionary time for the group, adjusting to larger venues than before, including amphitheaters, arenas, and stadiums. At the beginning of the album&#x27;s promotional cycle, the trio were driving from show to show in a van with a trailer attached for merchandise and equipment; by its end, they were flying on private jets. Hoppus recalled that &quot;we had gone from playing small clubs and sleeping on people&#x27;s floors to headlining amphitheaters and staying in five-star hotels.&quot; In the public eye, Blink became known for their juvenile antics, including running around nude; the band made a cameo appearance in the similarly bawdy comedy &quot;American Pie&quot; (1999). While grateful for their success—which the trio parlayed into various business ventures, like Famous Stars and Straps, Atticus Clothing and Macbeth Footwear—they gradually became unhappy with their goofy public image. In one instance, the European arm of UMG had taken photos shot lampooning boy bands and distributed them at face value, making their basis for parody appear thin.

In response, a conscious effort was made to make the trio appear more authentic with their next album. But the relentless pace also was wearing on the group, and the growing divide between art and commerce began to frustrate them. The band was rushed into recording the follow-up, as according to DeLonge, &quot;the president of MCA was penalizing us an obscene amount of money because our record wasn&#x27;t going to be out in time for them to make their quarterly revenue statements. [...] And we were saying, &#x27;Hey, we can&#x27;t do this right now, we need to reorganize ourselves and really think about what we want to do and write the best record we can.&#x27; They didn&#x27;t agree with us.&quot; To satiate fans in the interim, the band issued a stopgap live album, &quot;The Mark, Tom, and Travis Show (The Enema Strikes Back!)&quot;, which contained more of their high-energy antics, in November 2000.
==Recording and production==
===Pre-production===
The band began pre-production in December 2000, using ideas they had been developing on the road over the past year. DeLonge joked to a BBC reporter that the material may not be so fresh: &quot;About this time in our careers we start running out of guitar riffs and ideas, so we start pulling out of the archives,&quot; he laughed. They recorded demos at DML Studios, a small practice studio in Escondido, California, where the band had written &quot;Dude Ranch&quot; and &quot;Enema of the State&quot;. The group had written a dozen songs after three weeks and invited their manager, Rick DeVoe, to be the first person outside Blink-182 to hear the new material, which the band found &quot;catchy [but with] a definitive edge&quot;. DeVoe sat in the control room and quietly listened to the recordings, and pressed the band at the end on why there was no &quot;Blink-182 good-time summer anthem [thing]&quot;. DeLonge and Hoppus were furious, remarking, &quot;You want a fucking single? I&#x27;ll write you the cheesiest, catchiest, throwaway fucking summertime single you&#x27;ve ever heard!&quot; Hoppus went home and wrote lead single &quot;The Rock Show&quot; in ten minutes, and DeLonge similarly wrote &quot;First Date&quot;, which became the most successful singles from the record and future live staples.

The three worked on the arrangements for those two songs at Barker&#x27;s Famous Stars and Straps warehouse. Barker also proposed being promoted to official partner in the band; prior to 2001, he had been considered a touring musician only, and while he had arranged the songs on &quot;Enema&quot;, he received no publishing residuals. Hoppus and DeLonge obliged — they wanted his input on songwriting. Finn came into the process during the last week of pre-production, and was very fond of Barker&#x27;s drum parts, which the other musicians found unconventional and &quot;algebraic&quot;. Barker remembered going into the process was intimidating but exciting: &quot;We had a lot more pressure on that album than we did before, when nobody seemed to be paying attention. We had this huge success, but that just made us feel like we had something to prove. Instead of saying, &#x27;Let&#x27;s write some simple songs that will be huge,&#x27; we thought we&#x27;d try something more technical and darker. We wanted to be taken seriously, and we wanted to challenge ourselves.&quot;

===Recording===

&quot;Take Off Your Pants and Jacket&quot; was recorded between December 2000 and March 2001. The band began proper tracking for drums not long after pre-production at Larrabee Studios West and Cello Studios in Hollywood. The working relationship with producer Jerry Finn had been so fruitful that the same team was largely engaged for &quot;Take Off Your Pants and Jacket&quot;, with Finn producing and Joe McGrath engineering. Barker recorded his drum parts in &quot;two or three days&quot; while DeLonge and Hoppus watched television upstairs. Barker recorded the songs from memory with no scratch tracks, largely in one take; &quot;Take Off&quot; was the first time he enabled a click track while recording to ensure timing. When the drums were finished, the band returned to San Diego to record the majority of &quot;Take Off Your Pants and Jacket&quot; at Signature Sound, where they had also recorded its predecessor. While the band worked with few days off, the sessions also proved to be memorable: &quot;We took long dinner breaks, ate Sombrero burritos, watched &quot;Family Guy&quot; and &quot;Mr. Show&quot;, and laughed way too hard,&quot; said Hoppus. When MCA Records executives traveled to San Diego to hear the highly anticipated follow-up, the trio only played them joke songs—&quot;Fuck a Dog&quot; and &quot;When You Fucked Hitler&quot; (the subject of which later changed to a grandfather)—and the team responded incredulously: &quot;[they] lost it,&quot; said DeLonge. MCA put pressure on the band to maintain the sound that made &quot;Enema of the State&quot; sell millions; as a result, DeLonge believed the album took no &quot;creative leaps [or] bounds.&quot; As such, DeLonge felt creatively stifled and was privately &quot;bummed out&quot; with the label&#x27;s limitations.

In 2013, Hoppus referred to &quot;Take Off Your Pants and Jacket&quot; as the &quot;permanent record of a band in transition ... our confused, contentious, brilliant, painful, cathartic leap into the unknown.&quot; The creative struggle was evident from the outset. Hoppus loved everything regarding &quot;Enema of the State&quot;—including the music videos and live show—and &quot;wanted to do it again,&quot; hoping to create a bigger, better and louder follow-up. DeLonge&#x27;s guitar style was becoming dirtier and heavier; Arpeggiated guitar hooks became frenetic 1/16th note spasms,&quot; observed Hoppus. Meanwhile, drummer Travis Barker&#x27;s were imbued a sense of hip hop and heavy metal into his technique. Hoppus felt his lyricism was largely darker and more introspective: &quot;love songs became broken love songs,&quot; he remembered. DeLonge rewrote some of his lyrics after listening to songs by Alkaline Trio, feeling as though he needed to elevate himself. Hoppus remembered that it was the first time the three had worked in opposition to one another, and noted that the sessions sometimes prompted arguments. He felt that the sessions created an unspoken competition between him and DeLonge, between who could write the superior lyrics: &quot;Our confidence and insecurity begat some heated differences, sometime to the point where we had to leave rooms and cool down,&quot; he said in 2013. Finn helped to resolve these situations by offering fresh insights and good humor.

The band wrote two more songs in the studio; for these songs, Barker looped and filtered his parts and recorded the live drums after the fact. One of these songs became the single &quot;Stay Together for the Kids&quot;, which was developed only one day before the album was turned over for mixing.

===Technical===
The engineering and post-production team behind &quot;Jacket&quot; remains largely unchanged from its predecessor. Finn and McGrath, exacting in acquiring the best sound, took two days to assess microphone placement, different compressors, and shifting EQs before committing Barker&#x27;s drums to tape. Barker had technician Mike Fasano sit in and complete the drum tuning because he disliked waiting for Finn and his team. It was the last Blink album recorded on analogue tape; their next effort involved the emerging Pro Tools software. On the technical side, all of the vocals were recorded with Blue&#x27;s Bottle condenser tube microphone. DeLonge augments his guitar setup with chorus pedals, flangers and delays – &quot;just really light, tasteful touches&quot;, he felt. Barker used a variety of snare drums in his process, which he tuned tightly to his liking; the album uses brands like Ludwig Coliseum and Brady, and many came from Orange County Drum and Percussion. He liked using different snares to match what he felt the song required. To that end, the team rented a Tama snare called &quot;Big Red&quot; that Guns N&#x27; Roses used to make &quot;November Rain&quot;.

According an &quot;EQ&quot; piece published after the album&#x27;s release, Finn was so meticulous in quality that he A/B tested speaker wire from an independent hi-fi shop. Hoppus grew wary of the painstaking approach: &quot;You go out and spend [hundreds of thousands of dollars] on the best recording equipment in the world just to record onto tape how bad of a musician you really are.&quot; Roger Joseph Manning, Jr. returns to add keyboard parts, while Tom Lord-Alge served as the mixing engineer, which was conducted at Encore Studios in Burbank. He typically worked out of his Miami space, but the band had him mix the album in California instead. The band also returned to work with Brian Gardner at Bernie Grundman Mastering in Hollywood. A writer for &quot;EQ&quot; magazine profiling Finn was present at the mastering session and characterized the atmosphere as &quot;easygoing, the band was relaxed.&quot;

==Packaging==

The title is a tongue-in-cheek pun on male masturbation (&quot;take off your pants and jack it&quot;). Previous titles had included &quot;Epileptic Proctologist&quot;, &quot;If You See Kay&quot; (a pun on the spelling of &quot;fuck&quot;) and &quot;Genital Ben&quot;, accompanied by a bear on the cover of the album. Stressed at being at a loss for a name, DeLonge asked guitar tech Larry Palm for suggestions. The album&#x27;s title was coined by Palm, who was snowboarding on a rainy day. Inside the lodge, Palm was congregating with friends when a young kid walked in completely drenched, to which his mother suggested he &quot;take off [his] pants and jacket.&quot; Palm was told by DeLonge that if the band were to use the name, he would &quot;hook him up&quot;. Instead, Palm received a letter from manager Rick DeVoe for his contribution, which offered a $500 payout for the name. Palm scoffed at the amount, and filed suit in 2003 with the intellectual property attorney Ralph Loeb, alleging breach of contract and fraud against the band. Palm demanded $20,000; the band eventually settled out of court for $10,000. Journalist Joe Shooman called the title &quot;a glint of sharp intelligence behind the boys&#x27; humour as it draws oblique attention to the fact that, latterly, Blink-182 had often been encouraged to get naked in order to promote themselves. It&#x27;s a very self-aware album title in that context and a portent, perhaps, of what was to come&quot;.

The cover has three &quot;Zoso-like&quot; icons for each band member: a jacket, a pair of pants and an airplane. Delonge and Hoppus&#x27; symbols became the pants and jacket, respectively, leaving Barker the airplane despite begging his bandmates not to assign him the symbol, citing his fear of flying, but he took it anyway. CD copies of the album were initially released in three separate configurations for the first million printings: the &quot;red plane&quot;, the &quot;yellow pants&quot; and the &quot;green jacket&quot; editions. Each release contained two separate bonus tracks, ranging from joke tracks to outtakes. The only outward signs to differentiate the three editions were three stickers. The concept was inspired by NOFX&#x27;s &quot;Punk in Drublic&quot;, which had varying tracks on its corresponding cassette and CD versions. The idea was for each fan of the band to receive something special on their copy that they could then share with their friends. Executives hoped to market the three editions separately in order to boost sales (&quot;buy all three&quot;), but the band argued strongly against this tactic as they felt it was predatory to their fans. The multiple bonus-track versions were only available for a limited time before being replaced by an edition without any bonus tracks.

==Composition==

While &quot;Take Off Your Pants and Jacket&quot; fits squarely within the band&#x27;s &quot;commercial and conventional&quot; pop-punk mold, it quietly introduces disparate elements into the band&#x27;s sound. It ranges from bracingly fast-paced numbers to slower, more emo-indebted songs. Hoppus felt it was a &quot;darker, harder album that pushed the boundaries of what blink-182 could do.&quot; Roger Catlin of the &quot;Hartford Courant&quot; said the album boasts &quot;tight little anthems, with precision playing, staccato lyrics and sing-along choruses.&quot; Joshua Klein from &quot;The Washington Post&quot; described its familiar &quot;sturdy pop elements — chiming guitars, exciting drums, endearing vocals and ear-catching chord changes.&quot;

DeLonge&#x27;s droning guitar style was influenced by post-hardcore bands Fugazi and Refused. &quot;As Blink grew, I wanted to contribute progressive elements: bring some modernism into the band and change what everyone thought we were capable of,&quot; DeLonge said. Part of that stemmed from the band&#x27;s desire to illustrate they were not a boy band, as they felt had been marketed. Additionally, DeLonge&#x27;s adenoidal vocal twang, with its &quot;cartoonish California diction&quot;, is prominent. Barker&#x27;s drumming is more technical than before; &quot;Don&#x27;t Tell Me It&#x27;s Over&quot; uses an Afro-Cuban bass drum and hi-hat pattern, and another song takes the beat from James Brown&#x27;s &quot;Funky Drummer&quot;. One song that developed midway through recording used looping for a danceable drum &#x27;n&#x27; bass style. Barker used these affectations to differentiate the band from the rest of the pop-punk pack: &quot;Every punk rock band sounds recycled,&quot; he confided to &quot;Modern Drummer&quot; in 2001. &quot;It&#x27;s the same recycled beats. Believe me, I &quot;know&quot; where you took that fill from. I&#x27;m trying to bring more to the table.&quot;
==Songs==
&quot;Take Off Your Pants and Jacket&quot; has been called a concept album chronicling adolescence and associated feelings. The band did not consider them explicitly teenage songs: &quot;The things that happen to you in high school are the same things that happen your entire life,&quot; said Hoppus. &quot;You can fall in love at sixty; you can get rejected at eighty.&quot; The record begins with &quot;Anthem Part Two&quot;, which touches on disenchantment and blames adults for teenage problems. It serves as the opposite of the band&#x27;s typical &quot;party&quot; image presented to the media, with heavily politically-charged lyrics. Joe Shooman called it a &quot;generational manifesto that exhorts kids to be wary of the system that surrounds them&quot;. &quot;Online Songs&quot; was written by Hoppus about &quot;the thoughts that drive you crazy&quot; in the aftermath of a breakup, and is essentially a follow-up to &quot;Josie&quot;. &quot;First Date&quot; was inspired by DeLonge and then wife Jennifer Jenkins&#x27; first date at SeaWorld in San Diego. &quot;I was about 21 at the time and it was an excuse for me to take her somewhere because I wanted to hang out with her,&quot; said DeLonge. The track was written as a summary of neurotic teen angst and awkwardness. &quot;Happy Holidays, You Bastard&quot; is a joke track intended to &quot;piss parents off.&quot; The fifth track, &quot;Story of a Lonely Guy&quot;, concerns heartache and rejection prior to the high school prom. The song is downbeat and melancholy, filtered through &quot;tuneful guitar lines reminiscent of the Cure and hefty drum patterns&quot;.

The following track, &quot;The Rock Show&quot;, is the opposite: an upbeat &quot;effervescent celebration of love, life and music&quot;. It was written as a &quot;fast punk-rock love song&quot; in the vein of the Ramones and Screeching Weasel. The song tells the story of two teenagers meeting a rock concert, and, despite failing grades and disapproving parents, falling and staying in love. It was inspired by the band&#x27;s early days in San Diego&#x27;s all-ages venue SOMA. The dysfunctional&quot;Stay Together for the Kids&quot; follows and is written about divorce from the point of view of a helpless child. Inspired by DeLonge&#x27;s parents&#x27; divorce, it is one of the band&#x27;s darker songs. &quot;Roller Coaster&quot; was written when Hoppus had a nightmare when he and his wife, Skye, first began dating; the song is about finding something ideal but fearing for its certain departure. &quot;Reckless Abandon&quot; was penned by DeLonge as a reflection on summer memories, including parties, skateboarding and trips to the beach. &quot;Everytime I Look for You&quot; has no specific lyrical basis, according to Hoppus, and &quot;Give Me One Good Reason&quot; was written about punk music and nonconformity in a high school setting. &quot;Spin&quot; columnist Tim Coffman called it &quot;practically a pop-punk answer to &quot;Come On Eileen&quot; [...] &quot;Many of the great pop-punk songs are about rallying against your parents. No one really talked about what to do once the rebellion was over, though.&quot; &quot;Shut Up&quot;, a &quot;broken-family snapshot&quot;, revisits the territory of youthful woes, described by Shooman as a &quot;fairly familiar rites-of-passage tale&quot; that &quot;adds to general themes of isolation, alienation and moving on to a new place that pervade &quot;Take Off Your Pants and Jacket&quot;&quot;. &quot;Please Take Me Home&quot; concludes the standard edition of the album and was written about the consequences of a friendship developing into a relationship.

Several bonus tracks follow on separate editions; some continue the teenage theme, while others are joke tracks. Notably, &quot;What Went Wrong&quot; is an acoustic track; while DeLonge felt &quot;staple acoustic songs&quot; were big for groups at the time (such as Green Day&#x27;s &quot;Good Riddance&quot;), the band wrote all of their songs from their inception on acoustic guitars, and he felt he would rather have &quot;What Went Wrong&quot; in its original form. &quot;You grow up and realize, &#x27;Fuck! Who gives a fuck about punk rock?&#x27;&quot; he said. &quot;There are so many great forms of music out there, and you grow beyond wanting to listen to or write something because your parents will hate it.&quot; Producer Jerry Finn suggested lyrics for the song after viewing a documentary on the first Soviet nuclear test; in the film, an aged Soviet physicist says of watching the explosion, &quot;There was a loud boom, and then the bomb began fiercely kicking at the world.&quot;
==Promotion==
To promote &quot;Take Off Your Pants and Jacket&quot;, MCA Records released three singles: &quot;The Rock Show&quot;, &quot;First Date&quot; and &quot;Stay Together for the Kids&quot;, all of which were top-ten hits on &quot;Billboard&quot; Modern Rock Tracks chart. The band recorded a television commercial for the LP, starring Hoppus as a proctologist and Barker as his patient. Blink-182 performed on the &quot;Late Show with David Letterman&quot; and &quot;Late Night with Conan O&#x27;Brien&quot; in support of &quot;Take Off Your Pants and Jacket&quot;. The band also appeared in a &quot;MADtv&quot; sketch, in which the trio stars as misfits in an all-American 1950s family in a parody &quot;Leave It to Beaver&quot;. The trio also sanctioned a band biography, &quot;Tales from Beneath Your Mom&quot; (2001), which was written by the trio and Anne Hoppus (sister of Mark Hoppus).

==Commercial performance==

&quot;Take Off&quot; was a marquee rock release of the season, alongside acts like Staind and Tool; writer Jim DeRogatis of the &quot;Chicago Sun-Times&quot; viewed it an &quot;unlikely modern-rock radio blockbuster in an era otherwise dominated by vapid nu-metal.&quot; Like many high profile releases of the era, &quot;Take Off Your Pants and Jacket&quot; was leaked on the Internet prior to release. The album&#x27;s leak is mentioned in the book &quot;How Music Got Free&quot;, which profiles the warez group Rabid Neurosis, as well as the North Carolina CD manufacturing facility from which the album leaked. Its assured success allowed the band, according to Brittany Spanos at &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; to &quot;fully settle into their status as one of the biggest rock bands in the world.&quot; &quot;There&#x27;s nowhere to go but down,&quot; Hoppus joked.

Upon its official June 2001 bow, the album debuted at number one on the US &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 chart, with first-week sales of 350,000 copies. &quot;Billboard&quot; attributed the success of the record overall as a result of the success of the first single, &quot;The Rock Show&quot;. The album debuted at number one on the Canadian Albums Chart, selling 47,390 copies. It also reached number one on Germany&#x27;s Top 100 Albums. The album was the first album by a punk rock band to debut at number one in the United States. The record shipped enough units to be certified platinum, and it sold through those million copies by August. It was later certified double platinum in May 2002. It had moved three million units worldwide by December. &quot;Take Off Your Pants and Jacket&quot; is the second-highest selling album in the band&#x27;s catalogue, and has sold over 14 million copies worldwide.
==Critical reception==
Critical reception of &quot;Take Off Your Pants and Jacket&quot; in 2001 was generally positive. Rob Sheffield of &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; was generally the most effusive of the positive reviews, praising the unpretentious attitude of the band: &quot;As they plow in their relatively un-self-conscious way through the emotional hurdles of lust, terror, pain and rage, they reveal more about themselves and their audience than they even intend to, turning adolescent malaise into a friendly joke rather than a spiritual crisis.&quot; Darren Ratner of AllMusic felt likewise, writing that the record is &quot;one of their finest works to date, with almost every track sporting a commanding articulation and new-school punk sounds. They&#x27;ve definitely put a big-time notch in the win column&quot;. &quot;People&quot; commended the &quot;adrenaline-laced sonic gems reveling in Blink&#x27;s patented, potty-mouthed humor, recommended only for adolescents of all ages&quot;. British publication &quot;Q&quot; offered the sentiment that &quot;when they stop arsing around for the sake of it, Blink-182 write some very good pop songs&quot;.

&quot;The Village Voice&quot; called the sound &quot;emo-core ... intercut with elegiac little pauses that align Blink 182 with a branch of punk rock you could trace back through The Replacements and &quot;Ramones Leave Home&quot;, to the more ethereal of early Who songs&quot;. Aaron Scott of &quot;Slant Magazine&quot;, however, found the sound to be recycled from the band&#x27;s previous efforts, writing, &quot;Blink shines when they deviate from their formula, but it is awfully rare ... The album seems to be more concerned with maintaining the band&#x27;s large teenage fanbase than with expanding their overall audience.&quot; Joshua Klein from &quot;The Washington Post&quot; felt it was stagnant, critiquing its formula and &quot;cookie-cutter&quot; approach. &quot;Kerrang!&quot; Ian Fortnam critiqued its lack of risks, its &quot;money-in-the-bank commercialism. [It&#x27;s] eminently hummable dummy-spitting tantrum rock for the emo generation.&quot; &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; felt similarly, with David Browne opining that &quot;the album is angrier and more teeth gnashing than you&#x27;d expect. The band work so hard at it, and the music is such processed sounding mainstream rock played fast, that the album becomes a paradox: adolescent energy and rebellion made joyless&quot;. British magazine &quot;New Musical Express&quot;, who heavily criticized the band in their previous efforts, felt no more negative this time, saying &quot;Blink-182 are now indistinguishable from the increasingly tedious &#x27;teenage dirtbag&#x27; genre they helped spawn&quot;. The magazine continued, &quot;It like all that sanitised, castrated, shrink-wrapped &#x27;new wave&#x27; crap that the major US record companies pumped out circa 1981 in their belated attempt to jump on the &#x27;punk&#x27; bandwagon.&quot;

More recent reviews have subsequently been positive. Music critic Kelefa Sanneh complimented the album in a &quot;New Yorker&quot; profile: &quot;&quot;Take Off Your Pants and Jacket&quot; is by turns peppy, sulky, and stupid—Blink-182 at its finest.&quot; Website AbsolutePunk, in part of their &quot;Retro Reviews&quot; project in 2011, called &quot;Take Off Your Pants and Jacket&quot; the band&#x27;s best effort; reviewer Thomas Nassiff referred to it as &quot;a transitory record for Blink-182, but you can&#x27;t tell just by listening to it on its own. It&#x27;s developed and it&#x27;s full – it feels holistically complete, dick jokes and all&quot;. In 2005, the album was ranked number 452 in &quot;Rock Hard&quot; magazine&#x27;s book &quot;The 500 Greatest Rock &amp; Metal Albums of All Time&quot;. in 2021, Stereogum&#x27;s Grant Sharples felt it improved on its predecessor; &quot;[it&#x27;s an endearing time capsule [...] replete with refined songwriting and incredibly infectious hooks.&quot;

===Accolades===


==Touring==
The &quot;Take Off Your Pants and Jacket&quot; supporting tour began in April 2001 in Australia and New Zealand. Afterwards, the band played two weeks of club shows at small venues across America in an effort to decrease ticket prices and get back to their roots. The band returned to the US to promote their new record on the &quot;Late Show with David Letterman&quot; in June 2001. Afterwards, the band set out on the 2001 Honda Civic Tour with No Motiv, Sum 41, the Ataris, and Bodyjar, for which the trio designed a Honda Civic to promote the company. The band again received criticism for &quot;selling out&quot;, but the band argued by way of mitigation that their tickets were consistently offered at lower prices than those of other groups of their stature, and by accepting corporate links they could continue to give fans a good deal. Likewise, the band partnered with Ticketmaster, setting up a special website where fans could purchase pre-sale tickets for each show.

The main headlining tour visited arenas and amphitheaters between July and August 2001, and was supported by New Found Glory, Jimmy Eat World, Alkaline Trio and Midtown. Each show winkingly began with the overture of &quot;Also sprach Zarathustra&quot; and debuted a flaming sign reading &quot;FUCK&quot;. The band had initially contacted Eminem in hopes of partnering for a tour, but he was too busy. For Barker, he would have preferred to tour with a stylistically different artist: &quot;If it was my choice, we wouldn&#x27;t tour with other punk bands,&quot; he said in 2001. In December 2001, the trio played at a series of radio-sponsored holiday concerts—which Barker liked because of their variety—and also appeared as presenters at the 2001 &quot;Billboard&quot; Music Awards in Las Vegas. The band rescheduled European tour dates in the aftermath of the 9/11 attacks. &quot;After the attacks the world kind of went into freeze mode and we didn&#x27;t know whether to carry on with things or not ... so we decided we&#x27;d rather everyone was safe and play the shows a little later instead,&quot; said Hoppus shortly thereafter. In the wake of the tragedy, the band draped an American flag over a set of amplifiers and drummer Barker played on a red, white, and blue drum kit. At one concert, DeLonge invited the crowd to join him in his cheers of &quot;Fuck Osama bin Laden!&quot; The European dates were canceled a second time after DeLonge suffered a herniated disc in his back.

In 2002, the band co-headlined the Pop Disaster Tour with Green Day. The tour was conceived by Blink-182 to echo the famous Monsters of Rock tours; the idea was to have, effectively, a Monsters of Punk tour. The tour, from the band&#x27;s point of view, had been put together as a show of unity in the face of consistent accusations of rivalry between the two bands, especially in Europe. Instead, Green Day&#x27;s Tré Cool acknowledged in a &quot;Kerrang!&quot; interview that they committed to the tour as an opportunity to regain their reputation as a great live band, as they felt their spotlight had faded over the years. &quot;We set out to reclaim our throne as the most incredible live punk band from you know who,&quot; said Cool. Cool contended that &quot;we heard they were going to quit the tour because they were getting smoked so badly ... We didn&#x27;t want them to quit the tour. They&#x27;re good for filling up the seats up front.&quot; Several reviewers were unimpressed with Blink-182&#x27;s headlining set following Green Day. &quot;Sometimes playing last at a rock show is more a curse than a privilege ... Pity the headliner, for instance, that gets blown off the stage by the band before it. Blink-182 endured that indignity Saturday at the Shoreline Amphitheatre,&quot; a reporter for the &quot;San Francisco Chronicle&quot; wrote in 2002.

The band released a second DVD of home videos, live performances and music videos titled &quot;The Urethra Chronicles II: Harder Faster Faster Harder&quot; in 2002. Likewise, the 2003 film &quot;Riding in Vans with Boys&quot; follows the Pop Disaster Tour throughout the U.S.

==Legacy==

&quot;Take Off Your Pants and Jacket&quot; arrived at the apex of an early aughts, pre-9/11 moment for youth culture. A 2001 Federal Trade Commission report condemned the entertainment industry for marketing lewd lyrics to American youth, specifically naming Blink-182 as among the most explicit acts. It debuted at the peak of a pop-punk moment the band helped foment, a brand of snotty pop-punk popularized with progenitors like Sum 41, Simple Plan and Good Charlotte, all of whom released seminal albums in 2001–02. Its songs became common on peer-to-peer sites like Kazaa and LimeWire, and its sound proved influential: its ubiquity made it a &quot;sonic bible for many millennials&quot; according to Kat Bein of &quot;Billboard&quot;. Others agreed: “If you&#x27;re part of a certain twenty-something age bracket, you can recite every chorus [of the album]&quot; replied Zach Schonfeld of &quot;The Atlantic&quot;. The album was an influence on artists like Avril Lavigne, Mod Sun You Me at Six, Knuckle Puck, and Neck Deep, who covered &quot;Don&#x27;t Tell Me That It&#x27;s Over&quot; in 2019.

It also marked a transitionary period in the group, with it the first time the trio began to fracture. Shortly after the album&#x27;s release, the 9/11 attacks prompted a pause in the band&#x27;s schedule, which led DeLonge to explore a slower, more heavy musical style—which became the album &quot;Box Car Racer&quot; (2002). Blink producer Jerry Finn naturally returned to engineer, and DeLonge, ostensibly trying to avoid paying a session player, invited Barker to record drums—making Hoppus the odd man out. It marked a major rift in their friendship: while DeLonge claimed he was not intentionally omitted, Hoppus nonetheless felt betrayed. &quot;At the end of 2001, it felt like Blink-182 had broken up. It wasn&#x27;t spoken about, but it felt over&quot;, said Hoppus later.
==Track listing==


;Notes
* On the clean version of the album the track &quot;Happy Holidays, You Bastard&quot; is listed as just &quot;Happy Holidays&quot;, and is an instrumental with the exception of the very last line, due to nearly every other line containing strong language and/or crude sexual references.
* On the limited edition bonus track versions, &quot;Please Take Me Home&quot; has 182 seconds (roughly 3 minutes) of silence at the end, likely to hide the hidden tracks, which are not listed on the back cover, and also to reference their name.
* The clean version omits the second bonus track on each edition.

==Personnel==
;Blink-182
* Mark Hoppus – bass, vocals
* Tom DeLonge – guitars, vocals
* Travis Barker – drums

;Artwork
* Tim Stedman – art direction, design
* Marcos Orozco – design
* Justin Stephens – photography
* Intersection Studio – symbol design

;Additional musicians
* Roger Joseph Manning, Jr. – keyboards
;Production
* Jerry Finn – production
* Tom Lord-Alge – mixing
* Joe McGrath – engineering
* Joe Marlett – assistant engineer
* Ted Reiger – assistant engineer
* Robert Read – assistant engineer
* Femio Hernandez – mixing assistant
* Mike &quot;Sack&quot; Fasano – drum tech
* Brian Gardner – mastering
==Charts==

=== Weekly charts ===

=== Year-end charts ===


==Certifications==



==See also==
* List of number-one albums of 2001 (U.S.)

==References==
=== Citations ===
=== General and cited references ===
* 

==External links==

* &quot;Take Off Your Pants and Jacket&quot; at YouTube (streamed copy where licensed)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q482477" start="80" end="89" title="Blink-182" label="Blink-182"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338889" start="121" end="132" title="MCA Records" label="MCA Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q532004" start="231" end="249" title="Enema of the State" label="Enema of the State"/>
<link wikidata="Q3993049" start="332" end="347" title="tongue-in-cheek" label="tongue-in-cheek"/>
<link wikidata="Q263668" start="348" end="351" title="pun" label="pun"/>
<link wikidata="Q8396" start="360" end="372" title="masturbation" label="masturbation"/>
<link wikidata="Q212699" start="627" end="633" title="Geffen Records" label="Geffen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="699" end="708" title="San Diego" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q586229" start="723" end="733" title="Jerry Finn" label="Jerry Finn"/>
<link wikidata="Q487914" start="924" end="932" title="pop-punk" label="pop-punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q377910" start="1002" end="1015" title="post-hardcore" label="post-hardcore"/>
<link wikidata="Q277865" start="1048" end="1054" title="Fugazi" label="Fugazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358175" start="1059" end="1066" title="Refused" label="Refused"/>
<link wikidata="Q207393" start="1128" end="1141" title="concept album" label="concept album"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="1455" end="1464" title="punk rock" label="punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="1502" end="1530" title="Billboard 200" label="US &amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503026" start="1545" end="1560" title="RIAA certification" label="double platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712079" start="1624" end="1637" title="The Rock Show" label="The Rock Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q2709312" start="1651" end="1677" title="Stay Together for the Kids" label="Stay Together for the Kids"/>
<link wikidata="Q629831" start="1695" end="1705" title="First Date (Blink-182 song)" label="First Date"/>
<link wikidata="Q834587" start="1954" end="1971" title="Pop Disaster Tour" label="Pop Disaster Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q47871" start="1977" end="1986" title="Green Day" label="Green Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q532004" start="2251" end="2269" title="Enema of the State" label="Enema of the State"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122509" start="2375" end="2400" title="What&amp;#x27;s My Age Again?" label="What&amp;#x27;s My Age Again?"/>
<link wikidata="Q520856" start="2414" end="2434" title="All the Small Things" label="All the Small Things"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630356" start="2452" end="2468" title="Adam&amp;#x27;s Song" label="Adam&amp;#x27;s Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q193977" start="2508" end="2520" title="music videos" label="music videos"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="2543" end="2546" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976494" start="2759" end="2767" title="MTV News" label="MTV News"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503026" start="2930" end="2943" title="RIAA certification" label="multiplatinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q47871" start="3054" end="3063" title="Green Day" label="Green Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q4271" start="3412" end="3423" title="Mark Hoppus" label="Mark Hoppus"/>
<link wikidata="Q220140" start="3518" end="3531" title="Travis Barker" label="Travis Barker"/>
<link wikidata="Q163942" start="3543" end="3550" title="stalker" label="stalker"/>
<link wikidata="Q54831" start="3661" end="3673" title="amphitheater" label="amphitheater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062135" start="3890" end="3901" title="private jet" label="private jet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976556" start="4048" end="4057" title="Hotel rating" label="five-star"/>
<link wikidata="Q191796" start="4184" end="4200" title="cameo appearance" label="cameo appearance"/>
<link wikidata="Q220713" start="4237" end="4249" title="American Pie (film)" label="American Pie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066293" start="4358" end="4381" title="Famous Stars and Straps" label="Famous Stars and Straps"/>
<link wikidata="Q4383376" start="4383" end="4399" title="Atticus Clothing" label="Atticus Clothing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274119" start="4404" end="4420" title="Macbeth Footwear" label="Macbeth Footwear"/>
<link wikidata="Q38903" start="4519" end="4522" title="Universal Music Group" label="UMG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996251" start="5430" end="5486" title="The Mark, Tom, and Travis Show (The Enema Strikes Back!)" label="The Mark, Tom, and Travis Show (The Enema Strikes Back!)"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="5748" end="5751" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q220935" start="5958" end="5963" title="Demo (music)" label="demos"/>
<link wikidata="Q372454" start="6007" end="6028" title="Escondido, California" label="Escondido, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q846755" start="6063" end="6073" title="Dude Ranch (album)" label="Dude Ranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712079" start="6757" end="6770" title="The Rock Show" label="The Rock Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q629831" start="6827" end="6837" title="First Date (Blink-182 song)" label="First Date"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066293" start="7002" end="7025" title="Famous Stars and Straps" label="Famous Stars and Straps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1917775" start="7242" end="7252" title="music publishing" label="publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315501" start="7253" end="7261" title="Residual (entertainment industry)" label="residual"/>
<link wikidata="Q34006" start="8239" end="8248" title="Hollywood, Los Angeles" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q586229" start="8289" end="8299" title="Jerry Finn" label="Jerry Finn"/>
<link wikidata="Q15975575" start="8621" end="8634" title="Scratch track (studio recording)" label="scratch track"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124733" start="8652" end="8656" title="take" label="take"/>
<link wikidata="Q5132441" start="8711" end="8722" title="click track" label="click track"/>
<link wikidata="Q5930" start="9107" end="9117" title="Family Guy" label="Family Guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q257643" start="9134" end="9142" title="Mr. Show" label="Mr. Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="9373" end="9379" title="Hitler" label="Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q506986" start="10362" end="10373" title="Arpeggio" label="Arpeggiated"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="10509" end="10516" title="hip hop" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="10521" end="10532" title="Heavy metal music" label="heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142703" start="10748" end="10761" title="Alkaline Trio" label="Alkaline Trio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758908" start="11401" end="11407" title="Loop (music)" label="looped"/>
<link wikidata="Q2709312" start="11518" end="11544" title="Stay Together for the Kids" label="Stay Together for the Kids"/>
<link wikidata="Q6839887" start="11842" end="11862" title="Microphone practice" label="microphone placement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5517216" start="11874" end="11885" title="Gain compression" label="compressors"/>
<link wikidata="Q104531076" start="11900" end="11903" title="Equalization (audio)" label="EQs"/>
<link wikidata="Q292986" start="12133" end="12144" title="Blink-182 (album)" label="next effort"/>
<link wikidata="Q247670" start="12167" end="12176" title="Pro Tools" label="Pro Tools"/>
<link wikidata="Q4929431" start="12247" end="12251" title="Blue Microphones" label="Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q46384" start="12266" end="12291" title="condenser microphone" label="condenser tube microphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076641" start="12332" end="12344" title="chorus pedal" label="chorus pedal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323480" start="12347" end="12354" title="flanger" label="flanger"/>
<link wikidata="Q208421" start="12452" end="12462" title="snare drum" label="snare drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5299621" start="12489" end="12494" title="drum tuning" label="tuned"/>
<link wikidata="Q260586" start="12545" end="12560" title="Ludwig Drums" label="Ludwig Coliseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2923506" start="12565" end="12570" title="Brady Drum Company" label="Brady"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355050" start="12591" end="12624" title="Orange County Drum and Percussion" label="Orange County Drum and Percussion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536520" start="12730" end="12734" title="Tama Drums" label="Tama"/>
<link wikidata="Q11895" start="12773" end="12791" title="Guns N&amp;#x27; Roses" label="Guns N&amp;#x27; Roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142302" start="12811" end="12824" title="November Rain" label="November Rain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810071" start="12951" end="12959" title="A/B test" label="A/B test"/>
<link wikidata="Q922477" start="12962" end="12974" title="speaker wire" label="speaker wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q26674" start="12995" end="13005" title="High fidelity" label="hi-fi shop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358431" start="13229" end="13254" title="Roger Joseph Manning, Jr." label="Roger Joseph Manning, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q7816633" start="13292" end="13305" title="Tom Lord-Alge" label="Tom Lord-Alge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6884071" start="13320" end="13335" title="mixing engineer" label="mixing engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q39561" start="13378" end="13385" title="Burbank, California" label="Burbank"/>
<link wikidata="Q4963821" start="13525" end="13538" title="Brian Gardner" label="Brian Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q4894402" start="13542" end="13567" title="Bernie Grundman" label="Bernie Grundman Mastering"/>
<link wikidata="Q34006" start="13571" end="13580" title="Hollywood, Los Angeles" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3993049" start="13783" end="13798" title="tongue-in-cheek" label="tongue-in-cheek"/>
<link wikidata="Q263668" start="13799" end="13802" title="pun" label="pun"/>
<link wikidata="Q8396" start="13811" end="13823" title="masturbation" label="masturbation"/>
<link wikidata="Q41571" start="13906" end="13915" title="Epileptic" label="Epileptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413084" start="13916" end="13928" title="Proctologist" label="Proctologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428441" start="14017" end="14028" title="Gentle Ben" label="Genital Ben"/>
<link wikidata="Q201940" start="15270" end="15274" title="Zoso" label="Zoso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127417" start="15532" end="15546" title="fear of flying" label="fear of flying"/>
<link wikidata="Q265222" start="15979" end="15983" title="NOFX" label="NOFX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781089" start="15997" end="16012" title="Punk in Drublic" label="Punk in Drublic"/>
<link wikidata="Q487914" start="16703" end="16711" title="Pop punk" label="pop-punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q10926" start="16847" end="16850" title="emo" label="emo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587159" start="17002" end="17018" title="Hartford Courant" label="Hartford Courant"/>
<link wikidata="Q466944" start="17099" end="17107" title="staccato" label="staccato"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567963" start="17119" end="17129" title="sing-along" label="sing-along"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="17170" end="17189" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q109587074" start="17247" end="17262" title="Jangle" label="chiming guitars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326471" start="17314" end="17326" title="chord change" label="chord change"/>
<link wikidata="Q650316" start="17351" end="17358" title="drone music" label="droning"/>
<link wikidata="Q377910" start="17390" end="17403" title="post-hardcore" label="post-hardcore"/>
<link wikidata="Q277865" start="17410" end="17416" title="Fugazi" label="Fugazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358175" start="17421" end="17428" title="Refused" label="Refused"/>
<link wikidata="Q878985" start="17507" end="17516" title="modernism" label="modernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026812" start="17803" end="17821" title="California English" label="California diction"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17951" end="17961" title="Afro-Cuban#Music" label="Afro-Cuban"/>
<link wikidata="Q211028" start="17962" end="17971" title="bass drum" label="bass drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q963334" start="17976" end="17982" title="hi-hat" label="hi-hat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950" start="18029" end="18040" title="James Brown" label="James Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3288535" start="18054" end="18067" title="Funky Drummer" label="Funky Drummer"/>
<link wikidata="Q188994" start="18153" end="18176" title="drum &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; bass" label="drum &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q488665" start="18348" end="18362" title="Modern Drummer" label="Modern Drummer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414142" start="18470" end="18474" title="drum fill" label="fill"/>
<link wikidata="Q207393" start="18602" end="18615" title="concept album" label="concept album"/>
<link wikidata="Q105038092" start="18761" end="18772" title="High school (North America)" label="high school"/>
<link wikidata="Q104840804" start="18946" end="18961" title="Anthem Part Two" label="Anthem Part Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q100926628" start="19427" end="19434" title="breakup" label="breakup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2265412" start="19476" end="19481" title="Josie (Blink-182 song)" label="Josie"/>
<link wikidata="Q629831" start="19495" end="19505" title="First Date (Blink-182 song)" label="First Date"/>
<link wikidata="Q1946237" start="19587" end="19595" title="SeaWorld San Diego" label="SeaWorld"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150737" start="20035" end="20039" title="prom" label="prom"/>
<link wikidata="Q484427" start="20137" end="20145" title="the Cure" label="the Cure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712079" start="20205" end="20218" title="The Rock Show" label="The Rock Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q483407" start="20391" end="20398" title="Ramones" label="Ramones"/>
<link wikidata="Q570025" start="20403" end="20420" title="Screeching Weasel" label="Screeching Weasel"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="20620" end="20629" title="San Diego" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559102" start="20652" end="20656" title="Soma San Diego" label="SOMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2709312" start="20681" end="20707" title="Stay Together for the Kids" label="Stay Together for the Kids"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="21375" end="21385" title="punk music" label="punk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025912" start="21436" end="21440" title="Spin (magazine)" label="Spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113842" start="21524" end="21538" title="Come On Eileen" label="Come On Eileen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131696" start="21860" end="21876" title="Rite of passage" label="rites-of-passage"/>
<link wikidata="Q286080" start="22359" end="22367" title="Acoustic music" label="acoustic"/>
<link wikidata="Q47871" start="22469" end="22478" title="Green Day" label="Green Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089388" start="22492" end="22505" title="Good Riddance (Time of Your Life)" label="Good Riddance"/>
<link wikidata="Q586229" start="22937" end="22947" title="Jerry Finn" label="Jerry Finn"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="23019" end="23025" title="Soviet" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q210112" start="23026" end="23038" title="nuclear test" label="nuclear test"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712079" start="23311" end="23324" title="The Rock Show" label="The Rock Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q629831" start="23338" end="23348" title="First Date (Blink-182 song)" label="First Date"/>
<link wikidata="Q2709312" start="23365" end="23391" title="Stay Together for the Kids" label="Stay Together for the Kids"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="23439" end="23448" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025849" start="23455" end="23473" title="Alternative Songs" label="Modern Rock Tracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413084" start="23556" end="23568" title="proctologist" label="proctologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q858778" start="23629" end="23659" title="Late Show with David Letterman" label="Late Show with David Letterman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639429" start="23676" end="23710" title="Late Night with Conan O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="Late Night with Conan O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064766" start="23809" end="23814" title="MADtv" label="MADtv"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247688" start="23914" end="23932" title="Leave It to Beaver" label="Leave It to Beaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q266496" start="24214" end="24220" title="Staind" label="Staind"/>
<link wikidata="Q184827" start="24225" end="24229" title="Tool (band)" label="Tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q723229" start="24238" end="24251" title="Jim DeRogatis" label="Jim DeRogatis"/>
<link wikidata="Q577417" start="24265" end="24282" title="Chicago Sun-Times" label="Chicago Sun-Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q505119" start="24335" end="24346" title="Blockbuster (entertainment)" label="blockbuster"/>
<link wikidata="Q263734" start="24386" end="24394" title="nu-metal" label="nu-metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q112169170" start="24493" end="24499" title="Music leak" label="leaked"/>
<link wikidata="Q20856928" start="24587" end="24605" title="How Music Got Free" label="How Music Got Free"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669909" start="24632" end="24643" title="Warez scene" label="warez group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278715" start="24644" end="24658" title="Rabid Neurosis" label="Rabid Neurosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="24675" end="24689" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="24821" end="24834" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="25073" end="25098" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712079" start="25268" end="25281" title="The Rock Show" label="The Rock Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418776" start="25328" end="25349" title="Canadian Albums Chart" label="Canadian Albums Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q64305519" start="25419" end="25433" title="Media Control Charts" label="Top 100 Albums"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="25470" end="25479" title="punk rock" label="punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503026" start="25578" end="25586" title="RIAA certification" label="platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3486861" start="26024" end="26037" title="Rob Sheffield" label="Rob Sheffield"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="26047" end="26060" title="Rolling Stone (magazine)" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="26478" end="26486" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33659" start="26733" end="26739" title="People (magazine)" label="People"/>
<link wikidata="Q217629" start="26928" end="26929" title="Q (magazine)" label="Q"/>
<link wikidata="Q876158" start="27073" end="27090" title="The Village Voice" label="The Village Voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066024" start="27246" end="27262" title="The Replacements (band)" label="The Replacements"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346637" start="27273" end="27291" title="Leave Home" label="Ramones Leave Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q93346" start="27329" end="27332" title="The Who" label="Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086297" start="27367" end="27381" title="Slant Magazine" label="Slant Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="27727" end="27746" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q43281" start="27844" end="27852" title="Kerrang!" label="Kerrang!"/>
<link wikidata="Q565720" start="27928" end="27941" title="commercialism" label="commercialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q10926" start="28010" end="28013" title="emo" label="emo"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="28038" end="28058" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="28395" end="28414" title="New Musical Express" label="New Musical Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q6385561" start="28960" end="28973" title="Kelefa Sanneh" label="Kelefa Sanneh"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="29008" end="29018" title="The New Yorker" label="New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669758" start="29159" end="29171" title="AbsolutePunk" label="AbsolutePunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q455803" start="29604" end="29613" title="Rock Hard (magazine)" label="Rock Hard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532689" start="29716" end="29725" title="Stereogum" label="Stereogum"/>
<link wikidata="Q348" start="29815" end="29827" title="time capsule" label="time capsule"/>
<link wikidata="Q858778" start="30270" end="30300" title="Late Show with David Letterman" label="Late Show with David Letterman"/>
<link wikidata="Q134454" start="30362" end="30378" title="Honda Civic Tour" label="Honda Civic Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7044593" start="30384" end="30392" title="No Motiv" label="No Motiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q483558" start="30394" end="30400" title="Sum 41" label="Sum 41"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373222" start="30402" end="30412" title="the Ataris" label="the Ataris"/>
<link wikidata="Q600519" start="30418" end="30425" title="Bodyjar" label="Bodyjar"/>
<link wikidata="Q216747" start="30457" end="30468" title="Honda Civic" label="Honda Civic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309433" start="30537" end="30548" title="selling out" label="selling out"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609162" start="30816" end="30828" title="Ticketmaster" label="Ticketmaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q20858410" start="30922" end="30942" title="Take Off Your Pants and Jacket Tour" label="main headlining tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q850645" start="31027" end="31042" title="New Found Glory" label="New Found Glory"/>
<link wikidata="Q642988" start="31044" end="31059" title="Jimmy Eat World" label="Jimmy Eat World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142703" start="31061" end="31074" title="Alkaline Trio" label="Alkaline Trio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888903" start="31079" end="31086" title="Midtown (band)" label="Midtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q35720" start="31141" end="31164" title="Also sprach Zarathustra" label="Also sprach Zarathustra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608" start="31257" end="31263" title="Eminem" label="Eminem"/>
<link wikidata="Q392565" start="31668" end="31701" title="Billboard Music Award" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Music Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="31782" end="31794" title="9/11 attacks" label="9/11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q42537" start="32104" end="32117" title="American flag" label="American flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q42537" start="32174" end="32194" title="Flag of the United States" label="red, white, and blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317" start="32287" end="32302" title="Osama bin Laden" label="Osama bin Laden"/>
<link wikidata="Q697117" start="32382" end="32396" title="Spinal disc herniation" label="herniated disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q834587" start="32446" end="32463" title="Pop Disaster Tour" label="Pop Disaster Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q47871" start="32469" end="32478" title="Green Day" label="Green Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q749420" start="32535" end="32551" title="Monsters of Rock" label="Monsters of Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q660106" start="32826" end="32834" title="Tré Cool" label="Tré Cool"/>
<link wikidata="Q43281" start="32859" end="32867" title="Kerrang!" label="Kerrang!"/>
<link wikidata="Q7501435" start="33677" end="33699" title="Shoreline Amphitheatre" label="Shoreline Amphitheatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q139103" start="33732" end="33755" title="San Francisco Chronicle" label="San Francisco Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="" start="33873" end="33927" title="The Urethra Chronicles II: Harder Faster Faster Harder" label="The Urethra Chronicles II: Harder Faster Faster Harder"/>
<link wikidata="Q834587" start="33973" end="33997" title="Riding in Vans with Boys" label="Riding in Vans with Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q35024" start="34142" end="34148" title="aughts" label="aughts"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="34154" end="34158" title="9/11" label="9/11"/>
<link wikidata="Q786713" start="34192" end="34216" title="Federal Trade Commission" label="Federal Trade Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q173799" start="34238" end="34260" title="entertainment industry" label="entertainment industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q483558" start="34498" end="34504" title="Sum 41" label="Sum 41"/>
<link wikidata="Q485825" start="34506" end="34517" title="Simple Plan" label="Simple Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q485220" start="34522" end="34536" title="Good Charlotte" label="Good Charlotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q161410" start="34613" end="34625" title="peer-to-peer" label="peer-to-peer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163401" start="34637" end="34642" title="Kazaa" label="Kazaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q725906" start="34647" end="34655" title="LimeWire" label="LimeWire"/>
<link wikidata="Q277633" start="34741" end="34751" title="millennial" label="millennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="34790" end="34799" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542536" start="34967" end="34979" title="The Atlantic" label="The Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q30449" start="35030" end="35043" title="Avril Lavigne" label="Avril Lavigne"/>
<link wikidata="Q19664909" start="35045" end="35052" title="Mod Sun" label="Mod Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512507" start="35053" end="35066" title="You Me at Six" label="You Me at Six"/>
<link wikidata="Q17515236" start="35068" end="35080" title="Knuckle Puck" label="Knuckle Puck"/>
<link wikidata="Q16955493" start="35086" end="35095" title="Neck Deep" label="Neck Deep"/>
<link wikidata="Q544942" start="35469" end="35482" title="Box Car Racer (album)" label="Box Car Racer"/>
<link wikidata="Q586229" start="35512" end="35522" title="Jerry Finn" label="Jerry Finn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4271" start="36606" end="36617" title="Mark Hoppus" label="Mark Hoppus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4270" start="36635" end="36646" title="Tom DeLonge" label="Tom DeLonge"/>
<link wikidata="Q220140" start="36667" end="36680" title="Travis Barker" label="Travis Barker"/>
<link wikidata="Q706364" start="36715" end="36728" title="art direction" label="art direction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333350" start="36730" end="36736" title="album cover" label="design"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358431" start="36857" end="36882" title="Roger Joseph Manning, Jr." label="Roger Joseph Manning, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q586229" start="36909" end="36919" title="Jerry Finn" label="Jerry Finn"/>
<link wikidata="Q20077126" start="36922" end="36932" title="Sound recording and reproduction" label="production"/>
<link wikidata="Q7816633" start="36935" end="36948" title="Tom Lord-Alge" label="Tom Lord-Alge"/>
<link wikidata="Q17085328" start="36951" end="36957" title="Audio mixing (recorded music)" label="mixing"/>
<link wikidata="Q128124" start="36974" end="36985" title="Audio engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q4963821" start="37172" end="37185" title="Brian Gardner" label="Brian Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q421031" start="37188" end="37197" title="Audio mastering" label="mastering"/>
<link wikidata="Q4431893" start="37296" end="37336" title="List of number-one albums of 2001 (U.S.)" label="List of number-one albums of 2001 (U.S.)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143262" wikidata="Q1051810" url="?curid=143262" title="IWarp">
<text>iWarp was an experimental parallel supercomputer architecture developed as a joint project by Intel and Carnegie Mellon University. The project started in 1988, as a follow-up to CMU&#x27;s previous WARP research project, in order to explore building an entire parallel-computing &quot;node&quot; in a single microprocessor, complete with memory and communications links. In this respect the iWarp is very similar to the INMOS transputer and nCUBE.

Intel announced iWarp in 1989. The first iWarp prototype was delivered to Carnegie Mellon in summer of 1990, and in fall they received the first 64-cell production systems, followed by two more in 1991. With the creation of the Intel Supercomputing Systems Division in the summer of 1992, the iWarp was merged into the iPSC product line. Intel kept iWarp as a product but stopped actively marketing it.

Each iWarp CPU included a 32-bit ALU with a 64-bit FPU running at 20 MHz. It was purely scalar and completed one instruction per cycle, so the performance was 20 MIPS or 20 megaflops for single precision and 10 MFLOPS for double. The communications were handled by a separate unit on the CPU that drove four serial channels at 40 MB/s, and included networking support in hardware that allowed for up to 20 &quot;virtual channels&quot; (similar to the system added to the INMOS T9000).

iWarp processors were combined onto boards along with memory, but unlike other systems Intel chose the faster, but more expensive, static RAM for use on the iWarp. Boards typically included four CPUs and anywhere from 512 kB to 4 MB of SRAM.

Another difference in the iWarp was that the systems were connected together as a n-by-m torus, instead of the more common hypercube. A typical system included 64 CPUs connected as an 8×8 torus, which could deliver 1.2 gigaflops peak.

George Cox was the lead architect of the iWarp project. Steven McGeady (later an Intel Vice-president and witness in the Microsoft antitrust case) wrote an innovative development environment that allowed software to be written for the array before it was completed. Each node of the array was represented by a different Sun workstation on a LAN, with the iWarp&#x27;s unique inter-node communication protocol simulated over sockets. Unlike the chip-level simulator, which could not simulate a multi-node array, and which ran very slowly, this environment allowed in-depth development of array software to begin.

The production compiler for iWarp was a C and Fortran compiler based on the AT&amp;T pcc compiler for UNIX, ported under contract for Intel by the Canadian firm HCR Corporation and then extensively modified and extended by Intel.

==See also==
*Systolic array

==Notes==
==External links==
*iWarp Project at CMU</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1051810" start="0" end="5" title="IWarp" label="iWarp"/>
<link wikidata="Q232661" start="26" end="34" title="parallel computing" label="parallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q121117" start="35" end="48" title="supercomputer" label="supercomputer"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="94" end="99" title="Intel" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q190080" start="104" end="130" title="Carnegie Mellon University" label="Carnegie Mellon University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946714" start="199" end="203" title="WARP (systolic array)" label="WARP"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297" start="309" end="323" title="microprocessor" label="microprocessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q776861" start="421" end="437" title="INMOS transputer" label="INMOS transputer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051819" start="442" end="447" title="nCUBE" label="nCUBE"/>
<link wikidata="Q108649754" start="769" end="773" title="Intel iPSC" label="iPSC"/>
<link wikidata="Q225147" start="880" end="886" title="32-bit" label="32-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q192903" start="887" end="890" title="Arithmetic logic unit" label="ALU"/>
<link wikidata="Q252132" start="898" end="904" title="64-bit" label="64-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q733507" start="905" end="908" title="floating point unit" label="FPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q71486" start="1016" end="1020" title="million instructions per second" label="MIPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q188768" start="1027" end="1036" title="Flops" label="megaflops"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307173" start="1041" end="1057" title="single precision" label="single precision"/>
<link wikidata="Q518280" start="1162" end="1168" title="serial communication" label="serial"/>
<link wikidata="Q267416" start="1471" end="1481" title="static random-access memory" label="static RAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q12510" start="1672" end="1677" title="torus" label="torus"/>
<link wikidata="Q213723" start="1706" end="1715" title="hypercube" label="hypercube"/>
<link wikidata="Q188768" start="1802" end="1811" title="gigaflops" label="gigaflops"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1819" end="1829" title="George Cox (computer program)" label="George Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7615041" start="1875" end="1889" title="Steven McGeady" label="Steven McGeady"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345977" start="1940" end="1964" title="United States v. Microsoft Corp." label="Microsoft antitrust case"/>
<link wikidata="Q14647" start="2139" end="2142" title="Sun Microsystems" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q11381" start="2160" end="2163" title="local area network" label="LAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044498" start="2243" end="2250" title="Internet socket" label="sockets"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843047" start="2508" end="2516" title="AT&amp;amp;T Corporation" label="AT&amp;amp;T"/>
<link wikidata="Q279523" start="2517" end="2520" title="Portable C Compiler" label="pcc"/>
<link wikidata="Q96380082" start="2593" end="2608" title="HCR Corporation" label="HCR Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2377218" start="2677" end="2691" title="Systolic array" label="Systolic array"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143263" wikidata="Q532004" url="?curid=143263" title="Enema of the State">
<text>Enema of the State is the third studio album by American rock band Blink-182, released on June 1, 1999, by MCA Records. After a long series of performances at various clubs and festivals and several indie recordings throughout the 1990s, Blink-182 first achieved popularity on the Warped Tour and in Australia following the release of their second album &quot;Dude Ranch&quot; (1997) and its rock radio hit &quot;Dammit.&quot; To record their third album, Blink-182 turned to veteran punk rock producer Jerry Finn, who previously worked on Green Day&#x27;s breakthrough album &quot;Dookie&quot; (1994). &quot;Enema&quot; was the band&#x27;s first album to feature drummer Travis Barker, who replaced original drummer Scott Raynor.

The group recorded with Finn over a period of three months at numerous locations, including their hometown of San Diego and in Los Angeles. Finn was key in producing the fast-paced, melodic mixes, creating a pop-punk sound with a more radio-friendly, accessible polish. Lyrically, the album is inspired by adolescent frustration and relationships. Guitarist Tom DeLonge and bassist Mark Hoppus primarily culled stories from friends and autobiographical situations to craft summer-related tracks revolving around breakups, suburban parties and maturity, as well as more offbeat subject matter such as UFO conspiracy theories. The cover artwork for &quot;Enema of the State&quot; features porn star Janine Lindemulder famously clad in a nurse uniform; the title is a pun on the term &quot;enemy of the state&quot;.

&quot;Enema of the State&quot; was an enormous commercial success, although the band was criticized as synthesized, manufactured pop only remotely resembling punk, and pigeonholed as a joke act due to the puerile slant of its singles and associated music videos. The album has sold over 15 million copies worldwide and catapulted the band to become one of the biggest rock bands of the turn of the millennium. &quot;What&#x27;s My Age Again?&quot;, &quot;All the Small Things&quot;, and &quot;Adam&#x27;s Song&quot; became hit singles and MTV staples, generating heavy radio airplay. &quot;Enema of the State&quot; has retrospectively been hailed as a quintessential pop-punk album and had an extensive impact on the genre and beyond, reinventing it for a new generation, influencing countless bands and artists, and spawning numerous tributes and accolades.

==Background==

By 1997, Blink-182, consisting of Mark Hoppus, Tom DeLonge, and Scott Raynor, began to receive mainstream exposure as their sophomore record, &quot;Dude Ranch&quot;, shipped gold and the lead single &quot;Dammit&quot; began to be added to rock radio playlists across the country. The band entered an extended period of touring beginning that summer, which included each date of the worldwide 1997 Vans Warped Tour, a lifestyle tour promoting skateboarding and punk rock music. The trio would only return to their home of San Diego, California for days at a time before striking out the next tour. &quot;When we did our longest tour stretch, it was right when I started dating my fiancée,&quot; DeLonge, the band&#x27;s guitarist and vocalist, said in 2001. &quot;We were all new and in love, and I had to leave. It was just, &#x27;Hey, I&#x27;ll see you in nine months.&#x27; It was really hard.&quot; Hoppus felt increasingly lonely; while the other members had longtime girlfriends to return home to, Hoppus was single. In addition to the hefty touring schedule, the trio grew tired of other commitments, including interviews and TV appearances due to the success of &quot;Dammit.&quot;

Desperate for a break, the overworked band began to argue and tensions formed. Raynor, who was at the center of this drama, had been commenting of his desire to attend college for years, and had been taking homework out with him on tour to try and complete his high school diploma. The tension came to a head in February 1998 as the band embarked on SnoCore, described as &quot;a winter version of the Warped Tour.&quot; Sharing the stage with Primus, the band was enjoying more success than ever before, but the drama between the musicians had grown substantially. The band reached a low point when the band engaged in a fight on a Nebraska date after SnoCore&#x27;s conclusion. Raynor would depart following SnoCore, and the ensemble recruited Travis Barker, drummer for the opening ska punk group The Aquabats, to fill in for Raynor. Barker, who had not had time to prepare or practice with the duo, learned the drum tracks for the 20-song setlist in only 45 minutes before the first show and performed them flawlessly thereafter. &quot;I remember Travis rehearsing backstage for an hour or two, then playing with them during sound-check,&quot; said Adam Deibert of the Aquabats. &quot;A few of us were standing behind the stage and vividly remember the feeling of &quot;this is the new Blink&quot;. We should have looked for a new drummer right then because it was obvious what band he belonged in.&quot; Shortly thereafter, the band embarked on a short minitour along the western coast, most notably Southern California, the band&#x27;s favorite place to play. The tour ended with the band headlining a sold-out show at the Palladium in Hollywood, California, where the band had dreamed of performing for years. Raynor returned for the band&#x27;s Palladium performance, but the band became increasingly uneasy and arguments grew worse. To offset personal issues and a &quot;tragic loss,&quot; Raynor began to drink heavily and it began to affect the band&#x27;s performances.

Following a largely successful Australian tour in the spring, Hoppus and DeLonge presented an ultimatum: quit drinking or go to an in-patient rehab. Raynor agreed to both and informed the band of his decision after taking the weekend to mull options. According to Raynor, he was fired through a phone call despite his agreement to rehab. Despite this, he felt no malice toward his former bandmates and later conceded they were &quot;right&quot; to fire him. The band would minimize the impact of the situation in future interviews and remained vague regarding his departure. Initial news reports explained that Raynor had &quot;reportedly returned to school.&quot; DeLonge would later explain the drinking problem that led to his expulsion: &quot;One show he dropped his sticks 10 times. It was so disturbing to see someone ruining himself.&quot; The addition of Barker inspired DeLonge and Hoppus to &quot;play better&quot; and keep up with their new member, whom DeLonge called &quot;perfect.&quot;

==Recording and production==
===Pre-production===

MCA gave the band its first professional recording budget, and Blink-182 began work on &quot;Enema of the State&quot; in October 1998. The trio had not been in a studio in two years and were anxious to record new material. Blink-182 returned to DML Studios to write new songs, where the band had previously spent time writing songs for their second record, &quot;Dude Ranch&quot;. The three spent much more time in the studio than on previous records, allowing them to try many different things. Barker would drive down each day from Riverside to take part in the writing process. Very satisfied with the results, the band completed writing in two weeks. Though Barker helped write the songs on &quot;Enema of the State&quot;, only Hoppus and DeLonge received songwriting credits, as Barker was technically a hired musician, not official band member. Don Lithgow, owner and operator of DML Studios, said in 2001 that the trio&#x27;s celebrity had increased considerably since the last time: &quot;[It] was different than their other sessions — girls hanging around outside, calling their friends on cell phones. All the kids wanted autographs. ... They&#x27;d unlock the doors and let kids into the studio, which most bands would never do.&quot; Due to the success of &quot;Dude Ranch&quot;, the MCA label and band management had high expectations.

===Recording===
To record &quot;Enema of the State&quot;, Blink-182 turned to punk rock producer Jerry Finn, who previously worked on Green Day&#x27;s breakthrough album, &quot;Dookie&quot; (1994). Hoppus and DeLonge were impressed with his work when they recorded &quot;Mutt&quot; for its placement on the &quot;American Pie&quot; soundtrack. Finn was harder on the trio to record better takes, and Hoppus credited Finn with knowing a great deal about punk rock music, but also helping the band establish a more pop-inspired sound. Finn came with an array of amps, effects and equipments; previously the band were forced to rent such equipment. For Barker, the album was &quot;fueled by black coffee and Marlboro Lights&quot;; he was hopeful for the album as the band were well-rehearsed and no time would be wasted. According to Barker, the album&#x27;s title stemmed from DeLonge, who was worried about his diet at the time and using enemas.

The recording process for the album was completed over a period of four months, and production was handled at several production facilities in southern California, including Signature Sound and Studio West in San Diego, Big Fish Studios in Encinitas, and Conway Recording Studios and The Bomb Factory in Los Angeles. The first step was to record drums, which were tracked at Chick Corea&#x27;s Mad Hatter Studios in L.A. in January 1999. The band had so much fun with Finn that there were days when very little work was accomplished: &quot;Recording can get pretty monotonous, but at least we could laugh with Jerry,&quot; recalled Hoppus. &quot;A pretty typical day would involve multiple takes for one part of one song, and then everyone would get naked and jump on Jerry.&quot; The band chose &quot;never to work with anyone else again,&quot; and Finn would produce their next three releases.

At the end of recording, Finn suggested they utilize keyboardist Roger Joseph Manning, Jr., best known for his work with Beck. Hoppus was initially reluctant, noting that most of the band&#x27;s fans up to that point were hardcore punk rock fans that might not be receptive to keyboard parts. In the end, the group were open to his inclusion: &quot;They welcomed all my ideas and they were super supportive and that&#x27;s why it was so much fun working with them,&quot; Manning later remembered. Recording completed in March 1999 and all parties involved were pleased with the results. &quot;When it was done, we were so stoked. It was like a masterpiece for our band,&quot; remembered DeLonge. &quot;We knew this was going to be the best thing we ever did.&quot; Hoppus felt the band achieved the purest, cleanest sound on the record that they had been striving for. Finn felt similarly, proud of his work on the record and believing in retrospect that the album would appeal to the masses. &quot;The Party Song&quot; was the final song to be completed, and the three were mixing the song coincidentally when lead single &quot;What&#x27;s My Age Again?&quot; premiered on Los Angeles-based radio station KROQ. In 2013, Hoppus referred to &quot;Enema of the State&quot; as &quot;the heart of Blink-182&#x27;s musical sensibilities,&quot; singling out &quot;its simplicity, its purity, its singularity of purpose between the three of us.&quot;

===Technical===
From a technical perspective, &quot;Enema of the State&quot; sounds glossier than other pop-punk albums of its era. As the album was recorded on analog tape, the trio put enormous trust into Finn to give the record the polished pop sound they wanted, recalled DeLonge in 2012. DeLonge recorded the album on Fender Stratocaster, with his tone achieved through a Mesa/Boogie Triple Rectifier amplifier. In a September 1999 &quot;Guitar Player&quot; article, DeLonge outlined his intentions: &quot;I&#x27;m the kind of guitarist that wants the biggest, fattest, loudest, sound he can get.&quot; Barker used 12 different snare drums on the album, rented from Orange County Drum and Percussion (OCDP). Finn disliked Barker&#x27;s tendency to tune up his snares, which he felt sounded like popcorn, so Barker for the most part tuned them down during recording for a bigger, tougher sound. Mike Fasano, of OCDP, sat in for Barker during the tuning period, due to his dislike of Finn&#x27;s meticulous microphone placement process. Barker recorded the majority of his drum tracks in eight hours, without headphones. While later Blink records were recorded with a click track to ensure timing, &quot;Enema&quot; was recorded live. Finn was impressed—he had been matching the songs to a click in the control room, but found Barker stayed on meter reliably well. Barker kept attempting to tease Finn by sneaking in vibraslaps, which Finn hated.

All of the vocals were recorded with Blue&#x27;s Bottle condenser tube microphone, which Finn recommended. DeLonge focused on clean and correct vocal takes, trying to sing as best he could. He later felt it was to the record&#x27;s detriment, as he felt the performances were too processed instead of authentic. For bass guitar tracks, Hoppus has said that he used Fender Precision and Jazz Basses, as well as a Music Man StingRay (the latter of which he was accustomed to at the time). He eventually gravitated towards the Fender basses, as he and Finn agreed that they sat in the mix better. Hoppus later said in 2021 that he preferred the Fender basses and felt that the StingRay sounded too &quot;clanky&quot;.

For Tom Lord-Alge, the main mixing engineer on the album, the band had one goal: &quot;Make it sound as aggressive as possible.&quot; Lord-Alge&#x27;s mixes were completed at his space, South Beach Studios, located in Miami, Florida. Some of the drum sounds were triggered by Lord-Alge during the mixdown process. Lastly, the album was mastered by Brian Gardner at Bernie Grundman Mastering in Hollywood. With a runtime of 35 minutes and 17 seconds, &quot;Enema of the State&quot; is Blink-182&#x27;s shortest album to date.

==Musical style and composition==
&quot;Enema of the State&quot; is considered by critics as pop-punk and skate punk. The songs on &quot;Enema of the State&quot; are fast-paced songs regarding &quot;adolescent aimlessness, broken hearts and general confusion over the care and feeding of girls,&quot; according to writer Gavin Edwards. Summarizing the album&#x27;s content, &quot;The New York Times&quot; Jon Caramanica called &quot;Enema of the State&quot; a sampling of &quot;ecstatic, goofy numbers about teenage uselessness, with a smattering of tender introspection.&quot; The songs are mainly autobiographical, or are inspired by stories from friends&#x27; experiences. &quot;Enema of the State&quot; largely revolves around age and maturity—&quot;more specifically, their lack of it, their attitude toward their lack of it, or their eventual wide-eyed exploration of it,&quot; said writer Nitsuh Abebe. On guitar, DeLonge&#x27;s minimalist style trades solos for riffs: &quot;The riffs I write stand on their own without a rhythm guitar behind them. Riffs keep songs sounding more diverse than the same old chord progressions,&quot; he said in 1999.

DeLonge later reflected on his desire for a more &quot;pop&quot; sound:

The band decided to emphasize arrangements, harmonies and melodic ideas rather than the fast-paced nature of &quot;Dude Ranch&quot;; the change was brought about by the band, rather than record executives of theirs. Barker hoped to give the songs varying tempos, something missing in the group&#x27;s prior recordings. &quot;I told Mark and Tom, &#x27;It&#x27;s going to be repetitive if all our songs have the same punk-rock beat all the time. Why don&#x27;t we try some different tempos?&#x27;&quot; DeLonge noted he was open to his proposals, and responded, &quot;Dude, I just play guitar and write melodies. You own the beats. If you have an idea, that&#x27;s what you&#x27;re supposed to do.&quot; As a result, songs range from slow (&quot;Adam&#x27;s Song&quot;), mid-tempo (&quot;Going Away to College&quot;), and fast (&quot;Party Song&quot;). Where as other songs in the band&#x27;s arsenal stayed double-time, Barker worked to add differentiating features: in &quot;The Party Song&quot;, he plays in 4/4 time on the bridge with a &quot;jumpy&quot; tom beat, indebted to surf rock, and the choruses in &quot;Anthem&quot; are half-time. He incorporates a Latin samba on &quot;Dysentery Gary&quot;: &quot;We actually wrote that bossa nova part a couple days before we went into the studio. It wasn’t even supposed to be like that. I just played it as a joke one time during practice when we were writing the songs, because I just got bored of playing the same drum parts, and everyone liked it a lot, so we kept it.&quot; On &quot;Going Away to College&quot;, Barker settles into a single-stroke snare roll; he played in marching band in high school. In a 2000 interview with &quot;Drum!&quot;, he explained: &quot;There’s this &quot;Zildjian Day in New York&quot; video where Steve Gadd does a full solo, and for the first five minutes it’s all just on snare drum, like a marching beat. I always like the way that sounded, so that’s kind of why I put that in the middle of &#x27;Going Away to College.&#x27;&quot;

==Songs==

&quot;Dumpweed&quot; kicks off the record, and explores sexual frustration. The song is based around the hook &quot;I need a girl that I can train,&quot; as in dog training. DeLonge, the song&#x27;s primary lyricist, explains the song in a 2000 tour booklet: &quot;Girls are so much smarter than guys and can see the future as well as never forget the past. So that leaves the dog as the only thing men are smarter than.&quot; The song is a &quot;callow complaint about girls not always doing exactly what you wish they would,&quot; and is followed by Hoppus&#x27;s &quot;Don&#x27;t Leave Me,&quot; a song about a breakup, in irony. Hoppus wrote the song in ten minutes. The guitar swell preceding the second chorus is actually a digital reversal of the delaying guitar preceding it. &quot;Aliens Exist&quot; originates from DeLonge&#x27;s interest in UFOs and conspiracy theories. &quot;Going Away to College&quot; was written in ten minutes by Hoppus while at home sick on Valentine&#x27;s Day 1999. While watching the movie &quot;Can&#x27;t Hardly Wait&quot;, Hoppus began to think about &quot;how much it sucks when people are in love in high school&quot; and are forced to be separated after graduation by different colleges in different cities. Since it was recorded late in production, the band had to go back to Los Angeles to record Barker&#x27;s drum track.

The track segues directly into &quot;What&#x27;s My Age Again?,&quot; also penned by Hoppus, who created it partially as a joke to amuse friends. It was originally titled &quot;Peter Pan Complex,&quot; referencing the subject matter: one who refuses to grow up. &quot;Dysentery Gary&quot; leads off the second half of the album, and was written by DeLonge about a crush that instead chooses someone else. Left with &quot;nothing better to do,&quot; the devastated friend chooses to mock her boyfriend. It was one of the first songs the band wrote with Barker. &quot;Adam&#x27;s Song,&quot; the piano-laced seventh track of the record, was written primarily based on the loneliness that Hoppus experienced during the unending days of touring the previous year. When Hoppus brought the song to the band, the trio reacted positively but showed reluctance to add it to the record, believing the dark subject matter might off-put listeners. Although usually vocals would take many alternate takes to complete, Hoppus completed the vocal track for &quot;Adam&#x27;s Song&quot; in a single take. The power pop-inspired &quot;All the Small Things&quot; was composed by DeLonge as both an ode to his girlfriend and one of his favorite bands, the Ramones. During the recording process of &quot;Enema of the State&quot;, DeLonge came home to find roses at the top of the stairs from his girlfriend, which inspired the line: &quot;She left me roses by the stairs; surprises let me know she cares.&quot;

&quot;The Party Song&quot; was inspired by when Hoppus attended a &quot;jock-infested&quot; party at San Diego State University and met some students who thought highly of themselves. Uninterested in the party, he felt he would much rather be at home, which found its way into the song&#x27;s lyrics. &quot;Mutt&quot; was written by DeLonge for his friend Benji Weatherly and his appearance in the Taylor Steele surf video &quot;The Show&quot;. An early version of &quot;Mutt,&quot; with Scott Raynor behind the drum kit, was recorded with producer Mark Trombino and appears on the film&#x27;s 1998 soundtrack. The title of &quot;Wendy Clear&quot; comes from Hoppus&#x27;s boat, named &quot;Wendy,&quot; and how boaters end transmissions by letting other boaters know the channel is open for use, or &quot;clear.&quot; Hoppus wrote the song while on tour with MxPx about having a crush on &quot;someone that you are not supposed to like.&quot; Lastly, &quot;Anthem,&quot; the final song on &quot;Enema of the State&quot;, is about being trapped in the suburbs, longing for freedom and the age of 21. It is based on when DeLonge was in high school and told his peers that his band would be playing at a friend&#x27;s house. The party was later busted by the police and a &quot;giant fight broke out.&quot; Hoppus felt it a perfect summary of the album&#x27;s themes: &quot;lots of youthful angst, energy, and suburban unrest.&quot;

==Artwork==
The cover artwork features porn star Janine Lindemulder dressed in a nurse uniform, pulling on a rubber glove. The band—semi-nude—appear on the back cover with Lindemulder preparing for some sort of injection. The trio was oblivious to the fact that Lindemulder worked in the porn industry until informed by producer Jerry Finn. Record executives had delivered a stack of photos of potential cover girls, and the band members happened to pick Lindemulder. &quot;So it&#x27;s kind of funny that they&#x27;ve been lumped in with Kid Rock and Limp Bizkit, who play up that kind of pimp lifestyle, because Blink is so not that,&quot; remarked Finn. According to Mark Hoppus, they &quot;always intended to have a sexy nurse on the cover&quot;, and the women considered included models from both &quot;Playboy&quot; and Janine&#x27;s employer Vivid Entertainment. Lindemulder is also featured in the music video for &quot;What&#x27;s My Age Again?&quot;. David Goldman was the photographer behind the shoot, held March 12, 1999, and did not know the trio before shooting. In 2012, he stated the glove was inspired by the album&#x27;s working title. &quot;Up until the very last minute, the album was going to be called &quot;Turn Your Head and Cough&quot;,&quot; he said. &quot;And that&#x27;s why I came up with the idea of the glove. Obviously an enema is not really a glove type of thing. I thought it was a good visual.&quot; The album&#x27;s other working titles included &quot;Vasectomy, Vasecto-you&quot; and &quot;Does That Look Infected?&quot;; a similar title to the latter was later used by the band Sum 41 for their 2002 album.

There are four different versions of the cover art. The first release has a red cross on the nurse&#x27;s hat and a capital B in the Blink-182 logo. The band preferred the lower-case b in the band name, and the second version features the red cross and a lower-case b. In a Reddit comment on June 2, 2013, Blink-182 bassist Mark Hoppus claimed that the American Red Cross pressured the band to remove the red cross from their artwork, stating that if they did not, they would be in violation of the Geneva Conventions. The band complied and, thus, the third iteration of the album cover features a plain white nurse&#x27;s hat. This third version is the only version to bear a Parental Advisory label for profane lyrics in &quot;Dumpweed&quot; and &quot;Dysentery Gary.&quot; A fourth version, released only in Malaysia, features edited pictures on both the front and rear covers. Janine&#x27;s cleavage has been edited out, with her instead appearing to be wearing a red t-shirt. Then on the rear there have been clothes edited onto the band members. This version also bears the red cross on the nurse&#x27;s hat. Hoppus said the controversy some had with the cover was exaggerated as &quot;it is just a picture of a girl.&quot; Art direction for the album was headed by Tim Stedman, with Stedman and graphic designer Keith Tamashiro designing the package. The album cover has since been called iconic by many publications. In 2015, &quot;Billboard&quot; ranked the cover among the top 15 &quot;greatest of all-time,&quot; calling it &quot;an image that was burned into the mind of every &quot;TRL&quot; viewer, one that became instantly iconic.&quot;

==Singles==

To promote &quot;Enema of the State&quot;, MCA Records released three singles in support: &quot;What&#x27;s My Age Again?,&quot; &quot;All the Small Things,&quot; and &quot;Adam&#x27;s Song.&quot; The singles were bigger than anyone in the band expected, crossing over into Top 40 radio format and experiencing major commercial success. &quot;What&#x27;s My Age Again?&quot; became an &quot;airplay phenomenon,&quot; achieving mass success on both radio and television. Its television success made it into an MTV staple. It achieved the highest success on &quot;Billboard&quot; Modern Rock Tracks chart, where it peaked at number two. It registered within the top 20 on UK Singles Chart as well, peaking at number 17. The music video for &quot;What&#x27;s My Age Again?,&quot; directed by Marcos Siega, famously depicted the band running naked through the streets of Los Angeles. A clip of the band streaking opened the 1999 &quot;Billboard&quot; Awards and the band&#x27;s affinity for nudity would be referenced in interviews for years to come.

&quot;All the Small Things,&quot; released in early 2000, became an even bigger success — it crossed over from alt-rock radio to contemporary hit radio, peaking at number six on &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 and number one on the Modern Rock Tracks chart. This track stayed at the top of the Modern Rock Tracks chart for eight weeks and remained in the top 10 for 20 weeks. It also peaked at number two on the official UK charts, and within the top ten in Italy, Ireland, Austria, Sweden and Australia. The music video for &quot;All the Small Things&quot; parodies boy bands and contemporary pop videos, and features the trio participating in choreographed dancing and dressing up as members of Backstreet Boys, 98 Degrees, and &#x27;N Sync. &quot;I was a little surprised it went over so well,&quot; recalled Marcos Siega, director of the clip, commenting that he felt it would offend viewers of &quot;Total Request Live&quot; (&quot;TRL&quot;) and boy band fans. &quot;I think we had the opposite effect. In some ways, I think that video put Blink at that sort of pop level with those other bands. We were making fun of them, but it kind of became [what it was making fun of].&quot; At the 2000 MTV Video Music Awards, it was nominated for Video of the Year and Best Pop Video, and won Best Group Video.

The third and final single, &quot;Adam&#x27;s Song,&quot; performed less substantially than the first two but still managed to peak at number two on &quot;Billboard&quot; Alternative Songs chart. The band was engulfed in controversy when Greg Barnes, a survivor of the Columbine High School massacre, set &quot;Adam&#x27;s Song&quot; on repeat on his stereo and committed suicide in May 2000. Hoppus was very upset when he got the call from band manager Rick DeVoe explaining what happened, as he intended the track as an anti-suicide song. &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; later compared the controversy to that of Ozzy Osbourne&#x27;s &quot;Suicide Solution.&quot; Despite that controversy, it managed to connect deeply with fans of the band, who wrote letters to the band remarking the track saved their lives during difficult situations. The constant airplay of the three videos on MTV and &quot;TRL&quot; cemented the band&#x27;s image as video stars, amid a climate of teen pop and boy bands.

==Release==

By May 1999, the group was nearing platinum status for &quot;Dude Ranch&quot; and sales targets were higher for &quot;Enema of the State&quot;. The &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; ran a Sunday feature on the band two days prior to release, noting that &quot;The musicians are sanguine about chances to repeat or exceed the sales of &quot;Dude Ranch&quot;, noting the always-shifting sands of pop culture and that they&#x27;ve already done better than they&#x27;d ever anticipated.&quot; Momentum began to build when US radio stations received advance copies of &quot;Enema of the State&quot;. MCA issued &quot;Enema of the State&quot; on June 1, and the release peaked at number nine on the U.S. &quot;Billboard&quot; 200. The album chart was gripped by the Backstreet Boys&#x27; &quot;Millennium&quot;, but &quot;Enema of the State&quot; still managed to move 109,000 units that week. The band was supporting Lagwagon in Europe when MCA executives phoned the trio about rising record sales. Joey Cape, frontman of Lagwagon, remarked that &quot;They were selling, like, 90,000 records a day [...] I was saying things like, &#x27;What are you doing here? Go home! Why do you want to be on tour with Lagwagon right now?&quot; At a show shortly following the release of the album, DeLonge was approached by Noodles from The Offspring to congratulate him. &quot;He looks at me right in the eyes and he goes, &#x27;You&#x27;re next,&#x27;&quot; remembered DeLonge, who blushed and shook off the compliment.

The major-label debut sold strongly and nearly four times as fast as &quot;Dude Ranch&quot;, and shipped gold to stores, unlike its predecessor, which took seven months to achieve that certification. &quot;Enema of the State&quot; went platinum in October 1999 and went triple platinum in January 2000; in February 2001, the album was certified five times platinum in the United States by the Recording Industry Association of America. The record performed well in international markets as well. &quot;Enema of the State&quot; went quadruple platinum in Canada and triple platinum in Australia. It peaked at number seven on the Canadian Albums Chart, but peaked the highest worldwide on the New Zealand Albums Chart (number two), where it was certified double platinum. It was also certified double platinum in Italy, platinum in the United Kingdom, and gold in six other territories (Austria, Germany, Indonesia, Mexico, the Philippines, and Switzerland). In Europe, the album sold over one million copies. To further promote &quot;Enema of the State&quot;, the trio made a cameo appearance in &quot;American Pie&quot;, a teen comedy released several weeks following the album release. Hoppus, DeLonge and Barker appear in a scene in which they are interrupted rehearsing to see a webcast on a computer. Music from &quot;Enema of the State&quot; was also used in the film and on its soundtrack. The cameo appearance was well-received, with &quot;New York&quot; Nitsuh Abebe commending the common sensibility and humor between the two: &quot;green grass, sun, swimming pools, teen boys obsessed with and mildly terrified by sex, jokes about having sex with things that are not other humans, and a healthy side of toilet-oriented gags.&quot;

As of 2016, &quot;Enema of the State&quot; remains the highest seller in the band&#x27;s catalogue, moving 4.6 million units to date in the U.S., according to Nielsen SoundScan.

==Reception==
===Critical response===
The initial critical response to &quot;Enema&quot; at the time of its release was favorable, though some critics found it juvenile. &quot;The New York Times&quot; designated the record its &#x27;Album of the Week&#x27;, while Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic described it as a &quot;fun record that&#x27;s better than the average neo-punk release.&quot; &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; Neva Chonin found it &quot;harmless, but still gnarly enough to foment the kind of anti-everything rebellion that spawned rock &amp; roll way back in the day.&quot; &quot;Billboard&quot; Paul Verna called the record &quot;short, to the point, and bristling with attitude,&quot; while a &quot;Kerrang!&quot; critic wrote that the album includes &quot;enough energy, attitude and cracking songs here to ensure that Blink will be remembered for more than just onstage nudity.&quot; Stephen Thompson at &quot;The A.V. Club&quot; found it &quot;hard to hate&quot;, writing, &quot;the trio&#x27;s hooky music [is] as smartly conceived as its lyrics [are] stupid.&quot; &quot;NME&quot; was vicious in its assessment, with reviewer Stevie Chick calling the record despicable, &quot;wholly toothless and soulless&quot; and deriding the band as &quot;as bad, as meaningless, as the cock-rockers and hippy wankers punk originally sought to destroy.&quot;

In the decades since its debut, &quot;Enema of the State&quot; has been widely hailed as a pop-punk classic, and one of the genre&#x27;s defining works. Jeremy Gordon at &quot;Pitchfork&quot; called the record sensitive and juvenile in equal measure; an &quot;amazingly effective&quot; combo. Jeff Yerger from &quot;Stereogum&quot; viewed it as a spiritual canon successor to &quot;Dookie&quot;, calling it &quot;the strongest set of songs [Blink] ever wrote [...] the chemistry between the three members is instantly gratifying.&quot; &quot;Billboard&quot; described the album as a &quot;classic&quot; in a retrospective review, calling it the &quot;catchiest batch of songs the band had ever written,&quot; and commending the leap in quality both in production and vocals in comparison to its predecessor. Andy Greene of &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; dubbed it a &quot;landmark,&quot; while Dan Weiss, writing for The Recording Academy, praised its &quot;remarkably clean-sounding guitars, [and] the hyperactive drumming of Barker.&quot;

===Criticism===
The success of the album, as well as its cleaner sound and the group&#x27;s appearances on MTV, caused many longtime fans to accuse the band of &quot;selling out.&quot; Many commentators stated that the band&#x27;s polished pop sound only remotely resembled punk music. Although the video for &quot;All the Small Things&quot; was filmed as a mockery of boy bands and teen pop, &quot;fame [didn&#x27;t] discriminate based on origin: soon the group was as famous as those it was parodying.&quot; &quot;Blink now had the backing of a major record company ... just like the synthesized pop acts they were spoofing,&quot; said British journalist Tim Footman. &quot;In what way were they less &#x27;pop&#x27; than Sugar Ray and 98 Degrees?&quot; Matt Diehl, author of the book &quot;My So-Called Punk&quot;, called the basis for satire thin: &quot;To seasoned ears, Blink-182 sounded and looked just as manufactured as the pop idols they were poking fun at.&quot; The band faced a backlash shortly after &quot;Enema of the State&quot; was released from several punk and emo acts who wished to not be associated with their music.

Tristin Laughter, employee of Bay Area record label Lookout! Records, wrote in an issue of the influential zine &quot;Punk Planet&quot; that the band would have a genuinely negative impact on punk and accused the band of misogyny. DeLonge responded to the accusations, commenting, &quot;I love all those criticisms, because fuck all those magazines! I hate with a passion &quot;Maximumrocknroll&quot; and all those zines that think they know what punk is supposed to be. I think it&#x27;s so much more punk to piss people off than to conform to all those veganistic views.&quot; While ska veterans Blue Meanies tried to empathize (&quot;I think they [Blink] are just trying to get in the mindset of a teenager, which means a lot of curiosity about sex,&quot;) others, such as John Lydon, frontman of the Sex Pistols and Public Image Ltd, dismissed the band as a &quot;bunch of silly boys ... an imitation of a comedy act.&quot;

==Legacy==
The record proved very influential on the pop-punk genre. With the release of the record, Blink-182 became celebrities and the biggest pop-punk act of the era. The glossy production instantly set Blink-182 apart from the other crossover punk acts, such as Green Day. In 2011, &quot;The New York Times&quot; credited the record with &quot;[taking] punk&#x27;s already playful core and [giving] it a shiny, accessible polish,&quot; calling it &quot;among the catchiest music of the time.&quot; Matt Diehl, author of &quot;My So-Called Punk&quot;, writes that mainstream acolytes of their sound led to profound effects on the &quot;pop punk&quot; genre, such as the deracination of regional scene identity—due to its wide popularity, pop punk bands became commonplace outside the genre&#x27;s origins. Jon Blisten of &quot;Beats Per Minute&quot; writes that &quot;&quot;Enema&quot; success perpetuated pop-punk&#x27;s viability on mainstream radio, which is where Blink&#x27;s progeny — bands like Fall Out Boy, Simple Plan, and New Found Glory — would receive a decent amount of airplay.&quot; &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; Nicole Frehsée wrote that the album influenced emo fans, while MTV News credited the album, alongside the Get Up Kids&#x27; &quot;Something to Write Home About&quot; (1999) as pioneering emo pop, calling them &quot;some of the scene&#x27;s most influential records.&quot;

&quot;Enema of the State&quot; has been called an accurate representation of middle-class teenage life, especially at the time of its release. &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; called it the &quot;perfect encapsulation of the American adolescent male mind-set circa 1999.&quot; Nitsuh Abebe of &quot;New York&quot; describes the immense popularity of the record with adolescents in an article measuring its influence: &quot;After you figure in singles, videos, CD-R burns, copies on repeat in friends&#x27; cars and finished basements, this was apparently enough to create blanket immersion among America&#x27;s twenty-some million teenagers.&quot; &quot;Alternative Press&quot; has ranked &quot;Enema of the State&quot; among Jerry Finn&#x27;s top production work, and UK-based music magazine &quot;Rock Sound&quot; rated it number 2 on their list of &quot;101 Modern Classics&quot; in 2012, writing, &quot;&quot;Enema&quot; didn&#x27;t just bring pop-punk to the masses, it marked a complete shift in how music television, radio and the world at large viewed it.&quot; In 2014, Ian Cohen of &quot;Pitchfork&quot; noted the album&#x27;s extensive influence: &quot;In a literal sense, many indie bands evolved not from Velvet Underground or Sonic Youth, but &quot;Smash&quot;, &quot;Dookie&quot;, or &quot;Enema of the State&quot;—records that served as beginner&#x27;s manuals and inspired musicians in great numbers to buy their first guitar.&quot; Likewise, Scott Russo of the band Unwritten Law remarked that, following the album&#x27;s release, he would receive CDs from fans that mimicked the glossy sound the album made famous. &quot;It was revolutionary, it was equally as revolutionary as Green Day when it hit, they just didn&#x27;t get the credit,&quot; Russo remarked in 2009.

In 2014, &quot;Alternative Press&quot; ran a special in celebration of the album&#x27;s fifteenth anniversary, which contains reflections from members of bands influenced by the album, including The Maine, The Story So Far, Mayday Parade, and Yellowcard, among others. &quot;When I heard how massive and epic &quot;Enema&quot; was for the first time, my mind was blown. It definitely made me want to be a better songwriter and make bigger-sounding records,&quot; said Ryan Key of Yellowcard. In the article, the magazine credits the album with &quot;single-handedly changed the face of mainstream rock.&quot; Property of Zack also gave the album a fifteenth anniversary feature, commenting, &quot;&quot;Enema of the State&quot; has become the single most important album in our overarching community since its release in 1999. It is more important, to this current generation and the one preceding it, than &quot;Dookie&quot;, or &quot;Smash&quot;, or whatever you want to put on that pedestal — and it will likely never give up that spot at the top of the standings.&quot;

===Accolades===


==Touring==

With massive radio and video play, Blink-182 played to larger crowds when they began touring in support of &quot;Enema of the State&quot;. The Loserkids Tour commenced in the autumn of 1999 and was the band&#x27;s first arena tour. The band was forced to postpone remaining dates of a spring European tour in 2000 when both DeLonge and Barker came down with strep throat. The band played to sold-out audiences and performed worldwide during the summer of 2000 on The Mark, Tom and Travis Show Tour. The tour was staged as a drive-in movie, with a giant retro billboard suspended from the ceiling, and films were projected on the screen behind the band – including vintage gay porn as a joke. The tour was one of the most anticipated rock tours of the season and the band headed out on the road with Bad Religion and Fenix TX. Barker broke one of his fingers during an altercation with two men who kept flirting with his girlfriend in Ohio, and Damon Delapaz, guitarist of Fenix TX, stepped in on drums for Barker. Hoppus recalled an overwhelming emotional feeling when the band sold out the Great Western Forum in Los Angeles.

The band also performed at the Reading and Leeds Festivals in August 2000. To celebrate the success of the tour, the band released a limited edition live album titled &quot;The Mark, Tom, and Travis Show (The Enema Strikes Back!)&quot;, which featured snippets of the band&#x27;s between-song dialogue. Released in November 2000, the band returned to the studio with Finn to complete a song left off the final track listing of &quot;Enema of the State&quot;: &quot;Man Overboard.&quot; The final tour in support of &quot;Enema of the State&quot; was the 2001 Honda Civic Tour, for which the band designed a Honda Civic to promote the company.

In 2019, the band conducted a tour in which they celebrated the 20th anniversary of &quot;Enema of the State&quot; by performing the album in its entirety. Matt Skiba, who was the band&#x27;s guitarist/vocalist from 2015 to 2022, performed DeLonge&#x27;s parts.

==Track listing==
===Original release===

===Australian tour edition===
==Personnel==
Adapted from &quot;Enema of the State&quot; liner notes.

Blink-182
* Mark Hoppus – bass, vocals
* Tom DeLonge – guitars, vocals
* Travis Barker – drums

Additional musicians
* Roger Joseph Manning, Jr. – keyboards on &quot;What&#x27;s My Age Again?,&quot; &quot;Adam&#x27;s Song,&quot; &quot;All the Small Things,&quot; &quot;Wendy Clear,&quot; and &quot;Anthem&quot;

Artwork
* Tim Stedman – art direction, design
* Keith Tamashiro – design
* David Goldman – photography
* Janine Lindemulder – cover model

Production
* Jerry Finn – production, mixing engineer of &quot;The Party Song&quot; and &quot;Wendy Clear&quot;
* Tom Lord-Alge – mixing engineer
* Sean O&#x27;Dwyer – recording engineer
* Darrel Harvey – assistant engineer
* John Nelson – assistant engineer
* Robert Read – assistant engineer
* Mike Fasano – drum technician
* Brian Gardner – mastering engineer
==Charts==

===Weekly charts===

===Year-end charts===

==Certifications==





==See also==
* 1999 in music
* Pop-punk
* Jerry Finn

== Explanatory notes ==
==References==
=== Citations ===
=== General and cited references ===
* 


==Further reading==

==External links==
* &quot;Enema of the State&quot; at YouTube (streamed copy where licensed)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="57" end="61" title="Rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q482477" start="67" end="76" title="Blink-182" label="Blink-182"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338889" start="107" end="118" title="MCA Records" label="MCA Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q971625" start="281" end="292" title="Warped Tour" label="Warped Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q846755" start="360" end="370" title="Dude Ranch (album)" label="Dude Ranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q425931" start="413" end="419" title="Dammit" label="Dammit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="484" end="493" title="punk rock" label="punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q586229" start="503" end="513" title="Jerry Finn" label="Jerry Finn"/>
<link wikidata="Q47871" start="540" end="549" title="Green Day" label="Green Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q211292" start="582" end="588" title="Dookie (album)" label="Dookie"/>
<link wikidata="Q220140" start="672" end="685" title="Travis Barker" label="Travis Barker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191027" start="717" end="729" title="Scott Raynor" label="Scott Raynor"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="842" end="851" title="San Diego" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="859" end="870" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q487914" start="940" end="948" title="pop-punk" label="pop-punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q736922" start="1065" end="1078" title="Intimate relationship" label="relationships"/>
<link wikidata="Q4270" start="1090" end="1101" title="Tom DeLonge" label="Tom DeLonge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4271" start="1114" end="1125" title="Mark Hoppus" label="Mark Hoppus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715405" start="1332" end="1355" title="UFO conspiracy theories" label="UFO conspiracy theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q238580" start="1429" end="1447" title="Janine Lindemulder" label="Janine Lindemulder"/>
<link wikidata="Q13222206" start="1519" end="1537" title="enemy of the state" label="enemy of the state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122509" start="1962" end="1987" title="What&amp;#x27;s My Age Again?" label="What&amp;#x27;s My Age Again?"/>
<link wikidata="Q520856" start="2001" end="2021" title="All the Small Things" label="All the Small Things"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630356" start="2039" end="2055" title="Adam&amp;#x27;s Song" label="Adam&amp;#x27;s Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997853" start="2069" end="2079" title="hit single" label="hit single"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="2085" end="2088" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q4271" start="2456" end="2467" title="Mark Hoppus" label="Mark Hoppus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4270" start="2469" end="2480" title="Tom DeLonge" label="Tom DeLonge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191027" start="2486" end="2498" title="Scott Raynor" label="Scott Raynor"/>
<link wikidata="Q846755" start="2570" end="2580" title="Dude Ranch (album)" label="Dude Ranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q425931" start="2627" end="2633" title="Dammit" label="Dammit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6603769" start="2814" end="2835" title="List of Warped Tour lineups by year" label="1997 Vans Warped Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="2943" end="2964" title="San Diego, California" label="San Diego, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312529" start="3873" end="3892" title="high school diploma" label="high school diploma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7547867" start="3962" end="3969" title="SnoCore Tour" label="SnoCore"/>
<link wikidata="Q741836" start="4056" end="4062" title="Primus (band)" label="Primus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553" start="4245" end="4253" title="Nebraska" label="Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q220140" start="4358" end="4371" title="Travis Barker" label="Travis Barker"/>
<link wikidata="Q460674" start="4397" end="4405" title="ska punk" label="ska punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756214" start="4412" end="4424" title="The Aquabats" label="The Aquabats"/>
<link wikidata="Q4678959" start="4765" end="4777" title="Adam Deibert" label="Adam Deibert"/>
<link wikidata="Q12606" start="5089" end="5102" title="West Coast of the United States" label="western coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q4244839" start="5241" end="5250" title="Hollywood Palladium" label="Palladium"/>
<link wikidata="Q34006" start="5254" end="5263" title="Hollywood, Los Angeles" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="5265" end="5275" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q49243" start="7182" end="7191" title="Riverside, California" label="Riverside"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="7747" end="7758" title="cell phones" label="cell phones"/>
<link wikidata="Q586229" start="8095" end="8105" title="Jerry Finn" label="Jerry Finn"/>
<link wikidata="Q47871" start="8132" end="8141" title="Green Day" label="Green Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q211292" start="8175" end="8181" title="Dookie (album)" label="Dookie"/>
<link wikidata="Q96394486" start="8269" end="8273" title="Mutt (Blink-182 song)" label="Mutt"/>
<link wikidata="Q220713" start="8311" end="8323" title="American Pie (film)" label="American Pie"/>
<link wikidata="Q8486" start="8686" end="8698" title="black coffee" label="black coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q15075" start="8703" end="8718" title="Marlboro Lights" label="Marlboro Lights"/>
<link wikidata="Q466723" start="9118" end="9133" title="Signature Sound" label="Signature Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="9153" end="9162" title="San Diego" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q532711" start="9184" end="9193" title="Encinitas" label="Encinitas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166721" start="9199" end="9223" title="Conway Recording Studios" label="Conway Recording Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q4940409" start="9228" end="9244" title="Bomb Factory Studio" label="The Bomb Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="9248" end="9259" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q192465" start="9319" end="9330" title="Chick Corea" label="Chick Corea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358431" start="9906" end="9931" title="Roger Joseph Manning, Jr." label="Roger Joseph Manning, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q11901" start="9962" end="9966" title="Beck" label="Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191043" start="11047" end="11051" title="KROQ" label="KROQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q3931994" start="11447" end="11458" title="analog recording" label="analog tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q208173" start="11609" end="11628" title="Fender Stratocaster" label="Fender Stratocaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572433" start="11663" end="11674" title="Mesa/Boogie" label="Mesa/Boogie"/>
<link wikidata="Q131926863" start="11675" end="11691" title="Triple Rectifier" label="Triple Rectifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q208421" start="11919" end="11929" title="snare drum" label="snare drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355050" start="11957" end="11990" title="Orange County Drum and Percussion" label="Orange County Drum and Percussion"/>
<link wikidata="Q165112" start="12086" end="12093" title="popcorn" label="popcorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5132441" start="12457" end="12468" title="click track" label="click track"/>
<link wikidata="Q390110" start="12706" end="12715" title="vibraslap" label="vibraslap"/>
<link wikidata="Q4929431" start="12774" end="12778" title="Blue Microphones" label="Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q46384" start="12793" end="12818" title="condenser microphone" label="condenser tube microphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q727758" start="13102" end="13118" title="Fender Precision Bass" label="Fender Precision"/>
<link wikidata="Q288342" start="13123" end="13134" title="Fender Jazz Bass" label="Jazz Basses"/>
<link wikidata="Q743821" start="13149" end="13167" title="Music Man StingRay" label="Music Man StingRay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7816633" start="13457" end="13470" title="Tom Lord-Alge" label="Tom Lord-Alge"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="13671" end="13676" title="Miami" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="13678" end="13685" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q7841696" start="13716" end="13723" title="Trigger (drums)" label="trigger"/>
<link wikidata="Q4963821" start="13801" end="13814" title="Brian Gardner" label="Brian Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q4894402" start="13818" end="13843" title="Bernie Grundman" label="Bernie Grundman Mastering"/>
<link wikidata="Q34006" start="13847" end="13856" title="Hollywood, Los Angeles" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q487914" start="14072" end="14080" title="pop-punk" label="pop-punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q828305" start="14085" end="14095" title="skate punk" label="skate punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369657" start="14202" end="14214" title="broken heart" label="broken heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="14359" end="14377" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q37891778" start="14384" end="14398" title="Jon Caramanica" label="Jon Caramanica"/>
<link wikidata="Q4184" start="14578" end="14594" title="autobiography" label="autobiographical"/>
<link wikidata="Q173436" start="14915" end="14925" title="minimalist" label="minimalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326471" start="15093" end="15110" title="chord progression" label="chord progression"/>
<link wikidata="Q189214" start="15465" end="15470" title="tempo" label="tempo"/>
<link wikidata="Q882054" start="15626" end="15640" title="Blast beat" label="punk-rock beat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5641839" start="16117" end="16128" title="double-time" label="double-time"/>
<link wikidata="Q849349" start="16268" end="16271" title="Tom drum" label="tom"/>
<link wikidata="Q220830" start="16290" end="16299" title="surf rock" label="surf rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q727781" start="16373" end="16378" title="Music of Latin America" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11403" start="16379" end="16384" title="samba" label="samba"/>
<link wikidata="Q486263" start="16445" end="16455" title="bossa nova" label="bossa nova"/>
<link wikidata="Q5206078" start="16899" end="16904" title="Drum!" label="Drum!"/>
<link wikidata="Q202988" start="16951" end="16959" title="Zildjian" label="Zildjian"/>
<link wikidata="Q454031" start="16994" end="17004" title="Steve Gadd" label="Steve Gadd"/>
<link wikidata="Q725817" start="17250" end="17258" title="Dumpweed" label="Dumpweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q38490" start="17404" end="17416" title="dog training" label="dog training"/>
<link wikidata="Q100926628" start="17858" end="17865" title="breakup" label="breakup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3021489" start="17998" end="18006" title="Delay (audio effect)" label="delaying"/>
<link wikidata="Q118906096" start="18034" end="18046" title="Aliens Exist" label="Aliens Exist"/>
<link wikidata="Q421" start="18096" end="18100" title="UFOs" label="UFOs"/>
<link wikidata="Q159535" start="18105" end="18124" title="conspiracy theories" label="conspiracy theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q37587" start="18219" end="18239" title="Valentine&amp;#x27;s Day" label="Valentine&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632425" start="18277" end="18299" title="Can&amp;#x27;t Hardly Wait" label="Can&amp;#x27;t Hardly Wait"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122509" start="18650" end="18675" title="What&amp;#x27;s My Age Again?" label="What&amp;#x27;s My Age Again?"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077589" start="18790" end="18807" title="Peter Pan Complex" label="Peter Pan Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630356" start="19179" end="19195" title="Adam&amp;#x27;s Song" label="Adam&amp;#x27;s Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994" start="19207" end="19212" title="piano" label="piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q837837" start="19706" end="19715" title="power pop" label="power pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q520856" start="19731" end="19751" title="All the Small Things" label="All the Small Things"/>
<link wikidata="Q483407" start="19850" end="19857" title="Ramones" label="Ramones"/>
<link wikidata="Q997848" start="20177" end="20181" title="Jock (athlete)" label="jock"/>
<link wikidata="Q913861" start="20206" end="20232" title="San Diego State University" label="San Diego State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q17183678" start="20503" end="20516" title="Taylor Steele (filmmaker)" label="Taylor Steele"/>
<link wikidata="Q6770043" start="20654" end="20667" title="Mark Trombino" label="Mark Trombino"/>
<link wikidata="Q221101" start="20965" end="20969" title="MxPx" label="MxPx"/>
<link wikidata="Q238580" start="21586" end="21604" title="Janine Lindemulder" label="Janine Lindemulder"/>
<link wikidata="Q158175" start="22076" end="22084" title="Kid Rock" label="Kid Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q240767" start="22089" end="22100" title="Limp Bizkit" label="Limp Bizkit"/>
<link wikidata="Q150820" start="22345" end="22352" title="Playboy" label="Playboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q629244" start="22386" end="22405" title="Vivid Entertainment" label="Vivid Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122509" start="22465" end="22490" title="What&amp;#x27;s My Age Again?" label="What&amp;#x27;s My Age Again?"/>
<link wikidata="Q194517" start="22892" end="22897" title="enema" label="enema"/>
<link wikidata="Q483558" start="23154" end="23160" title="Sum 41" label="Sum 41"/>
<link wikidata="Q863864" start="23171" end="23181" title="Does This Look Infected?" label="2002 album"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136" start="23458" end="23464" title="Reddit" label="Reddit"/>
<link wikidata="Q470110" start="23537" end="23555" title="American Red Cross" label="American Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q133536" start="23683" end="23701" title="Geneva Conventions" label="Geneva Conventions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455930" start="23861" end="23878" title="Parental Advisory" label="Parental Advisory"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="24624" end="24633" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q637715" start="24779" end="24782" title="Total Request Live" label="TRL"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122509" start="24947" end="24972" title="What&amp;#x27;s My Age Again?" label="What&amp;#x27;s My Age Again?"/>
<link wikidata="Q520856" start="24986" end="25006" title="All the Small Things" label="All the Small Things"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630356" start="25024" end="25040" title="Adam&amp;#x27;s Song" label="Adam&amp;#x27;s Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q408978" start="25242" end="25249" title="airplay" label="airplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="25360" end="25363" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025849" start="25429" end="25447" title="Modern Rock Tracks" label="Modern Rock Tracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="25521" end="25537" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3846656" start="25640" end="25652" title="Marcos Siega" label="Marcos Siega"/>
<link wikidata="Q392565" start="25771" end="25804" title="Billboard Music Award" label="1999 &amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q427487" start="26028" end="26050" title="contemporary hit radio" label="contemporary hit radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="26077" end="26106" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q216337" start="26464" end="26473" title="boy bands" label="boy bands"/>
<link wikidata="Q17140" start="26594" end="26609" title="Backstreet Boys" label="Backstreet Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q277230" start="26611" end="26621" title="98 Degrees" label="98 Degrees"/>
<link wikidata="Q154454" start="26627" end="26639" title="&amp;#x27;N Sync" label="&amp;#x27;N Sync"/>
<link wikidata="Q637715" start="26802" end="26820" title="Total Request Live" label="Total Request Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q223703" start="27096" end="27118" title="MTV Video Music Awards" label="MTV Video Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025849" start="27377" end="27394" title="Alternative Songs" label="Alternative Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q473845" start="27475" end="27505" title="Columbine High School massacre" label="Columbine High School massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="27753" end="27766" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q133151" start="27815" end="27828" title="Ozzy Osbourne" label="Ozzy Osbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2461379" start="27842" end="27858" title="Suicide Solution" label="Suicide Solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q739138" start="28174" end="28182" title="teen pop" label="teen pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="28366" end="28383" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="28906" end="28931" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066505" start="28996" end="29006" title="Millennium (Backstreet Boys album)" label="Millennium"/>
<link wikidata="Q842156" start="29120" end="29128" title="Lagwagon" label="Lagwagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349702" start="29202" end="29211" title="Joey Cape" label="Joey Cape"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335614" start="29514" end="29521" title="Noodles (musician)" label="Noodles"/>
<link wikidata="Q157041" start="29527" end="29540" title="The Offspring" label="The Offspring"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="30106" end="30147" title="Recording Industry Association of America" label="Recording Industry Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418776" start="30341" end="30362" title="Canadian Albums Chart" label="Canadian Albums Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q14918641" start="30404" end="30428" title="New Zealand Albums Chart" label="New Zealand Albums Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q191796" start="30788" end="30804" title="cameo appearance" label="cameo appearance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146335" start="30836" end="30847" title="teen film" label="teen comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109638" start="30995" end="31002" title="webcast" label="webcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507987" start="31160" end="31168" title="New York (magazine)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067041" start="31614" end="31631" title="Nielsen SoundScan" label="Nielsen SoundScan"/>
<link wikidata="Q976031" start="31898" end="31921" title="Stephen Thomas Erlewine" label="Stephen Thomas Erlewine"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="31925" end="31933" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q43281" start="32347" end="32355" title="Kerrang!" label="Kerrang!"/>
<link wikidata="Q7610676" start="32534" end="32550" title="Stephen Thompson (journalist)" label="Stephen Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233970" start="32560" end="32573" title="The A.V. Club" label="The A.V. Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="32724" end="32727" title="NME" label="NME"/>
<link wikidata="Q721140" start="33176" end="33185" title="Pitchfork (website)" label="Pitchfork"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532689" start="33316" end="33325" title="Stereogum" label="Stereogum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351100" start="33912" end="33933" title="The Recording Academy" label="The Recording Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309433" start="34203" end="34214" title="selling out" label="selling out"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="34277" end="34280" title="Pop music" label="pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="34311" end="34321" title="Punk rock" label="punk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7803515" start="34694" end="34705" title="Tim Footman" label="Tim Footman"/>
<link wikidata="Q575400" start="34761" end="34770" title="Sugar Ray" label="Sugar Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q277230" start="34775" end="34785" title="98 Degrees" label="98 Degrees"/>
<link wikidata="Q128758" start="34876" end="34882" title="satire" label="satire"/>
<link wikidata="Q10926" start="35117" end="35120" title="emo" label="emo"/>
<link wikidata="Q213205" start="35207" end="35215" title="Bay Area" label="Bay Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q430070" start="35229" end="35245" title="Lookout! Records" label="Lookout! Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118386" start="35295" end="35306" title="Punk Planet" label="Punk Planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q308857" start="35398" end="35406" title="misogyny" label="misogyny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1914259" start="35555" end="35571" title="Maximumrocknroll" label="Maximumrocknroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q181138" start="35732" end="35737" title="vegan" label="vegan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4929419" start="35775" end="35787" title="Blue Meanies (Illinois band)" label="Blue Meanies"/>
<link wikidata="Q106662" start="35953" end="35963" title="John Lydon" label="John Lydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q82545" start="35981" end="35992" title="Sex Pistols" label="Sex Pistols"/>
<link wikidata="Q845265" start="35997" end="36013" title="Public Image Ltd" label="Public Image Ltd"/>
<link wikidata="Q487914" start="36159" end="36167" title="pop-punk" label="pop-punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4877282" start="36937" end="36953" title="Beats Per Minute (website)" label="Beats Per Minute"/>
<link wikidata="Q485811" start="37112" end="37124" title="Fall Out Boy" label="Fall Out Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q485825" start="37126" end="37137" title="Simple Plan" label="Simple Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q850645" start="37143" end="37158" title="New Found Glory" label="New Found Glory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976494" start="37298" end="37306" title="MTV News" label="MTV News"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757786" start="37337" end="37352" title="the Get Up Kids" label="the Get Up Kids"/>
<link wikidata="Q3964601" start="37365" end="37394" title="Something to Write Home About" label="Something to Write Home About"/>
<link wikidata="Q3724735" start="37422" end="37429" title="emo pop" label="emo pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="37657" end="37677" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q420778" start="37968" end="37972" title="CD-R" label="CD-R"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268417" start="38162" end="38179" title="Alternative Press (music magazine)" label="Alternative Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q565273" start="38307" end="38317" title="Rock Sound" label="Rock Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q103550" start="38726" end="38744" title="Velvet Underground" label="Velvet Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q188626" start="38748" end="38759" title="Sonic Youth" label="Sonic Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q840130" start="38771" end="38776" title="Smash (The Offspring album)" label="Smash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197707" start="38992" end="39005" title="Unwritten Law" label="Unwritten Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514460" start="39492" end="39501" title="The Maine (band)" label="The Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7766730" start="39503" end="39519" title="The Story So Far (band)" label="The Story So Far"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514140" start="39521" end="39534" title="Mayday Parade" label="Mayday Parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q465075" start="39540" end="39550" title="Yellowcard" label="Yellowcard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467607" start="39765" end="39773" title="Ryan Key" label="Ryan Key"/>
<link wikidata="Q16954996" start="40866" end="40900" title="The Mark, Tom and Travis Show Tour" label="The Mark, Tom and Travis Show Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q201669" start="41202" end="41214" title="Bad Religion" label="Bad Religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q260297" start="41219" end="41227" title="Fenix TX" label="Fenix TX"/>
<link wikidata="Q639129" start="41494" end="41513" title="Great Western Forum" label="Great Western Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137962" start="41562" end="41589" title="Reading and Leeds Festivals" label="Reading and Leeds Festivals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996251" start="41704" end="41760" title="The Mark, Tom, and Travis Show (The Enema Strikes Back!)" label="The Mark, Tom, and Travis Show (The Enema Strikes Back!)"/>
<link wikidata="Q134454" start="42090" end="42106" title="Honda Civic Tour" label="Honda Civic Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q216747" start="42138" end="42149" title="Honda Civic" label="Honda Civic"/>
<link wikidata="Q65068511" start="42203" end="42209" title="Blink-182 and Lil Wayne Tour" label="a tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q707151" start="42331" end="42341" title="Matt Skiba" label="Matt Skiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q4271" start="42594" end="42605" title="Mark Hoppus" label="Mark Hoppus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4270" start="42623" end="42634" title="Tom DeLonge" label="Tom DeLonge"/>
<link wikidata="Q220140" start="42655" end="42668" title="Travis Barker" label="Travis Barker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358431" start="42701" end="42726" title="Roger Joseph Manning, Jr." label="Roger Joseph Manning, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q2122509" start="42748" end="42773" title="What&amp;#x27;s My Age Again?" label="What&amp;#x27;s My Age Again?"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630356" start="42787" end="42803" title="Adam&amp;#x27;s Song" label="Adam&amp;#x27;s Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q520856" start="42817" end="42837" title="All the Small Things" label="All the Small Things"/>
<link wikidata="Q238580" start="42999" end="43017" title="Janine Lindemulder" label="Janine Lindemulder"/>
<link wikidata="Q586229" start="43046" end="43056" title="Jerry Finn" label="Jerry Finn"/>
<link wikidata="Q183945" start="43059" end="43069" title="Record producer" label="production"/>
<link wikidata="Q17085328" start="43071" end="43086" title="Audio mixing (recorded music)" label="mixing engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7816633" start="43147" end="43160" title="Tom Lord-Alge" label="Tom Lord-Alge"/>
<link wikidata="Q128124" start="43201" end="43219" title="Audio engineering" label="recording engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q128124" start="43238" end="43256" title="Audio engineering" label="assistant engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4963821" start="43361" end="43374" title="Brian Gardner" label="Brian Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q421031" start="43377" end="43395" title="mastering engineer" label="mastering engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331985" start="43491" end="43504" title="1999 in music" label="1999 in music"/>
<link wikidata="Q487914" start="43507" end="43515" title="Pop-punk" label="Pop-punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q586229" start="43518" end="43528" title="Jerry Finn" label="Jerry Finn"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="43705" end="43712" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143266" wikidata="Q2630356" url="?curid=143266" title="Adam's Song">
<text>&quot;Adam&#x27;s Song&quot; is a song recorded by the American rock band Blink-182 for their third studio album, &quot;Enema of the State&quot; (1999). It was released as the third and final single from &quot;Enema of the State&quot; in March 2000, through MCA Records. &quot;Adam&#x27;s Song&quot; shares writing credits between the band&#x27;s guitarist Tom DeLonge and bassist Mark Hoppus, but Hoppus was the primary composer of the song. The track contains themes of suicide, depression and loneliness. It incorporates a piano in its bridge section and was regarded as one of the most serious songs the band had written to that point.

Hoppus was inspired by the loneliness he experienced while on tour; while his bandmates had significant others to return home to, he was single. He was also influenced by a teen suicide letter he read in a magazine. The song takes the form of a suicide note, and contains lyrical allusions to the Nirvana song &quot;Come as You Are&quot;. &quot;Adam&#x27;s Song&quot; was one of the last songs to be written and recorded for &quot;Enema of the State&quot;, and it was nearly left off the album. Though Hoppus worried the subject matter was too depressing, his bandmates were receptive to its message. The song was produced by Jerry Finn.

&quot;Adam&#x27;s Song&quot; peaked at number two on the US &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot Modern Rock Tracks chart; it was also a top 25 hit in Canada and Italy, but did not replicate its success on other charts. It received praise from music critics, who considered it a change of pace from the trio&#x27;s more lighthearted singles. The single&#x27;s music video, a hit on MTV, was directed by Liz Friedlander. Though the song was intended to inspire hope to those struggling with depression, it encountered controversy when a student of Columbine High School died by suicide with the track playing on repeat in 2000.

==Background==

Beginning in the summer of 1997, Blink-182 would enter an extended period of touring to support their second studio album, &quot;Dude Ranch&quot;. The group had played a handful of dates on the Vans Warped Tour 1996, a lifestyle tour promoting skateboarding and punk rock music. However, upon &quot;Dude Ranch&quot; release and popularity, Blink-182 would play every date of the 1997 tour worldwide with the bands NOFX and Social Distortion. The group were gone from their hometown of San Diego for nearly nine months straight beginning in late 1997. &quot;When we did our longest tour stretch, it was right when I started dating my fiancee,&quot; recalled vocalist/guitarist Tom DeLonge. &quot;We were all new and in love, and I had to leave. It was just, &quot;Hey, I&#x27;ll see you in nine months.&quot; It was really hard.&quot;

Bassist Mark Hoppus penned &quot;Adam&#x27;s Song&quot; to vent these frustrations and the loneliness he experienced on the tour; while the other members had longtime girlfriends to return home to, Hoppus was single. &quot;When you&#x27;re on tour, you&#x27;re so lonely,&quot; Hoppus said. &quot;You hang out with all your bros and it&#x27;s a great time and everything, but everybody wants to come home and have a girlfriend. And every time we&#x27;d fly home, Tom and Scott always had girlfriends waiting for them at the airport, and I didn&#x27;t. It&#x27;s about me being depressed and lonely out on tour, and not really having anything to come home to.&quot; The couplet &quot;I couldn&#x27;t wait til I got home/To pass the time in my room alone&quot; originally ended &quot;to get off the plane alone.&quot; In opposition to what Hoppus was feeling was the fact that the band were reaching professional highs: &quot;Dude Ranch&quot; had gone gold and the band were on the verge of stardom. &quot;It feels ridiculous saying, &#x27;Our band&#x27;s doing really good, but personally, I&#x27;m not feeling like I&#x27;m connecting.&#x27; It felt like I had too much good fortune to complain about anything,&quot; he recalled in a later interview.

Hoppus said the song&#x27;s inspiration came from &quot;reading a magazine where some teenage kid had killed himself and left a letter for his family.&quot; Online rumors purported that the song was inspired by a friend from Hoppus&#x27; high school years who took his own life, or a play titled &quot;Adam&#x27;s Letter&quot; (2005) that has the same focus, but was not written until years after the song&#x27;s release. John Cosper, the writer behind &quot;Adam&#x27;s Letter&quot;, said, &quot;the naming of the central character was a coincidence. The name goes back to the original script; I had no knowledge of Blink-182 or their music at that time.&quot;
In his memoir &quot;Can I Say&quot;, drummer Travis Barker wrote that the song&#x27;s title was taken from a &quot;sketch on &quot;Mr. Show&quot; about a band [Titannica] that writes a song with that name encouraging one particular fan to kill himself.&quot; David Cross, co-creator of &quot;Mr. Show&quot;, confirmed this, commenting, &quot;They were fans of the show and that was a knowing tribute that I thought was pretty cool.&quot;

==Recording and production==
&quot;Adam&#x27;s Song&quot; was among the last tracks composed and recorded for &quot;Enema of the State&quot;, and was nearly absent from the final album. The band was halfway finished with recording when Hoppus developed the idea. Though he worried it was &quot;a bit too far and depressing for what we were trying to do,&quot; his bandmates were receptive towards the idea:

Although vocals would usually take many alternate takes to complete, Hoppus completed much of the vocal track for &quot;Adam&#x27;s Song&quot; in a single take. &quot;It&#x27;s in a pretty high register for me, so I just blasted it out one night after dinner. That&#x27;s, like, 90 percent of what&#x27;s on the final track,&quot; he told &quot;Kerrang!&quot;. The idea to include piano in the track came without much forethought; &quot;We realized, &#x27;Well, this part here could sound rad if we put piano in here.&#x27; So we tried it out, and it sounded rad,&quot; said Hoppus. The piano was performed by session musician Roger Joseph Manning, Jr., best known for his work with Beck.

==Composition==

&quot;Adam&#x27;s Song&quot; was a departure from the content of the band&#x27;s previous singles, in favor of a slower tempo and more depressing lyrics. Brian Wallace of MTV wrote that Blink-182 &quot;explores new ground on &quot;Adam&#x27;s Song,&quot; setting aside their normal pop-punk punch for a more emo-influenced approach.&quot; The song is an emo, pop punk, and alternative rock track composed in the key of C major and is set in time signature of common time with a tempo of 136 beats per minute. Hoppus&#x27; vocal range spans from G3 to G4.

The song begins with the narrator contemplating suicide with the lyrics &quot;I never thought I&#x27;d die alone.&quot; The lyrics continue: &quot;I&#x27;m too depressed to go on / You&#x27;ll be sorry when I&#x27;m gone.&quot; &quot;Adam&#x27;s Song&quot; includes a reference to &quot;Come as You Are&quot; by Nirvana. &quot;Come as You Are&quot; includes the lyrics &quot;Take your time, hurry up, the choice is yours, don&#x27;t be late&quot;. &quot;Adam&#x27;s Song&quot;, in turn, includes the lyrics &quot;I took my time, I hurried up, The choice was mine, I didn&#x27;t think enough&quot;.

Barker&#x27;s drum track was labeled by Drummerworld as &quot;one of the most creative beats of his career,&quot; and mainly consists of the same basic beat repeated in sections throughout the verses. The first measure begins with the kick drum and splash cymbal playing on the downbeat, followed by a hit on the bell of the ride cymbal on the &quot;and&quot; of beat two, preceding an open hi-hat that rings out for a full count on beat three. &quot;The kick, snare, and floor tom are all hit simultaneously on beat four, followed by floor tom hits on the last two sixteenth-note triplets of beat four.&quot; The snare is hit on beats two and four, respectively. The song &quot;gradually builds to a powerful, piano-laden crescendo,&quot; and the song&#x27;s final chorus and conclusion take a more uplifting view of the world: &quot;Tomorrow holds such better days / Days when I can still feel alive/ When I can&#x27;t wait to get outside.&quot; DeLonge noted that over six guitar parts were recorded for the &quot;gigantic, sad&quot; choruses, but upon mixing, only four were used. &quot;The extra ones didn&#x27;t really do anything besides make it a little more unclear what was going on.&quot;

==Commercial performance==
&quot;Adam&#x27;s Song&quot; was mainly a commercial success in the United States, but it was a top 25 hit in Canada and Italy as well. In the US, it debuted on &quot;Billboard&quot; Modern Rock Tracks chart at number 38 in the issue dated March 18, 2000. Over the following weeks, it gradually ascended the chart to a peak of number two in the issue dated April 29. It remained at that position for seven weeks, held off the top position by &quot;Otherside&quot; by the Red Hot Chili Peppers, and &quot;Kryptonite&quot; by 3 Doors Down. On May 13, the single peaked at number one on the Bubbling Under the Hot 100 chart. In &quot;CMJ New Music Report&quot;, a trade magazine that contained exclusive charts of non-commercial and college radio airplay and independent and trend-forward retail sales, &quot;Adam&#x27;s Song&quot; was a number one hit on their Commercial Alternative Cuts chart in the issue dated May 15, 2000. The song made its sole appearance on &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 Airplay chart on that same date, peaking at number 79. The song&#x27;s last appearance on the Modern Rock Tracks chart came on September 9, 2000; as a whole, it spent 26 weeks on the chart. In the &quot;Billboard&quot; issue for July 19, 2003, Nielsen Broadcast Data Systems recognized the single with the BDS Certified Award for 100,000 radio spins. The song later made an appearance on &quot;Billboard&quot; Rock Digital Songs at position 38 shortly after the release of the band&#x27;s sixth album, &quot;Neighborhoods&quot;, in October 2011.

In Canada, the single debuted on the Rock Report chart, compiled by &quot;RPM&quot;, on May 15, 2000, at number 26. Over the ensuing weeks, its position fluctuated, but it reached a peak of number 20 on June 12, 2000. It last appeared on the chart on July 24 at number 29 before dropping out. In Italy, the single reached a peak of number 21 and spent three weeks on the charts. In New Zealand, the song reached a peak of number 39 and spent six weeks on the chart, while in Germany, the single fared poorly, spending only one week and reaching a peak of 98. Although the song did not chart in the United Kingdom, the British Phonographic Industry (BPI) awarded the song a silver certification in October 2021 for sales and streams of over 200,000 units.

==Critical reception==
&quot;Adam&#x27;s Song&quot; is generally considered one of the band&#x27;s more serious songs, one &quot;that hints at the emotional maturity they&#x27;d show on later releases,&quot; particularly their eponymous 2003 release. Richard Harrington of &quot;The Washington Post&quot; deemed the song &quot;a powerful exploration of exhaustion and depression.&quot; Alex Pappademas, writing for &quot;Spin&quot;, compared the song to the music of Weezer. Katy Kroll of &quot;Billboard&quot; recognized it among her top 10 singles of 2000, calling it &quot;a good old-fashioned depressing song with mainstream flair.&quot; Geoff Boucher, writing for the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot;, called it &quot;a poignant essay on a teen mulling over suicide&quot;; conversely, Steve Appleford of the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; dubbed it a &quot;moving if unremarkable examination.&quot; Scott Mervis of the &quot;Pittsburgh Post-Gazette&quot; called it a &quot;rare departure from the usual Blink fare.&quot;

Writers for &quot;The A.V. Club&quot; listed it among other suicide-related songs in 2009, describing it as &quot;surprisingly affecting, especially when the band reaches the bombastic chorus, and when the song describes suicide&#x27;s crushing aftermath.&quot; In a retrospective review, Chris Payne of &quot;Billboard&quot; wrote, &quot;Stylistically, it&#x27;s also a Blink breakthrough: rather than putting their heads down and plowing through at breakneck speed, the band dials back the verses and interludes to let them breathe a bit. The resulting chorus achieves an arena-worthy feel not achieved anywhere else on &quot;Enema of the State&quot;.&quot;

In 2016, &quot;Stereogum&quot; ranked the song number two on their list of the 10 greatest Blink-182 songs, and in 2022, &quot;Kerrang&quot; ranked the song number five on their list of the 20 greatest Blink-182 songs.

==Suicide of Greg Barnes==
The song caused a controversy in 2000 when it was set to replay indefinitely on a nearby stereo as 17-year-old Greg Barnes, a teenager who attended Columbine High School and had lost one of his best friends in the massacre the previous year, hanged himself in the garage of his family&#x27;s home. Both Hoppus and DeLonge were sympathetic but stressed the song&#x27;s meaning during an MTV News interview in 2001:
Hoppus also told interviewers that he received fan mail following the song&#x27;s release from fans that had contemplated suicide, but decided not to go through with it after hearing the song. &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; compared the controversy to that of Ozzy Osbourne&#x27;s &quot;Suicide Solution&quot;, which was played before a teen died by suicide in January 1986.

==Music video==
The song&#x27;s music video was directed by Liz Friedlander and debuted on MTV&#x27;s &quot;Total Request Live&quot; on March 7, 2000. It consists of performance footage of the trio in a warehouse in front of a wall decorated with photographs. In between verses, the photos&#x27; origins are explored through the different perspectives of individuals near the band. As the band prepares to play a show, a man has a conversation with a girl and is subsequently left alone. In another, while DeLonge and Hoppus read magazines inside a late-night convenience store, a melancholy woman attempts to make a call via a pay phone. Other montages show the trio in the company of friends and practicing, a man looking out upon the sea, and a solitary man deserted by others at an outdoor restaurant. The final montage consists of personal photos from the band&#x27;s past. Friedlander&#x27;s vision for the video was to focus on everyday individuals, going through difficult moments in their lives. &quot;We never know what&#x27;s going on in other people&#x27;s lives,&quot; she told Andrew Limbong of NPR in 2018. &quot;We all are dealing with our stuff, and we don&#x27;t look, and don&#x27;t see, and so then we don&#x27;t notice.&quot;

==Legacy==
The band retired the song in 2009 after the death of Adam Goldstein, best known as DJ AM, a close personal friend of Barker and of the band. Hoppus noted that he could not bring himself to perform the tune, believing it to be &quot;too hard&quot;. However, the band brought the song back after nine years, playing it again during their &quot;Kings of the Weekend&quot; Las Vegas residency in 2018. When asked about its revival, Hoppus said he found new meaning in the song: &quot;I think of it more, now, as almost a celebration, of hardships gone through and friends lost.&quot; The band brought the song back again in 2023, with Hoppus noting that the song helped him through his battle with cancer.

For a 2018 broadcast of NPR&#x27;s &quot;All Things Considered&quot;, reporter Andrew Limbong chose &quot;Adam&#x27;s Song&quot; as part of their series of &quot;American Anthems&quot;—&quot;music that challenges, unites, and celebrates&quot;. In describing his selection, he wrote:

==Formats and track listing==
All songs written by Mark Hoppus and Tom DeLonge, except where noted. Live tracks recorded in November 1999 at the Universal Amphitheatre, Los Angeles, California.

US/UK CD single (155 742-2)
#&quot;Adam&#x27;s Song&quot; (Radio Edit) – 3:35
#&quot;Going Away to College&quot; (Live) – 3:46
#&quot;Adam&#x27;s Song&quot; (Live) – 4:53
#&quot;Adam&#x27;s Song&quot; (Video) – 4:09

German CD single (155 743-2)
#&quot;Adam&#x27;s Song&quot; (Radio Edit) – 3:35
#&quot;Going Away to College&quot; (Live) – 3:46

Australian CD single (155 752-2)
#&quot;Adam&#x27;s Song&quot; (Radio Edit) – 3:35
#&quot;Going Away to College&quot; (Live) – 3:46
#&quot;Adam&#x27;s Song&quot; (Live) – 4:53
#&quot;Wendy Clear&quot; (Live) – 2:46
== Credits and personnel ==
Credits adapted from the liner notes for &quot;Enema of the State&quot;.

Locations
*Recorded at Signature Sound and Studio West in San Diego, California, Mad Hatter Studios and the Bomb Factory in Los Angeles, California, Conway Recording Studios in Hollywood, California, and Big Fish Studios in Encinitas, California.
*Mixed at Conway Recording Studios in Hollywood, California, and South Beach Studios in Miami, Florida.
*Mastering at Bernie Grundman Mastering in Hollywood, California.

Personnel
*Mark Hoppus – bass guitar, vocals
*Tom DeLonge – guitars
*Travis Barker – drums
*Roger Joseph Manning, Jr. – piano
*Jerry Finn – production
*Tom Lord-Alge – mixing engineer
*Sean O&#x27;Dwyer – recording engineer

*Darrel Harvey – assistant engineer
*John Nelson – assistant engineer
*Robert Read – assistant engineer
*Mike Fasano – drum technician
*Rick DeVoe – management
*Gary Ashley – A&amp;R
*Brian Gardner – mastering engineer
==Charts==

===Weekly charts===


===Year-end charts===

==Certifications==


==References==
===Citations===
===Bibliography===
* 

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2630356" start="6" end="22" title="Adam&amp;#x27;s Song" label="Adam&amp;#x27;s Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="64" end="68" title="rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q482477" start="74" end="83" title="Blink-182" label="Blink-182"/>
<link wikidata="Q532004" start="120" end="138" title="Enema of the State" label="Enema of the State"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338889" start="258" end="269" title="MCA Records" label="MCA Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q4270" start="357" end="368" title="Tom DeLonge" label="Tom DeLonge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4271" start="381" end="392" title="Mark Hoppus" label="Mark Hoppus"/>
<link wikidata="Q10737" start="472" end="479" title="suicide" label="suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q4340209" start="481" end="491" title="Depression (mood)" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q223270" start="496" end="506" title="loneliness" label="loneliness"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994" start="526" end="531" title="piano" label="piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q11493441" start="733" end="750" title="significant other" label="significant other"/>
<link wikidata="Q11649" start="938" end="945" title="Nirvana (band)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q910487" start="957" end="972" title="Come as You Are (Nirvana song)" label="Come as You Are"/>
<link wikidata="Q586229" start="1267" end="1277" title="Jerry Finn" label="Jerry Finn"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="1346" end="1355" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025849" start="1362" end="1384" title="Hot Modern Rock Tracks" label="Hot Modern Rock Tracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="1420" end="1426" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="1431" end="1436" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q193977" start="1629" end="1640" title="music video" label="music video"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="1651" end="1654" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q4492730" start="1672" end="1687" title="Liz Friedlander" label="Liz Friedlander"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112675" start="1816" end="1837" title="Columbine High School" label="Columbine High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q846755" start="2042" end="2052" title="Dude Ranch (album)" label="Dude Ranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6603769" start="2107" end="2128" title="List of Warped Tour lineups by year" label="Vans Warped Tour 1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="2175" end="2184" title="punk rock" label="punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q265222" start="2327" end="2331" title="NOFX" label="NOFX"/>
<link wikidata="Q976882" start="2336" end="2353" title="Social Distortion" label="Social Distortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="2398" end="2407" title="San Diego" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q4270" start="2589" end="2600" title="Tom DeLonge" label="Tom DeLonge"/>
<link wikidata="Q220140" start="4707" end="4720" title="Travis Barker" label="Travis Barker"/>
<link wikidata="Q257643" start="4793" end="4801" title="Mr. Show" label="Mr. Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q362332" start="4921" end="4932" title="David Cross" label="David Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q43281" start="5854" end="5862" title="Kerrang!" label="Kerrang!"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994" start="5890" end="5895" title="piano" label="piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358431" start="6136" end="6161" title="Roger Joseph Manning, Jr." label="Roger Joseph Manning, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q11901" start="6192" end="6196" title="Beck" label="Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="6387" end="6390" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q10926" start="6524" end="6527" title="emo" label="emo"/>
<link wikidata="Q487914" start="6575" end="6583" title="pop punk" label="pop punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q11366" start="6589" end="6605" title="alternative rock" label="alternative rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q534932" start="6628" end="6631" title="Key (music)" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022293" start="6635" end="6642" title="C major" label="C major"/>
<link wikidata="Q155234" start="6657" end="6671" title="time signature" label="time signature"/>
<link wikidata="Q155234" start="6675" end="6686" title="common time" label="common time"/>
<link wikidata="Q189214" start="6694" end="6699" title="tempo" label="tempo"/>
<link wikidata="Q189214" start="6707" end="6723" title="beats per minute" label="beats per minute"/>
<link wikidata="Q910487" start="7059" end="7074" title="Come as You Are (Nirvana song)" label="Come as You Are"/>
<link wikidata="Q11649" start="7084" end="7091" title="Nirvana (band)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309198" start="7411" end="7423" title="Drummerworld" label="Drummerworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q211028" start="7606" end="7615" title="kick drum" label="kick drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074981" start="7620" end="7633" title="splash cymbal" label="splash cymbal"/>
<link wikidata="Q93992" start="7696" end="7707" title="ride cymbal" label="ride cymbal"/>
<link wikidata="Q963334" start="7762" end="7768" title="Hi-hat (instrument)" label="hi-hat"/>
<link wikidata="Q208421" start="7832" end="7837" title="Snare drum" label="snare"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305735" start="7843" end="7852" title="floor tom" label="floor tom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305735" start="7906" end="7915" title="floor tom" label="floor tom"/>
<link wikidata="Q113558" start="8094" end="8103" title="crescendo" label="crescendo"/>
<link wikidata="Q17085328" start="8427" end="8433" title="Audio mixing (recorded music)" label="mixing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025849" start="8782" end="8800" title="Modern Rock Tracks" label="Modern Rock Tracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q737257" start="9047" end="9056" title="Otherside" label="Otherside"/>
<link wikidata="Q10708" start="9070" end="9091" title="Red Hot Chili Peppers" label="Red Hot Chili Peppers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4980576" start="9103" end="9113" title="Kryptonite (3 Doors Down song)" label="Kryptonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q175097" start="9123" end="9135" title="3 Doors Down" label="3 Doors Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q570827" start="9187" end="9213" title="Bubbling Under the Hot 100" label="Bubbling Under the Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q5012897" start="9230" end="9250" title="CMJ New Music Report" label="CMJ New Music Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356902" start="9584" end="9599" title="Hot 100 Airplay" label="Hot 100 Airplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7031609" start="9836" end="9866" title="Nielsen Broadcast Data Systems" label="Nielsen Broadcast Data Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246718" start="9936" end="9941" title="spin (radio)" label="spins"/>
<link wikidata="Q19754079" start="10002" end="10020" title="Rock Digital Songs" label="Rock Digital Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q930644" start="10100" end="10113" title="Neighborhoods (Blink-182 album)" label="Neighborhoods"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344164" start="10213" end="10216" title="RPM (magazine)" label="RPM"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="10521" end="10532" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="10614" end="10621" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q751895" start="10757" end="10786" title="British Phonographic Industry" label="British Phonographic Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q292986" start="11122" end="11144" title="Blink-182 (album)" label="eponymous 2003 release"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="11174" end="11193" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025912" start="11316" end="11320" title="Spin (magazine)" label="Spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q209956" start="11362" end="11368" title="Weezer" label="Weezer"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="11574" end="11591" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q3063794" start="11821" end="11844" title="Pittsburgh Post-Gazette" label="Pittsburgh Post-Gazette"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233970" start="11936" end="11949" title="The A.V. Club" label="The A.V. Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532689" start="12594" end="12603" title="Stereogum" label="Stereogum"/>
<link wikidata="Q43281" start="12706" end="12713" title="Kerrang!" label="Kerrang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112675" start="12974" end="12995" title="Columbine High School" label="Columbine High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q473845" start="13040" end="13048" title="Columbine High School massacre" label="massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="13439" end="13452" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q133151" start="13495" end="13508" title="Ozzy Osbourne" label="Ozzy Osbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2461379" start="13522" end="13538" title="Suicide Solution" label="Suicide Solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q193977" start="13643" end="13654" title="music video" label="music video"/>
<link wikidata="Q4492730" start="13671" end="13686" title="Liz Friedlander" label="Liz Friedlander"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="13702" end="13705" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q637715" start="13719" end="13737" title="Total Request Live" label="Total Request Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q4340209" start="14192" end="14202" title="Depression (mood)" label="melancholy"/>
<link wikidata="Q671510" start="14720" end="14723" title="NPR" label="NPR"/>
<link wikidata="Q349529" start="14953" end="14958" title="DJ AM" label="DJ AM"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="15239" end="15248" title="Las Vegas" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q671510" start="15597" end="15600" title="NPR" label="NPR"/>
<link wikidata="Q2837534" start="15614" end="15635" title="All Things Considered" label="All Things Considered"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010349" start="16002" end="16024" title="Universal Amphitheatre" label="Universal Amphitheatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q624669" start="16111" end="16121" title="Radio Edit" label="Radio Edit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263757" start="16666" end="16677" title="liner notes" label="liner notes"/>
<link wikidata="Q466723" start="16738" end="16753" title="Signature Sound" label="Signature Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="16839" end="16850" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166721" start="16864" end="16888" title="Conway Recording Studios" label="Conway Recording Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q532711" start="16939" end="16948" title="Encinitas, California" label="Encinitas"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="17050" end="17055" title="Miami" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="17057" end="17064" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q4271" start="17144" end="17155" title="Mark Hoppus" label="Mark Hoppus"/>
<link wikidata="Q46185" start="17158" end="17169" title="bass guitar" label="bass guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q27939" start="17171" end="17177" title="Singing" label="vocals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4270" start="17179" end="17190" title="Tom DeLonge" label="Tom DeLonge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607" start="17193" end="17199" title="guitar" label="guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q220140" start="17202" end="17215" title="Travis Barker" label="Travis Barker"/>
<link wikidata="Q128309" start="17218" end="17223" title="Drum kit" label="drums"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358431" start="17225" end="17250" title="Roger Joseph Manning, Jr." label="Roger Joseph Manning, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q5994" start="17253" end="17258" title="piano" label="piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q586229" start="17260" end="17270" title="Jerry Finn" label="Jerry Finn"/>
<link wikidata="Q20077126" start="17273" end="17283" title="Sound recording and reproduction" label="production"/>
<link wikidata="Q7816633" start="17285" end="17298" title="Tom Lord-Alge" label="Tom Lord-Alge"/>
<link wikidata="Q128124" start="17338" end="17356" title="Audio engineering" label="recording engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q128124" start="17375" end="17393" title="Audio engineering" label="assistant engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q610225" start="17533" end="17540" title="Artists and repertoire" label="A&amp;amp;R"/>
<link wikidata="Q4963821" start="17542" end="17555" title="Brian Gardner" label="Brian Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q421031" start="17558" end="17576" title="mastering engineer" label="mastering engineer"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143270" wikidata="Q863778" url="?curid=143270" title="HyperTransport">
<text>HyperTransport (HT), formerly known as Lightning Data Transport, is a technology for interconnection of computer processors. It is a bidirectional serial/parallel high-bandwidth, low-latency point-to-point link that was introduced on April 2, 2001. The HyperTransport Consortium is in charge of promoting and developing HyperTransport technology.

HyperTransport is best known as the system bus architecture of AMD central processing units (CPUs) from Athlon 64 through AMD FX and the associated motherboard chipsets. HyperTransport has also been used by IBM and Apple for the Power Mac G5 machines, as well as a number of modern MIPS systems.

The current specification HTX 3.1 remained competitive for 2014 high-speed (2666 and 3200 MT/s or about 10.4 GB/s and 12.8 GB/s) DDR4 RAM and slower (around 1 GB/s similar to high end PCIe SSDs ULLtraDIMM flash RAM) technology—a wider range of RAM speeds on a common CPU bus than any Intel front-side bus. Intel technologies require each speed range of RAM to have its own interface, resulting in a more complex motherboard layout but with fewer bottlenecks. HTX 3.1 at 26 GB/s can serve as a unified bus for as many as four DDR4 sticks running at the fastest proposed speeds. Beyond that DDR4 RAM may require two or more HTX 3.1 buses diminishing its value as unified transport.

== Overview ==
=== Links and rates ===
HyperTransport comes in four versions—1.x, 2.0, 3.0, and 3.1—which run from 200MHz to 3.2 GHz. It is also a DDR or &quot;double data rate&quot; connection, meaning it sends data on both the rising and falling edges of the clock signal. This allows for a maximum data rate of 6400 MT/s when running at 3.2 GHz. The operating frequency is autonegotiated with the motherboard chipset (North Bridge) in current computing.

HyperTransport supports an autonegotiated bit width, ranging from 2 to 32 bits per link; there are two unidirectional links per HyperTransport bus. With the advent of version 3.1, using full 32-bit links and utilizing the full HyperTransport 3.1 specification&#x27;s operating frequency, the theoretical transfer rate is 25.6 GB/s (3.2 GHz × 2 transfers per clock cycle × 32 bits per link) per direction, or 51.2 GB/s aggregated throughput, making it faster than most existing bus standard for PC workstations and servers as well as making it faster than most bus standards for high-performance computing and networking.

Links of various widths can be mixed together in a single system configuration as in one 16-bit link to another CPU and one 8-bit link to a peripheral device, which allows for a wider interconnect between CPUs, and a lower bandwidth interconnect to peripherals as appropriate. It also supports link splitting, where a single 16-bit link can be divided into two 8-bit links. The technology also typically has lower latency than other solutions due to its lower overhead.

Electrically, HyperTransport is similar to low-voltage differential signaling (LVDS) operating at 1.2 V. HyperTransport 2.0 added post-cursor transmitter deemphasis. HyperTransport 3.0 added scrambling and receiver phase alignment as well as optional transmitter precursor deemphasis.

===Packet-oriented===
HyperTransport is packet-based, where each packet consists of a set of 32-bit words, regardless of the physical width of the link. The first word in a packet always contains a command field. Many packets contain a 40-bit address. An additional 32-bit control packet is prepended when 64-bit addressing is required. The data payload is sent after the control packet. Transfers are always padded to a multiple of 32 bits, regardless of their actual length.

HyperTransport packets enter the interconnect in segments known as bit times. The number of bit times required depends on the link width. HyperTransport also supports system management messaging, signaling interrupts, issuing probes to adjacent devices or processors, I/O transactions, and general data transactions. There are two kinds of write commands supported: posted and non-posted. Posted writes do not require a response from the target. This is usually used for high bandwidth devices such as uniform memory access traffic or direct memory access transfers. Non-posted writes require a response from the receiver in the form of a &quot;target done&quot; response. Reads also require a response, containing the read data. HyperTransport supports the PCI consumer/producer ordering model.

=== Power-managed ===
HyperTransport also facilitates power management as it is compliant with the Advanced Configuration and Power Interface specification. This means that changes in processor sleep states (C states) can signal changes in device states (D states), e.g. powering off disks when the CPU goes to sleep. HyperTransport 3.0 added further capabilities to allow a centralized power management controller to implement power management policies.

== Applications ==
=== Front-side bus replacement ===
The primary use for HyperTransport is to replace the Intel-defined front-side bus, which is different for every type of Intel processor. For instance, a Pentium cannot be plugged into a PCI Express bus directly, but must first go through an adapter to expand the system. The proprietary front-side bus must connect through adapters for the various standard buses, like AGP or PCI Express. These are typically included in the respective controller functions, namely the &quot;northbridge&quot; and &quot;southbridge&quot;.

In contrast, HyperTransport is an open specification, published by a multi-company consortium. A single HyperTransport adapter chip will work with a wide spectrum of HyperTransport enabled microprocessors.

AMD used HyperTransport to replace the front-side bus in their Opteron, Athlon 64, Athlon II, Sempron 64, Turion 64, Phenom, Phenom II and FX families of microprocessors.

=== Multiprocessor interconnect ===
Another use for HyperTransport is as an interconnect for NUMA multiprocessor computers. AMD used HyperTransport with a proprietary cache coherency extension as part of their Direct Connect Architecture in their Opteron and Athlon 64 FX (Dual Socket Direct Connect (DSDC) Architecture) line of processors. Infinity Fabric used with the EPYC server CPUs is a superset of HyperTransport. The HORUS interconnect from Newisys extends this concept to larger clusters. The Aqua device from 3Leaf Systems virtualizes and interconnects CPUs, memory, and I/O.

=== Router or switch bus replacement ===
HyperTransport can also be used as a bus in routers and switches. Routers and switches have multiple network interfaces, and must forward data between these ports as fast as possible. For example, a four-port, 1000 Mbit/s Ethernet router needs a maximum 8000 Mbit/s of internal bandwidth (1000 Mbit/s × 4 ports × 2 directions)—HyperTransport greatly exceeds the bandwidth this application requires. However a 4 + 1 port 10 Gb router would require 100 Gbit/s of internal bandwidth. Add to that 802.11ac 8 antennas and the WiGig 60 GHz standard (802.11ad) and HyperTransport becomes more feasible (with anywhere between 20 and 24 lanes used for the needed bandwidth).

=== Co-processor interconnect ===
The issue of latency and bandwidth between CPUs and co-processors has usually been the major stumbling block to their practical implementation. Co-processors such as FPGAs have appeared that can access the HyperTransport bus and become integrated on the motherboard. Current generation FPGAs from both main manufacturers (Altera and Xilinx) directly support the HyperTransport interface, and have IP Cores available. Companies such as XtremeData, Inc. and DRC take these FPGAs (Xilinx in DRC&#x27;s case) and create a module that allows FPGAs to plug directly into the Opteron socket.

AMD started an initiative named Torrenza on September 21, 2006, to further promote the usage of HyperTransport for plug-in cards and coprocessors. This initiative opened their &quot;Socket F&quot; to plug-in boards such as those from XtremeData and DRC.

=== Add-on card connector (HTX and HTX3) ===

A connector specification that allows a slot-based peripheral to have direct connection to a microprocessor using a HyperTransport interface was released by the HyperTransport Consortium. It is known as HyperTransport eXpansion (HTX). Using a reversed instance of the same mechanical connector as a 16-lane PCI Express slot (plus an x1 connector for power pins), HTX allows development of plug-in cards that support direct access to a CPU and DMA to the system RAM. The initial card for this slot was the QLogic InfiniPath InfiniBand HCA. IBM and HP, among others, have released HTX compliant systems.

The original HTX standard is limited to 16bits and 800MHz.

In August 2008, the HyperTransport Consortium released HTX3, which extends the clock rate of HTX to 2.6 GHz (5.2 GT/s, 10.7 GTi, 5.2 real GHz data rate, 3 MT/s edit rate) and retains backwards compatibility.

=== Testing ===
The &quot;DUT&quot; test connector is defined to enable standardized functional test system interconnection.

== Implementations ==
* AMD AMD64 and Direct Connect Architecture based CPUs
* AMD chipsets
** AMD-8000 series
** AMD 480 series
** AMD 580 series
** AMD 690 series
** AMD 700 series
** AMD 800 series
** AMD 900 series
* ATI chipsets
** ATI Radeon Xpress 200 for AMD processor
** ATI Radeon Xpress 3200 for AMD processor
* Broadcom (then ServerWorks) HyperTransport SystemI/O controllers
** HT-2000
** HT-2100
* Cisco QuantumFlow Processors
* ht_tunnel from OpenCores project (MPL licence)
* IBM CPC925 and CPC945 (PowerPC 970 northbridges) chipsets
* Loongson-3 MIPS processor
* Nvidia nForce chipsets
** nForce and nForce2 series (link between North and South Bridges)
** nForce Professional MCPs (Media and Communication Processor)
** nForce 3 series
** nForce 4 series
** nForce 500 series
** nForce 600 series
** nForce 700 series
** nForce 900 series
* PMC-Sierra RM9000X2 MIPS CPU
* Power Mac G5
* Raza Thread Processors
* SiByte MIPS CPUs from Broadcom
* Transmeta TM8000 Efficeon CPUs
* VIA chipsets K8 series

== Frequency specifications ==

* AMD Athlon 64, Athlon 64 FX, Athlon 64 X2, Athlon X2, Athlon II, Phenom, Phenom II, Sempron, Turion series and later use one 16-bit HyperTransport link. AMD Athlon 64 FX (1207), Opteron use up to three 16-bit HyperTransport links. Common clock rates for these processor links are 800 MHz to 1 GHz (older single and multi socket systems on 754/939/940 links) and 1.6 GHz to 2.0 GHz (newer single socket systems on AM2+/AM3 links—most newer CPUs using 2.0GHz). While HyperTransport itself is capable of 32-bit width links, that width is not currently utilized by any AMD processors. Some chipsets though do not even utilize the 16-bit width used by the processors. Those include the Nvidia nForce3 150, nForce3 Pro 150, and the ULi M1689—which use a 16-bit HyperTransport downstream link but limit the HyperTransport upstream link to 8 bits.

== Name ==
There has been some marketing confusion between the use of HT referring to HyperTransport and the later use of HT to refer to Intel&#x27;s Hyper-Threading feature on some Pentium 4-based and the newer Nehalem and Westmere-based Intel Core microprocessors. Hyper-Threading is officially known as Hyper-Threading Technology (HTT) or HT Technology. Because of this potential for confusion, the HyperTransport Consortium always uses the written-out form: &quot;HyperTransport.&quot;

== Infinity Fabric ==
Infinity Fabric (IF) is a superset of HyperTransport announced by AMD in 2016 as an interconnect for its GPUs and CPUs. It is also usable as interchip interconnect for communication between CPUs and GPUs (for Heterogeneous System Architecture), an arrangement known as Infinity Architecture. The company said the Infinity Fabric would scale from 30GB/s to 512GB/s, and be used in the Zen-based CPUs and Vega GPUs which were subsequently released in 2017.

On Zen and Zen+ CPUs, the &quot;SDF&quot; data interconnects are run at the same frequency as the DRAM memory clock (MEMCLK), a decision made to remove the latency caused by different clock speeds. As a result, using a faster RAM module makes the entire bus faster. The links are 32-bit wide, as in HT, but 8 transfers are done per cycle (128-bit packets) compared to the original 2. Electrical changes are made for higher power efficiency. On Zen 2 and Zen 3 CPUs, the IF bus is on a separate clock, either in a 1:1 or a 2:1 ratio to the DRAM clock. This avoids a limitation on desktop platforms where maximum DRAM speeds were in practice limited by the IF speed. The bus width has also been doubled. On Zen 4 and later CPUs, the IF bus is able to run at an asynchronous clock to the DRAM, to allow the higher clock speeds that DDR5 is capable of.

UALink will utilize Infinity Fabric as the primary shared memory protocol.

== See also ==
* Elastic interface bus
* Fibre Channel
* Front-side bus
* Intel QuickPath Interconnect
* List of interface bit rates
* PCI Express
* RapidIO
* AGESA

== References ==
== External links ==
* .
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q863778" start="0" end="14" title="HyperTransport" label="HyperTransport"/>
<link wikidata="Q863778" start="16" end="18" title="HyperTransport" label="HT"/>
<link wikidata="Q863778" start="39" end="63" title="HyperTransport" label="Lightning Data Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466064" start="113" end="122" title="Processor (computing)" label="processor"/>
<link wikidata="Q518280" start="147" end="153" title="Serial communication" label="serial"/>
<link wikidata="Q763575" start="154" end="162" title="Parallel communication" label="parallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576430" start="168" end="177" title="Bandwidth (computing)" label="bandwidth"/>
<link wikidata="Q48995598" start="183" end="190" title="Memory latency" label="latency"/>
<link wikidata="Q681349" start="191" end="210" title="point-to-point link" label="point-to-point link"/>
<link wikidata="Q17060328" start="253" end="278" title="HyperTransport Consortium" label="HyperTransport Consortium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2377054" start="384" end="394" title="system bus" label="system bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q128896" start="411" end="414" title="AMD" label="AMD"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="415" end="438" title="central processing unit" label="central processing unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q294894" start="452" end="461" title="Athlon 64" label="Athlon 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q13055354" start="470" end="476" title="AMD FX" label="AMD FX"/>
<link wikidata="Q4321" start="496" end="507" title="motherboard" label="motherboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="555" end="558" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="563" end="568" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q5512726" start="577" end="589" title="Power Mac G5" label="Power Mac G5"/>
<link wikidata="Q527464" start="630" end="634" title="MIPS architecture" label="MIPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195816" start="735" end="737" title="megatransfer" label="MT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189682" start="774" end="778" title="DDR4" label="DDR4"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="829" end="838" title="Solid-state drive#Standard card form factors" label="PCIe SSDs"/>
<link wikidata="Q18394905" start="839" end="849" title="ULLtraDIMM" label="ULLtraDIMM"/>
<link wikidata="Q272695" start="935" end="949" title="front-side bus" label="front-side bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q39369" start="1444" end="1447" title="MHz" label="MHz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251396" start="1486" end="1502" title="double data rate" label="double data rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q426882" start="1587" end="1599" title="clock signal" label="clock signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q225147" start="1975" end="1981" title="32-bit" label="32-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q79738" start="2110" end="2112" title="Gigabyte" label="GB"/>
<link wikidata="Q194368" start="2495" end="2501" title="16-bit" label="16-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q270159" start="2530" end="2535" title="8-bit" label="8-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="2611" end="2614" title="CPU" label="CPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q178648" start="2655" end="2665" title="peripheral" label="peripheral"/>
<link wikidata="Q475966" start="2920" end="2954" title="low-voltage differential signaling" label="low-voltage differential signaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q578290" start="3031" end="3041" title="deemphasis" label="deemphasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q214111" start="3203" end="3209" title="Packet (information technology)" label="packet"/>
<link wikidata="Q225147" start="3256" end="3262" title="32-bit" label="32-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q219320" start="3909" end="3912" title="I/O" label="I/O"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936765" start="4143" end="4164" title="uniform memory access" label="uniform memory access"/>
<link wikidata="Q210813" start="4176" end="4196" title="direct memory access" label="direct memory access"/>
<link wikidata="Q4437810" start="4492" end="4508" title="power management" label="power management"/>
<link wikidata="Q379523" start="4537" end="4579" title="Advanced Configuration and Power Interface" label="Advanced Configuration and Power Interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q272695" start="5015" end="5029" title="front-side bus" label="front-side bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12353724" start="5101" end="5108" title="Pentium compatible processor" label="Pentium"/>
<link wikidata="Q206924" start="5134" end="5145" title="PCI Express" label="PCI Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q338808" start="5317" end="5320" title="Accelerated Graphics Port" label="AGP"/>
<link wikidata="Q830445" start="5423" end="5434" title="Northbridge (computing)" label="northbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q585208" start="5451" end="5462" title="Southbridge (computing)" label="southbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q128896" start="5678" end="5681" title="AMD" label="AMD"/>
<link wikidata="Q272695" start="5717" end="5731" title="front-side bus" label="front-side bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q295060" start="5741" end="5748" title="Opteron" label="Opteron"/>
<link wikidata="Q294894" start="5750" end="5759" title="Athlon 64" label="Athlon 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q294885" start="5761" end="5770" title="Athlon II" label="Athlon II"/>
<link wikidata="Q295097" start="5772" end="5782" title="Sempron 64" label="Sempron 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q253278" start="5784" end="5793" title="Turion 64" label="Turion 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q295064" start="5795" end="5801" title="Phenom (processor)" label="Phenom"/>
<link wikidata="Q295057" start="5803" end="5812" title="Phenom II" label="Phenom II"/>
<link wikidata="Q294924" start="5817" end="5819" title="Bulldozer (microarchitecture)" label="FX"/>
<link wikidata="Q868014" start="5943" end="5947" title="Non-Uniform Memory Access" label="NUMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q846651" start="5948" end="5962" title="multiprocessor" label="multiprocessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025017" start="6017" end="6032" title="cache coherency" label="cache coherency"/>
<link wikidata="Q295060" start="6097" end="6104" title="Opteron" label="Opteron"/>
<link wikidata="Q294894" start="6109" end="6121" title="Athlon 64 FX" label="Athlon 64 FX"/>
<link wikidata="Q295066" start="6123" end="6169" title="AMD Quad FX platform" label="Dual Socket Direct Connect (DSDC) Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6191" end="6206" title="#Infinity Fabric" label="Infinity Fabric"/>
<link wikidata="Q33083031" start="6221" end="6225" title="EPYC" label="EPYC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4032953" start="6275" end="6293" title="HORUS interconnect" label="HORUS interconnect"/>
<link wikidata="Q7018276" start="6299" end="6306" title="Newisys" label="Newisys"/>
<link wikidata="Q5318" start="6522" end="6528" title="Router (computing)" label="router"/>
<link wikidata="Q4503" start="6534" end="6542" title="Network switch" label="switches"/>
<link wikidata="Q8805" start="6693" end="6697" title="Mbit" label="Mbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q79984" start="6700" end="6708" title="Ethernet" label="Ethernet"/>
<link wikidata="Q190411" start="7345" end="7350" title="FPGAs" label="FPGAs"/>
<link wikidata="Q438294" start="7501" end="7507" title="Altera" label="Altera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046482" start="7512" end="7518" title="Xilinx" label="Xilinx"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654284" start="7576" end="7584" title="Semiconductor intellectual property core" label="IP Cores"/>
<link wikidata="Q7827054" start="7797" end="7805" title="Torrenza" label="Torrenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q859595" start="7898" end="7910" title="coprocessors" label="coprocessors"/>
<link wikidata="Q206924" start="8373" end="8384" title="PCI Express" label="PCI Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q210813" start="8509" end="8512" title="Direct memory access" label="DMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295" start="8527" end="8530" title="RAM" label="RAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q3412325" start="8571" end="8577" title="QLogic" label="QLogic"/>
<link wikidata="Q80978" start="8613" end="8615" title="Hewlett-Packard" label="HP"/>
<link wikidata="Q128896" start="9088" end="9091" title="AMD" label="AMD"/>
<link wikidata="Q272629" start="9092" end="9097" title="AMD64" label="AMD64"/>
<link wikidata="Q128896" start="9143" end="9146" title="AMD" label="AMD"/>
<link wikidata="Q4652587" start="9178" end="9192" title="AMD 580 chipset series" label="AMD 480 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4652587" start="9196" end="9210" title="AMD 580 chipset series" label="AMD 580 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q294728" start="9214" end="9228" title="AMD 690 chipset series" label="AMD 690 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q294730" start="9232" end="9246" title="AMD 700 chipset series" label="AMD 700 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q294733" start="9250" end="9264" title="AMD 800 chipset series" label="AMD 800 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q294736" start="9268" end="9282" title="AMD 900 chipset series" label="AMD 900 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q213849" start="9285" end="9288" title="ATI Technologies" label="ATI"/>
<link wikidata="Q298948" start="9305" end="9322" title="Xpress 200" label="Radeon Xpress 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118940" start="9348" end="9366" title="Xpress 3200" label="Radeon Xpress 3200"/>
<link wikidata="Q790060" start="9387" end="9395" title="Broadcom" label="Broadcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q115821989" start="9402" end="9413" title="ServerWorks" label="ServerWorks"/>
<link wikidata="Q173395" start="9476" end="9481" title="Cisco" label="Cisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q851141" start="9522" end="9531" title="OpenCores" label="OpenCores"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="9556" end="9559" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9579" end="9603" title="PowerPC G5#Northbridges" label="PowerPC 970 northbridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q615955" start="9616" end="9624" title="Loongson" label="Loongson"/>
<link wikidata="Q527464" start="9627" end="9631" title="MIPS architecture" label="MIPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q182477" start="9644" end="9650" title="Nvidia" label="Nvidia"/>
<link wikidata="Q308573" start="9670" end="9676" title="nForce" label="nForce"/>
<link wikidata="Q308610" start="9681" end="9688" title="nForce2" label="nForce2"/>
<link wikidata="Q307560" start="9802" end="9810" title="nForce 3" label="nForce 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q302013" start="9821" end="9829" title="nForce 4" label="nForce 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q307669" start="9840" end="9857" title="nForce 500" label="nForce 500 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q307885" start="9861" end="9878" title="nForce 600" label="nForce 600 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q307733" start="9882" end="9899" title="nForce 700" label="nForce 700 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4438351" start="9903" end="9920" title="nForce 900" label="nForce 900 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7119723" start="9923" end="9933" title="PMC-Sierra" label="PMC-Sierra"/>
<link wikidata="Q527464" start="9943" end="9947" title="MIPS architecture" label="MIPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5512726" start="9954" end="9966" title="Power Mac G5" label="Power Mac G5"/>
<link wikidata="Q2124355" start="9969" end="9973" title="Raza Microelectronics Inc" label="Raza"/>
<link wikidata="Q527464" start="10001" end="10005" title="MIPS architecture" label="MIPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q790060" start="10016" end="10024" title="Broadcom" label="Broadcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q836542" start="10027" end="10036" title="Transmeta" label="Transmeta"/>
<link wikidata="Q633839" start="10060" end="10063" title="VIA Technologies" label="VIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q294894" start="10122" end="10131" title="Athlon 64" label="Athlon 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q294890" start="10147" end="10159" title="Athlon 64 X2" label="Athlon 64 X2"/>
<link wikidata="Q294885" start="10172" end="10181" title="Athlon II" label="Athlon II"/>
<link wikidata="Q295057" start="10191" end="10200" title="Phenom II" label="Phenom II"/>
<link wikidata="Q295097" start="10202" end="10209" title="Sempron" label="Sempron"/>
<link wikidata="Q253278" start="10211" end="10217" title="AMD Turion" label="Turion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475023" start="10289" end="10293" title="Socket F" label="1207"/>
<link wikidata="Q295060" start="10296" end="10303" title="Opteron" label="Opteron"/>
<link wikidata="Q307560" start="10806" end="10813" title="nForce3" label="nForce3"/>
<link wikidata="Q294551" start="10844" end="10847" title="ULi" label="ULi"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="11096" end="11101" title="Intel" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q830955" start="11109" end="11124" title="Hyper-Threading" label="Hyper-Threading"/>
<link wikidata="Q237757" start="11141" end="11150" title="Pentium 4" label="Pentium 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q19481932" start="11198" end="11208" title="Intel Core" label="Intel Core"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616181" start="11681" end="11714" title="Heterogeneous System Architecture" label="Heterogeneous System Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q96416011" start="11856" end="11859" title="Zen (microarchitecture)" label="Zen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11875" end="11879" title="Graphics Core Next#Graphics Core Next 5" label="Vega"/>
<link wikidata="Q47315086" start="11939" end="11943" title="Zen+" label="Zen+"/>
<link wikidata="Q25021818" start="12372" end="12377" title="Zen 2" label="Zen 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q96416013" start="12382" end="12387" title="Zen 3" label="Zen 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q110936355" start="12633" end="12638" title="Zen 4" label="Zen 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q131303036" start="12778" end="12784" title="UALink" label="UALink"/>
<link wikidata="Q5353559" start="12871" end="12892" title="Elastic interface bus" label="Elastic interface bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q376827" start="12895" end="12908" title="Fibre Channel" label="Fibre Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q272695" start="12911" end="12925" title="Front-side bus" label="Front-side bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196272" start="12928" end="12956" title="Intel QuickPath Interconnect" label="Intel QuickPath Interconnect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149752" start="12959" end="12986" title="List of interface bit rates" label="List of interface bit rates"/>
<link wikidata="Q206924" start="12989" end="13000" title="PCI Express" label="PCI Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367679" start="13003" end="13010" title="RapidIO" label="RapidIO"/>
<link wikidata="Q294948" start="13013" end="13018" title="AGESA" label="AGESA"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143271" wikidata="Q629831" url="?curid=143271" title="First Date (Blink-182 song)">
<text>&quot;First Date&quot; is a song by American rock band Blink-182 from their fourth studio album, &quot;Take Off Your Pants and Jacket&quot; (2001). It was released as the second single from the album on September 24, 2001. It was written primarily by guitarist Tom DeLonge, with additional songwriting credit to bassist Mark Hoppus, and drummer Travis Barker. &quot;First Date&quot; centers on the awkwardness and complicated emotions two individuals can experience upon initial meeting. DeLonge based the song on memories of his initial courtship with then-spouse Jennifer Jenkins.

The song&#x27;s creation stems from Blink-182 manager Rick DeVoe&#x27;s opinion that the album lacked a catchy, &quot;feel-good&quot; song. DeLonge composed &quot;First Date&quot; in response, while bassist Mark Hoppus composed the album&#x27;s lead single &quot;The Rock Show&quot;. The song&#x27;s music video depicts the trio as hippies in the 1970s, parading around the suburbs in a Volkswagen van and visiting a water park.

The song spent nearly half a year on &quot;Billboard&quot; Modern Rock Tracks chart, where it peaked at number six; internationally, it was a top five hit on the UK Rock Chart, and reached the top 40 on the all-genre UK Singles Chart, as well as in Flanders and Scotland. Music critics were generally mixed in their reception, with many considering it unimaginative. In promotion of the single, Blink-182 performed the song live on late-night talk show &quot;Late Night with Conan O&#x27;Brien&quot;, and at the 2001 MTV Europe Music Awards.

==Background==
Prior to recording their fourth studio album, &quot;Take Off Your Pants and Jacket&quot;, Blink-182 recorded demos at DML Studios, a small practice studio in Escondido, California, where the band had written &quot;Dude Ranch&quot; and &quot;Enema of the State&quot;. The group had written a dozen songs after three weeks and invited their manager, Rick DeVoe, to be the first person outside Blink-182 to hear the new material, which the band found &quot;catchy [but with] a definitive edge&quot;. DeVoe sat in the control room and quietly listened to the recordings, and pressed the band at the end on why there was no &quot;Blink-182 good-time summer anthem [thing]&quot;. DeLonge and Hoppus were furious, remarking, &quot;You want a fucking single? I&#x27;ll write you the cheesiest, catchiest, throwaway fucking summertime single you&#x27;ve ever heard!&quot; Hoppus went home and wrote &quot;The Rock Show&quot; in ten minutes, and DeLonge similarly wrote &quot;First Date&quot;, which became the most successful singles from the record and future live staples. The song&#x27;s arrangement was worked in the Famous Stars and Straps warehouse in San Diego.

The song was inspired by DeLonge&#x27;s then-wife, Jennifer Jenkins, who he wed in 2001. When they were first dating, their first outing was to SeaWorld San Diego. DeLonge remembered how awkward it was: &quot;We just hung out and walked around looking at fish.&quot; He pulled from these experiences to write the tune, a summary of &quot;going on a first date with a girl and not necessarily knowing how to act, what to wear or what to say.&quot;

==Reception==
Joshua Klein of &quot;The Washington Post&quot; found the track &quot;immediately likable,&quot; if innocuous, while Gina Vivinetto of &quot;Tampa Bay Times&quot; called the song a &quot;tender tune.&quot; Darren Ratner, reviewing for Allmusic, writes that the song serves as &quot;therapy for post-pubescent dilemma,&quot; adding that he found it &quot;sharp, if not entertaining.&quot; Aaron Scott of Slant Magazine expressed the belief that the &quot;biggest chunk of the record-buying public is just the right age to relate to their songs about first dates,&quot; viewing its parent album on the whole monotonous. Nick Hornby, writing for &quot;The New Yorker&quot;, said the song proceeds &quot;straightforwardly and unimaginatively.&quot; Chuck Taylor at &quot;Billboard&quot; was dismissive, commenting, &quot;Fans will dig it — otherwise it&#x27;s business as usual for a band who&#x27;s made the most of its 15 minutes.&quot;

==Commercial performance==
&quot;First Date&quot; was first released as a single on September 24, 2001, in Australia, then was serviced to US alternative radio in early 2002. It debuted on &quot;Billboard&quot; Modern Rock Tracks chart in the issue dated February 2, 2002, at position 25; it began collecting significant airplay two weeks later. It first entered the top ten in the week ending March 16, and reached its peak at number six during the week of April 6, where it remained for four weeks. It dropped out of the top ten in the week ending May 11, and fell off the ranking after 25 weeks, on July 27, 2002.

==Music video==

The music video for &quot;First Date&quot; pays homage to 1970s culture, featuring the band acting as long-haired hippie versions of themselves. Clad in long wigs, bell-bottoms and butterfly collars, the trio drive around a quiet suburb in a Volkswagen van, making stops at a diner and water park. The video, directed by The Malloys, was filmed over three days in Tsawwassen, British Columbia, and performance footage was filmed in a garage decorated with 1970s paraphernalia. Although the video was actually filmed in British Columbia, the video was thematically set in El Segundo, California in 1974. Singer Jordan Pundik and guitarist Chad Gilbert of New Found Glory, with whom the band were touring at the time, make cameo appearances in the clip. Journalist Joe Shooman interpreted the video as a retelling of the film &quot;Dazed and Confused&quot;. Elements of the clip&#x27;s concept stemmed from DeLonge, who viewed a documentary on the Bee Gees and found their hair and clothing outrageous: &quot;I called up Mark and was like, &#x27;Dude you&#x27;ve got to watch this shit.&#x27; These dudes are on top of a mountain, singing face to face, with the sunset behind them,&quot; he recounted. The video debuted on MTV&#x27;s &quot;Total Request Live&quot; on January 18, 2002; it was added to the playlists of MuchMusic in Canada during the week of February 9, 2002, and the College Television Network on March 16. As its radio performance peaked, it attracted airplay on MTV; it was first listed on &quot;Billboard&quot; Video Monitor, ranking the most-played clips on television stations, in the week of April 20, 2002.

A shot from the video, where DeLonge&#x27;s character Boomer mouths the phrase &quot;what the fuck&quot;, became a popular GIF online in the late 2010s. In addition, DeLonge&#x27;s company, To the Stars, has produced merchandise based on the Boomer character. In 2021, DeLonge created and played a new character named &quot;Disco&quot; that is said to be Boomer&#x27;s older brother. Disco was featured in the music video for the song &quot;Losing My Mind&quot; by DeLonge&#x27;s other band, Angels &amp; Airwaves.

==Track listing==


==Charts==
==Certifications==

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q629831" start="6" end="16" title="First Date (Blink-182 song)" label="First Date"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="45" end="49" title="rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q482477" start="55" end="64" title="Blink-182" label="Blink-182"/>
<link wikidata="Q475517" start="103" end="133" title="Take Off Your Pants and Jacket" label="Take Off Your Pants and Jacket"/>
<link wikidata="Q4270" start="261" end="272" title="Tom DeLonge" label="Tom DeLonge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4271" start="320" end="331" title="Mark Hoppus" label="Mark Hoppus"/>
<link wikidata="Q220140" start="345" end="358" title="Travis Barker" label="Travis Barker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454150" start="471" end="486" title="first date" label="initial meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q4271" start="791" end="802" title="Mark Hoppus" label="Mark Hoppus"/>
<link wikidata="Q133661" start="829" end="840" title="lead single" label="lead single"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712079" start="847" end="860" title="The Rock Show" label="The Rock Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q193977" start="884" end="895" title="music video" label="music video"/>
<link wikidata="Q339747" start="916" end="923" title="hippies" label="hippies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2506917" start="971" end="985" title="Volkswagen Type 2 (T1)" label="Volkswagen van"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025849" start="1073" end="1091" title="Modern Rock Tracks" label="Modern Rock Tracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698302" start="1176" end="1189" title="UK Rock Chart" label="UK Rock Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="1231" end="1247" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q234" start="1263" end="1271" title="Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="1276" end="1284" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q986699" start="1446" end="1466" title="late-night talk show" label="late-night talk show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639429" start="1473" end="1507" title="Late Night with Conan O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="Late Night with Conan O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059555" start="1526" end="1554" title="2001 MTV Europe Music Awards" label="2001 MTV Europe Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q475517" start="1624" end="1654" title="Take Off Your Pants and Jacket" label="Take Off Your Pants and Jacket"/>
<link wikidata="Q220935" start="1681" end="1686" title="Demo (music)" label="demos"/>
<link wikidata="Q372454" start="1730" end="1751" title="Escondido, California" label="Escondido, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q846755" start="1786" end="1796" title="Dude Ranch (album)" label="Dude Ranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q532004" start="1813" end="1831" title="Enema of the State" label="Enema of the State"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712079" start="2468" end="2481" title="The Rock Show" label="The Rock Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066293" start="2684" end="2707" title="Famous Stars and Straps" label="Famous Stars and Straps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1946237" start="2877" end="2895" title="SeaWorld San Diego" label="SeaWorld San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="3217" end="3236" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q1714356" start="3336" end="3351" title="Tampa Bay Times" label="Tampa Bay Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="3430" end="3438" title="Allmusic" label="Allmusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086297" start="3598" end="3612" title="Slant Magazine" label="Slant Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q313007" start="3813" end="3824" title="Nick Hornby" label="Nick Hornby"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="3844" end="3858" title="The New Yorker" label="The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037693" start="4273" end="4290" title="alternative radio" label="alternative radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q339747" start="4880" end="4886" title="hippie" label="hippie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568360" start="4930" end="4942" title="bell-bottoms" label="bell-bottoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2506917" start="5008" end="5022" title="Volkswagen Type 2 (T1)" label="Volkswagen van"/>
<link wikidata="Q961238" start="5087" end="5098" title="The Malloys" label="The Malloys"/>
<link wikidata="Q7849447" start="5130" end="5158" title="Tsawwassen, British Columbia" label="Tsawwassen, British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q983859" start="5337" end="5359" title="El Segundo, California" label="El Segundo, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q4343922" start="5376" end="5389" title="Jordan Pundik" label="Jordan Pundik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630791" start="5404" end="5416" title="Chad Gilbert" label="Chad Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q850645" start="5420" end="5435" title="New Found Glory" label="New Found Glory"/>
<link wikidata="Q191796" start="5487" end="5503" title="cameo appearance" label="cameo appearance"/>
<link wikidata="Q39975" start="5596" end="5614" title="Dazed and Confused (film)" label="Dazed and Confused"/>
<link wikidata="Q133405" start="5712" end="5720" title="Bee Gees" label="Bee Gees"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="5987" end="5990" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q637715" start="6004" end="6022" title="Total Request Live" label="Total Request Live"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6481" end="6494" title="Fuck#Modern usage" label="what the fuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2192" start="6519" end="6522" title="GIF" label="GIF"/>
<link wikidata="Q488562" start="6888" end="6909" title="Angels &amp;amp; Airwaves" label="Angels &amp;amp; Airwaves"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143272" wikidata="Q2712079" url="?curid=143272" title="The Rock Show">
<text>&quot;The Rock Show&quot; is a song by American rock band Blink-182 for the group&#x27;s fourth studio album, &quot;Take Off Your Pants and Jacket&quot; (2001). It was released as the lead single from the album on May 7, 2001. The track was composed primarily by bassist Mark Hoppus about meeting a girl at a rock concert. It was inspired by the band&#x27;s early days touring punk rock clubs, mainly Soma in their hometown of San Diego.

The song&#x27;s creation stems from Blink-182 manager Rick DeVoe&#x27;s opinion that the album lacked a catchy, &quot;feel-good&quot; song. Hoppus composed &quot;The Rock Show&quot; in response, while guitarist Tom DeLonge composed the album&#x27;s second single, &quot;First Date&quot;. The song was influenced by bands such as the Ramones, Screeching Weasel, and the Descendents.

The song peaked at number two on &quot;Billboard&quot; Modern Rock Tracks chart, making it the most successful single from the album. It also reached number 14 in the United Kingdom. The song&#x27;s music video finds the band given an unusually large budget for the video, and spending frivolously on random things. In promotion of the single, Blink-182 performed the song live on late-night talk show &quot;Late Show with David Letterman&quot;.

==Background==
Prior to recording the group&#x27;s fourth studio album, &quot;Take Off Your Pants and Jacket&quot;, Blink-182 recorded demos at DML Studios, a small practice studio in Escondido, California, where the band had written &quot;Dude Ranch&quot; and &quot;Enema of the State&quot;. The group had written a dozen songs after three weeks and invited the band&#x27;s manager, Rick DeVoe, to be the first person outside Blink-182 to hear the new material, which the band found &quot;catchy [but with] a definitive edge&quot;. DeVoe sat in the control room and quietly listened to the recordings, and pressed the band at the end on why there was no &quot;Blink-182 good-time summer anthem [thing]&quot;. DeLonge and Hoppus were furious, remarking, &quot;You want a fucking single? I&#x27;ll write you the cheesiest, catchiest, throwaway fucking summertime single you&#x27;ve ever heard!&quot; Hoppus went home and wrote &quot;The Rock Show&quot; in ten minutes, and DeLonge similarly wrote &quot;First Date&quot;, which became the most successful singles from the record and future live staples.

Hoppus wrote the song based on his memories of the San Diego club Soma. In their early days, Blink-182 performed dozens of concerts at the venue, mainly at the 5305 Metro Street location. &quot;It was covered with graffiti, it stunk, it was made of concrete and metal so the sound sucked and the toilets were always over-flowing. It was the best, we loved it,&quot; he recalled. Barker remembered that the song&#x27;s arrangement was worked in the Famous Stars and Straps warehouse in San Diego. The band felt the song captured &quot;the spirit of the Ramones and Screeching Weasel,&quot; and &quot;[it was] definitely influenced by bands like the Descendents.&quot; The band members expanded upon this in a 2001 interview with BBC Music:

Although it only peaked at number 71 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 and number 33 on the Mainstream Top 40 chart, it reached number two on &quot;Billboard&quot; Modern Rock Tracks chart.

==Reception==
Eric Aiese of &quot;Billboard&quot; examined the song through the lens of its airplay competition: &quot;As the face of rock radio has yielded toward the emerging hard sounds on &quot;nu metal,&quot; Blink continues to provide a contrasting voice […] &quot;The Rock Show&quot; clearly shows the band&#x27;s talent for writing—and performing—hooks.&quot;

==Music video==
The band filmed a music video that included them trashing televisions, trains, taking the homeless for a spa makeover, handing out cash to strangers and paying dancers to mow people&#x27;s lawns. The relatively large budget for the video, reportedly $50,000, was the basis of the joke and frivolously spent.

==Track listing==


==Charts==

===Weekly charts===

===Year-end charts===

==Certifications==


==Release history==
==In popular culture==
* During the hiatus, Mark Hoppus and Travis Barker regularly played this song in their band, +44. Guitarist and background vocalist Craig Fairbaugh replaced DeLonge on backing vocals.
* &quot;The Rock Show&quot; appears in the video games &quot;Amplitude&quot;, &quot;Guitar Hero 5&quot;, &quot;Guitar Hero Live&quot;, and &quot;Splashdown&quot;.
* The song is available as DLC for both &quot;Rock Band&quot; and its portable counterpart, &quot;Rock Band Unplugged&quot;.
* In 2025, American pop-punk band Bowling for Soup covered this song to coincide with the announcement that they are playing two of the 2025 Warped Tour dates. Frontman Jaret Reddick stated “All of a sudden we find out that Warped Tour is back in 2025 and that we are playing… the absolute first thing that popped into my head was the lyric, ‘I couldn’t wait for the summer and the Warped Tour.’”

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2712079" start="6" end="19" title="The Rock Show" label="The Rock Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="48" end="52" title="rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q482477" start="58" end="67" title="Blink-182" label="Blink-182"/>
<link wikidata="Q475517" start="116" end="146" title="Take Off Your Pants and Jacket" label="Take Off Your Pants and Jacket"/>
<link wikidata="Q133661" start="184" end="195" title="lead single" label="lead single"/>
<link wikidata="Q4271" start="271" end="282" title="Mark Hoppus" label="Mark Hoppus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="377" end="386" title="punk rock" label="punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559102" start="401" end="405" title="Soma San Diego" label="Soma"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="427" end="436" title="San Diego" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q4270" start="650" end="661" title="Tom DeLonge" label="Tom DeLonge"/>
<link wikidata="Q629831" start="709" end="719" title="First Date (Blink-182 song)" label="First Date"/>
<link wikidata="Q483407" start="772" end="779" title="Ramones" label="Ramones"/>
<link wikidata="Q570025" start="781" end="798" title="Screeching Weasel" label="Screeching Weasel"/>
<link wikidata="Q301142" start="808" end="819" title="Descendents (band)" label="Descendents"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025849" start="877" end="895" title="Modern Rock Tracks" label="Modern Rock Tracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q193977" start="1021" end="1032" title="music video" label="music video"/>
<link wikidata="Q986699" start="1203" end="1223" title="late-night talk show" label="late-night talk show"/>
<link wikidata="Q858778" start="1230" end="1260" title="Late Show with David Letterman" label="Late Show with David Letterman"/>
<link wikidata="Q475517" start="1347" end="1377" title="Take Off Your Pants and Jacket" label="Take Off Your Pants and Jacket"/>
<link wikidata="Q220935" start="1404" end="1409" title="Demo (music)" label="demos"/>
<link wikidata="Q372454" start="1453" end="1474" title="Escondido, California" label="Escondido, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q846755" start="1509" end="1519" title="Dude Ranch (album)" label="Dude Ranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q532004" start="1536" end="1554" title="Enema of the State" label="Enema of the State"/>
<link wikidata="Q629831" start="2271" end="2281" title="First Date (Blink-182 song)" label="First Date"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559102" start="2438" end="2442" title="Soma San Diego" label="Soma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066293" start="2820" end="2843" title="Famous Stars and Straps" label="Famous Stars and Straps"/>
<link wikidata="Q483407" start="2924" end="2931" title="Ramones" label="Ramones"/>
<link wikidata="Q570025" start="2936" end="2953" title="Screeching Weasel" label="Screeching Weasel"/>
<link wikidata="Q301142" start="3020" end="3031" title="Descendents (band)" label="Descendents"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834855" start="3100" end="3109" title="BBC Music" label="BBC Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="3156" end="3185" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q862774" start="3207" end="3224" title="Mainstream Top 40" label="Mainstream Top 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="3340" end="3349" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q263734" start="3504" end="3512" title="nu metal" label="nu metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4271" start="4161" end="4172" title="Mark Hoppus" label="Mark Hoppus"/>
<link wikidata="Q220140" start="4177" end="4190" title="Travis Barker" label="Travis Barker"/>
<link wikidata="Q158611" start="4233" end="4236" title="+44 (band)" label="+44"/>
<link wikidata="Q2844464" start="4385" end="4394" title="Amplitude (2003 video game)" label="Amplitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1955682" start="4408" end="4421" title="Guitar Hero 5" label="Guitar Hero 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q19801811" start="4435" end="4451" title="Guitar Hero Live" label="Guitar Hero Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q7578398" start="4469" end="4479" title="Splashdown (video game)" label="Splashdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2323659" start="4533" end="4542" title="Rock Band" label="Rock Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q6296086" start="4585" end="4604" title="Rock Band Unplugged" label="Rock Band Unplugged"/>
<link wikidata="Q487914" start="4632" end="4640" title="pop-punk" label="pop-punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q895463" start="4646" end="4662" title="Bowling for Soup" label="Bowling for Soup"/>
<link wikidata="Q971625" start="4753" end="4764" title="Warped Tour" label="Warped Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142201" start="4781" end="4794" title="Jaret Reddick" label="Jaret Reddick"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143273" wikidata="Q2709312" url="?curid=143273" title="Stay Together for the Kids">
<text>&quot;Stay Together for the Kids&quot; is a song recorded by American rock band Blink-182 for their fourth studio album, &quot;Take Off Your Pants and Jacket&quot; (2001). It was released as the third and final single from the album on February 19, 2002. The track was composed primarily by guitarist Tom DeLonge, who based its lyrics on his parents&#x27; divorce and its effect on him.

The song&#x27;s original music video, directed by Samuel Bayer, depicts the band performing in a home being destroyed by a wrecking ball in a metaphor for divorce. The clip was re-shot following the 9/11 attacks, with both the band and label MCA deeming its imagery too similar to the collapse of the World Trade Center.

The song received positive reviews from contemporary music critics, with many praising its tone and subject matter. It was a hit on rock radio in the United States, where it peaked at number seven on the Modern Rock Tracks chart in 2001.

==Background==

&quot;Stay Together for the Kids&quot; is written about divorce from the point of view of a helpless child. Its heavier sound was inspired by bands the group&#x27;s members were listening to in the two weeks they wrote their fourth album, &quot;Take Off Your Pants and Jacket&quot;, such as Fugazi and Refused. Primarily written by guitarist Tom DeLonge, the song is biographical in nature. He and bassist Mark Hoppus were growing up when their respective parents divorced. For Hoppus, he was eight years old when he was sent to live with his father. &quot;The thing you realize as you get older is that parents don’t know what the hell they’re doing and neither will you when you get to be a parent. You’ve just got to understand that people are human and they make mistakes,&quot; he said. DeLonge remembered learning of his parents&#x27; divorce when he discovered scrape marks on the driveway of their home. &quot;Right then, I knew my dad had dragged out his furniture single-handedly,&quot; he recalled. He spoke on the song&#x27;s inspiration in 2001:

Due to its tone and subject matter, it is considered one of the band&#x27;s darker songs, alongside &quot;Adam&#x27;s Song&quot;, their 2000 single revolving around suicide. Hoppus told an interviewer at the time of the album&#x27;s release that &quot;There&#x27;s always a song or two where we really try to really push ourselves [...] On this new record I think we&#x27;ve done a lot of different stuff that people wouldn&#x27;t ever expect from us. [...] On the new one, it&#x27;s &#x27;Stay Together for the Kids.&#x27;&quot; DeLonge later confirmed he had received emails from fans thanking him for the song&#x27;s message. &quot;With &quot;Stay Together&quot;, we get emails—just kid after kid after kid—saying, &#x27;I know exactly what you&#x27;re talking about! That song is about my life!&#x27;&quot; In 2002, divorce statistics were four times higher than their average just over thirty years prior, with over 50 percent of marriages ending in divorce. &quot;You look at statistics that 50 percent of parents get divorced, and you’re going to get a pretty large group of kids who are pissed off and who don’t agree with what their parents have done,&quot; said DeLonge. &quot;Stay Together&quot; was the final song completed during the recording sessions; it was created one day before the album was handed off to the mixing engineer.

==Composition==
&quot;Stay Together for the Kids&quot; is set in the time signature of common time, with a tempo of 72 beats per minute. It is composed in the key of D major with vocals spanning the tonal nodes of A3 to B5. Hoppus and DeLonge split vocals on the song, with the former handling verses and the latter singing the choruses. In the verses, the lyrics detail a marriage gone awry: &quot;Rather than fix the problems/They never solve them/It makes no sense at all.&quot; The song fades out with DeLonge singing &quot;It’s not right.&quot;

==Commercial performance==
&quot;Stay Together for the Kids&quot; was released as a single and EP with live tracks and video extras. It debuted on &quot;Billboard&quot; Modern Rock Tracks chart in the issue dated September 22, 2001 at number 36, before gradually rising to a peak of position seven in the issue dated November 24, 2001. The single spent 26 weeks on the chart as a whole, before appearing in the issue dated March 16, 2002. It also peaked at number 16 and spent five weeks on the Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart, which documents top singles that have yet to chart on the main chart, the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100. By June 2002, the song had accumulated over 80,000 spins on radio in the United States, and it received a BDS Certified Spin Award. Outside of the US, the song charted in Germany, where it reached a peak of 73.

==Reception==
&quot;Stay Together for the Kids&quot; received positive reviews from contemporary music critics. Rob Sheffield of &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; deemed the song &quot;bleak,&quot; describing it as a &quot;broken-family snapshot.&quot; Eric Aiese of &quot;Billboard&quot; wrote that the song &quot;remains compelling throughout,&quot; suggesting it could be a &quot;MacArthur Park&quot; or &quot;Hey Jude&quot; within the band’s catalogue. Slant Magazine&#x27;s Aaron Scott called it &quot;the best track on the album,&quot; writing, &quot;The surprising content about a marriage that is resisting divorce will certainly appeal to a generation of youth subjected to a massive divorce epidemic. Blink hints at something here, but resists saying anything concrete.&quot;

John J. Miller of the &quot;National Review&quot; included the song at number 17 in &quot;Rockin&#x27; the Right: The 50 Greatest Conservative Rock Songs&quot;, describing it as &quot;a eulogy for family values by an alt-rock band whose members were raised in a generation without enough of them&quot;.

William Shaw of &quot;Blender&quot; compared the song to then-popular songs by rock bands about divorce, such as Papa Roach (&quot;Broken Home&quot;), Staind (&quot;For You&quot;) and Nickelback (&quot;Too Bad&quot;), commenting, &quot;The ’90s had Generation X — have we ended up with Generation Whine?&quot; He interviewed DeLonge, who remarked in response to divorce&#x27;s effect on children, &quot;Is this a damaged generation? Yeah, I’d say so.&quot;

==Music video==
The first music video for &quot;Stay Together for the Kids&quot; was directed by Samuel Bayer, best known for his work with Metallica and Nirvana. In the clip, Blink-182 perform in a suburban home that is destroyed with a wrecking ball in a metaphor for a &quot;crumbling marriage.&quot; The video opens with a statistic, claiming that &quot;50 percent of American households are destroyed by divorce.&quot;

The band filmed the music video on September 10-11, 2001 in Los Angeles, in days preceding the 9/11 terrorist attacks. Following those events, the band and its label MCA felt the clip’s images were &quot;too evocative&quot; of the footage of the collapse of the World Trade Center. The band ended up recording a second video for this song with the same production crew, with the setting changed to an empty mansion populated by shouting teens.

The two videos were first released on &quot;The Urethra Chronicles II: Harder Faster Faster Harder&quot;, a 2002 home video on the band. The first video has since widely become available online on sites like YouTube.

==Cover versions==
The song is played on acoustic guitar by a soldier in the War in Afghanistan near the end of the film &quot;Restrepo&quot; (2010).

==Track listing==

==Charts==
==References==

===Footnotes===
===Sources===

==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2709312" start="6" end="32" title="Stay Together for the Kids" label="Stay Together for the Kids"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="70" end="74" title="rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q482477" start="80" end="89" title="Blink-182" label="Blink-182"/>
<link wikidata="Q475517" start="127" end="157" title="Take Off Your Pants and Jacket" label="Take Off Your Pants and Jacket"/>
<link wikidata="Q4270" start="301" end="312" title="Tom DeLonge" label="Tom DeLonge"/>
<link wikidata="Q93190" start="356" end="363" title="divorce" label="divorce"/>
<link wikidata="Q193977" start="413" end="424" title="music video" label="music video"/>
<link wikidata="Q512419" start="438" end="450" title="Samuel Bayer" label="Samuel Bayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q331472" start="511" end="524" title="wrecking ball" label="wrecking ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="587" end="599" title="9/11 attacks" label="9/11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q62179" start="673" end="707" title="collapse of the World Trade Center" label="collapse of the World Trade Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025849" start="914" end="932" title="Modern Rock Tracks" label="Modern Rock Tracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q277865" start="1256" end="1262" title="Fugazi" label="Fugazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358175" start="1267" end="1274" title="Refused (band)" label="Refused"/>
<link wikidata="Q4270" start="1307" end="1318" title="Tom DeLonge" label="Tom DeLonge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4271" start="1371" end="1382" title="Mark Hoppus" label="Mark Hoppus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630356" start="2131" end="2147" title="Adam&amp;#x27;s Song" label="Adam&amp;#x27;s Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q10737" start="2190" end="2197" title="suicide" label="suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q6884071" start="3354" end="3369" title="mixing engineer" label="mixing engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q155234" start="3441" end="3455" title="time signature" label="time signature"/>
<link wikidata="Q189214" start="3491" end="3507" title="beats per minute" label="beats per minute"/>
<link wikidata="Q534932" start="3531" end="3534" title="key (music)" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124006" start="3538" end="3545" title="D major" label="D major"/>
<link wikidata="Q744346" start="3586" end="3588" title="A (musical note)" label="A3"/>
<link wikidata="Q726738" start="3592" end="3594" title="B (musical note)" label="B5"/>
<link wikidata="Q848346" start="3863" end="3872" title="Fade (audio engineering)" label="fades out"/>
<link wikidata="Q169930" start="4018" end="4020" title="Extended play" label="EP"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="4076" end="4085" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025849" start="4092" end="4110" title="Modern Rock Tracks" label="Modern Rock Tracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q570827" start="4418" end="4448" title="Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles" label="Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="4530" end="4559" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="4732" end="4739" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q3486861" start="4885" end="4898" title="Rob Sheffield" label="Rob Sheffield"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="4908" end="4921" title="Rolling Stone (magazine)" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="5038" end="5047" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357239" start="5148" end="5162" title="MacArthur Park (song)" label="MacArthur Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q607742" start="5178" end="5186" title="Hey Jude" label="Hey Jude"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086297" start="5222" end="5236" title="Slant Magazine" label="Slant Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699649" start="5580" end="5595" title="National Review" label="National Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q804471" start="5878" end="5885" title="Blender (magazine)" label="Blender"/>
<link wikidata="Q254371" start="5969" end="5979" title="Papa Roach" label="Papa Roach"/>
<link wikidata="Q584621" start="5987" end="5998" title="Broken Home (Papa Roach song)" label="Broken Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q266496" start="6007" end="6013" title="Staind" label="Staind"/>
<link wikidata="Q5466950" start="6021" end="6028" title="For You (Staind song)" label="For You"/>
<link wikidata="Q483802" start="6040" end="6050" title="Nickelback" label="Nickelback"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577086" start="6058" end="6065" title="Too Bad" label="Too Bad"/>
<link wikidata="Q379689" start="6105" end="6117" title="Generation X" label="Generation X"/>
<link wikidata="Q193977" start="6340" end="6351" title="music video" label="music video"/>
<link wikidata="Q512419" start="6411" end="6423" title="Samuel Bayer" label="Samuel Bayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q15920" start="6454" end="6463" title="Metallica" label="Metallica"/>
<link wikidata="Q11649" start="6468" end="6475" title="Nirvana (band)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q331472" start="6552" end="6565" title="wrecking ball" label="wrecking ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="6799" end="6810" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="6834" end="6856" title="9/11 terrorist attacks" label="9/11 terrorist attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338889" start="6905" end="6908" title="MCA Records" label="MCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q62179" start="6985" end="7019" title="collapse of the World Trade Center" label="collapse of the World Trade Center"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7228" end="7282" title="The Urethra Chronicles II: Harder Faster Faster Harder" label="The Urethra Chronicles II: Harder Faster Faster Harder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2561317" start="7297" end="7307" title="home video" label="home video"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="7392" end="7399" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q182865" start="7479" end="7497" title="War in Afghanistan (2001–present)" label="War in Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394447" start="7529" end="7537" title="Restrepo (film)" label="Restrepo"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143279" wikidata="Q10315" url="?curid=143279" title="Real Sociedad">
<text>Real Sociedad de Fútbol, more commonly referred to as Real Sociedad ( ; &quot;Royal Society&quot;) in English, and Erreala or Reala in Basque, is a Spanish professional sports club in the city of Donostia-San Sebastián, Basque Country, founded on 7 September 1909. It plays its home matches at the Anoeta Stadium.

Real Sociedad won the Liga title in 1980–81 and 1981–82, and finished runner-up in 1979–80, 1987–88, and 2002–03. The club has also won the Copa del Rey three times, in 1909, 1987, and 2020. It contests the Basque derby against rivals Athletic Bilbao. Real Sociedad was a founding member of La Liga in 1929; its longest spell in the top flight was for 40 seasons, from 1967 to 2007.

Traditionally the club followed a policy (similar to that of its rival Athletic) of signing only Basque players, before signing Republic of Ireland forward John Aldridge in 1989. While a strong Basque contingent has been retained among its players, nowadays both non-Basque Spaniards and foreign players are represented at the club. Its youth academy subsequent to the all-Basque era has still been very successful in developing internationally renowned players, such as World Cup winners Xabi Alonso and Antoine Griezmann.

The club has competed in the UEFA Champions League four times. Their first appearance was in the 1981–82 edition, where the club lost in the first round against CSKA Sofia. In the following season, the team reached the semifinals, only to lose narrowly against Hamburger SV. In the 2003–04 season, the club progressed to the round of 16 before losing to Lyon. In the 2013–14 season, the team finished 4th place in the group stage. Their most recent appearance was in the 2023-24 season, where they progressed to the round of 16, losing 4–1 over two legs to PSG.

Aside from football (including a women&#x27;s team), Real Sociedad also has several sections in athletics, including track and field, field hockey, and basque pelota.

==History==

===Early history===
Football was introduced to San Sebastián in the early 1900s by students and workers returning from Britain. In 1904, they formed San Sebastián Recreation Club, the first football club in the city, and in 1905 the club competed in the Copa del Rey. In 1907, a conflict between the club&#x27;s members caused the team to split with several players (such as Alfonso and Miguel Sena and Domingo Arrillaga) leaving to create a new team in 1908, the San Sebastian Football Club. This team applied to enter the 1909 Copa del Rey, but complications over registration permits saw them compete as Club Ciclista de San Sebastián. This team convincingly defeated the powerful Athletic Club 4–2 in the quarter-finals and then beat Club Español de Madrid 3–1 in the final. A notable figure of this team was George McGuinness, who netted 6 goals in the tournament including the opener in the final.

A few months after this victory, the players who had won the tournament founded the Sociedad de Futbol on 7 September 1909. Sociedad applied to enter the 1910 Copa del Rey, but once again had to compete under a different name, Vasconia de San Sebastián, and once again they reached the final (UECF), where they were beaten by Athletic (0–1). In the same year, King Alfonso XIII – who used San Sebastián as his summer capital – gave the club his patronage, where it subsequently became known as Real Sociedad de Fútbol. The first final the club played as &quot;Real Sociedad&quot; was in 1913, where FC Barcelona needed three games to beat them. After a 15-year hiatus, Sociedad reached the 1928 final, which was remarkably similar to their previous one since Barcelona again needed three games to beat them at El Sardinero.
Real Sociedad was a founding member of La Liga in 1929. The team came fourth with Francisco &quot;Paco&quot; Bienzobas finishing as the top scorer. The team&#x27;s name was changed to &quot;Donostia Club de Futbol&quot; in 1931 with the advent of the Second Spanish Republic, but changed back to Real Sociedad after the Spanish Civil War in 1939. The team has generally fluctuated between the &quot;Primera&quot; and &quot;Segunda&quot; divisions, in one period (during the 1940s) managing to be relegated and promoted seven times. Around that time, the sculptor Eduardo Chillida was the team&#x27;s goalkeeper until injury put a stop to his football career.

===The success of the 1980s===
The team finished as runners-up in La Liga for the first time in 1979–80, gaining 52 points compared to Real Madrid&#x27;s 53, and 13 points clear of third-placed Sporting de Gijón. Real Sociedad won its first ever Primera División title at the end of the 1980–81 season, denying Real Madrid a fourth-consecutive title because although both clubs earned 45 points and Madrid had the superior goal difference Sociedad were better in the head-to-heads. This qualified La Real for the 1981–82 European Cup, where they were eliminated in the first round by CSKA Sofia of Bulgaria, who hosted and won the first leg 1–0. The second leg in Spain was a 0–0 draw.
The club retained the Liga title the following season, beating Barcelona by 47 points to 45, under the management of Alberto Ormaetxea. Forward Jesús María Satrústegui was the club&#x27;s top scorer for 1980–81 with 16 goals. He scored 13 the following season as Pedro Uralde was the top scorer, with 14. The club reached the semi-finals of the 1982–83 European Cup, defeating Víkingur of Iceland, Celtic and Sporting Clube de Portugal before losing 3–2 on aggregate to eventual champions Hamburger SV. Real Sociedad won the Supercopa de España at the beginning of the 1982–83 season, overturning a 1–0 defeat in the first leg to defeat Real Madrid 4–1 on aggregate.

On 11 March 1987, Real Sociedad set a record for most goals in a quarter-final of the Copa del Rey after defeating Mallorca 10–1. In the semi-finals of the same tournament, it beat its Basque rivals Athletic Bilbao 1–0 over two legs. On 27 June 1987, Real Sociedad won its first Copa del Rey title, defeating Atlético Madrid 4–2 on penalties after drawing 2–2. The match was held at La Romareda in Zaragoza, Aragon. In the following season&#x27;s Copa del Rey, Real Sociedad defeated Atlético Madrid again after defeating them in the quarter-finals. It then beat Real Madrid 5–0 on aggregate in the semi-finals, but lost 1–0 in the final to Barcelona at Real Madrid&#x27;s Santiago Bernabéu Stadium on 30 March 1988. In the 1987–88 La Liga, Real Sociedad were runners-up for the first time since its lost its title – with 51 points to Real Madrid&#x27;s 62 – and three points clear of third-placed Atlético Madrid.
For many years, Real Sociedad followed the practice of its Basque rivals Athletic Bilbao of signing only Basque players. It abandoned the policy in 1989 when it signed Irish international John Aldridge from Liverpool. Aldridge scored 16 goals in his first season to be the club&#x27;s top scorer, and fourth-highest scorer of the entire league as La Real finished fifth. In 1990, La Real signed an English striker, Dalian Atkinson of Sheffield Wednesday, who therefore became the club&#x27;s first black player. He scored 12 goals in his first season, second at the club only to Aldridge&#x27;s 17. That was Aldridge&#x27;s final season at La Real, and he left to play in the English 2nd tier at Tranmere Rovers, while Atkinson left to join top-flight Aston Villa.

In 1997–98, Real Sociedad finished third, its best finish since being runners-up for the first time since 1988. Its total of 63 points was 11 less than champions Barcelona but just two less than runners-up Athletic Bilbao. The club finished higher in the table than Real Madrid due to a superior goal differential. Yugoslav striker Darko Kovačević scored 17 times that season, making him the fourth-highest scorer in the league. The third-place finish qualified La Real for the 1998–99 UEFA Cup, where it beat Sparta Prague and Dynamo Moscow before being knocked out in the third round by Atlético Madrid.

===21st century===
After finishing in 13th position for three consecutive seasons, Real Sociedad were runners-up in the 2002–03 La Liga, its best finish since 1988. Its tally of 76 points was only beaten by Real Madrid&#x27;s 78, and La Real had four more points than third-placed Deportivo de La Coruña. The club was managed by Frenchman Raynald Denoueix. La Real&#x27;s strikeforce combined the Turkish striker Nihat Kahveci with Yugoslav international Darko Kovačević. The two were third and fourth top scorer in the league respectively, with 23 and 20 goals. The team also included Dutch international goalkeeper Sander Westerveld and Xabi Alonso in midfield. Alonso was the winner of the 2003 Don Balón award for the best Spanish player in the league, while Kahveci was voted the best foreign player and Denoueix the best manager.

Key moments from that season came when Real Sociedad beat Real Madrid in April 4–2 at the Anoeta Stadium. It kept first place in La Liga until the penultimate game of 38, when it lost 3–2 away to Celta de Vigo, while Real Madrid beat Atlético Madrid 4–0. This meant that Real Madrid secured first place two points clear of Real Sociedad for the last game, where La Real defeated Atlético Madrid 3–0 and Real Madrid beat Athletic Bilbao to win the title. The team qualified directly for the 2003–04 UEFA Champions League after finishing second; it was unbeaten at home, scored 71 goals in total and lost just six times.

Real Sociedad were placed in Group D of the 2003–04 Champions League with Juventus, Galatasaray and Olympiacos. The team won two matches, drew three and lost away to Juventus to finish second and advance to the last 16. It was knocked out after losing 1–0 in both games against Lyon, hosting the first game. The 2003–04 La Liga saw a dramatic decline in the club&#x27;s performance, slipping to 15th out of 20. Their tally of 46 points was only five more than relegated Real Valladolid.

On 9 September 2006, Real Sociedad played its 2,000th La Liga match. That same season, they were relegated from La Liga, finishing 19th and ended a 40-year streak there, their longest ever stay in the top flight. On 9 July 2007, former Welsh international and Fulham manager Chris Coleman was appointed as the new club coach, on the recommendation of former Real Sociedad manager John Toshack, an important board member at the club. Coleman resigned on 16 January 2008.
In the 2012–13 season, Real Sociedad finished in fourth place and qualified for the 2013–14 Champions League for the first time since the 2003–04 season, but in the play-offs, this time. In the play-offs, the club defeated Lyon 2–0 in both legs to qualify for the group stage. Real Sociedad, however, did not make it out of the group, earning just one point.

On 10 November 2014, Real Sociedad announced David Moyes as the chosen manager to replace Jagoba Arrasate, who was sacked following a series of poor results. Moyes became the sixth British manager in the club&#x27;s history, however he was sacked 9 November 2015 after falling to 16th in La Liga. Later that day, he was replaced by Eusebio Sacristán.

Sacristán signed an initial contract until 30 June 2017. His contract was renewed in 2017, but Sacristán was ultimately dismissed after a string of poor performances left that 15th in the table and drawn into a relegation battle. Aiser Garitano became the next head coach, having arrived from Leganés. He lasted only seven months before being dismissed, with the team also in 15th place, with only five wins in his seventeen league matches.

Garitano was succeeded by reserve team manager and local boy Imanol Alguacil on 26 December 2018. During his tenure, he oversaw an attacking style of play combining pace, precision, power, and exuberance.

In 2008, at Real Sociedad&#x27;s annual general meeting, Iñaki Badiola, at the time the club&#x27;s president, accused the preceding club management of buying doping substances. In 2013 Badiola gave an extended interview in which he accused José Luis Astiazarán&#x27;s presidency of paying up to €300,000 to Eufemiano Fuentes to dope players on the team between 2001 and 2007. José Luis Astiazarán, who was Real Sociedad&#x27;s president between 2001 and 2005, denied the claims.

Real Sociedad won its third Copa del Rey on 3 April 2021, the nearly year-long delayed 2020 Copa del Rey Final due to COVID-19, in a Basque derby against Athletic Bilbao. In the 2022–23 season, the club finished fourth in La Liga to qualify to the next season&#x27;s Champions League for the first time in ten years.

== Stadium and facility ==
Real Sociedad plays home fixtures in the Anoeta Stadium. The venue is owned by the San Sebastián Municipal Council.

==Name and colours==
The club&#x27;s name means &quot;Royal Society of Football&quot; in Spanish. The club&#x27;s name was changed to &quot;Donostia Club de Futbol&quot; in 1931 with the advent of the Second Spanish Republic, but changed back to Real Sociedad after the Spanish Civil War in 1939. The club is nicknamed in Basque as Erreala or the txuri-urdin (&quot;white-blue&quot; due to the colours of their kit). The colours stem from the flag of San Sebastián: a blue canton on a white field.

==Fanbase==
The Spanish Centro de Investigaciones Sociológicas (Centre of Sociological Investigations) found out that of 2,473 adults interviewed in 49 provinces in 2007, 1.3% of the Spanish population have more feelings for Real Sociedad than any other club, and 1.5% have more feelings for La Real than any other club apart from their favourite.

In appreciation of the value of the supporters to the club – in the words of club president Jokin Aperribay, &quot;The fans are the soul, the nourishment and the reason for Real Sociedad&quot; – the players each wore the name of a randomly selected club member on their shirt for the match against Sevilla in December 2012.

==Honours==
===Domestic===
====League====
* La Liga
** Winners (2): 1980–81, 1981–82
* Segunda División
** Winners (3): 1948–49, 1966–67, 2009–10

====Cup====
* Copa del Rey
** Winners (3): 1909, 1986–87, 2019–20
* Supercopa de España
** Winners (1): 1982

====Regional competition====
* Gipuzkoa Championship
** Winners (6): 1918–19, 1922–23, 1924–25, 1926–27, 1928–29, 1932–33

===Notes===
==Players==
===Current squad===









===Reserve team===






===Out on loan===



==Seasons==

===Recent seasons===

===Season to season===

*&quot;As Real Sociedad de Fútbol&quot;

*78 seasons in &quot;La Liga&quot;
*16 seasons in &quot;Segunda División&quot;

==History in European competitions==
===Overall record===
:&quot;Accurate as of 14 February 2024&quot;

==Coaching staff==

==Coaches==

==Player statistics==

===Most appearances===

===Top scorers===

==Notable former players==
Note: this list includes players that have appeared in at least 100 league games or have reached international status.
== Presidents ==
==See also==
* Real Sociedad B – 1st reserve team in Segunda División 
*Real Sociedad C – 2nd reserve team in &quot;Tercera División&quot;
*Real Sociedad cantera – youth system up to 19 years, in leagues including &quot;División de Honor Juvenil&quot;
*Real Sociedad Femenino – women&#x27;s team in the &quot;Primera División Femenino&quot;

==References==
==External links==
* Real Sociedad at La Liga 
* Real Sociedad at UEFA </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q10315" start="0" end="23" title="Real Sociedad" label="Real Sociedad de Fútbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q10315" start="54" end="67" title="Real Sociedad" label="Real Sociedad"/>
<link wikidata="Q10315" start="115" end="122" title="Real Sociedad" label="Erreala"/>
<link wikidata="Q10315" start="126" end="131" title="Real Sociedad" label="Reala"/>
<link wikidata="Q8752" start="135" end="141" title="Basque language" label="Basque"/>
<link wikidata="Q847017" start="169" end="180" title="sports club" label="sports club"/>
<link wikidata="Q10313" start="196" end="218" title="San Sebastián" label="Donostia-San Sebastián"/>
<link wikidata="Q3995" start="220" end="234" title="Basque Country (autonomous community)" label="Basque Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q917845" start="298" end="312" title="Anoeta Stadium" label="Anoeta Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q280174" start="351" end="358" title="1980–81 La Liga" label="1980–81"/>
<link wikidata="Q720621" start="363" end="370" title="1981–82 La Liga" label="1981–82"/>
<link wikidata="Q838354" start="398" end="405" title="1979–80 La Liga" label="1979–80"/>
<link wikidata="Q720590" start="407" end="414" title="1987–88 La Liga" label="1987–88"/>
<link wikidata="Q603403" start="420" end="427" title="2002–03 La Liga" label="2002–03"/>
<link wikidata="Q483794" start="455" end="467" title="Copa del Rey" label="Copa del Rey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130660" start="484" end="488" title="1909 Copa del Rey" label="1909"/>
<link wikidata="Q963371" start="490" end="494" title="1986–87 Copa del Rey" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q56378370" start="500" end="504" title="2019–20 Copa del Rey" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023610" start="522" end="534" title="Basque derby" label="Basque derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q8687" start="550" end="565" title="Athletic Bilbao" label="Athletic Bilbao"/>
<link wikidata="Q324867" start="606" end="613" title="La Liga" label="La Liga"/>
<link wikidata="Q28134904" start="741" end="778" title="Athletic Bilbao signing policy" label="similar to that of its rival Athletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q163547" start="827" end="846" title="Republic of Ireland national football team" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q342826" start="855" end="868" title="John Aldridge" label="John Aldridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q28404801" start="1036" end="1049" title="Real Sociedad cantera" label="youth academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q208104" start="1188" end="1199" title="Xabi Alonso" label="Xabi Alonso"/>
<link wikidata="Q455462" start="1204" end="1221" title="Antoine Griezmann" label="Antoine Griezmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="1253" end="1274" title="UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q642743" start="1321" end="1336" title="1981–82 European Cup" label="1981–82 edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q136433" start="1385" end="1395" title="CSKA Sofia" label="CSKA Sofia"/>
<link wikidata="Q51974" start="1485" end="1497" title="Hamburger SV" label="Hamburger SV"/>
<link wikidata="Q244467" start="1506" end="1513" title="2003–04 UEFA Champions League" label="2003–04"/>
<link wikidata="Q704" start="1578" end="1582" title="Olympique Lyonnais" label="Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q30608" start="1591" end="1598" title="2013–14 UEFA Champions League" label="2013–14"/>
<link wikidata="Q111309338" start="1695" end="1702" title="2023-24 UEFA Champions League" label="2023-24"/>
<link wikidata="Q483020" start="1781" end="1784" title="Paris Saint-Germain" label="PSG"/>
<link wikidata="Q5549552" start="1820" end="1837" title="Real Sociedad Femenino" label="women&amp;#x27;s team"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312129" start="1904" end="1919" title="track and field" label="track and field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455" start="1921" end="1933" title="field hockey" label="field hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q212845" start="1939" end="1952" title="basque pelota" label="basque pelota"/>
<link wikidata="Q10313" start="2015" end="2028" title="San Sebastián" label="San Sebastián"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="2087" end="2094" title="United Kingdom" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6119697" start="2117" end="2146" title="San Sebastián Recreation Club" label="San Sebastián Recreation Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q483794" start="2222" end="2234" title="Copa del Rey" label="Copa del Rey"/>
<link wikidata="Q113459727" start="2343" end="2350" title="Alfonso Sena" label="Alfonso"/>
<link wikidata="Q113237065" start="2355" end="2366" title="Miguel Sena" label="Miguel Sena"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2432" end="2459" title="Club Ciclista de San Sebastián#Football section" label="San Sebastian Football Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130660" start="2492" end="2509" title="1909 Copa del Rey" label="1909 Copa del Rey"/>
<link wikidata="Q8687" start="2652" end="2665" title="Athletic Bilbao" label="Athletic Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q2180347" start="2706" end="2728" title="Club Español de Madrid" label="Club Español de Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4558999" start="2740" end="2745" title="1909 Copa del Rey Final" label="final"/>
<link wikidata="Q106193122" start="2781" end="2798" title="George McGuinness" label="George McGuinness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130669" start="3027" end="3044" title="1910 Copa del Rey" label="1910 Copa del Rey"/>
<link wikidata="Q96360251" start="3159" end="3171" title="1910 UECF Copa del Rey Final" label="final (UECF)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18363" start="3238" end="3250" title="Alfonso XIII" label="Alfonso XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912045" start="3283" end="3297" title="summer capital" label="summer capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q4559702" start="3460" end="3464" title="1913 UECF Copa del Rey Final" label="1913"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156" start="3472" end="3484" title="FC Barcelona" label="FC Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q4562231" start="3563" end="3573" title="1928 Copa del Rey Final" label="1928 final"/>
<link wikidata="Q5400177" start="3683" end="3695" title="Estadio El Sardinero (1913)" label="El Sardinero"/>
<link wikidata="Q324867" start="3736" end="3743" title="La Liga" label="La Liga"/>
<link wikidata="Q178038" start="3948" end="3971" title="Second Spanish Republic" label="Second Spanish Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="4017" end="4034" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q156736" start="4260" end="4276" title="Eduardo Chillida" label="Eduardo Chillida"/>
<link wikidata="Q838354" start="4453" end="4460" title="1979–80 La Liga" label="1979–80"/>
<link wikidata="Q8682" start="4492" end="4503" title="Real Madrid C.F." label="Real Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q12278" start="4551" end="4568" title="Sporting de Gijón" label="Sporting de Gijón"/>
<link wikidata="Q280174" start="4644" end="4658" title="1980–81 La Liga" label="1980–81 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q642743" start="4870" end="4890" title="1981–82 European Cup" label="1981–82 European Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q136433" start="4941" end="4951" title="PFC CSKA Sofia" label="CSKA Sofia"/>
<link wikidata="Q720621" start="5080" end="5096" title="1981–82 La Liga" label="following season"/>
<link wikidata="Q708768" start="5160" end="5177" title="Alberto Ormaetxea" label="Alberto Ormaetxea"/>
<link wikidata="Q562421" start="5187" end="5210" title="Jesús María Satrústegui" label="Jesús María Satrústegui"/>
<link wikidata="Q2554252" start="5306" end="5318" title="Pedro Uralde" label="Pedro Uralde"/>
<link wikidata="Q642777" start="5388" end="5408" title="1982–83 European Cup" label="1982–83 European Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140538" start="5420" end="5428" title="Knattspyrnufélagið Víkingur" label="Víkingur"/>
<link wikidata="Q19593" start="5441" end="5447" title="Celtic F.C." label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q75729" start="5452" end="5478" title="Sporting Clube de Portugal" label="Sporting Clube de Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q51974" start="5532" end="5544" title="Hamburger SV" label="Hamburger SV"/>
<link wikidata="Q485997" start="5568" end="5587" title="Supercopa de España" label="Supercopa de España"/>
<link wikidata="Q615583" start="5612" end="5626" title="1982–83 La Liga" label="1982–83 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q8835" start="5826" end="5834" title="RCD Mallorca" label="Mallorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q963371" start="5867" end="5882" title="1986–87 Copa del Rey" label="same tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023610" start="5896" end="5909" title="Basque derby" label="Basque rivals"/>
<link wikidata="Q8687" start="5910" end="5925" title="Athletic Bilbao" label="Athletic Bilbao"/>
<link wikidata="Q8701" start="6020" end="6035" title="Atlético Madrid" label="Atlético Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q17484" start="6094" end="6105" title="La Romareda" label="La Romareda"/>
<link wikidata="Q10305" start="6109" end="6117" title="Zaragoza" label="Zaragoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q4040" start="6119" end="6125" title="Aragon" label="Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156" start="6352" end="6361" title="FC Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q164027" start="6384" end="6409" title="Santiago Bernabéu Stadium" label="Santiago Bernabéu Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q720590" start="6435" end="6450" title="1987–88 La Liga" label="1987–88 La Liga"/>
<link wikidata="Q28134904" start="6718" end="6745" title="Athletic Bilbao signing policy" label="signing only Basque players"/>
<link wikidata="Q163547" start="6794" end="6813" title="Republic of Ireland national football team" label="Irish international"/>
<link wikidata="Q342826" start="6814" end="6827" title="John Aldridge" label="John Aldridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="6833" end="6842" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q494913" start="7041" end="7056" title="Dalian Atkinson" label="Dalian Atkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q19498" start="7060" end="7079" title="Sheffield Wednesday F.C." label="Sheffield Wednesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q19637" start="7322" end="7337" title="Tranmere Rovers" label="Tranmere Rovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q18711" start="7378" end="7389" title="Aston Villa F.C." label="Aston Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q223368" start="7395" end="7402" title="1997–98 La Liga" label="1997–98"/>
<link wikidata="Q313050" start="7724" end="7739" title="Darko Kovačević" label="Darko Kovačević"/>
<link wikidata="Q367810" start="7870" end="7886" title="1998–99 UEFA Cup" label="1998–99 UEFA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q193481" start="7902" end="7915" title="AC Sparta Prague" label="Sparta Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q17497" start="7920" end="7933" title="FC Dynamo Moscow" label="Dynamo Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q603403" start="8119" end="8134" title="2002–03 La Liga" label="2002–03 La Liga"/>
<link wikidata="Q8760" start="8280" end="8302" title="Deportivo de La Coruña" label="Deportivo de La Coruña"/>
<link wikidata="Q784889" start="8338" end="8354" title="Raynald Denoueix" label="Raynald Denoueix"/>
<link wikidata="Q284359" start="8412" end="8425" title="Nihat Kahveci" label="Nihat Kahveci"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131732" start="8431" end="8453" title="Serbia and Montenegro national football team" label="Yugoslav international"/>
<link wikidata="Q313050" start="8454" end="8469" title="Darko Kovačević" label="Darko Kovačević"/>
<link wikidata="Q47050" start="8585" end="8604" title="Netherlands national football team" label="Dutch international"/>
<link wikidata="Q342572" start="8616" end="8633" title="Sander Westerveld" label="Sander Westerveld"/>
<link wikidata="Q208104" start="8638" end="8649" title="Xabi Alonso" label="Xabi Alonso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238923" start="8697" end="8706" title="Don Balón" label="Don Balón"/>
<link wikidata="Q917845" start="8926" end="8940" title="Anoeta Stadium" label="Anoeta Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q8749" start="9032" end="9045" title="Celta de Vigo" label="Celta de Vigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q244467" start="9326" end="9355" title="2003–04 UEFA Champions League" label="2003–04 UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422" start="9530" end="9538" title="Juventus FC" label="Juventus"/>
<link wikidata="Q495299" start="9540" end="9551" title="Galatasaray S.K. (football)" label="Galatasaray"/>
<link wikidata="Q19628" start="9556" end="9566" title="Olympiacos F.C." label="Olympiacos"/>
<link wikidata="Q704" start="9734" end="9738" title="Olympique Lyonnais" label="Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q697226" start="9768" end="9783" title="2003–04 La Liga" label="2003–04 La Liga"/>
<link wikidata="Q10319" start="9926" end="9941" title="Real Valladolid" label="Real Valladolid"/>
<link wikidata="Q18708" start="10204" end="10210" title="Fulham F.C." label="Fulham"/>
<link wikidata="Q381769" start="10219" end="10232" title="Chris Coleman (footballer)" label="Chris Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q342989" start="10324" end="10336" title="John Toshack" label="John Toshack"/>
<link wikidata="Q720018" start="10421" end="10435" title="2012–13 La Liga" label="2012–13 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q30608" start="10498" end="10522" title="2013–14 UEFA Champions League" label="2013–14 Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q297252" start="10819" end="10830" title="David Moyes" label="David Moyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q13422032" start="10864" end="10879" title="Jagoba Arrasate" label="Jagoba Arrasate"/>
<link wikidata="Q366816" start="11106" end="11123" title="Eusebio Sacristán" label="Eusebio Sacristán"/>
<link wikidata="Q4806891" start="11356" end="11370" title="Asier Garitano" label="Aiser Garitano"/>
<link wikidata="Q856119" start="11419" end="11426" title="CD Leganés" label="Leganés"/>
<link wikidata="Q9008053" start="11629" end="11644" title="Imanol Alguacil" label="Imanol Alguacil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323651" start="12015" end="12035" title="José Luis Astiazarán" label="José Luis Astiazarán"/>
<link wikidata="Q525061" start="12082" end="12099" title="Eufemiano Fuentes" label="Eufemiano Fuentes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323651" start="12151" end="12171" title="José Luis Astiazarán" label="José Luis Astiazarán"/>
<link wikidata="Q78147855" start="12342" end="12365" title="2020 Copa del Rey Final" label="2020 Copa del Rey Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023610" start="12388" end="12400" title="Basque derby" label="Basque derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q111134893" start="12433" end="12440" title="2022–23 La Liga" label="2022–23"/>
<link wikidata="Q111309338" start="12522" end="12538" title="2023–24 UEFA Champions League" label="Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2651835" start="12683" end="12714" title="City Council of San Sebastián" label="San Sebastián Municipal Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="12806" end="12813" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q178038" start="12918" end="12941" title="Second Spanish Republic" label="Second Spanish Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="12987" end="13004" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8752" start="13039" end="13045" title="Basque language" label="Basque"/>
<link wikidata="Q10329" start="13863" end="13870" title="Sevilla FC" label="Sevilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q324867" start="13934" end="13941" title="La Liga" label="La Liga"/>
<link wikidata="Q280174" start="13958" end="13965" title="1980–81 La Liga" label="1980–81"/>
<link wikidata="Q720621" start="13967" end="13974" title="1981–82 La Liga" label="1981–82"/>
<link wikidata="Q35615" start="13977" end="13993" title="Segunda División" label="Segunda División"/>
<link wikidata="Q843462" start="14010" end="14017" title="1948–49 Segunda División" label="1948–49"/>
<link wikidata="Q376488" start="14019" end="14026" title="1966–67 Segunda División" label="1966–67"/>
<link wikidata="Q14855345" start="14028" end="14035" title="2009–10 Segunda División" label="2009–10"/>
<link wikidata="Q483794" start="14051" end="14063" title="Copa del Rey" label="Copa del Rey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130660" start="14080" end="14084" title="Copa del Rey 1909" label="1909"/>
<link wikidata="Q963371" start="14086" end="14093" title="1986–87 Copa del Rey" label="1986–87"/>
<link wikidata="Q56378370" start="14095" end="14102" title="2019–20 Copa del Rey" label="2019–20"/>
<link wikidata="Q485997" start="14105" end="14124" title="Supercopa de España" label="Supercopa de España"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476341" start="14141" end="14145" title="1982 Supercopa de España" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q5744492" start="14178" end="14199" title="Gipuzkoa Championship" label="Gipuzkoa Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q324867" start="14490" end="14497" title="La Liga" label="La Liga"/>
<link wikidata="Q35615" start="14525" end="14541" title="Segunda División" label="Segunda División"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067750" start="14930" end="14945" title="Real Sociedad B" label="Real Sociedad B"/>
<link wikidata="Q2412834" start="14952" end="14964" title="reserve team" label="reserve team"/>
<link wikidata="Q35615" start="14968" end="14984" title="Segunda División" label="Segunda División"/>
<link wikidata="Q8246700" start="14987" end="15002" title="Real Sociedad C" label="Real Sociedad C"/>
<link wikidata="Q749736" start="15031" end="15047" title="Tercera División" label="Tercera División"/>
<link wikidata="Q28404801" start="15055" end="15076" title="Real Sociedad cantera" label="Real Sociedad cantera"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119268" start="15079" end="15091" title="youth system" label="youth system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023337" start="15135" end="15160" title="División de Honor Juvenil de Fútbol" label="División de Honor Juvenil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5549552" start="15168" end="15190" title="Real Sociedad Femenino" label="Real Sociedad Femenino"/>
<link wikidata="Q606060" start="15193" end="15210" title="Women&amp;#x27;s association football" label="women&amp;#x27;s team"/>
<link wikidata="Q40068" start="15224" end="15249" title="Primera División (women)" label="Primera División Femenino"/>
<link wikidata="Q324867" start="15310" end="15317" title="La Liga" label="La Liga"/>
<link wikidata="Q35572" start="15338" end="15342" title="UEFA" label="UEFA"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143281" wikidata="Q315000" url="?curid=143281" title="Jean Froissart">
<text>Jean Froissart (Old and Middle French: &quot;&quot;; sometimes known as John Froissart in English; – ) was a French-speaking medieval author and court historian from the Low Countries who wrote several works, including &quot;Chronicles&quot; and &quot;Meliador&quot;, a long Arthurian romance, and a large body of poetry, both short lyrical forms as well as longer narrative poems. For centuries, Froissart&#x27;s &quot;Chronicles&quot; have been recognised as the chief expression of the chivalric revival of the 14th-century kingdoms of England, France and Scotland. His history is also an important source for the first half of the Hundred Years&#x27; War.

==Life==

What little is known of Froissart&#x27;s life comes mainly from his historical writings and from archival sources which mention him in the service of aristocrats or receiving gifts from them. Although his poems have also been used in the past to reconstruct aspects of his biography, this approach is in fact flawed, as the &#x27;I&#x27; persona which appears in many of the poems should not be construed as a reliable reference to the historical author. This is why de Looze has characterised these works as &#x27;pseudo-autobiographical&#x27;.

Froissart came from Valenciennes in the County of Hainaut, situated in the western tip of the Holy Roman Empire, bordering France. Earlier scholars have suggested that his father was a painter of armorial bearings, but there is actually little evidence for this. Other suggestions include that he began working as a merchant but soon gave that up to become a cleric. For this conclusion there is also no real evidence, as the poems which have been cited to support these interpretations are not really autobiographical.

By about age 24, Froissart left Hainault and entered the service of Philippa of Hainault, queen consort of Edward III of England, in 1361 or 1362. This service, which would have lasted until the queen&#x27;s death in 1369, has often been presented as including a position of court poet and/or official historiographer. Based on surviving archives of the English court, Croenen has concluded instead that this service did not entail an official position at court, and probably was more a literary construction, in which a courtly poet dedicated poems to his &#x27;lady&#x27; and in return received occasional gifts as remuneration.

Froissart took a serious approach to his work. He traveled in England, Scotland, Wales, France, Flanders and Spain gathering material and first-hand accounts for his &quot;Chronicles&quot;. He traveled with Lionel, Duke of Clarence, to Milan to attend and chronicle the duke&#x27;s wedding to Violante, the daughter of Galeazzo Visconti. At this wedding, two other significant writers of the Middle Ages were present, Chaucer and Petrarch.

After the death of Queen Philippa, he enjoyed the patronage of Joanna, Duchess of Brabant among various others. He received rewards – including the benefice of Estinnes, a village near Binche, and later a canonry of Chimay – sufficient to finance further travels, which provided additional material for his work. He returned to England in 1395 but seemed disappointed by changes that he viewed as the end of chivalry. The date and circumstances of his death are unknown but St. Monegunda of Chimay in Hainaut might be the final resting place for his remains, although still unverified.

==Legacy==

Much more than his poetry, Froissart&#x27;s fame is due to his &quot;Chronicles&quot;. The text of his &quot;Chronicles&quot; is preserved in more than 100 illuminated manuscripts, illustrated by a variety of miniaturists. One of the most lavishly illuminated copies was commissioned by Louis de Gruuthuse, a Flemish nobleman, in the 1470s. The four volumes of this copy (BNF, Fr 2643; BNF, Fr 2644; BNF, Fr 2645; BNF, Fr 2646) contain 112 miniatures painted by well-known Brugeois artists of the day, among them Loiset Lyédet, to whom the miniatures in the first two volumes are attributed. Froissart is thought to have been one of the first to mention the use of the verge and foliot, or verge escapement in European clockworks, by 1368.

The English composer Edward Elgar wrote an overture titled &quot;Froissart&quot;, inspired by the &quot;Chronicles&quot;.

==Works==
*&quot;Chronicles&quot;
*&quot;L&#x27;Horloge amoureux&quot;
*&quot;Méliador&quot;

==References==
==Bibliography==
* Peter Ainsworth, &quot;Froissart, Jean&quot;, in Graeme Dunphy, &quot;Encyclopedia of the Medieval Chronicle&quot;, Leiden, Brill, 2010, pp. 642–645 ().
* . This contains a lengthy discussion of Froissart&#x27;s life and works as understood at the time, and may contain material that could be added to this article.
* Cristian Bratu, « Je, auteur de ce livre »: L’affirmation de soi chez les historiens, de l’Antiquité à la fin du Moyen Âge. Later Medieval Europe Series (vol. 20). Leiden: Brill, 2019 ().
* Cristian Bratu, &quot;&quot;Je, aucteur de ce livre&quot;: Authorial Persona and Authority in French Medieval Histories and Chronicles.&quot; In &quot;Authorities in the Middle Ages. Influence, Legitimacy and Power in Medieval Society&quot;. Sini Kangas, Mia Korpiola, and Tuija Ainonen, eds. (Berlin/New York: De Gruyter, 2013): 183–204.
* Cristian Bratu, &quot;De la grande Histoire à l’histoire personnelle: l’émergence de l’écriture autobiographique chez les historiens français du Moyen Age (XIIIe-XVe siècles).&quot; &quot;Mediävistik&quot; 25 (2012): 85-117.

==External links==

*
*Works at Open Library
*Bibliography Jean Froissart, compiled by Dr. Godfried Croenen, University of Liverpool.
*The Chronicles of Froissart, from Harvard Classics.
*The Online Froissart Project , by the University of Sheffield and the University of Liverpool.
*The Chronicles of Froissart Full 12 Volumes Edition online</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q315000" start="0" end="14" title="Jean Froissart" label="Jean Froissart"/>
<link wikidata="Q35222" start="16" end="19" title="Old French" label="Old"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473289" start="24" end="37" title="Middle French" label="Middle French"/>
<link wikidata="Q315000" start="72" end="86" title="Jean Froissart" label="John Froissart"/>
<link wikidata="Q201788" start="151" end="160" title="historian" label="historian"/>
<link wikidata="Q476033" start="170" end="183" title="Low Countries" label="Low Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q482" start="314" end="320" title="poetry" label="poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q12826" start="397" end="436" title="Froissart&amp;#x27;s Chronicles" label="Froissart&amp;#x27;s &amp;quot;Chronicles&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056721" start="489" end="498" title="chivalry" label="chivalric"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="539" end="546" title="Kingdom of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q70972" start="548" end="554" title="Kingdom of France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="559" end="567" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q12551" start="635" end="658" title="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q163795" start="1238" end="1250" title="Valenciennes" label="Valenciennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q309460" start="1258" end="1275" title="County of Hainaut" label="County of Hainaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="1312" end="1329" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q18336" start="1414" end="1430" title="heraldry" label="armorial bearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q215536" start="1534" end="1542" title="merchant" label="merchant"/>
<link wikidata="Q229279" start="1807" end="1827" title="Philippa of Hainault" label="Philippa of Hainault"/>
<link wikidata="Q129247" start="1846" end="1867" title="Edward III of England" label="Edward III of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="2433" end="2440" title="Kingdom of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="2442" end="2450" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="2452" end="2457" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q234" start="2467" end="2475" title="Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q313846" start="2578" end="2602" title="Lionel, Duke of Clarence" label="Lionel, Duke of Clarence"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="2607" end="2612" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1980610" start="2664" end="2672" title="Violante Visconti" label="Violante"/>
<link wikidata="Q453300" start="2690" end="2707" title="Galeazzo II Visconti" label="Galeazzo Visconti"/>
<link wikidata="Q5683" start="2789" end="2796" title="Chaucer" label="Chaucer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401" start="2801" end="2809" title="Petrarch" label="Petrarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q271908" start="2875" end="2901" title="Joanna, Duchess of Brabant" label="Joanna, Duchess of Brabant"/>
<link wikidata="Q274410" start="2960" end="2968" title="benefice" label="benefice"/>
<link wikidata="Q666446" start="2972" end="2980" title="Estinnes" label="Estinnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q95121" start="2997" end="3003" title="Binche" label="Binche"/>
<link wikidata="Q95380" start="3028" end="3034" title="Chimay" label="Chimay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056721" start="3220" end="3228" title="chivalry" label="chivalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129" start="3313" end="3320" title="Hainaut Province" label="Hainaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q48498" start="3567" end="3589" title="illuminated manuscript" label="illuminated manuscript"/>
<link wikidata="Q981450" start="3698" end="3716" title="Louis de Gruuthuse" label="Louis de Gruuthuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3287108" start="3772" end="3781" title="Froissart of Louis of Gruuthuse (BnF Fr 2643-6)" label="this copy"/>
<link wikidata="Q193563" start="3783" end="3786" title="Bibliothèque nationale de France" label="BNF"/>
<link wikidata="Q12994" start="3884" end="3892" title="Bruges" label="Brugeois"/>
<link wikidata="Q2132490" start="3924" end="3937" title="Loiset Lyédet" label="Loiset Lyédet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435427" start="4090" end="4096" title="Foliot (timepiece)" label="foliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435427" start="4101" end="4117" title="verge escapement" label="verge escapement"/>
<link wikidata="Q179631" start="4173" end="4185" title="Edward Elgar" label="Edward Elgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q674666" start="4217" end="4226" title="Froissart Overture (Elgar)" label="Froissart"/>
<link wikidata="Q12826" start="4286" end="4308" title="Froissart&amp;#x27;s Chronicles" label="&amp;quot;Chronicles&amp;quot;"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143282" wikidata="Q1408341" url="?curid=143282" title="Journey (Journey album)">
<text>Journey is the debut studio album by American rock band Journey. It was released on April 1, 1975, by Columbia Records. Unlike their later recordings, this is primarily a progressive rock album which focuses mainly on the band&#x27;s instrumental talents. It is the only album to include rhythm guitarist George Tickner among their lineup.

Journey recorded a demo album prior to the release of &quot;Journey&quot;, with the same songs in different order and with Prairie Prince as the drummer. There were additional tracks, including instrumental pieces, that did not make it to the final product, including the original title track of the demo album, &quot;Charge of the Light Brigade&quot;.

==Track listing==

==Personnel==
Journey
* Gregg Rolie – lead vocals, keyboards
* Neal Schon – lead guitar, vocals
* George Tickner – rhythm guitar
* Ross Valory – bass, piano, vocals
* Aynsley Dunbar – drums

Production
*Roy Halee – producer, engineer
* Mark Friedman – recording
* George Horn – mastering at CBS Studios, San Francisco
* Nancy Donald – art direction
* Steven Silverstein – photography
* Richard Swanson – production management

==Charts==
== See also ==
* Comet Kohoutek

==References==
== External links ==
* Journey - &quot;Journey&quot; (1975) album review by Stephen Thomas Erlewine, credits and releases at AllMusic.com
* Journey - &quot;Journey&quot; (1975) album releases &amp; credits at Discogs.com
* Journey - &quot;Journey&quot; (1975) album to be listened as stream at Play.Spotify.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="46" end="50" title="rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q464749" start="56" end="63" title="Journey (band)" label="Journey"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="102" end="118" title="Columbia Records" label="Columbia Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q49451" start="171" end="187" title="progressive rock" label="progressive rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545232" start="305" end="319" title="George Tickner" label="George Tickner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107607" start="464" end="478" title="Prairie Prince" label="Prairie Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335067" start="738" end="749" title="Gregg Rolie" label="Gregg Rolie"/>
<link wikidata="Q52954" start="765" end="774" title="keyboard instrument" label="keyboards"/>
<link wikidata="Q389242" start="777" end="787" title="Neal Schon" label="Neal Schon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545232" start="812" end="826" title="George Tickner" label="George Tickner"/>
<link wikidata="Q301874" start="845" end="856" title="Ross Valory" label="Ross Valory"/>
<link wikidata="Q516251" start="881" end="895" title="Aynsley Dunbar" label="Aynsley Dunbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5783581" start="917" end="926" title="Roy Halee" label="Roy Halee"/>
<link wikidata="Q31428" start="1169" end="1183" title="Comet Kohoutek" label="Comet Kohoutek"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="1325" end="1337" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q504063" start="1409" end="1420" title="Discogs" label="Discogs.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q689141" start="1494" end="1510" title="Spotify" label="Play.Spotify.com"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143283" wikidata="Q333398" url="?curid=143283" title="John Vanbrugh">
<text>Sir John Vanbrugh (; 24 January 1664 (baptised) – 26 March 1726) was an English architect, dramatist and herald, perhaps best known as the designer of Blenheim Palace and Castle Howard. He wrote two argumentative and outspoken Restoration comedies, &quot;The Relapse&quot; (1696) and &quot;The Provoked Wife&quot; (1697), which have become enduring stage favourites but originally occasioned much controversy. He was knighted in 1714.

Vanbrugh was in many senses a radical throughout his life. As a young man and a committed Whig, he was part of the scheme to overthrow James II and put William III on the throne. He was imprisoned by the French as a political prisoner. In his career as a playwright, he offended many sections of Restoration and 18th century society, not only by the sexual explicitness of his plays, but also by their messages in defence of women&#x27;s rights in marriage. He was attacked on both counts, and was one of the prime targets of Jeremy Collier&#x27;s &quot;Short View of the Immorality and Profaneness of the English Stage&quot;.

In his architectural career, he created what came to be known as English Baroque. His architectural work was as bold and daring as his early political activism and marriage-themed plays, and jarred conservative opinions on the subject.

==Early life and background==
Born in London and baptised on 24 January 1664, Vanbrugh was the fourth child (of 19), and eldest surviving son, of Giles Vanbrugh, a London cloth-merchant of Flemish descent (as evident in the name, contracted from &quot;Van Brugh&quot;) and Protestant background, and his wife Elizabeth, widow of Thomas Barker (by whom Vanbrugh&#x27;s mother had the first of her twenty children, Vanbrugh&#x27;s elder half-sister, Elizabeth), and daughter of Sir Dudley Carleton, of Imber Court, Thames Ditton, Surrey. He grew up in Chester, where his family had been driven by either the major outbreak of the plague in London in 1665, or the Great Fire of 1666. It is possible that he attended The King&#x27;s School in Chester, though no records of his being a scholar there survive. Another candidate would have been the school at Ashby-de-la-Zouch, founded by Henry Hastings, 3rd Earl of Huntingdon. It was also not uncommon for boys to be sent to study at school away from home, or with a tutor.
Architectural historian Kerry Downes is sceptical of earlier historians&#x27; claims of a lower middle-class background, and writes that a 19th-century suggestion that Giles Vanbrugh was a sugar-baker has been misunderstood. &quot;Sugar-baker&quot; implies wealth, as the term refers not to a maker of sweets but to the owner of a sugar house, a factory for the refining of raw sugar from Barbados. Sugar refining would normally have been combined with sugar trading, which was a lucrative business. Downes&#x27; example of one sugar baker&#x27;s house in Liverpool, estimated to bring in £40,000 a year in trade from Barbados, throws a new light on Vanbrugh&#x27;s social background, one rather different from the picture of a backstreet Chester sweetshop as painted by Leigh Hunt in 1840 and reflected in many later accounts.

To dispel the myth of Vanbrugh&#x27;s humble origins, Downes took pains to explore Vanbrugh&#x27;s background, closely examining the family and connexions of each of his four grandparents: Vanbrugh, Jacobs or Jacobson, Carleton, and Croft, summing up the characteristics of each line and concluding that, far from being of lower middle class origins, Vanbrugh was descended from Anglo-Flemish or Netherlandish Protestant merchants who settled in London in the 16th and 17th centuries, minor courtiers, and country gentry. The complex web of kinship Downes&#x27; research shows that Vanbrugh had ties to many of England&#x27;s leading mercantile, gentry, and noble families. These ties reveal the decidedly Protestant and sometimes radical milieu out of which Vanbrugh&#x27;s own political opinions came. They also gave him a very wide social network that would play a role in all sections of his career: architectural, ceremonial, dramatic, military, political, and social.

Taken in this context, though he has sometimes been viewed as an odd or unqualified appointee to the College of Arms, it is not surprising, given the social expectations of his day, that by descent his credentials for his offices there were sound. His forebears, both Flemish/Dutch and English, were armigerous, and their coats of arms can be traced in three out of four cases, revealing that Vanbrugh was of gentle descent (Jacobson, of Antwerp and London [the family of his paternal grandmother Maria daughter of Peter brother to Philip Jacobson, jeweller and financier to successive English kings, James I, and Charles I, and monied backer of the Second Virginia Company and the East India Company]; Carleton of Imber Court; Croft of Croft Castle).

After growing up in a large household in Chester (12 children of his mother&#x27;s second marriage survived infancy), the question of how Vanbrugh spent the years from age 18 to 22 (after he left school) was long unanswered, with the baseless suggestion sometimes made that he had been studying architecture in France (stated as fact in the &quot;Dictionary of National Biography&quot;).
In 1681 records name a &#x27;John Vanbrugg&#x27; working for William Matthews, Giles Vanbrugh&#x27;s cousin. It was not unusual for a merchant&#x27;s son to follow in his father&#x27;s trade and seek similar work in business, making use of family ties and connections. However, Robert Williams proved in an article in the &quot;Times Literary Supplement&quot; (&quot;Vanbrugh&#x27;s Lost Years&quot;, 3 September 1999) that Vanbrugh was in India for part of this period, working for the East India Company at their trading post in Surat, Gujarat where his uncle, Edward Pearce, had been Governor. However, Vanbrugh never mentioned this experience in writing. Scholars debate whether evidence of his exposure to Indian architecture can be detected in any of his architectural designs.

The picture of a well-connected youth is reinforced by the fact that Vanbrugh in January 1686 took up an officer&#x27;s commission in his distant relative the Earl of Huntingdon&#x27;s foot regiment. Since commissions were in the gift of the commanding officer, Vanbrugh&#x27;s entry as an officer shows that he did have the kind of family network that was then essential to a young man starting out in life. Even so in August 1686 he left this position when the regiment was ordered to help garrison Guernsey.

In spite of the distant noble relatives and the lucrative sugar trade, Vanbrugh never seemed to possess any capital for business ventures (such as the Haymarket Theatre), but always had to rely on loans and backers. The fact that Giles Vanbrugh had twelve children to support and set up in life may go some way towards explaining the debts that were to plague John all his life.

===Connections===

Some of Vanbrugh&#x27;s kinsmen – as he addressed them in his letters:
* The Earl of Arran (1639–1686). His wife (from 1673) was Vanbrugh&#x27;s first cousin, Dorothy née Ferrers.
* The 3rd Earl of Berkshire (1619–1706). Frances née Harrison, Countess of Berkshire. Vanbrugh&#x27;s grandfather&#x27;s sister, Elizabeth Carleton married John Harrison, uncle of the Countess of Berkshire and in addition the Countess&#x27;s aunt, Anne Garrard, married Dudley Carleton, Viscount Dorchester, uncle to Vanbrugh&#x27;s same grandfather. Frances was (half) second cousin to Vanbrugh&#x27;s mother.
* The 3rd Earl of Carlisle (1669–1738) of Castle Howard. Carlisle&#x27;s grandmother, Lady Anne Howard, Countess of Carlisle, was first cousin to the 3rd Earl of Berkshire.
* The Duke of Devonshire (1640–1707). His Duchess was the Earl of Arran&#x27;s sister.
* The 2nd Earl of Chesterfield (1634–1714). His Countess was the Earl of Arran&#x27;s sister. His uncle Ferdinando Stanhope married Lettice Ferrers, aunt of the Countess of Arran.
* The 7th Earl of Huntingdon (1650–1701). Vanbrugh&#x27;s mother was his (half) third cousin.

Vanbrugh&#x27;s younger brothers, Charles MP and Philip, Governor of Newfoundland Colony, were naval commanders.

Vanbrugh&#x27;s own first and second cousins included Sir Humphrey Ferrers (1652–1678), Sir Herbert Croft Bt (1652–1720), Sir Roger Cave Bt (1655–1703) and Cave&#x27;s sister, wife of Sir Orlando Bridgeman Bt (1650–1701).

==Political activism and the Bastille==
From 1686, Vanbrugh was working undercover, playing a role in bringing about the armed invasion by William of Orange, the deposition of James II, and the Glorious Revolution of 1688. He thus demonstrates an intense early identification with the Whig cause of parliamentary democracy, with which he was to remain affiliated all his life. Returning from bringing William messages at The Hague, Vanbrugh was arrested at Calais on a charge of espionage (which Downes concludes was trumped-up) in September 1688, two months before William invaded England. Vanbrugh remained in prison in France for four and a half years, albeit in reasonable comfort. In 1691 he requested to be moved from Calais to Vincennes, at his own expense, where his treatment deteriorated enough to suffice his writing to Louis XIV, leading to his eventual transfer to the Bastille in February 1692. This raised the profile of his case once more, finally prompting his release in November of the same year, in an exchange of political prisoners.

His life is sharply bisected by this prison experience, which he entered at age 24 and emerged from at 29, after having spent, as Downes puts it, half his adult life in captivity. It seems to have left him with a lasting distaste for the French political system but also with a taste for the comic dramatists and the architecture of France.

The often-repeated claim that Vanbrugh wrote part of his comedy &quot;The Provoked Wife&quot; in the Bastille is based on allusions in a couple of much later memoirs and is regarded with some doubt by modern scholars (see McCormick). After being released from the Bastille, he had to spend three months in Paris, free to move around but unable to leave the country, and with every opportunity to see an architecture &quot;unparalleled in England for scale, ostentation, richness, taste and sophistication&quot;. He was allowed to return to England in April 1693; once he returned to England he joined the Navy and took part in an unsuccessful naval attack against the French at Brest. At some point in the mid-1690s, it is not known exactly when, he exchanged army life for London and the London stage.

==Public life==

=== London ===
Vanbrugh&#x27;s London career was diverse and varied, comprising playwriting, architectural design, and attempts to combine these two overarching interests. His overlapping achievements and business ventures were sometimes confusing even to Vanbrugh himself.

====The Kit-Cat Club====
A committed Whig, Vanbrugh was a member of the Kit-Cat Club – and particularly popular for &quot;his colossal geniality, his great good humour, his easy-going temperament&quot;. The Club is best known today as an early 18th-century social gathering point for culturally and politically prominent Whigs, including many artists and writers (William Congreve, Joseph Addison, Godfrey Kneller) and politicians (the Duke of Marlborough, Charles Seymour, the Earl of Burlington, Thomas Pelham-Holles, Sir Robert Walpole and Richard Temple, 1st Viscount Cobham who gave Vanbrugh several architectural commissions at Stowe).

Politically, the Club promoted the Whig objectives of a strong Parliament, a limited monarchy, resistance to France, and primarily the Protestant succession to the throne. Yet the Kit-Cats always presented their club as more a matter of dining and conviviality, and this reputation has been successfully relayed to posterity. Downes suggests, however, that the Club&#x27;s origins go back to before the Glorious Revolution of 1689 and that its political importance was much greater before it went public in 1700, in calmer and more Whiggish times. Downes proposes a role for an early Kit-Cat grouping in the armed invasion by William of Orange and the Glorious Revolution. Horace Walpole, son of Kit-Cat Sir Robert Walpole, claims that the respectable middle-aged Club members generally mentioned as &quot;a set of wits&quot; were originally &quot;in reality the patriots that saved Britain&quot;, in other words were the active force behind the Glorious Revolution itself. Secret groups tend to be poorly documented, and this sketch of the pre-history of the Club cannot be proved. But as we have seen, young Vanbrugh was indeed in 1688 part of a secret network working for William&#x27;s invasion. If the roots of the Club go back that far, it is tempting to speculate that Vanbrugh in joining the club was not merely becoming one of a convivial London &quot;set of wits&quot; but was also linking up with old friends and co-conspirators. A hero of the cause who had done time in French prison for it, could have been confident of a warm welcome.

====The Haymarket theatre====

In 1703, Vanbrugh started buying land and signing backers for the construction of a new theatre, the Queen&#x27;s Theatre, in Haymarket, designed by himself and managed by Vanbrugh along with Thomas Betterton and his associate William Congreve. It was intended for the use of an actors&#x27; cooperative (see &quot;The Provoked Wife&quot; below) and hoped to improve the chances of legitimate theatre in London. Theatre was under threat from more colourful types of entertainment such as opera, juggling, pantomime (introduced by John Rich), animal acts, travelling dance troupes, and famous visiting Italian singers. They also hoped to make a profit, and Vanbrugh optimistically bought up the actors&#x27; company, making himself sole owner. He was now bound to pay salaries to the actors and, as it turned out, to manage the theatre, a notorious tightrope act for which he had no experience. The often repeated rumour that the acoustics of the building Vanbrugh had designed were bad is exaggerated (see Milhous ), but the more practical Congreve had become anxious to extricate himself from the project, and Vanbrugh was left spreading himself extremely thin, running a theatre and simultaneously overseeing the building of Blenheim, a project which after June 1705 often took him out of town.

Unsurprisingly under these circumstances, Vanbrugh&#x27;s management of the Queen&#x27;s Theatre in Haymarket showed &quot;numerous signs of confusion, inefficiency, missed opportunities, and bad judgment&quot;. Having burned his fingers on theatre management, Vanbrugh too extricated himself, expensively, by selling the business in 1708 to Owen Swiny., though without ever collecting much of the putative price. He had put a lot of money, his own and borrowed, into the theatre company, which he was never to recover. It was noted as remarkable by contemporaries that he continued to pay the actors&#x27; salaries fully and promptly while they were working for him, just as he always paid the workmen he had hired for construction work; shirking such responsibilities was close to being standard practice in early 18th century England. Vanbrugh himself never seems to have pursued those who owed him money, and throughout his life his finances can at best be described as precarious.

====The College of Arms====
Vanbrugh&#x27;s introduction and advancement in the College of Arms remain controversial. On 21 June 1703 the obsolete office of Carlisle Herald was revived for Vanbrugh. This appointment was followed by a promotion to the post of Clarenceux King of Arms in March 1704. In 1725 he sold this office to Knox Ward, and he told a friend he had &quot;got leave to dispose in earnest, of a place I got in jest&quot;. His colleagues&#x27; opposition to an ill-gotten appointment ought to have been directed to Lord Carlisle, who as Deputy Earl Marshal, arranged both appointments and against whose wishes they were powerless. Vanbrugh went on to make more friends than enemies at the College, however. The pageantry of state occasions appealed to his theatrical sense, his duties were not difficult, and he appears to have performed them well. In the opinion of a modern herald and historian, although the appointment was &quot;incongruous&quot;, he was &quot;possibly the most distinguished man who has ever worn a herald&#x27;s tabard.&quot; In May 1706 Lord Halifax and Vanbrugh – representing the octogenarian Garter King of Arms, Sir Henry St George – led a delegation to Hanover to confer the Order of the Garter on Prince George, later to become King George II. Vaughan Hart has shown how Vanbrugh&#x27;s interest in arms and heraldry found expression in, and gave meaning to, his architecture.

====Marriage and death====

In 1719, at St Lawrence&#x27;s Church, York (since rebuilt), Vanbrugh married Henrietta Maria Yarburgh of Heslington Hall, York, aged 26 to his 55. In spite of the age difference, this was by all accounts a happy marriage, which produced two sons. Unlike that of the rake heroes and fops of his plays, Vanbrugh&#x27;s personal life was without scandal.

Vanbrugh died &quot;of an asthma&quot; on 26 March 1726, in the modest town house designed by him in 1703 out of the ruins of Whitehall Palace and satirised by Swift as &quot;the goose pie&quot;. His married life, however, was mostly spent at Greenwich (then not considered part of London at all) in the house on Maze Hill now known as Vanbrugh Castle, a miniature Scottish tower house designed by Vanbrugh in the earliest stages of his career. A Grade I listed building, and formerly a RAF Boys&#x27; School, it is today divided into private apartments.

===Playwright===
Vanbrugh arrived in London at a time of scandal and internal drama at London&#x27;s only theatre company, as a long-running conflict between pinchpenny management and disgruntled actors came to a head and the actors walked out. A new comedy staged with the makeshift remainder of the company in January 1696, Colley Cibber&#x27;s &quot;Love&#x27;s Last Shift&quot;, had a final scene that to Vanbrugh&#x27;s critical mind demanded a sequel, and even though it was his first play he threw himself into the fray by providing it.

====&quot;The Relapse&quot;====
Cibber&#x27;s &quot;Love&#x27;s Last Shift&quot;
Colley Cibber&#x27;s notorious tear-jerker &quot;Love&#x27;s Last Shift, Or, Virtue Rewarded&quot; was written and staged in the eye of a theatrical storm. London&#x27;s only and mismanaged theatre company, known as the United Company, had split in two in March 1695 when the senior actors began operating their own acting cooperative, and the next season was one of cutthroat rivalry between the two companies.

Cibber, an inconspicuous young actor still employed by the parent company, seized this moment of unique demand for new plays and launched his career on two fronts by writing a play with a big, flamboyant part for himself: the Frenchified fop Sir Novelty Fashion. Backed up by Cibber&#x27;s own uninhibited performance, Sir Novelty delighted the audiences. In the serious part of &quot;Love&#x27;s Last Shift&quot;, wifely patience is tried by an out-of-control Restoration rake husband, and the perfect wife is celebrated and rewarded in a climactic finale where the cheating husband kneels to her and expresses the depth of his repentance.

&quot;Love&#x27;s Last Shift&quot; has not been staged again since the early 18th century and is read only by the most dedicated scholars, who sometimes express distaste for its businesslike combination of four explicit acts of sex and rakishness with one of sententious reform (see Hume). If Cibber indeed was deliberately attempting to appeal simultaneously to rakish and respectable Londoners, it worked: the play was a great box-office hit.

Sequel: &quot;The Relapse&quot;
Vanbrugh&#x27;s witty sequel &quot;The Relapse, Or, Virtue in Danger&quot;, offered to the United Company six weeks later, questions the justice of women&#x27;s position in marriage at this time. He sends new sexual temptations in the way of not only the reformed husband but also the patient wife, and allows them to react in more credible and less predictable ways than in their original context, lending the flat characters from &quot;Love&#x27;s Last Shift&quot; a dimension that at least some critics are willing to consider psychological (see Hume ).

In a trickster subplot, Vanbrugh provides the more traditional Restoration attraction of an overly well-dressed and exquisite fop, Lord Foppington, a brilliant re-creation of Cibber&#x27;s Sir Novelty Fashion in &quot;Love&#x27;s Last Shift&quot; (Sir Novelty has simply in &quot;The Relapse&quot; bought himself the title of &quot;Lord Foppington&quot; through the corrupt system of Royal title sales). Critics of Restoration comedy are unanimous in declaring Lord Foppington &quot;the greatest of all Restoration fops&quot; (Dobrée), by virtue of being not merely laughably affected, but also &quot;brutal, evil, and smart&quot; (Hume ).

&quot;The Relapse&quot;, however, came very close to not being performed at all. The United Company had lost all its senior performers, and had great difficulty in finding and keeping actors of sufficient skills for the large cast required by &quot;The Relapse&quot;. Members of that cast had to be kept from defecting to the rival actors&#x27; cooperative, had to be &quot;seduced&quot; (as the legal term was) back when they did defect, and had to be blandished into attending rehearsals which dragged out into ten months and brought the company to the threshold of bankruptcy. &quot;They have no company at all&quot;, reported a contemporary letter on 19 November 1696 &quot;and unless a new play comes out on Saturday revives their reputation, they must break&quot;. That new play, &quot;The Relapse&quot;, did turn out a tremendous success that saved the company, not least by virtue of Colley Cibber again bringing down the house with his second impersonation of Lord Foppington. &quot;This play (the &quot;Relapse&quot;)&quot;, writes Cibber in his autobiography forty years later, &quot;from its new and easy Turn of Wit, had great Success&quot;.

====&quot;The Provoked Wife&quot;====

Vanbrugh&#x27;s second original comedy, &quot;The Provoked Wife&quot;, followed soon after, performed by the rebel actors&#x27; company. This play is different in tone from the largely farcical &quot;The Relapse&quot;, and adapted to the greater acting skills of the rebels. Vanbrugh had good reason to offer his second play to the new company, which had got off to a brilliant start by premièring Congreve&#x27;s &quot;Love for Love&quot;, the greatest London box-office success for years. The actors&#x27; cooperative boasted the established star performers of the age, and Vanbrugh tailored &quot;The Provoked Wife&quot; to their specialities. While &quot;The Relapse&quot; had been robustly phrased to be suitable for amateurs and minor acting talents, he could count on versatile professionals like Thomas Betterton, Elizabeth Barry, and the rising young star Anne Bracegirdle to do justice to characters of depth and nuance.

&quot;The Provoked Wife&quot; is a comedy, but Elizabeth Barry who played the abused wife was especially famous as a tragic actress, and for her power of &quot;moving the passions&quot;, i.e., moving an audience to pity and tears. Barry and the younger Bracegirdle had often worked together as a tragic/comic heroine pair to bring audiences the typically tragic/comic rollercoaster experience of Restoration plays. Vanbrugh takes advantage of this schema and these actresses to deepen audience sympathy for the unhappily married Lady Brute, even as she fires off her witty ripostes. In the intimate conversational dialogue between Lady Brute and her niece Bellinda (Bracegirdle), and especially in the star part of Sir John Brute the brutish husband (Betterton), which was hailed as one of the peaks of Thomas Betterton&#x27;s remarkable career, &quot;The Provoked Wife&quot; is something as unusual as a Restoration problem play. The premise of the plot, that a wife trapped in an abusive marriage might consider either leaving it or taking a lover, outraged some sections of Restoration society.

====Other works====
* &quot;Aesop&quot; (1697)
* &quot;The False Friend&quot; (1702)
* &quot;Squire Trelooby&quot; (1704)
* &quot;The Confederacy&quot; (1705)
* &quot;The Mistake&quot; (1705)

====Changing audience taste====
In 1698, Vanbrugh&#x27;s argumentative and sexually frank plays were singled out for special attention by Jeremy Collier in his &quot;Short View of the Immorality and Profaneness of the English Stage&quot;, particularly for their failure to impose exemplary morality by appropriate rewards and punishments in the fifth act. Vanbrugh laughed at these charges and published a joking reply, where he accused the clergyman Collier of being more sensitive to unflattering portrayals of the clergy than to real irreligion. However, rising public opinion was already on Collier&#x27;s side. The intellectual and sexually explicit Restoration comedy style was becoming less and less acceptable to audiences and was soon to be replaced by a drama of sententious morality. Colley Cibber&#x27;s &quot;Love&#x27;s Last Shift&quot;, with its reformed rake and sentimental reconciliation scene, can be seen as a forerunner of this drama.

Although Vanbrugh continued to work for the stage in many ways, he produced no more original plays. With the change in audience taste away from Restoration comedy, he turned his creative energies from original composition to dramatic adaptation/translation, theatre management, and architecture.

===Architect===
The precise reasons and motivations behind Vanbrugh&#x27;s change in career remain unclear, but the decision was sudden enough even to be remarked upon by commentators of his time:

:&quot;Van&#x27;s genius, without thought or lecture,&quot;
:&quot;Is hugely turn&#x27;d to architecture.&quot;

Jonathan Swift, in this quote, suggests that Vanbrugh had no previous training in, nor studied architecture, but applied himself to the discipline whole-heartedly.

As an architect (or surveyor, as the term then was) Vanbrugh is thought to have had no formal training (see &quot;Early life&quot; above). To what extent Vanbrugh&#x27;s exposure to contemporary French architecture during years of imprisonment in France affected him is hard to gauge, in April 1691 he was transferred to Château de Vincennes in the months he spent as a prisoner there he would have got to know the architect Louis Le Vau&#x27;s grand classical work (1656–61) in the château well. On his release from prison (he was at the Bastille by then) on 22 November 1692 he spent a short time in Paris, there he would have seen much recent architecture including Les Invalides, the Collège des Quatre-Nations and the east wing of the Louvre Palace. His inexperience was compensated for by his unerring eye for perspective and detail and his close working relationship with Nicholas Hawksmoor. Hawksmoor, a former clerk of Sir Christopher Wren, was to be Vanbrugh&#x27;s collaborator in many of his most ambitious projects, including Castle Howard and Blenheim. During his almost thirty years as a practising architect, Vanbrugh designed and worked on numerous buildings. More often than not his work was a rebuild or remodel, such as that of Kimbolton Castle, where Vanbrugh had to follow the instructions of his patron. Consequently these houses, which often claim Vanbrugh as their architect, do not best display his own architectural concepts and ideas. In the summer of 1699 as part of his architectural education Vanbrugh made a tour of northern England, writing to Charles Montagu, 1st Duke of Manchester, (he was still an Earl at the time) on Christmas Day of that year: &#x27;I have seen most of the great houses in the North, as Ld Nottings (sic): Duke of Leeds Chattesworth (sic) &amp;C.&#x27; This itinerary likely included many of the great Elizabethan houses, including: Burghley House, Wollaton Hall, Hardwick Hall and Bolsover Castle, whose use of towers, complex skylines, bow widows and other features would be reinterpreted in Vanbrugh&#x27;s own buildings.

Though Vanbrugh is best known in connection with stately houses, the parlous state of London&#x27;s 18th-century streets did not escape his attention. It was reported in the &quot;London Journal&quot; of 16 March 1722–23:

Vanbrugh&#x27;s chosen style was the baroque, which had been spreading across Europe during the 17th century, promoted by, among others, Bernini and Le Vau. The first baroque country house built in England was Chatsworth House, designed by William Talman three years before Castle Howard. In the contest for the commission of Castle Howard, the untrained and untried Vanbrugh astonishingly managed to out-charm and out-clubman the professional but less socially adept Talman and to persuade the Earl of Carlisle to give the great opportunity to him instead. Seizing it, Vanbrugh instigated European baroque&#x27;s metamorphosis into a subtle, almost understated version that became known as English baroque. Four of Vanbrugh&#x27;s designs act as milestones for evaluating this process:
# Castle Howard, North Yorkshire, commissioned in 1699;
# Blenheim Palace, Oxfordshire, commissioned in 1704;
# Kings Weston House, Bristol, begun in 1712;
# Seaton Delaval Hall, Northumberland, begun in 1718.

Work on each of these projects overlapped with that on the next, providing a natural progression of thoughts and style.

====Castle Howard====
Charles Howard, 3rd Earl of Carlisle, a fellow member of the Kit-Cat Club, commissioned Vanbrugh in 1699 to design his mansion, often described as England&#x27;s first truly baroque building. The baroque style at Castle Howard is the most European that Vanbrugh ever used.
Castle Howard, with its immense corridors in segmental colonnades leading from the main entrance block to the flanking wings, its centre crowned by a great domed tower complete with cupola, is very much in the school of classic European baroque. It combined aspects of design that had only appeared occasionally, if at all, in English architecture: John Webb&#x27;s Greenwich Palace, Wren&#x27;s unexecuted design for Greenwich, which like Castle Howard was dominated by a domed centre block, and of course Talman&#x27;s Chatsworth. A possible inspiration for Castle Howard was also Vaux-le-Vicomte in France.

The interiors are extremely dramatic, the Great Hall rising 80 feet (24 m) into the cupola. Scagliola, and Corinthian columns abound, and galleries linked by soaring arches give the impression of an opera stage-set – doubtless the intention of the architect.

Castle Howard was acclaimed a success. This fantastical building, unparalleled in England, with its facades and roofs decorated by pilasters, statuary, and flowing ornamental carving, ensured that baroque became an overnight success. While the greater part of Castle Howard was inhabited and completed by 1709, the finishing touches were to continue for much of Vanbrugh&#x27;s lifetime. The west wing was finally completed after Vanbrugh&#x27;s death, to an altered design. The acclaim of the work at Castle Howard led to Vanbrugh&#x27;s most famous commission, architect for Blenheim Palace.

Regarding the commission, William Talman, an already established architect and Comptroller of the King&#x27;s Works had initially been the architect of choice, charging more than the Lord had thought reasonable. Vanbrugh&#x27;s charm, and Talman&#x27;s lack thereof, may have been enough to convince the patron to change his architect. However, it remains unknown how Vanbrugh, totally untrained and inexperienced, persuaded Earl Carlisle to grant the responsibility of architect to him. The design process began in the summer of 1699, before the end of the year the model for Castle Howard was under construction, stone was being quarried and foundations discussed.

It appears that the early drawings of the design for Castle Howard were made by Nicholas Hawksmoor, and in 1700 he was formally introduced by Vanbrugh into the project as draughtsman and clerk of works. Designs varied and evolved until 1702, the pair working together.
====Vanbrugh&#x27;s House====

In July 1700 the King granted Vanbrugh permission to build on the ruins of Whitehall at his own expense. Brick and stone from the ruins of the Palace of Whitehall were used and the house was sited on what was the Vice-Chamberlain&#x27;s lodgings. The small, two storied house was unique in design, though its size and proportions led to it being called, unflatteringly, a &#x27;goose-pie&#x27; by Swift.

The house was demolished in 1898 to make way for the Old War Office Building.

====Blenheim Palace====
The Duke of Marlborough&#x27;s forces defeated King Louis XIV&#x27;s army at Blenheim, a village on the Danube in 1704. Marlborough&#x27;s reward, from a grateful nation, was to be a splendid country seat, and the Duke himself chose fellow Kit-Cat John Vanbrugh to be the architect. Work began on the palace in 1705, though as Vanbrugh wasn&#x27;t a trained architect he worked alongside Nicholas Hawksmoor on the project.

Blenheim Palace was conceived to be not only a grand country house, but a national monument. Consequently, the light baroque style used at Castle Howard would have been unsuitable for what is in effect a war memorial. It is in truth more of a castle, or citadel, than a palace. As it was designed as a national monument first and a comfortable family home second, Vanbrugh had many arguments with the Duchess who wanted the Palace to be a comfortable country house for her family, &quot;I made Mr. Vanbrugh my enemy by the constant disputes I had with him to prevent his extravagance&quot; As a result of these arguments Vanbrugh resigned before the palace was completed in November 1716.&quot;You have your end Madam, for I will never trouble you more Unless the Duke of Marlborough recovers so far, to shelter me from such intolerable Treatment.&quot;

The qualities of the building are best illustrated by the massive East Gate (&quot;illustration, below, left&quot;), set in the curtain wall of the service block, it has been described as resembling an impregnable entrance to a walled city. The gate, its tapering walls creating an illusion of greater height, also serves as water tower for the palace, thus confounding those of Vanbrugh&#x27;s critics, such as the Duchess, who accused him of impracticability.

Blenheim, the largest non-royal domestic building in England, consists of three blocks, the centre containing the living and state rooms, and two flanking rectangular wings both built around a central courtyard: one contains the stables, and the other the kitchens, laundries, and storehouses. If Castle Howard was the first truly baroque building in England, then Blenheim Palace is the most definitive. While Castle Howard is a dramatic assembly of restless masses, Blenheim is altogether of a more solid construction, relying on tall slender windows and monumental statuary on the roofs to lighten the mass of yellow stone.

The suite of state rooms placed on the &quot;piano nobile&quot; were designed to be overpowering and magnificent displays, rather than warm, or comfortable. Cosy, middle class comfort was not the intention at Versailles, the great palace of Marlborough&#x27;s foe, and it was certainly not deemed a consideration in the palace built to house the conqueror of Versailles&#x27; master.

As was common in the 18th century, personal comfort was sacrificed to perspective. Windows were to adorn the facades, as well as light the interior. Blenheim was designed as a theatre piece both externally and also from the 67 foot (20 m) high great hall, leading to the huge frescoed saloon, all designed on an axis with the 134 foot (41 m) high column of victory in the grounds, with the trees planted in the battle positions of Marlborough&#x27;s soldiers. Over the south portico (&quot;illustrated right&quot;), itself a massive and dense construction of piers and columns, definitely not designed in the Palladian manner for elegant protection from the sun, a huge bust of Louis XIV is forced to look down on the splendours and rewards of his conqueror. Whether this placement and design was an ornamental feature created by Vanbrugh, or an ironic joke by Marlborough, is not known. However, as an architectural composition it is a unique example of baroque ornament.

At Blenheim, Vanbrugh developed baroque from the mere ornamental to a denser, more solid, form, where the massed stone became the ornament. The great arched gates and the huge solid portico were ornament in themselves, and the whole mass was considered rather than each facade. As the palace is still treated as an important part of English heritage, it became a World Heritage Site in 1987.

====Kings Weston House====

Kings Weston House in Bristol was built between 1712 and 1719 for Edward Southwell on the site of an earlier Tudor house. A significant architectural feature is the grouping of all the chimneys into a massive arcade. The Kings Weston estate possesses one of the largest collections of buildings designed by Sir John Vanbrugh in the UK. Whilst the house and the majority of the estate buildings are still standing others have been demolished or been heavily altered. Bristol is the only UK city outside London to possess buildings designed by Vanbrugh.

On 29 April Edward Southwell wrote in his journal at Kings Weston, &quot;Upwards of 60 men preparing stones and digging the foundation of the new house,&quot; and on 16 June 1712 work formally began on building the new house by John Vanbrugh. His client, Edward Southwell, did not desire a house on a monumental scale. The result was one of Vanbrugh&#x27;s smaller houses. It is also his severest in style, obtaining high architectural drama by the well judged disposition of elements that are few in number, and simple in their nature. The exterior of the house would have been at the point of completion in 1717, the date on the contract for one of the parapet vases. The interior would have been virtually complete by 1719, when the design for inlay on the stair landings was drawn up. Two of the façades have since been remodelled, by Robert Mylne, who remodelled the interior in the 1760s. The stone, which was quarried on the site, was originally ochre in colour but has weathered to an orange-pink.

The arcade formed by linking the chimneys, which rises above the roof, is a notable external feature of the building, reminiscent of the belvederes of Blenheim Palace and producing a &#x27;castle air&#x27;.[18] It is square in shape and open on the northeast. The current structure is the result of a rebuilding in 1968, using Bath Stone.

The entrance front, on the southwest, has a centre containing six Corinthian pilasters, with those at each side paired to produce three bays, each of which contains a round arched window. The pediment has a central lunette, and each side consists of two bays in which the windows have wide flat surrounds. There are four parapet vases. The steps originally had low flank walls perpendicular to the facade, which were removed in the later remodelling.

On the southeast facade, the centre has a Doric temple front with open pediment, which surrounds the doorway. The centre has an attic as its upper storey, topped by a blocking course with scrolled supports at each end. A design with a pediment was prepared for this front, but is thought never to have been built. Though the only decoration is the rustication on the Doric temple&#x27;s pilasters, a remarkably rich effect is achieved.

The northeast and northwest facades of Vanbrugh&#x27;s original design were entirely undecorated, and a consequent lack of popular appeal may be the reason why they were largely destroyed in later remodelling.

Vanbrugh&#x27;s northwest facade consisted of a single flat surface, in which a Venetian window on each floor filled the central space between two shallow projections. Perhaps to improve the view down to Avonmouth, the centre was remodelled by Mylne with a canted bay window, at odds with the tautness of Vanbrugh&#x27;s overall design of the house, in which all planes were parallel or perpendicular to the walls. On the northeast the wall was moved forward during nineteenth-century remodelling, destroying an aesthetically significant alignment between wall projections and the break in the roof arcade, which had been present in Vanbrugh&#x27;s design.

====Seaton Delaval Hall====

Seaton Delaval Hall was Vanbrugh&#x27;s final work, this northern, seemingly rather bleak country house is considered his finest architectural masterpiece;
by this stage in his architectural career Vanbrugh was a master of baroque, he had taken this form of architecture not only beyond the flamboyant continental baroque of Castle Howard, but also past the more severe but still decorated Blenheim. Ornament was almost disguised: a recess or a pillar was not placed for support, but to create a play of light or shadow. The silhouette of the building was of equal, if not greater, importance than the interior layout. In every aspect of the house, subtlety was the keyword.

Built between 1718 and 1728 for Admiral George Delaval, it replaced the existing house on the site. It is possible that the design of Seaton Delaval was influenced by Palladio&#x27;s Villa Foscari (sometimes known as &quot;La Malcontenta&quot;), built circa 1555. Both have rusticated facades and similar demilune windows over a non-porticoed entrance. Even the large attic gable at Villa Foscari hints at the clerestory of Seaton&#x27;s great hall.

The design concept Vanbrugh drew up was similar to that employed at Castle Howard and Blenheim: a corps de logis between two flanking wings. At Seaton Delaval the wings have a centre projection of three bays, crowned by pediment, either side of which are 7 bays of sash windows above a ground floor arcade. However, Seaton Delaval was to be on a much smaller scale. Work began in 1718 and continued for ten years. The building is an advancement on the style of Blenheim, rather than the earlier Castle Howard. The principal block, or corps de logis, containing, as at Blenheim and Castle Howard, the principal state and living room, forms the centre of a three-sided court. Towers crowned by balustrades and pinnacles give the house something of what Vanbrugh called his castle air.

Seaton Delaval is one of the few houses Vanbrugh designed alone without the aid of Nicholas Hawksmoor. The sobriety of their joint work has sometimes been attributed to Hawksmoor, and yet Seaton Delaval is a very sombre house indeed. Whereas Castle Howard could successfully be set down in Dresden or Würzburg, the austerity and solidity of Seaton Delaval firmly belongs in Northumberland landscape. Vanbrugh, in the final stage in his career, was fully liberated from the rules of the architects of a generation earlier. The rustic stonework is used for the entire facade, including on the entrance facade, the pairs of twin columns supporting little more than a stone cornice. The twin columns are severe and utilitarian, and yet ornament, as they provide no structural use. This is part of the furtive quality of the baroque of Seaton Delaval: the ornamental appears as a display of strength and mass.

The likewise severe, but perfectly proportioned, garden facade has at its centre a four-columned, balcony-roofed portico. Here the slight fluting of the stone columns seems almost excessive ornament. As at Blenheim, the central block is dominated by the raised clerestory of the great hall, adding to the drama of the building&#x27;s silhouette, but unlike Vanbrugh&#x27;s other great houses, no statuary decorates the roof-scape here. The decoration is provided solely by a simple balustrade hiding the roof line, and chimneys disguised as finials to the balustrading of the low towers. The massing of the stone, the colonnades of the flanking wings, the heavy stonework and intricate recesses all create light and shade which is ornament in itself.

Among architects, only Vanbrugh could have taken for his inspiration one of Palladio&#x27;s masterpieces, and while retaining the humanist values of the building, alter and adapt it, into a unique form of baroque unseen elsewhere in Europe.

====Architectural reputation====
Vanbrugh&#x27;s prompt success as an architect can be attributed to his friendships with the influential of the day. No less than five of his architectural patrons were fellow members of the Kit-Cat Club. In 1702, through the influence of Charles Howard, Earl of Carlisle, Vanbrugh was appointed Comptroller of the King&#x27;s Works. This entitled him to a house at Hampton Court Palace, which he let out. In 1703, he was appointed commissioner of Greenwich Hospital, which was under construction at this time, and succeeded Wren as the official architect (or Surveyor), while Hawksmoor was appointed Site Architect. Vanbrugh&#x27;s small but conspicuous final changes to the nearly completed building were considered a fine interpretation of Wren&#x27;s original plans and intentions. Thus what was intended as an infirmary and hostel for destitute retired sailors was transformed into a magnificent national monument. His work here is said to have impressed both Queen Anne and her government, and is directly responsible for his subsequent success.

Vanbrugh&#x27;s reputation still suffers from accusations of extravagance, impracticability and a bombastic imposition of his own will on his clients. Ironically, all of these unfounded charges derive from Blenheim – Vanbrugh&#x27;s selection as architect of Blenheim was never completely popular. The Duchess, the formidable Sarah Churchill, particularly wanted Sir Christopher Wren. However, eventually a warrant signed by the Earl of Godolphin, the parliamentary treasurer, appointed Vanbrugh, and outlined his remit. Sadly, nowhere did this warrant mention Queen, or Crown. This error provided the get-out clause for the state when the costs and political infighting escalated.

Though Parliament had voted funds for the building of Blenheim, no exact sum had ever been fixed upon, and certainly no provision had been made for inflation. Almost from the outset, funds had been intermittent. Queen Anne paid some of them, but with growing reluctance and lapses, following her frequent altercations with her one time best friend, Sarah, Duchess of Marlborough. After the Duchess&#x27;s final argument with the Queen in 1712, all state money ceased and work came to a halt. £220,000 had already been spent and £45,000 was owing to workmen. The Marlboroughs went into exile on the continent, and did not return until after Queen Anne&#x27;s death in 1714.

The day after the Queen&#x27;s death the Marlboroughs returned, and were reinstated in favour at the court of the new King George I. The 64-year-old Duke now decided to complete the project at his own expense; in 1716 work restarted and Vanbrugh was left to rely entirely upon the means of the Duke of Marlborough himself. Already discouraged and upset by the reception the palace was receiving from the Whig factions, the final blow for Vanbrugh came when the Duke was incapacitated in 1717 by a severe stroke, and the thrifty (and hostile) Duchess took control. The Duchess blamed Vanbrugh entirely for the growing extravagance of the palace, and its general design: that her husband and government had approved them, she discounted. (In fairness to her, it must be mentioned that the Duke of Marlborough had contributed £60,000 to the initial cost, which, supplemented by Parliament, should have built a monumental house.) Following a meeting with the Duchess, Vanbrugh left the building site in a rage, insisting that the new masons, carpenters and craftsmen were inferior to those he had employed. The master craftsmen he had patronised, however, such as Grinling Gibbons, refused to work for the lower rates paid by the Marlboroughs. The craftsmen brought in by the Duchess, under the guidance of furniture designer James Moore, completed the work in perfect imitation of the greater masters, so perhaps there was fault and intransigence on both sides in this famed argument.

Vanbrugh was deeply distressed by the turn of events. The rows and resulting rumours had damaged his reputation, and the palace he had nurtured like a child was forbidden to him. In 1719, while the duchess was &quot;not at home&quot;, Vanbrugh was able to view the palace in secret; but when he and his wife, with the Earl of Carlisle, visited the completed Blenheim as members of the viewing public in 1725, they were refused admission to even enter the park. The palace had been completed by Nicholas Hawksmoor.

That Vanbrugh&#x27;s work at Blenheim has been the subject of criticism can largely be blamed on those, including the Duchess, who failed to understand the chief reason for its construction: to celebrate a martial triumph. In the achievement of this remit, Vanbrugh was as triumphant as was Marlborough on the field of battle.

After Vanbrugh&#x27;s death Abel Evans suggested this as his epitaph:
&quot;Under this stone, reader, survey&quot;
&quot;Dead Sir John Vanbrugh&#x27;s house of clay&quot;.
&quot;Lie heavy on him, Earth! For he&quot;
&quot;Laid many heavy loads on thee!&quot;
Vanbrugh was buried in the church of St Stephen Walbrook in the City of London, but his grave is unmarked and the above epitaph is as yet unused.

Throughout the Georgian period reaction to Vanbrugh&#x27;s architecture varied. Voltaire, who visited Blenheim Palace in the autumn of 1727, described it as &#x27;a great mass of stone with neither charm nor taste&#x27; and thought that if the apartments &#x27;were but as spacious as the walls thick, the house would be commodious enough&#x27;.

In a letter dated 10 March 1740, the German Jacob Friedrich, Baron Bielfeld had this to say about Vanbrugh:

This building (Blenheim) has been severely censured, and I agree that it is not entirely exempt from rational censure as it is too much loaded with columns and other heavy ornaments. But if we consider that Sir John Vanbrugh was to construct a building of endless duration, that no bounds were set to expense, and that an edifice was required that should strike with awe and surprise even at a distance; the architect may be excused for having sacrificed, in some degree, the elegance of design to multiplicity of ornament. All the several parts are moreover exactly calculated, all the rules of art are well observed, and this immense fabric reminds us, on the first glance, of the majesty and state of those of Greece and ancient Rome. When we behold it a distance, it appears not as a single palace, but as an entire city. We arrive at it by a stately bridge of a single arch, and which is itself a masterpiece of architecture. I have contracted a very intimate friend ship with the son of Sir John Vanbrugh, who has lately obtained a company in the foot guards, and is a young gentleman of real merit. He has shown me, not only all the designs of his father, but also two houses of his building, one near Whitehall, and the other at Greenwich. They are indeed mere models of houses, but notwithstanding their confined situation, there are everywhere traces of a master to be discovered in their execution. The vulgar critic finds too many columns and ornaments; but the true connoisseur sees that all these ornaments are accompanied with utility, and that an inventive genius is visible in every part. This architect was likewise author of several comedies, which are indeed written in a style that is rather licentious, but at the same time are resplendent with wit and vivacity. So true it is, that genius is not confined to one subject, but wherever exercised, is equally manifest.

In 1766 Lord Stanhope described the Roman amphitheatre at Nîmes as &#x27;Ugly and clumsy enough to have been the work of Vanbrugh if it had been in England.&#x27; In 1772 Horace Walpole described Castle Howard thus:

Nobody had informed me that I should at one view see a palace, a town, a fortified city, temples on high places, woods worthy of being each a metropolis of the Druids, vales connected to hills by other woods, the noblest lawn in the world fenced by half the horizon, and a mausoleum that would tempt one to be buried alive; in short I have seen gigantic places before, but never a sublime one.&#x27;

Walpole was not as complimentary of Blenheim, describing it as &#x27;execrable within, without &amp; almost all round&#x27; and went on &#x27;a quarry of stone that looked at a distance like a great house&#x27;. In 1773 Robert Adam and James Adam in the preface to their &quot;Works in Architecture&quot; wrote that:

Sir John Vanbrugh&#x27;s genius was of the first class; and, in point of movement, novelty and ingenuity, his works have not been exceeded by anything in modern times. We should certainly quote Blenheim and Castle Howard as great examples of these perfections in preference to any work of our own, or of any other modern architect; but unluckily for the reputation of this excellent artist, his taste kept no pace with his genius, and his works are so crowded with barbarisms and absurdities, and so born down by their own preposterous weight, that none but the discerning can separate their merits from their defects. In the hands of the ingenious artist, who knows how to polish and refine and bring them into use, we have always regarded his productions as rough jewels of inestimable value&#x27;.

In 1786 Sir Joshua Reynolds wrote in his 13th Discourse &#x27;...in the buildings of Vanbrugh, who was a poet as well as an architect, there is a greater display of imagination, than we shall find perhaps in any other.&#x27; In 1796 Uvedale Price described Blenheim as &#x27;uniting in one building the beauty and magnificence of Grecian architecture, the picturesqueness of the Gothic, and the massive grandeur of a castle.&#x27; In his fifth Royal Academy lecture of 1810, Sir John Soane said that &#x27;By studying his works the artist will acquire a bold flight of irregular fancy&#x27;, calling him &#x27;the Shakespeare of architects&#x27;. Sir Robert Smirke was less complimentary &#x27;Heaviness was the lightest of (Vanbrugh&#x27;s) faults... The Italian style...which he contrived to caricature...is apparent in all his works; he helped himself liberally to its vices, contributed many of his own, and by an unfortunate misfortune adding impurity to that which was already greatly impure, left it disgusting and often odious&#x27;. Charles Robert Cockerell had this to say about Castle Howard: &quot;great play &amp; charm in Hall. I could not leave it. Vast effect, movement in staircases &amp;c. good effect of long passages on entering.&quot;

==Legacy==

Vanbrugh is remembered today for his vast contribution to British culture, theatre, and architecture. An immediate dramatic legacy was found among his papers after his sudden death, the three-act comedy fragment &quot;A Journey to London&quot;. Vanbrugh had told his old friend Colley Cibber that he intended in this play to question traditional marriage roles even more radically than in the plays of his youth, and end it with a marriage falling irreconcilably apart. The unfinished manuscript, today available in Vanbrugh&#x27;s &quot;Collected Works&quot;, depicts a country family travelling to London and falling prey to its sharpers and temptations, while a London wife drives her patient husband to despair with her gambling and her consorting with the demi-monde of con men and half-pay officers. As with &quot;The Relapse&quot; at the outset of Vanbrugh&#x27;s dramatic career, Colley Cibber again became involved, and this time he had last word. Cibber, now a successful actor-manager, completed Vanbrugh&#x27;s manuscript under the title of &quot;The Provoked Husband&quot; (1728) and gave it a happy and sententious ending in which the provocative wife repents and is reconciled: a eulogy of marriage which was the opposite of Vanbrugh&#x27;s declared intention to end his last and belated &quot;Restoration comedy&quot; with marital break-up. Cibber considered this projected outcome to be &quot;too severe for Comedy&quot;.

On the 18th-century stage, Vanbrugh&#x27;s &quot;Relapse&quot; and &quot;Provoked Wife&quot; were only considered possible to perform in bowdlerised versions, but as such, they remained popular. Throughout Colley Cibber&#x27;s long and successful acting career, audiences continued to demand to see him as Lord Foppington in &quot;The Relapse&quot;, while Sir John Brute in &quot;The Provoked Wife&quot; became, after being an iconic role for Thomas Betterton, one of David Garrick&#x27;s most famous roles.

With the completion of Castle Howard, English baroque came into fashion overnight. It had brought together the isolated and varied instances of monumental design, by, among others, Inigo Jones and Christopher Wren. Vanbrugh thought of masses, volume and perspective in a way that his predecessors had not.

He was adept at delivering buildings for his clients, that successfully met their requirements. His reputation has suffered because of his famed disagreements with the Duchess of Marlborough, yet, one must remember his original client was the British Nation, not the Duchess, and the nation wanted a monument and celebration of victory, and that is what Vanbrugh gave the nation.

Nicholas Hawksmoor, Vanbrugh&#x27;s friend and collaborator on so many projects continued to design many London churches for ten years after Vanbrugh&#x27;s death. Vanbrugh&#x27;s pupil and cousin the architect Edward Lovett Pearce rose to become one of Ireland&#x27;s greatest architects. His influence in Yorkshire can also be seen in the work of the amateur architect William Wakefield, who designed several buildings in the county that show Vanbrugh&#x27;s influence.

Vanbrugh is commemorated throughout Britain, by inns, street names, a university college (York) and schools named in his honour. His architectural works have been described as &quot;the architectural equivalent of the heroic play, theatrical, grandiose, a dramatic grouping of restless masses with little reference to function.&quot;
==Arms==
== See also ==
* List of works by John Vanbrugh

==Notes==
==Citations==
==References==
* Berkowitz, Gerald M., &quot;Sir John Vanbrugh and the End of Restoration Comedy&quot;, Editions Rodopi (January 1981), .
* 
* Dobrée, Bonamy (1927). Introduction to &quot;The Complete Works of Sir John Vanbrugh&quot;, vol. 1. Bloomsbury: The Nonesuch Press.
* Downes, Kerry (1987). &quot;Sir John Vanbrugh:A Biography&quot;. London: Sidgwick and Jackson.
* Green, David (1982). &quot;Blenheim Palace&quot;. Oxford: Alden Press.
* Halliday, E. E. (1967). &quot;Cultural History of England&quot;. London: Thames and Hudson.
* Hart, Vaughan (2003). &#x27;&quot;A Pretty Impudent Countenance&quot;: John Vanbrugh&#x27;s Seaton Delaval&#x27;, &quot;Architectural Research Quarterly&quot;, vol.7 no.3/4, pp. 311–23.
* Hart, Vaughan (2008). &quot;Sir John Vanbrugh: Storyteller in Stone&quot;, London and New Haven: Yale University Press.
* Hume, Robert D. (1976). &quot;The Development of English Drama in the Late Seventeenth Century&quot;. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
* Hunt, Leigh (ed.) (1840). &quot;The Dramatic Works of Wycherley, Congreve, Vanbrugh and Farquhar.&quot;
* Mallgrave, Harry Francis. (2005). &quot;Modern Architectural Theory: A Historical Survey, 1673–1968&quot;. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. .
* McCormick, Frank (1991). &quot;Sir John Vanbrugh: The Playwright as Architect.&quot; University Park, Pennsylvania: Pennsylvania State University Press.
* Milhous, Judith (1979). &quot;Thomas Betterton and the Management of Lincoln&#x27;s Inn Fields 1695—1708&quot;. Carbondale, Illinois: Southern Illinois University Press.
* Sherwood, Jennifer; and Pevsner, Nikolaus (1974) &quot;Oxfordshire&quot; (London: Penguin; )
* Watkin, David (1979). &quot;English Architecture&quot;. London: Thames and Hudson.
* 
* 

==Further reading==
* Cordner, Michael. &quot;Playwright versus priest: profanity and the wit of Restoration comedy&quot;. In Deborah Payne Fisk (ed.) (2000), &quot;The Cambridge Companion to English Restoration Theatre&quot;, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
* Cropplestone, Trewin (1963). &quot;World Architecture&quot;. Hamlyn.
* Dal Lago, Adalbert (1966). &quot;Ville Antiche&quot;. Milan: Fratelli Fabbri.
* Harlin, Robert (1969). &quot;Historic Houses&quot;. London: Condé Nast.
* Vanbrugh, John (1927). &quot;The Complete Works&quot;, vols 1–5 (ed. Bonamy Dobrée and Geoffrey Webb). Bloomsbury: The Nonesuch Press.
* Whistler, Laurence (1938). &quot;Sir John Vanbrugh, Architect &amp; Dramatist, 1664–1726.&quot; London.

==External links==
* 
* Vanbrugh, The Provoked Wife. Use with caution, this is an abridged and bowdlerised text.
* Colley Cibber, &quot;Apology&quot;, vol. 1
* Colley Cibber, &quot;Apology&quot;, vol. 2
* Castle Howard
* Blenheim Palace
* Kings Weston House
* Seaton Delaval Hall
* Vanbrugh Castle</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q333398" start="0" end="17" title="John Vanbrugh" label="Sir John Vanbrugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q696819" start="105" end="111" title="herald" label="herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q208181" start="151" end="166" title="Blenheim Palace" label="Blenheim Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049514" start="171" end="184" title="Castle Howard" label="Castle Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417690" start="227" end="247" title="Restoration comedy" label="Restoration comedies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058431" start="255" end="266" title="The Relapse" label="The Relapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3205376" start="290" end="307" title="The Provoked Wife" label="The Provoked Wife"/>
<link wikidata="Q833163" start="417" end="425" title="Knight Bachelor" label="knighted"/>
<link wikidata="Q108700" start="526" end="530" title="Whigs (British political party)" label="Whig"/>
<link wikidata="Q126188" start="571" end="579" title="James II of England" label="James II"/>
<link wikidata="Q129987" start="588" end="599" title="William III of England" label="William III"/>
<link wikidata="Q217105" start="652" end="670" title="political prisoner" label="political prisoner"/>
<link wikidata="Q846848" start="732" end="743" title="English Restoration" label="Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252" start="861" end="880" title="feminism" label="women&amp;#x27;s rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346769" start="962" end="976" title="Jeremy Collier" label="Jeremy Collier"/>
<link wikidata="Q138377" start="990" end="1055" title="Short View of the Immorality and Profaneness of the English Stage" label="Short View of the Immorality and Profaneness of the English Stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q12271" start="1071" end="1084" title="architecture" label="architectural"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574110" start="1129" end="1144" title="English Baroque" label="English Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311831" start="1777" end="1796" title="Dudley Carleton (diplomat)" label="Sir Dudley Carleton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1801" end="1812" title="Thames Ditton#Pre-1800" label="Imber Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q954764" start="1814" end="1827" title="Thames Ditton" label="Thames Ditton"/>
<link wikidata="Q170263" start="1851" end="1858" title="Chester" label="Chester"/>
<link wikidata="Q917048" start="1929" end="1945" title="Great Plague of London" label="plague in London"/>
<link wikidata="Q164679" start="1962" end="1972" title="Great Fire of London" label="Great Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7744469" start="2014" end="2036" title="The King&amp;#x27;s School, Chester" label="The King&amp;#x27;s School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046537" start="2153" end="2170" title="Ashby-de-la-Zouch" label="Ashby-de-la-Zouch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5722729" start="2183" end="2221" title="Henry Hastings, 3rd Earl of Huntingdon" label="Henry Hastings, 3rd Earl of Huntingdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q19753998" start="2344" end="2356" title="Kerry Downes" label="Kerry Downes"/>
<link wikidata="Q241588" start="2416" end="2428" title="middle class" label="middle-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q7634719" start="2551" end="2562" title="Sugar-baker" label="Sugar-baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159627" start="2613" end="2628" title="confectionery" label="maker of sweets"/>
<link wikidata="Q244" start="2709" end="2717" title="Barbados" label="Barbados"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="2876" end="2885" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="2909" end="2910" title="Pound sterling" label="£"/>
<link wikidata="Q655213" start="3091" end="3101" title="James Henry Leigh Hunt" label="Leigh Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q18336" start="4424" end="4434" title="heraldry" label="armigerous"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="4725" end="4732" title="James I of England" label="James I"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="4738" end="4747" title="Charles I of England" label="Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152507" start="4774" end="4797" title="Virginia Company" label="Second Virginia Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="4806" end="4824" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q745833" start="4827" end="4850" title="Dudley Carleton, 1st Viscount Dorchester" label="Carleton of Imber Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187474" start="4852" end="4873" title="Croft Castle" label="Croft of Croft Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768060" start="5593" end="5618" title="Times Literary Supplement" label="Times Literary Supplement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4629" start="5796" end="5801" title="Surat" label="Surat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7609477" start="6209" end="6234" title="Theophilus Hastings, 7th Earl of Huntingdon" label="Earl of Huntingdon&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311985" start="6551" end="6559" title="Guernsey" label="Guernsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q11002" start="6620" end="6631" title="sugar trade" label="sugar trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q540426" start="6713" end="6730" title="Haymarket Theatre" label="Haymarket Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324496" start="7034" end="7051" title="Richard Butler, 1st Earl of Arran" label="The Earl of Arran"/>
<link wikidata="Q7790840" start="7143" end="7180" title="Thomas Howard, 3rd Earl of Berkshire" label="The 3rd Earl of Berkshire (1619–1706)"/>
<link wikidata="Q337634" start="7554" end="7578" title="Charles Howard, 3rd Earl of Carlisle" label="The 3rd Earl of Carlisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049514" start="7594" end="7607" title="Castle Howard" label="Castle Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2697139" start="7727" end="7749" title="William Cavendish, 1st Duke of Devonshire" label="The Duke of Devonshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026694" start="7814" end="7842" title="Philip Stanhope, 2nd Earl of Chesterfield" label="The 2nd Earl of Chesterfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5443953" start="7916" end="7935" title="Ferdinando Stanhope" label="Ferdinando Stanhope"/>
<link wikidata="Q7609477" start="7994" end="8020" title="Theophilus Hastings, 7th Earl of Huntingdon" label="The 7th Earl of Huntingdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184500" start="8136" end="8142" title="Philip VanBrugh" label="Philip"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984260" start="8156" end="8175" title="Newfoundland Colony" label="Newfoundland Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q7527243" start="8289" end="8321" title="Sir Herbert Croft, 1st Baronet" label="Sir Herbert Croft Bt (1652–1720)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11802547" start="8323" end="8352" title="Roger Cave" label="Sir Roger Cave Bt (1655–1703)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7528406" start="8385" end="8421" title="Sir Orlando Bridgeman, 1st Baronet, of Ridley" label="Sir Orlando Bridgeman Bt (1650–1701)"/>
<link wikidata="Q129987" start="8563" end="8580" title="William III of England" label="William of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q126188" start="8600" end="8608" title="James II of England" label="James II"/>
<link wikidata="Q189508" start="8618" end="8637" title="Glorious Revolution" label="Glorious Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="8723" end="8746" title="parliamentary democracy" label="parliamentary democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q36600" start="8845" end="8854" title="The Hague" label="The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q6454" start="8881" end="8887" title="Calais" label="Calais"/>
<link wikidata="Q193819" start="9158" end="9167" title="Vincennes" label="Vincennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="9255" end="9264" title="Louis XIV" label="Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865480" start="9306" end="9314" title="Bastille" label="Bastille"/>
<link wikidata="Q12193" start="10500" end="10505" title="Brest, France" label="Brest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417500" start="10990" end="11002" title="Kit-Cat Club" label="Kit-Cat Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q366805" start="11282" end="11298" title="William Congreve (playwright)" label="William Congreve"/>
<link wikidata="Q206384" start="11300" end="11314" title="Joseph Addison" label="Joseph Addison"/>
<link wikidata="Q65317" start="11316" end="11331" title="Godfrey Kneller" label="Godfrey Kneller"/>
<link wikidata="Q678363" start="11337" end="11348" title="Politics of the United Kingdom" label="politicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q153803" start="11354" end="11373" title="John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough" label="Duke of Marlborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066062" start="11375" end="11390" title="Charles Seymour, 6th Duke of Somerset" label="Charles Seymour"/>
<link wikidata="Q5075725" start="11396" end="11414" title="Charles Boyle, 2nd Earl of Burlington" label="Earl of Burlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q273809" start="11416" end="11436" title="Thomas Pelham-Holles" label="Thomas Pelham-Holles"/>
<link wikidata="Q104190" start="11438" end="11456" title="Robert Walpole" label="Sir Robert Walpole"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072512" start="11461" end="11496" title="Richard Temple, 1st Viscount Cobham" label="Richard Temple, 1st Viscount Cobham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003761" start="11552" end="11557" title="Stowe, Buckinghamshire" label="Stowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="11624" end="11634" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="11696" end="11706" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q309903" start="12234" end="12248" title="Horace Walpole" label="Horace Walpole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155331" start="13243" end="13263" title="His Majesty&amp;#x27;s Theatre, London" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q893034" start="13268" end="13277" title="Haymarket (London)" label="Haymarket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511187" start="13334" end="13350" title="Thomas Betterton" label="Thomas Betterton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13451" end="13480" title="#The Provoked Wife" label="&amp;quot;The Provoked Wife&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q194326" start="13637" end="13645" title="juggling" label="juggling"/>
<link wikidata="Q13409536" start="13647" end="13656" title="pantomime" label="pantomime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923560" start="13672" end="13681" title="John Rich (producer)" label="John Rich"/>
<link wikidata="Q5102690" start="14782" end="14792" title="Owen Swiny" label="Owen Swiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109101" start="15507" end="15522" title="College of Arms" label="College of Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095534" start="15686" end="15709" title="Clarenceux King of Arms" label="Clarenceux King of Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265164" start="15980" end="15999" title="Earl Marshal" label="Deputy Earl Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q696819" start="16319" end="16325" title="herald" label="herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q535449" start="16478" end="16484" title="tabard" label="tabard"/>
<link wikidata="Q332154" start="16549" end="16561" title="octogenarian" label="octogenarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q640138" start="16562" end="16581" title="Garter King of Arms" label="Garter King of Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q5728581" start="16583" end="16602" title="Henry St George, the younger" label="Sir Henry St George"/>
<link wikidata="Q1715" start="16625" end="16632" title="Hanover" label="Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q215248" start="16647" end="16666" title="Order of the Garter" label="Order of the Garter"/>
<link wikidata="Q131981" start="16670" end="16683" title="George II of Great Britain" label="Prince George"/>
<link wikidata="Q18210399" start="16891" end="16922" title="St Lawrence&amp;#x27;s Church, York" label="St Lawrence&amp;#x27;s Church, York"/>
<link wikidata="Q5745748" start="16985" end="17000" title="Heslington Hall" label="Heslington Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7286558" start="17146" end="17150" title="rake (character)" label="rake"/>
<link wikidata="Q5466622" start="17162" end="17165" title="fop" label="fop"/>
<link wikidata="Q35869" start="17259" end="17265" title="asthma" label="asthma"/>
<link wikidata="Q391620" start="17359" end="17375" title="Whitehall Palace" label="Whitehall Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q41166" start="17393" end="17398" title="Jonathan Swift" label="Swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q19873590" start="17412" end="17421" title="Goose-pie House" label="goose pie"/>
<link wikidata="Q179385" start="17476" end="17485" title="Greenwich, London" label="Greenwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q15979590" start="17569" end="17584" title="Vanbrugh Castle" label="Vanbrugh Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q91312" start="17607" end="17618" title="tower house" label="tower house"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="17720" end="17723" title="RAF" label="RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q918326" start="18115" end="18128" title="Colley Cibber" label="Colley Cibber"/>
<link wikidata="Q16386791" start="18386" end="18408" title="Love&amp;#x27;s Last Shift" label="Love&amp;#x27;s Last Shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q7286558" start="19289" end="19305" title="Rake (character)" label="Restoration rake"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058431" start="19930" end="19941" title="The Relapse" label="The Relapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="20478" end="20491" title="psychology" label="psychological"/>
<link wikidata="Q902180" start="20511" end="20520" title="trickster" label="trickster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2844015" start="22762" end="22775" title="Love for Love" label="Love for Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q750975" start="23207" end="23223" title="Anne Bracegirdle" label="Anne Bracegirdle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3389567" start="24191" end="24203" title="problem play" label="problem play"/>
<link wikidata="Q101948335" start="24428" end="24444" title="The False Friend (Vanbrugh play)" label="The False Friend"/>
<link wikidata="Q98966282" start="24466" end="24481" title="Squire Trelooby" label="Squire Trelooby"/>
<link wikidata="Q101948330" start="24503" end="24518" title="The Confederacy (play)" label="The Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346769" start="24704" end="24718" title="Jeremy Collier" label="Jeremy Collier"/>
<link wikidata="Q138377" start="24732" end="24797" title="Short View of the Immorality and Profaneness of the English Stage" label="Short View of the Immorality and Profaneness of the English Stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q41166" start="26131" end="26145" title="Jonathan Swift" label="Jonathan Swift"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26410" end="26420" title="#Early life and background" label="Early life"/>
<link wikidata="Q5501689" start="26478" end="26510" title="French Baroque architecture" label="contemporary French architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q663673" start="26617" end="26637" title="Château de Vincennes" label="Château de Vincennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q310530" start="26721" end="26733" title="Louis Le Vau" label="Louis Le Vau"/>
<link wikidata="Q188977" start="26965" end="26978" title="Les Invalides" label="Les Invalides"/>
<link wikidata="Q979600" start="26984" end="27010" title="Collège des Quatre-Nations" label="Collège des Quatre-Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984289" start="27019" end="27049" title="east wing of the Louvre Palace" label="east wing of the Louvre Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900281" start="27112" end="27123" title="Perspective (visual)" label="perspective"/>
<link wikidata="Q366674" start="27175" end="27193" title="Nicholas Hawksmoor" label="Nicholas Hawksmoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q170373" start="27228" end="27244" title="Christopher Wren" label="Christopher Wren"/>
<link wikidata="Q501080" start="27544" end="27560" title="Kimbolton Castle" label="Kimbolton Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q793583" start="27873" end="27912" title="Charles Montagu, 1st Duke of Manchester" label="Charles Montagu, 1st Duke of Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365000" start="28155" end="28166" title="Elizabethan architecture" label="Elizabethan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015079" start="28186" end="28200" title="Burghley House" label="Burghley House"/>
<link wikidata="Q17528596" start="28202" end="28215" title="Wollaton Hall" label="Wollaton Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526406" start="28217" end="28230" title="Hardwick Hall" label="Hardwick Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2968590" start="28235" end="28250" title="Bolsover Castle" label="Bolsover Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670534" start="28559" end="28573" title="London Journal" label="London Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q840829" start="28639" end="28646" title="Baroque architecture" label="baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q160538" start="28739" end="28746" title="Gian Lorenzo Bernini" label="Bernini"/>
<link wikidata="Q310530" start="28751" end="28757" title="Louis Le Vau" label="Le Vau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068289" start="28812" end="28828" title="Chatsworth House" label="Chatsworth House"/>
<link wikidata="Q964066" start="28842" end="28856" title="William Talman (architect)" label="William Talman"/>
<link wikidata="Q337634" start="29097" end="29113" title="Charles Howard, 3rd Earl of Carlisle" label="Earl of Carlisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049514" start="29391" end="29404" title="Castle Howard" label="Castle Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q23086" start="29406" end="29421" title="North Yorkshire" label="North Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q208181" start="29447" end="29462" title="Blenheim Palace" label="Blenheim Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q23169" start="29464" end="29475" title="Oxfordshire" label="Oxfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6413038" start="29501" end="29519" title="Kings Weston House" label="Kings Weston House"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="29521" end="29528" title="Bristol" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915561" start="29547" end="29566" title="Seaton Delaval Hall" label="Seaton Delaval Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q23079" start="29568" end="29582" title="Northumberland" label="Northumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q337634" start="29743" end="29779" title="Charles Howard, 3rd Earl of Carlisle" label="Charles Howard, 3rd Earl of Carlisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417500" start="29804" end="29816" title="Kit-Cat Club" label="Kit-Cat Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1802963" start="29862" end="29869" title="mansion" label="mansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q657100" start="30071" end="30080" title="colonnade" label="colonnade"/>
<link wikidata="Q11346334" start="30198" end="30204" title="cupola" label="cupola"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526679" start="30365" end="30381" title="John Webb (architect)" label="John Webb&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q739976" start="30599" end="30614" title="Vaux-le-Vicomte" label="Vaux-le-Vicomte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415022" start="30719" end="30728" title="Scagliola" label="Scagliola"/>
<link wikidata="Q54124" start="30734" end="30752" title="Corinthian order" label="Corinthian columns"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31561" end="31597" title="Office of Works#Comptroller of the King&amp;#x27;s Works" label="Comptroller of the King&amp;#x27;s Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q366674" start="32230" end="32248" title="Nicholas Hawksmoor" label="Nicholas Hawksmoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060703" start="32908" end="32931" title="Old War Office Building" label="Old War Office Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q153803" start="32962" end="32988" title="John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough" label="Duke of Marlborough&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="33010" end="33026" title="Louis XIV of France" label="Louis XIV&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q154635" start="33035" end="33043" title="Battle of Blenheim" label="Blenheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="33062" end="33068" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q366674" start="33346" end="33364" title="Nicholas Hawksmoor" label="Nicholas Hawksmoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343246" start="33435" end="33448" title="country house" label="country house"/>
<link wikidata="Q575759" start="33586" end="33598" title="war memorial" label="war memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q23413" start="33625" end="33631" title="castle" label="castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q88291" start="33636" end="33643" title="citadel" label="citadel"/>
<link wikidata="Q16560" start="33652" end="33658" title="palace" label="palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q89794" start="34365" end="34377" title="Curtain wall (fortification)" label="curtain wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q274153" start="34562" end="34573" title="water tower" label="water tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431958" start="34825" end="34835" title="state room" label="state room"/>
<link wikidata="Q309250" start="34901" end="34910" title="courtyard" label="courtyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q214252" start="34929" end="34935" title="stable" label="stable"/>
<link wikidata="Q852100" start="34966" end="34975" title="laundry" label="laundries"/>
<link wikidata="Q815421" start="35373" end="35385" title="piano nobile" label="piano nobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946" start="35537" end="35547" title="Palace of Versailles" label="Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q134194" start="35989" end="35995" title="fresco" label="fresco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431958" start="35998" end="36004" title="state room" label="saloon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="37050" end="37069" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q6413038" start="37108" end="37126" title="Kings Weston House" label="Kings Weston House"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="37130" end="37137" title="Bristol" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q816265" start="38805" end="38814" title="Belvedere (structure)" label="belvedere"/>
<link wikidata="Q942787" start="39223" end="39230" title="lunette" label="lunette"/>
<link wikidata="Q128403915" start="40188" end="40203" title="Venetian window" label="Venetian window"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792885" start="40312" end="40321" title="Avonmouth" label="Avonmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915561" start="40795" end="40814" title="Seaton Delaval Hall" label="Seaton Delaval Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q335261" start="41195" end="41203" title="Ornament (architecture)" label="Ornament"/>
<link wikidata="Q898700" start="41320" end="41330" title="silhouette" label="silhouette"/>
<link wikidata="Q5538476" start="41511" end="41525" title="George Delaval" label="George Delaval"/>
<link wikidata="Q177692" start="41638" end="41646" title="Palladio" label="Palladio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139609" start="41654" end="41667" title="Villa Foscari" label="Villa Foscari"/>
<link wikidata="Q396851" start="41745" end="41755" title="rustication (architecture)" label="rusticated"/>
<link wikidata="Q244490" start="41839" end="41844" title="attic" label="attic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161370" start="41845" end="41850" title="gable" label="gable"/>
<link wikidata="Q580731" start="41881" end="41891" title="clerestory" label="clerestory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135108" start="42020" end="42034" title="corps de logis" label="corps de logis"/>
<link wikidata="Q186637" start="42221" end="42227" title="Arcade (architecture)" label="arcade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135108" start="42456" end="42470" title="corps de logis" label="corps de logis"/>
<link wikidata="Q658386" start="42614" end="42625" title="Baluster" label="balustrades"/>
<link wikidata="Q683031" start="42630" end="42638" title="pinnacle" label="pinnacle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1731" start="42996" end="43003" title="Dresden" label="Dresden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2999" start="43007" end="43015" title="Würzburg" label="Würzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q23079" start="43080" end="43094" title="Northumberland" label="Northumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q328092" start="43376" end="43383" title="cornice (architecture)" label="cornice"/>
<link wikidata="Q170552" start="43710" end="43717" title="balcony" label="balcony"/>
<link wikidata="Q580731" start="43873" end="43883" title="clerestory" label="clerestory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406758" start="44153" end="44159" title="finial" label="finial"/>
<link wikidata="Q657100" start="44230" end="44239" title="colonnade" label="colonnade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417500" start="44830" end="44842" title="Kit-Cat Club" label="Kit-Cat Club"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44935" end="44971" title="Office of Works#Comptroller of the King&amp;#x27;s Works" label="Comptroller of the King&amp;#x27;s Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q205666" start="45005" end="45025" title="Hampton Court Palace" label="Hampton Court Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q15137935" start="45087" end="45105" title="Greenwich Hospital (London)" label="Greenwich Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q119702" start="45604" end="45614" title="Anne, Queen of Great Britain" label="Queen Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q19176" start="46018" end="46033" title="Sarah Churchill, Duchess of Marlborough" label="Sarah Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q170373" start="46059" end="46075" title="Christopher Wren" label="Christopher Wren"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477326" start="46099" end="46106" title="Warrant (law)" label="warrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q947776" start="46121" end="46138" title="Sidney Godolphin, 1st Earl of Godolphin" label="Earl of Godolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5396975" start="46294" end="46308" title="get-out clause" label="get-out clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q130805" start="47172" end="47180" title="George I of Great Britain" label="George I"/>
<link wikidata="Q108700" start="47453" end="47457" title="Whigs (British political party)" label="Whig"/>
<link wikidata="Q610462" start="48209" end="48225" title="Grinling Gibbons" label="Grinling Gibbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q6139983" start="48371" end="48382" title="James Moore (furniture designer)" label="James Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q4666556" start="49403" end="49413" title="Abel Evans" label="Abel Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q952386" start="49671" end="49690" title="St Stephen Walbrook" label="St Stephen Walbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="49698" end="49712" title="City of London" label="City of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q9068" start="49861" end="49869" title="Voltaire" label="Voltaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q332487" start="52135" end="52148" title="Philip Stanhope, 4th Earl of Chesterfield" label="Lord Stanhope"/>
<link wikidata="Q42807" start="52185" end="52190" title="Nîmes" label="Nîmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q309903" start="52298" end="52312" title="Horace Walpole" label="Horace Walpole"/>
<link wikidata="Q312635" start="52965" end="52976" title="Robert Adam" label="Robert Adam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618073" start="52981" end="52991" title="James Adam (architect)" label="James Adam"/>
<link wikidata="Q194402" start="53877" end="53892" title="Joshua Reynolds" label="Joshua Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q4006821" start="54098" end="54111" title="Uvedale Price" label="Uvedale Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q549786" start="54344" end="54354" title="John Soane" label="John Soane"/>
<link wikidata="Q983719" start="54512" end="54529" title="Robert Smirke (architect)" label="Sir Robert Smirke"/>
<link wikidata="Q567735" start="54907" end="54931" title="Charles Robert Cockerell" label="Charles Robert Cockerell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7490395" start="55765" end="55772" title="sharper" label="sharper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7023752" start="55909" end="55916" title="confidence trick" label="con men"/>
<link wikidata="Q101948332" start="56193" end="56213" title="The Provoked Husband" label="The Provoked Husband"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421766" start="56711" end="56722" title="bowdlerised" label="bowdlerised"/>
<link wikidata="Q222390" start="57042" end="57055" title="David Garrick" label="David Garrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q527971" start="57982" end="58002" title="Edward Lovett Pearce" label="Edward Lovett Pearce"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913999" start="58334" end="58338" title="Vanbrugh College (University of York)" label="York"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645659" start="58604" end="58634" title="List of works by John Vanbrugh" label="List of works by John Vanbrugh"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143284" wikidata="Q1417690" url="?curid=143284" title="Restoration comedy">
<text>Restoration comedy is English comedy written and performed in the Restoration period of 1660–1710. Comedy of manners is used as a synonym for this. After public stage performances were banned for 18 years by the Puritan regime, reopening of the theatres in 1660 marked a renaissance of English drama. Sexually explicit language was encouraged by King Charles II (1660–1685) personally and by the rakish style of his court. Historian George Norman Clark argues:

The socially diverse audiences included aristocrats, their servants and hangers-on and a major middle-class segment. They were attracted to the comedies by up-to-the-minute topical writing, crowded and bustling plots, introduction of the first professional actresses, and the rise of the first celebrity actors. The period saw the first professional female playwright, Aphra Behn.

==Theatre companies==
===Original patent companies, 1660–1682===

Charles II was an active and interested patron of drama. Soon after his restoration in 1660 he granted exclusive staging rights, so-called Royal patents, to the King&#x27;s Company and the Duke&#x27;s Company, led by two middle-aged Caroline playwrights, Thomas Killigrew and William Davenant. The patentees scrambled for performance rights to the previous generation&#x27;s Jacobean and Caroline plays, as the first necessity for economic survival before any new plays existed. Their next priority was to build splendid patent theatres in Drury Lane and Dorset Gardens, respectively. Striving to outdo each other, Killigrew and Davenant ended with quite similar theatres, both designed by Christopher Wren, both optimally providing music and dancing, and both fitted with moveable scenery and elaborate machines for thunder, lightning, and waves.

The Restoration dramatists renounced the tradition of satire recently embodied by Ben Jonson, devoting themselves to the comedy of manners.

The audience of the early Restoration period was not exclusively courtly, as has sometimes been supposed, but it was quite small and could barely support two companies. There was no untapped reserve of occasional playgoers. Ten consecutive performances constituted a success. This closed system forced playwrights to respond strongly to popular taste. Fashions in drama would change almost week by week rather than season by season, as each company responded to the offerings of the other, and new plays were urgently sought. In this hectic climate the new genres of heroic drama, pathetic drama and Restoration comedy were born and flourished.

===United Company, 1682–1695===
Both the quantity and quality of drama suffered in 1682 when the more successful Duke&#x27;s Company absorbed the struggling King&#x27;s Company to form the &quot;United Company&quot;. Production of new plays dropped off sharply in the 1680s, affected by the monopoly and the political situation (see Decline of comedy below). The influence and incomes of actors dropped too. In the late 1680s, predatory investors (&quot;adventurers&quot;) converged on the United Company. Management was taken over by the lawyer Christopher Rich, who tried to finance a tangle of &quot;farmed&quot; shares and sleeping partners by slashing salaries and dangerously by abolishing traditional perks of senior performers, who were stars with the clout to fight back.

===War of the theatres, 1695–1700===
The company owners, wrote the young United Company employee Colley Cibber, &quot;had made a monopoly of the stage, and consequently presum&#x27;d they might impose what conditions they pleased upon their people. [They] did not consider that they were all this while endeavouring to enslave a set of actors whom the public were inclined to support.&quot; Performers like the legendary Thomas Betterton, the tragedienne Elizabeth Barry and the rising young comedian Anne Bracegirdle had the audience on their side, and confident of this walked out.

The actors gained a Royal &quot;licence to perform&quot;, so bypassing Rich&#x27;s ownership of the original Duke&#x27;s and King&#x27;s Company patents from 1660 and forming their own cooperative company. This venture was set up with detailed rules for avoiding arbitrary managerial authority, regulating the ten actors&#x27; shares, setting the conditions of salaried employees and the sickness and retirement benefits of both categories. The cooperative had the good luck to open in 1695 with the première of William Congreve&#x27;s famous &quot;Love For Love&quot; and the skill to make it a huge box-office success.

London again had two competing companies. Their dash to attract audiences briefly revitalised Restoration drama, but also set it on a fatal slope to the lowest common denominator of public taste. Rich&#x27;s company notoriously offered Bartholomew Fair-type attractions – high kickers, jugglers, rope dancers, performing animals – while the co-operating actors, while appealing to snobbery by setting themselves up as the one legitimate theatre company in London, were not above retaliating with &quot;prologues recited by boys of five and epilogues declaimed by ladies on horseback&quot;.

==Actors==
===First actresses===

Restoration comedy was strongly influenced by the first professional actresses. Before the closing of the theatres, all female roles had been taken by boy players and the predominantly male audiences of the 1660s and 1670s were curious, censorious and delighted at the novelty of seeing real women engage in risqué repartee and take part in physical seduction scenes. Samuel Pepys refers many times in his diary to visiting the playhouse to watch or re-watch performances by particular actresses and to his enjoyment of these.

Daringly suggestive comedy scenes involving women became especially common, although of course Restoration actresses were, just like male actors, expected to do justice to all kinds and moods of plays. (Their role in the development of Restoration tragedy is also important, compare She-tragedy.)

A speciality introduced almost as early as actresses was the breeches role – an actress appearing in male clothes (breeches of tight-fitting knee-length pants, the standard male garment of the time), for instance to play a witty heroine who disguises herself as a boy to hide or to engage in escapades disallowed to girls. A quarter of the plays produced on the London stage between 1660 and 1700 contained breeches roles. Women playing them behaved with the freedom society allowed to men. Some feminist critics such as Jacqueline Pearson saw them as subverting conventional gender roles and empowering female members of the audience. Elizabeth Howe has objected that the male disguise, when studied in relation to play texts, prologues, and epilogues, comes out as &quot;little more than yet another means of displaying the actress as a sexual object&quot; to male patrons, by showing off her body, normally hidden by a skirt, outlined by the male outfit.&quot;

Successful Restoration actresses included Charles II&#x27;s mistress Nell Gwyn, the tragedienne Elizabeth Barry, famous for an ability to &quot;move the passions&quot; and make whole audiences cry, the 1690s comedian Anne Bracegirdle, and Susanna Mountfort (Susanna Verbruggen), who had many roles written specially for her in the 1680s and 1690s. Letters and memoirs of the period show men and women in the audience relishing Mountfort&#x27;s swaggering, roistering impersonations of young women breeched to enjoy the social and sexual freedom of male Restoration rakes.

===First celebrity actors===

Male and female actors on the London stage in the Restoration period became for the first time public celebrities. Documents of the period show audiences attracted to performances by the talents of specific actors as much as by specific plays, and more than by authors (who seem to have been the least important draw, no performance being advertised by an author until 1699). Although playhouses were built for large audiences – the second Drury Lane theatre from 1674 held 2000 patrons – they were compact in design and an actor&#x27;s charisma could be intimately projected from the thrust stage.

With two companies competing for their services from 1660 to 1682, star actors could negotiate star deals, comprising company shares and benefit nights as well as salaries. This advantage changed when the two companies were amalgamated in 1682, but the way the actors rebelled and took command of a new company in 1695 is in itself an illustration of how far their status and power had developed since 1660.

The greatest fixed stars among Restoration actors were Elizabeth Barry (&quot;Famous Mrs Barry&quot; who &quot;forc &#x27;d Tears from the Eyes of her Auditory&quot;) and Thomas Betterton, both active in running the actors&#x27; revolt in 1695 and both original patent-holders in the resulting actors&#x27; cooperative.

Betterton played every great male part there was from 1660 into the 18th century. After watching &quot;Hamlet&quot; in 1661, Pepys reports in his diary that the young beginner Betterton &quot;did the prince&#x27;s part beyond imagination.&quot; Such expressive performances seem to have attracted playgoers as magnetically, as did the novelty of seeing women on the stage. He was soon established as the leading man in the Duke&#x27;s Company, and played Dorimant, the seminal irresistible Restoration rake, at the première of George Etherege&#x27;s &quot;Man of Mode&quot; (1676). Betterton&#x27;s position remained unassailed through the 1680s, both as leading man of the United Company and as its stage manager and &quot;de facto&quot; day-to-day leader. He remained loyal to Rich longer than many of his co-workers, but eventually it was he who headed an actors&#x27; walkout in 1695 and became the acting manager of the new company.

==Comedies==
Variety and dizzying fashion changes are typical of Restoration comedy. Though the &quot;Restoration drama&quot; unit taught to college students is likely to be telescoped in a way that makes the plays all sound contemporary, scholars now have a strong sense of the rapid evolution of English drama over these 40 years and its social and political causes. The influence of theatre-company competition and playhouse economics is also acknowledged.
Restoration comedy peaked twice. The genre came to marked maturity in the mid-1670s with an extravaganza of aristocratic comedies. Twenty lean years followed this short golden age, though the achievement of Aphra Behn in the 1680s can be noted. In the mid-1690s a brief second Restoration comedy renaissance arose, aimed at a wider audience. The comedies of the golden 1670s and 1690s peak times are extremely different from each other. An attempt is made below to illustrate the generational taste shift by describing &quot;The Country Wife&quot; (1675) and &quot;The Provoked Wife&quot; (1697) in some detail. The two plays differ in some typical ways, just as a Hollywood movie of the 1950s differs from one of the 1970s. The plays are not, however, offered as &quot;typical&quot; of their decades. Indeed, there exist no typical comedies of the 1670s or the 1690s; even within these two short peak-times, comedy types kept mutating and multiplying.

===Aristocratic comedy, 1660–1680===
The drama of the 1660s and 1670s was vitalised by the competition between the two patent companies created at the Restoration, and by the personal interest of Charles II, while comic playwrights arose to the demand for new plays. They stole freely from the contemporary French and Spanish stage, from English Jacobean and Caroline plays, and even from Greek and Roman classical comedies, combining the looted plotlines in adventurous ways. Resulting differences of tone in a single play were appreciated rather than frowned on: audiences prized &quot;variety&quot; within as well as between plays. Early Restoration audiences had little enthusiasm for structurally simple, well-shaped comedies such as those of Molière. They demanded bustling, crowded multi-plot action and fast pace. Even a splash of high heroic drama might be thrown in to enrich the comedy mix, as in George Etherege&#x27;s &quot;Love in a Tub&quot; (1664), which has one heroic verse &quot;conflict between love and friendship&quot; plot, one urbane wit comedy plot, and one burlesque pantsing plot. (&quot;See illustration, top right&quot;.) Such incongruities contributed to the low esteem held by Restoration comedy in the 18th, 19th and early 20th centuries, whereas today such total theatre experience is again valued on the stage and by postmodern academic critics.

The unsentimental or &quot;hard&quot; comedies of John Dryden, William Wycherley, and George Etherege reflected the atmosphere at Court. They celebrated with frankness an aristocratic macho lifestyle of unremitting sexual intrigue and conquest. The Earl of Rochester, a real-life Restoration rake, courtier and poet, is flatteringly portrayed in Etherege&#x27;s &quot;The Man of Mode&quot; (1676) as a riotous, witty, intellectual, sexually irresistible aristocrat, a template for posterity&#x27;s idea of the glamorous Restoration rake (actually never a very common character in Restoration comedy). Wycherley&#x27;s &quot;The Plain Dealer&quot; (1676), a variation on the theme of Molière&#x27;s &quot;Le Misanthrope&quot;, was highly regarded for uncompromising satire and earned Wycherley the appellation &quot;Plain Dealer&quot; Wycherley or &quot;Manly&quot; Wycherley, after the play&#x27;s main character Manly. The single play that does most to support the charge of obscenity levelled then and now at Restoration comedy is probably Wycherley&#x27;s &quot;The Country Wife&quot; (1675). 
====Example. William Wycherley, &quot;The Country Wife&quot; (1675)====
&quot;The Country Wife&quot; has three interlinked but distinct plots, which each project sharply different moods:

1. Horner&#x27;s impotence trick provides the main plot and the organising principle. The upper-class rake Horner mounts a campaign to seduce as many respectable ladies as possible, first spreading a false rumour of his own impotence, so as to be allowed where no other men might go. The trick is a great success and Horner has sex with many married ladies of virtuous reputation, whose husbands are happy to leave them alone with him. In the famously outrageous &quot;China scene&quot;, sexual intercourse is assumed to take place repeatedly just off stage, where Horner and his mistresses carry on a sustained double entendre dialogue purportedly about Horner&#x27;s china collection. &quot;The Country Wife&quot; is driven by a succession of near-discoveries of the truth about Horner&#x27;s sexual prowess (and so the truth about the respectable ladies), from which he extricates himself by quick thinking and luck. Horner never reforms, but keeps his secret to the end and is seen to go on merrily reaping the fruits of his planted misinformation past the last act and beyond.

2. The married life of Pinchwife and Margery draws on Molière&#x27;s &quot;School for Wives&quot;. Middle-aged Pinchwife has married an ignorant young country girl in the hope that she will not know to cuckold him. Horner teaches her, and Margery cuts a swathe through the sophistications of London marriage without even noticing them. She is enthusiastic about the virile handsomeness of town gallants, rakes, and especially theatre actors (such self-referential stage jokes were nourished by the new higher status of actors), and keeps Pinchwife in a state of continual horror with her plain-spokenness and interest in sex. A running joke is the way Pinchwife&#x27;s pathological jealousy always leads him into supplying Margery with the very information he wishes her not to have.

3. The courtship of Harcourt and Alithea is a comparatively uplifting love story, in which the witty Harcourt wins the hand of Pinchwife&#x27;s sister Alithea from the hands of the upper-class town snob Sparkish, to whom she was engaged until discovering he loved her only for her money.

===Decline of comedy, 1678–1690===
When the two companies merged in 1682 and the London stage became a monopoly, both the number and the variety of new plays dropped sharply. There was a swing away from comedy to serious political drama, reflecting preoccupations and divisions after the Popish Plot (1678) and Exclusion Crisis (1682). The few comedies produced tended to be political in focus, the Whig dramatist Thomas Shadwell sparring with the Tories John Dryden and Aphra Behn. Behn&#x27;s achievement as an early professional woman writer has been the subject of much recent study.

===Comedy renaissance, 1690–1700===
During a second wave of Restoration comedy in the 1690s, the &quot;softer&quot; comedies of William Congreve and John Vanbrugh reflected mutating cultural perceptions and great social change. The playwrights of the 1690s set out to appeal to more socially mixed audiences with a strong middle-class element, and to female spectators, for instance by moving the war between the sexes from the arena of intrigue into that of marriage. The focus in comedy is less on young lovers outwitting the older generation, more on marital relations after the wedding bells. Thomas Southerne&#x27;s dark &quot;The Wives&#x27; Excuse&quot; (1691) is not yet &quot;soft&quot;: it shows a woman miserably married to the fop Friendall, everybody&#x27;s friend, whose follies and indiscretions undermine her social worth, as her honour is bound up in his. Mrs Friendall is pursued by a would-be lover, a matter-of-fact rake devoid of all the qualities that made Etherege&#x27;s Dorimant charming. She is kept from action and choice by the unattractiveness of all her options. The humour of this &quot;comedy&quot; is in the subsidiary love-chase and fornication plots, none in the main plot.

In Congreve&#x27;s &quot;Love for Love&quot; (1695) and &quot;The Way of the World&quot; (1700), the &quot;wit duels&quot; between lovers typical of 1670s comedy are underplayed. The give-and-take set pieces of couples still testing their attraction for each other have mutated into witty prenuptial debates on the eve of marriage, as in the famous &quot;Proviso&quot; scene in &quot;The Way of the World&quot; (1700). Vanbrugh&#x27;s &quot;The Provoked Wife&quot; (1697) follows in the footsteps of Southerne&#x27;s &quot;Wives&#x27; Excuse&quot;, with a lighter touch and more humanly recognisable characters.

====Example. John Vanbrugh, &quot;The Provoked Wife&quot; (1697)====

&quot;The Provoked Wife&quot; is something of a Restoration problem play in its attention to the subordinate legal position of married women and the complexities of &quot;divorce&quot; and separation, issues that had been highlighted in the mid-1690s by some notorious cases before the House of Lords (see Stone).

Sir John Brute in &quot;The Provoked Wife&quot; is tired of matrimony. He comes home drunk every night and is continually rude and insulting to his wife. She is meanwhile tempted to embark on an affair with the witty and faithful Constant. Divorce is no option for either of the Brutes at this time, but forms of legal separation have recently arisen and would entail separate maintenance for the wife. Such an arrangement would prevent remarriage. Still, muses Lady Brute, in one of many discussions with her niece Bellinda, &quot;These are good times. A woman may have a gallant and a separate maintenance too.&quot;

Bellinda is meanwhile grumpily courted by Constant&#x27;s friend Heartfree, who is surprised and dismayed to find himself in love with her. The bad example of the Brutes is a constant warning to Heartfree not to marry.

&quot;The Provoked Wife&quot; is a talk play, with the focus less on love scenes and more on discussions between friends, female (Lady Brute and Bellinda) and male (Constant and Heartfree). These are full of jokes, but are also thoughtful, with a dimension of melancholy and frustration.

After a forged-letter complication, the play ends with marriage between Heartfree and Bellinda and stalemate between the Brutes. Constant continues to pay court to Lady Brute, and she continues to shilly-shally.

===End of comedy===
The tolerance for Restoration comedy even in its modified form was running out by the end of the 17th century, as public opinion turned to respectability and seriousness faster than playwrights did. Interconnected causes for this shift in taste were demographic change, the Glorious Revolution of 1688, William&#x27;s and Mary&#x27;s dislike of the theatre, and the lawsuits brought against playwrights by the Society for the Reformation of Manners (founded in 1692). When Jeremy Collier attacked Congreve and Vanbrugh in his &quot;Short View of the Immorality and Profaneness of the English Stage&quot; in 1698, he was confirming a shift in audience taste that had taken place. At the much-anticipated all-star première in 1700 of &quot;The Way of the World&quot;, Congreve&#x27;s first comedy for five years, the audience showed only moderate enthusiasm for that subtle and almost melancholy work. The comedy of sex and wit was about to be replaced by the drama of obvious sentiment and exemplary morality.

==After Restoration comedy==
===Stage history===
During the 18th and 19th centuries, the sexual frankness of Restoration comedy ensured that theatre producers cannibalised it or adapted it with a heavy hand, rather than actually performed it. Today Restoration comedy is again appreciated on stage. The classics – Wycherley&#x27;s &quot;The Country Wife&quot; and &quot;The Plain-Dealer&quot;, Etherege&#x27;s &quot;The Man of Mode&quot;, and Congreve&#x27;s &quot;Love For Love&quot; and &quot;The Way of the World&quot; – have competition not only from Vanbrugh&#x27;s &quot;The Relapse&quot; and &quot;The Provoked Wife&quot;, but from such dark, unfunny comedies as Thomas Southerne&#x27;s &quot;The Wives Excuse&quot;. Aphra Behn, once considered unstageable, has had a renaissance, with &quot;The Rover&quot; now a repertory favourite.

===Literary criticism===
Distaste for sexual impropriety long kept Restoration comedy off the stage, locked in a critical poison cupboard. Victorian critics like William Hazlitt, though valuing the linguistic energy and &quot;strength&quot; of the writers Etherege, Wycherley and Congreve, found it necessary to temper aesthetic praise with heavy moral condemnation. Aphra Behn received the condemnation without the praise, as outspoken sex comedy was seen as particularly offensive from a woman author. At the turn of the 20th century, an embattled minority of academic Restoration comedy enthusiasts began to appear, such as the editor Montague Summers, whose work ensured that plays of Restoration comedy authors remained in print.

&quot;Critics remain astonishingly defensive about the masterpieces of this period,&quot; wrote Robert D. Hume as late as 1976. It is only over the last few decades that the statement has become untrue, with Restoration comedy acknowledged as a rewarding subject for high theory analysis, and Wycherley&#x27;s &quot;The Country Wife&quot;, long branded the most obscene play in the English language, becoming something of an academic favourite. &quot;Minor&quot; comic writers are getting a fair share of attention, especially the post-Aphra Behn generation of women playwrights around the turn of the 18th century: Delarivier Manley, Mary Pix, Catharine Trotter, and Susanna Centlivre. A broad study of most never-reprinted Restoration comedies has been made possible by internet access (by subscription only) to the first editions at the British Library.

==List of Restoration comedies==
*George Etherege – &quot;The Comical Revenge&quot; (1664), &quot;She Would If She Could&quot; (1668), &quot;The Man of Mode&quot; (1676)
*John Dryden – &quot;An Evening&#x27;s Love&quot; (1668), &quot;Marriage a la Mode&quot; (1672)
*Charles Sedley – &quot;The Mulberry-Garden&quot; (1668), &quot;Bellamira: or, The Mistress&quot; (1687)
*George Villiers, 2nd Duke of Buckingham – &quot;The Rehearsal&quot; (1671)
*William Wycherley – &quot;Love in a Wood&quot; (1671), &quot;The Country Wife&quot; (1675), &quot;The Plain Dealer&quot; (1676)
*Thomas Shadwell – &quot;Epsom Wells&quot; (1672), &quot;The Virtuoso&quot; (1676), &quot;A True Widow&quot; (1678), &quot;The Woman Captain&quot; (1679), &quot;The Squire of Alsatia&quot; (1688), &quot;Bury Fair&quot; (1689), &quot;The Volunteers&quot; (1692)
*Edward Ravenscroft – &quot;The Careless Lovers&quot; (1673) &quot;The London Cuckolds&quot; (1681), &quot;Dame Dobson&quot; (1683), &quot;The Canterbury Guests&quot; (1694)
*John Crowne – &quot;The Country Wit&quot; (1676), &quot;City Politiques&quot; (1683), &quot;Sir Courtly Nice&quot; (1685), &quot;The English Friar&quot; (1690), &quot;The Married Beau&quot; (1694)
* Thomas Rawlins – &quot;Tom Essence&quot; (1676), &quot;Tunbridge Wells&quot; (1678)
*Aphra Behn – &quot;The Counterfeit Bridegroom&quot; (1677), &quot;The Rover&quot; (1677), &quot;The Roundheads&quot; (1681), &quot;The Revenge&quot; (1680), &quot;The City Heiress&quot; (1682), &quot;The Lucky Chance&quot; (1686)
*Thomas D&#x27;Urfey – &quot;A Fond Husband&quot; (1677), &quot;Squire Oldsapp&quot; (1678), &quot;The Virtuous Wife&quot; (1679), &quot;Sir Barnaby Whigg&quot; (1681), &quot;The Royalist&quot; (1682) &quot;A Commonwealth of Women&quot; (1685), &quot;A Fool&#x27;s Preferment&quot; (1688), &quot;Love for Money&quot; (1691), &quot;The Marriage-Hater Matched&quot; (1692), &quot;The Campaigners&quot; (1698)
* Thomas Otway – &quot;Friendship in Fashion&quot; (1678)
*Thomas Southerne – &quot;Sir Anthony Love&quot; (1690), &quot;The Wives Excuse&quot; (1691), &quot;The Maid&#x27;s Last Prayer&quot; (1693)
*William Congreve – &quot;The Old Bachelor&quot; (1693), &quot;Love For Love&quot; (1695), &quot;The Way of the World&quot; (1700)
*John Vanbrugh – &quot;The Relapse&quot; (1696), &quot;The Provoked Wife&quot; (1697)
*George Farquhar – &quot;Love and a Bottle&quot; (1698), &quot;The Constant Couple&quot; (1699), &quot;Sir Harry Wildair&quot; (1701), &quot;The Recruiting Officer&quot; (1706), &quot;The Beaux&#x27; Stratagem&quot; (1707)
*Susanna Centlivre – &quot;The Perjured Husband&quot; (1700), &quot;The Basset-Table&quot;, (1705), &quot;The Busie Body&quot; (1709)

==Film adaptations==

*&quot;The Country Wife&quot;, starring Helen Mirren (1977)

==See also==

*Essay of Dramatick Poesie
*John Rich (producer)
*Restoration style

==Notes==
==References==
*Colley Cibber, first published 1740, 1976, &quot;An Apology for the Life of Colley Cibber&quot;. London: J. M. Dent &amp; Sons
*Bonamy Dobrée, 1927, Introduction to &quot;The Complete Works of Sir John Vanbrugh&quot;, vol. 1. Bloomsbury: The Nonesuch Press
*Elizabeth Howe, 1992, &quot;The First English Actresses: Women and Drama 1660–1700&quot;. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
*Robert D. Hume, 1976, &quot;The Development of English Drama in the Late Seventeenth Century&quot;. Oxford: Clarendon Press
*Judith Milhous, 1979, &quot;Thomas Betterton and the Management of Lincoln&#x27;s Inn Fields 1695–1708&quot;. Carbondale, Illinois: Southern Illinois University Press
*Fidelis Morgan, 1981, &quot;The Female Wits – Women Playwrights on the London Stage 1660–1720&quot;. London: Virago
*Jacqueline Pearson, 1988, &quot;The Prostituted Muse: Images of Women and Women Dramatists 1642–1737&quot;. New York: St. Martin&#x27;s Press
*Lawrence Stone, 1990, &quot;Road to Divorce: England 1530–1987&quot;. Oxford: Oxford University Press
*William Van Lennep, ed., 1965, &quot;The London Stage 1660–1800: A Calendar of Plays, Entertainments &amp; Afterpieces Together with Casts, Box-Receipts and Contemporary Comment Compiled From the Playbills, Newspapers and Theatrical Diaries of the Period, Part 1: 1660–1700&quot;. Carbondale, Illinois: Southern Illinois University Press

==Further reading==
Selected seminal critical studies:
*Douglas Canfield, 1997, &quot;Tricksters and Estates: On the Ideology of Restoration Comedy&quot;. Lexington, Kentucky: The University Press of Kentucky
*Thomas H. Fujimura, 1952, &quot;The Restoration Comedy of Wit&quot;. Princeton: Princeton University Press
*Norman N. Holland, 1959), &quot;The First Modern Comedies: The Significance of Etherege, Wycherley and Congreve&quot;. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press
*Robert Markley, 1988, &quot;Two-Edg&#x27;d Weapons: Style and Ideology in the Comedies of Etherege, Wycherley, and Congreve&quot;. Oxford : Clarendon Press
*Montague Summers, 1935, &quot;Playhouse of Pepys&quot;. London: Kegan Paul
*Harold Weber, 1986, &quot;The Restoration Rake-Hero: Transformations in Sexual Understanding in Seventeenth-Century England&quot;. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press
*Rose Zimbardo, 1965, &quot;Wycherley&#x27;s Drama: A Link in the Development of English Satire.&quot; New Haven: Yale University Press

==External links==

*Restoration playhouses (archived 11 March 2007)
*Links to e-texts of restorations Plays, Univ. of Oldenburg, 2007
*17th Century Database
*Aphra Behn, &quot;The Rover&quot;
*William Congreve, &quot;Love For Love&quot;
*William Congreve, &quot;The Way of the World&quot;
*George Etherege, &quot;The Man of Mode&quot; (archived 31 October 2000)
*John Vanbrugh, &quot;The Provoked Wife&quot;. Use with caution, this is an abridged and bowdlerised text.
*William Wycherley, &quot;The Country Wife&quot;
*William Wycherley, &quot;The Gentleman Dancing-Master&quot; (archived 4 December 2004)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1417690" start="0" end="18" title="Restoration comedy" label="Restoration comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151421" start="30" end="36" title="Comedy (drama)" label="comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q846848" start="66" end="77" title="Restoration (England)" label="Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q222926" start="99" end="116" title="Comedy of manners" label="Comedy of manners"/>
<link wikidata="Q137073" start="212" end="219" title="Puritan" label="Puritan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4065157" start="286" end="299" title="English drama" label="English drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="346" end="361" title="Charles II of England" label="King Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5542931" start="433" end="452" title="George Norman Clark" label="George Norman Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q231886" start="831" end="841" title="Aphra Behn" label="Aphra Behn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511010" start="1049" end="1062" title="letters patent" label="Royal patents"/>
<link wikidata="Q2197437" start="1071" end="1090" title="King&amp;#x27;s Company" label="King&amp;#x27;s Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041073" start="1099" end="1118" title="Duke&amp;#x27;s Company" label="Duke&amp;#x27;s Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="1143" end="1151" title="Charles I of England" label="Caroline"/>
<link wikidata="Q490824" start="1165" end="1181" title="Thomas Killigrew" label="Thomas Killigrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q450199" start="1186" end="1202" title="William Davenant" label="William Davenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="1285" end="1293" title="James I of England" label="Jacobean"/>
<link wikidata="Q381395" start="1431" end="1445" title="patent theatre" label="patent theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261392" start="1450" end="1460" title="Drury Lane" label="Drury Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527632" start="1465" end="1479" title="Dorset Gardens" label="Dorset Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q170373" start="1600" end="1616" title="Christopher Wren" label="Christopher Wren"/>
<link wikidata="Q193857" start="1841" end="1851" title="Ben Jonson" label="Ben Jonson"/>
<link wikidata="Q222926" start="1880" end="1897" title="comedy of manners" label="comedy of manners"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134237" start="1965" end="1972" title="noble court" label="courtly"/>
<link wikidata="Q483394" start="2457" end="2462" title="genre" label="genre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3038949" start="2467" end="2479" title="heroic drama" label="heroic drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055934" start="2481" end="2495" title="she-tragedy" label="pathetic drama"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2879" end="2896" title="#Decline of comedy, 1678–90" label="Decline of comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2966642" start="3092" end="3108" title="Christopher Rich (theatre manager)" label="Christopher Rich"/>
<link wikidata="Q918326" start="3425" end="3438" title="Colley Cibber" label="Colley Cibber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511187" start="3749" end="3765" title="Thomas Betterton" label="Thomas Betterton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2403674" start="3783" end="3798" title="Elizabeth Barry" label="Elizabeth Barry"/>
<link wikidata="Q750975" start="3829" end="3845" title="Anne Bracegirdle" label="Anne Bracegirdle"/>
<link wikidata="Q366805" start="4425" end="4441" title="William Congreve (playwright)" label="William Congreve"/>
<link wikidata="Q4865247" start="4771" end="4787" title="Bartholomew Fair" label="Bartholomew Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q24884889" start="5247" end="5274" title="London theatre closure 1642" label="the closing of the theatres"/>
<link wikidata="Q895818" start="5311" end="5321" title="boy player" label="boy player"/>
<link wikidata="Q106143" start="5528" end="5540" title="Samuel Pepys" label="Samuel Pepys"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055934" start="5971" end="5982" title="She-tragedy" label="She-tragedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q849959" start="6047" end="6060" title="breeches role" label="breeches role"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672163" start="6562" end="6574" title="gender roles" label="gender roles"/>
<link wikidata="Q234163" start="7020" end="7029" title="Nell Gwyn" label="Nell Gwyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2403674" start="7047" end="7062" title="Elizabeth Barry" label="Elizabeth Barry"/>
<link wikidata="Q750975" start="7168" end="7184" title="Anne Bracegirdle" label="Anne Bracegirdle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505640" start="7209" end="7227" title="Susanna Verbruggen" label="Susanna Verbruggen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7286558" start="7504" end="7521" title="Rake (character)" label="Restoration rakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q211236" start="7656" end="7667" title="celebrity" label="celebrities"/>
<link wikidata="Q641553" start="8139" end="8151" title="thrust stage" label="thrust stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850936" start="8291" end="8305" title="Benefit concert" label="benefit nights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511187" start="8734" end="8750" title="Thomas Betterton" label="Thomas Betterton"/>
<link wikidata="Q41567" start="8987" end="8993" title="Hamlet" label="Hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7286558" start="9374" end="9390" title="Rake (character)" label="Restoration rake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2546081" start="9411" end="9426" title="George Etherege" label="George Etherege"/>
<link wikidata="Q123432" start="10391" end="10403" title="aristocracy" label="aristocratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q231886" start="10490" end="10500" title="Aphra Behn" label="Aphra Behn"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="11583" end="11591" title="James I of England" label="Jacobean"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="11596" end="11604" title="Charles I of England" label="Caroline"/>
<link wikidata="Q189072" start="11626" end="11631" title="Greek theatre" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203607" start="11636" end="11641" title="Theatre of ancient Rome" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q841090" start="11642" end="11651" title="Classics" label="classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q687" start="11985" end="11992" title="Molière" label="Molière"/>
<link wikidata="Q2546081" start="12145" end="12160" title="George Etherege" label="George Etherege"/>
<link wikidata="Q47783" start="12588" end="12598" title="postmodern" label="postmodern"/>
<link wikidata="Q213355" start="12668" end="12679" title="John Dryden" label="John Dryden"/>
<link wikidata="Q978564" start="12681" end="12698" title="William Wycherley" label="William Wycherley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2546081" start="12704" end="12719" title="George Etherege" label="George Etherege"/>
<link wikidata="Q842254" start="12802" end="12807" title="machismo" label="macho"/>
<link wikidata="Q358912" start="12867" end="12884" title="John Wilmot, 2nd Earl of Rochester" label="Earl of Rochester"/>
<link wikidata="Q3203819" start="12986" end="13001" title="The Man of Mode" label="The Man of Mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q3203701" start="13242" end="13258" title="The Plain Dealer (play)" label="The Plain Dealer"/>
<link wikidata="Q687" start="13301" end="13308" title="Molière" label="Molière"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053387" start="13322" end="13336" title="Le Misanthrope" label="Le Misanthrope"/>
<link wikidata="Q31110" start="13594" end="13603" title="obscenity" label="obscenity"/>
<link wikidata="Q734639" start="13683" end="13699" title="The Country Wife" label="The Country Wife"/>
<link wikidata="Q734639" start="13793" end="13809" title="The Country Wife" label="The Country Wife"/>
<link wikidata="Q184674" start="13920" end="13929" title="impotence" label="impotence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030511" start="14515" end="14530" title="double entendre" label="double entendre"/>
<link wikidata="Q131395" start="14531" end="14539" title="dialogue" label="dialogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q937443" start="15061" end="15077" title="School for Wives" label="School for Wives"/>
<link wikidata="Q901048" start="15655" end="15676" title="pathological jealousy" label="pathological jealousy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540578" start="16348" end="16359" title="Popish Plot" label="Popish Plot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383566" start="16371" end="16387" title="Exclusion Crisis" label="Exclusion Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q108700" start="16459" end="16463" title="British Whig Party" label="Whig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230771" start="16474" end="16489" title="Thomas Shadwell" label="Thomas Shadwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q499956" start="16508" end="16514" title="Tories (British political party)" label="Tories"/>
<link wikidata="Q213355" start="16515" end="16526" title="John Dryden" label="John Dryden"/>
<link wikidata="Q231886" start="16531" end="16541" title="Aphra Behn" label="Aphra Behn"/>
<link wikidata="Q366805" start="16777" end="16793" title="William Congreve (playwright)" label="William Congreve"/>
<link wikidata="Q333398" start="16798" end="16811" title="John Vanbrugh" label="John Vanbrugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2403714" start="17246" end="17262" title="Thomas Southerne" label="Thomas Southerne"/>
<link wikidata="Q107608623" start="17281" end="17303" title="The Wives&amp;#x27; Excuse" label="The Wives&amp;#x27; Excuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5466622" start="17388" end="17391" title="fop" label="fop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2844015" start="17884" end="17897" title="Love for Love" label="Love for Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q723947" start="17921" end="17941" title="The Way of the World" label="The Way of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q3205376" start="18300" end="18317" title="The Provoked Wife" label="The Provoked Wife"/>
<link wikidata="Q3389567" start="18602" end="18614" title="problem play" label="problem play"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="18828" end="18842" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q37732" start="20469" end="20480" title="demographic" label="demographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q189508" start="20493" end="20512" title="Glorious Revolution" label="Glorious Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q129987" start="20522" end="20529" title="William III of England" label="William"/>
<link wikidata="Q130812" start="20541" end="20545" title="Mary II of England" label="Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q747816" start="20629" end="20667" title="Society for the Reformation of Manners" label="Society for the Reformation of Manners"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346769" start="20692" end="20706" title="Jeremy Collier" label="Jeremy Collier"/>
<link wikidata="Q138377" start="20751" end="20816" title="Short View of the Immorality and Profaneness of the English Stage" label="Short View of the Immorality and Profaneness of the English Stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2403714" start="21899" end="21915" title="Thomas Southerne" label="Thomas Southerne"/>
<link wikidata="Q107608623" start="21929" end="21945" title="The Wives Excuse" label="The Wives Excuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q126596" start="22234" end="22249" title="William Hazlitt" label="William Hazlitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q712220" start="22710" end="22726" title="Montague Summers" label="Montague Summers"/>
<link wikidata="Q734639" start="23124" end="23140" title="The Country Wife" label="The Country Wife"/>
<link wikidata="Q299871" start="23424" end="23441" title="Delarivier Manley" label="Delarivier Manley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296230" start="23443" end="23451" title="Mary Pix" label="Mary Pix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091103" start="23453" end="23470" title="Catharine Trotter" label="Catharine Trotter"/>
<link wikidata="Q931103" start="23476" end="23493" title="Susanna Centlivre" label="Susanna Centlivre"/>
<link wikidata="Q23308" start="23648" end="23663" title="British Library" label="British Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q2546081" start="23700" end="23715" title="George Etherege" label="George Etherege"/>
<link wikidata="Q107608633" start="23724" end="23743" title="The Comical Revenge" label="The Comical Revenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q107649165" start="23764" end="23786" title="She Would If She Could" label="She Would If She Could"/>
<link wikidata="Q3203819" start="23807" end="23822" title="The Man of Mode" label="The Man of Mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q213355" start="23837" end="23848" title="John Dryden" label="John Dryden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4749938" start="23857" end="23879" title="An Evening&amp;#x27;s Love" label="An Evening&amp;#x27;s Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q906510" start="23900" end="23918" title="Marriage à la mode (Restoration Drama)" label="Marriage a la Mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066050" start="23933" end="23947" title="Charles Sedley" label="Charles Sedley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752608" start="23956" end="23975" title="The Mulberry-Garden" label="The Mulberry-Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883444" start="23996" end="24023" title="Bellamira (Sedley play)" label="Bellamira: or, The Mistress"/>
<link wikidata="Q336101" start="24038" end="24077" title="George Villiers, 2nd Duke of Buckingham" label="George Villiers, 2nd Duke of Buckingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3212601" start="24086" end="24099" title="The Rehearsal (play)" label="The Rehearsal"/>
<link wikidata="Q978564" start="24114" end="24131" title="William Wycherley" label="William Wycherley"/>
<link wikidata="Q108083660" start="24140" end="24154" title="Love in a Wood (play)" label="Love in a Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q734639" start="24175" end="24191" title="The Country Wife" label="The Country Wife"/>
<link wikidata="Q3203701" start="24212" end="24228" title="The Plain Dealer (play)" label="The Plain Dealer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230771" start="24243" end="24258" title="Thomas Shadwell" label="Thomas Shadwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q104855071" start="24267" end="24278" title="Epsom Wells" label="Epsom Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q7772848" start="24299" end="24311" title="The Virtuoso (play)" label="The Virtuoso"/>
<link wikidata="Q107969348" start="24332" end="24344" title="A True Widow" label="A True Widow"/>
<link wikidata="Q107969388" start="24365" end="24382" title="The Woman Captain" label="The Woman Captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841704" start="24403" end="24424" title="The Squire of Alsatia" label="The Squire of Alsatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q107970249" start="24445" end="24454" title="Bury Fair" label="Bury Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q102046500" start="24475" end="24489" title="The Volunteers (play)" label="The Volunteers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048652" start="24504" end="24522" title="Edward Ravenscroft" label="Edward Ravenscroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q107524177" start="24531" end="24550" title="The Careless Lovers" label="The Careless Lovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q107556932" start="24570" end="24589" title="The London Cuckolds" label="The London Cuckolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q107556839" start="24610" end="24621" title="Dame Dobson" label="Dame Dobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q104859547" start="24642" end="24663" title="The Canterbury Guests" label="The Canterbury Guests"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181297" start="24678" end="24689" title="John Crowne" label="John Crowne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520414" start="24698" end="24713" title="The Country Wit" label="The Country Wit"/>
<link wikidata="Q108112928" start="24734" end="24749" title="City Politiques" label="City Politiques"/>
<link wikidata="Q107524158" start="24770" end="24786" title="Sir Courtly Nice" label="Sir Courtly Nice"/>
<link wikidata="Q108004000" start="24807" end="24824" title="The English Frier" label="The English Friar"/>
<link wikidata="Q107608610" start="24845" end="24861" title="The Married Beau" label="The Married Beau"/>
<link wikidata="Q16863599" start="24877" end="24891" title="Thomas Rawlins" label="Thomas Rawlins"/>
<link wikidata="Q108112941" start="24900" end="24911" title="Tom Essence" label="Tom Essence"/>
<link wikidata="Q108112951" start="24932" end="24947" title="Tunbridge Wells (play)" label="Tunbridge Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q231886" start="24962" end="24972" title="Aphra Behn" label="Aphra Behn"/>
<link wikidata="Q107556930" start="24981" end="25007" title="The Counterfeit Bridegroom" label="The Counterfeit Bridegroom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3205256" start="25028" end="25037" title="The Rover (play)" label="The Rover"/>
<link wikidata="Q85808352" start="25058" end="25072" title="The Roundheads or, The Good Old Cause" label="The Roundheads"/>
<link wikidata="Q107568415" start="25093" end="25104" title="The Revenge (1680 play)" label="The Revenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7723175" start="25125" end="25141" title="The City Heiress" label="The City Heiress"/>
<link wikidata="Q55635364" start="25162" end="25178" title="The Lucky Chance" label="The Lucky Chance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145838" start="25193" end="25212" title="Thomas D&amp;#x27;Urfey" label="Thomas D&amp;#x27;Urfey"/>
<link wikidata="Q107596465" start="25221" end="25235" title="A Fond Husband" label="A Fond Husband"/>
<link wikidata="Q107536366" start="25256" end="25270" title="Squire Oldsapp" label="Squire Oldsapp"/>
<link wikidata="Q107969379" start="25291" end="25308" title="The Virtuous Wife (play)" label="The Virtuous Wife"/>
<link wikidata="Q108044079" start="25329" end="25346" title="Sir Barnaby Whigg" label="Sir Barnaby Whigg"/>
<link wikidata="Q107556933" start="25367" end="25379" title="The Royalist" label="The Royalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q107596459" start="25399" end="25422" title="A Commonwealth of Women" label="A Commonwealth of Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q108083765" start="25443" end="25467" title="A Fool&amp;#x27;s Preferment" label="A Fool&amp;#x27;s Preferment"/>
<link wikidata="Q107568620" start="25488" end="25502" title="Love for Money" label="Love for Money"/>
<link wikidata="Q107608618" start="25523" end="25549" title="The Marriage-Hater Matched" label="The Marriage-Hater Matched"/>
<link wikidata="Q108265750" start="25570" end="25585" title="The Campaigners" label="The Campaigners"/>
<link wikidata="Q955217" start="25601" end="25613" title="Thomas Otway" label="Thomas Otway"/>
<link wikidata="Q107608634" start="25622" end="25643" title="Friendship in Fashion" label="Friendship in Fashion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2403714" start="25658" end="25674" title="Thomas Southerne" label="Thomas Southerne"/>
<link wikidata="Q107568405" start="25683" end="25699" title="Sir Anthony Love" label="Sir Anthony Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q107608623" start="25720" end="25736" title="The Wives Excuse" label="The Wives Excuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q107969420" start="25757" end="25784" title="The Maid&amp;#x27;s Last Prayer" label="The Maid&amp;#x27;s Last Prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q366805" start="25799" end="25815" title="William Congreve (playwright)" label="William Congreve"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754796" start="25824" end="25840" title="The Old Bachelor" label="The Old Bachelor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2844015" start="25861" end="25874" title="Love For Love" label="Love For Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q723947" start="25895" end="25915" title="The Way of the World" label="The Way of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q333398" start="25930" end="25943" title="John Vanbrugh" label="John Vanbrugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058431" start="25952" end="25963" title="The Relapse" label="The Relapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3205376" start="25984" end="26001" title="The Provoked Wife" label="The Provoked Wife"/>
<link wikidata="Q517634" start="26016" end="26031" title="George Farquhar" label="George Farquhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q104853539" start="26040" end="26057" title="Love and a Bottle" label="Love and a Bottle"/>
<link wikidata="Q101096596" start="26078" end="26097" title="The Constant Couple" label="The Constant Couple"/>
<link wikidata="Q101096608" start="26118" end="26135" title="Sir Harry Wildair" label="Sir Harry Wildair"/>
<link wikidata="Q7759830" start="26156" end="26178" title="The Recruiting Officer" label="The Recruiting Officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3212548" start="26199" end="26224" title="The Beaux&amp;#x27; Stratagem" label="The Beaux&amp;#x27; Stratagem"/>
<link wikidata="Q931103" start="26239" end="26256" title="Susanna Centlivre" label="Susanna Centlivre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26265" end="26285" title="The Perjured Husband" label="The Perjured Husband"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26306" end="26322" title="The Basset-Table" label="The Basset-Table"/>
<link wikidata="Q85806682" start="26344" end="26358" title="The Busie Body" label="The Busie Body"/>
<link wikidata="Q734639" start="26402" end="26418" title="The Country Wife" label="The Country Wife"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903757" start="26471" end="26496" title="Essay of Dramatick Poesie" label="Essay of Dramatick Poesie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923560" start="26498" end="26518" title="John Rich (producer)" label="John Rich (producer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3973547" start="26520" end="26537" title="Restoration style" label="Restoration style"/>
<link wikidata="Q124344645" start="26614" end="26654" title="An Apology for the Life of Colley Cibber" label="An Apology for the Life of Colley Cibber"/>
<link wikidata="Q106686896" start="28840" end="28853" title="Rose Zimbardo" label="Rose Zimbardo"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143285" wikidata="Q1933972" url="?curid=143285" title="Infinity (Journey album)">
<text>Infinity is the fourth studio album by American rock band Journey, released in January 1978 by Columbia Records. It was the band&#x27;s first album with vocalist Steve Perry and the last to feature drummer Aynsley Dunbar.

== Background ==
Looking for a stronger lead vocalist, Journey briefly enlisted Robert Fleischman and even recorded a few tracks with him, one of which, &quot;For You&quot;, later appeared on the &quot;Time3&quot; compilation album and Fleischman&#x27;s solo album &quot;Perfect Stranger&quot;. Fleischman was soon replaced by Steve Perry, due to musical and management differences. Fleischman would later resurface as the first singer of the glam metal band Vinnie Vincent Invasion.

In &quot;Feeling That Way&quot;, Perry dueted with keyboardist Gregg Rolie, who sings lead vocals on &quot;Anytime&quot;.

&quot;Patiently&quot; was the first song Perry and Neal Schon wrote together. Perry wrote the lyrics, in which he expresses the sadness of being on the road and away from home, while also expressing admiration for the band&#x27;s fans, and Schon wrote the music for the song. Other popular singles included &quot;Lights&quot; and &quot;Wheel in the Sky&quot;. The latter was co-written with temporary frontman Fleischman.

Journey&#x27;s manager, Herbie Herbert, enlisted English producer Roy Thomas Baker to produce &quot;Infinity&quot;. Baker produced a layered sound approach, similar to his work with Queen, as demonstrated on tracks such as &quot;Winds of March&quot; (with help from engineer Geoff Workman). In addition, Baker&#x27;s method of stacked harmonies, notable on several other albums he produced, became trademarks of Journey&#x27;s sound. He achieved this by having each vocalist (usually Perry and Rolie, sometimes joined by Valory and/or Schon) sing each harmony part in unison. This had the effect of making three or four voices sound like more, and is notable on the songs &quot;Feeling that Way&quot; and &quot;Anytime&quot;, which are often played in tandem consecutively on radio stations as presented on the album.

The addition of Perry gave the band a more mainstream sound, and helped Journey attain their highest chart success to date.

== Reception ==

&quot;Cash Box&quot; said of the single &quot;Anytime&quot; that it is a &quot;dynamic, irresistible effort that features exuberant, multi-tracked harmonies and potent lead guitar.&quot; &quot;Record World&quot; said of &quot;Anytime&quot; that &quot;The a capella opening and high harmonies are guaranteed to catch the listener within seconds.&quot; &quot;The Globe and Mail&quot; deemed the album &quot;one of the most unjustifiably ignored gems of 1978.&quot;

In John Franck&#x27;s AllMusic review, he wrote that the album, &quot;effectively cemented their rep as one of America&#x27;s most beloved (and sometimes hated) commercial rock/pop bands.&quot; The changes to the band and its music allowed &quot;each bandmember to play to his strength: Perry&#x27;s soaring, whale of a voice, Schon&#x27;s scorching fret work, and Gregg Rolie&#x27;s subtle keyboard arrangements.&quot; 

== Track listing ==

== Personnel ==
Journey
*Steve Perry – lead vocals
*Neal Schon – electric and acoustic guitars, backing vocals
*Gregg Rolie – keyboards, backing and co-lead (2 &amp; 3) vocals 
*Ross Valory – bass guitar, backing vocals
*Aynsley Dunbar – drums, percussion

Production
*Roy Thomas Baker – producer, mixing
*Geoff Workman – engineering
*John Golden – mastering
*Tommy Steele – design
*Alton Kelley, Stanley Mouse – artwork
*Sam Emerson – photography
*Mark Linett, Greg Schafer – technicians

== Charts ==
==Certifications==

== References ==
===Sources===</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="48" end="52" title="Rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q464749" start="58" end="65" title="Journey (band)" label="Journey"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="95" end="111" title="Columbia Records" label="Columbia Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q175857" start="162" end="173" title="Steve Perry" label="Steve Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q516251" start="206" end="220" title="Aynsley Dunbar" label="Aynsley Dunbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344378" start="303" end="320" title="Robert Fleischman" label="Robert Fleischman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804844" start="425" end="430" title="Time 3" label="Time3"/>
<link wikidata="Q188539" start="666" end="676" title="glam metal" label="glam metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774590" start="682" end="705" title="Vinnie Vincent Invasion" label="Vinnie Vincent Invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335067" start="771" end="782" title="Gregg Rolie" label="Gregg Rolie"/>
<link wikidata="Q389242" start="882" end="892" title="Neal Schon" label="Neal Schon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6546511" start="1144" end="1150" title="Lights (Journey song)" label="Lights"/>
<link wikidata="Q7992015" start="1167" end="1183" title="Wheel in the Sky" label="Wheel in the Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7965128" start="1278" end="1292" title="Walter Herbert (manager)" label="Herbie Herbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q556032" start="1320" end="1336" title="Roy Thomas Baker" label="Roy Thomas Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q15862" start="1436" end="1441" title="Queen (band)" label="Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101061" start="1529" end="1542" title="Geoff Workman" label="Geoff Workman"/>
<link wikidata="Q656903" start="2221" end="2229" title="Cash Box" label="Cash Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q3422110" start="2408" end="2420" title="Record World" label="Record World"/>
<link wikidata="Q185298" start="2470" end="2479" title="a capella" label="a capella"/>
<link wikidata="Q604525" start="2572" end="2590" title="The Globe and Mail" label="The Globe and Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="2701" end="2709" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q175857" start="3147" end="3158" title="Steve Perry" label="Steve Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045845" start="3161" end="3172" title="lead vocalist" label="lead vocals"/>
<link wikidata="Q389242" start="3174" end="3184" title="Neal Schon" label="Neal Schon"/>
<link wikidata="Q78987" start="3187" end="3195" title="electric guitar" label="electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q31561" start="3200" end="3208" title="Acoustic guitar" label="acoustic"/>
<link wikidata="Q798487" start="3218" end="3232" title="backing vocalist" label="backing vocals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335067" start="3234" end="3245" title="Gregg Rolie" label="Gregg Rolie"/>
<link wikidata="Q52954" start="3248" end="3257" title="Keyboard instrument" label="keyboards"/>
<link wikidata="Q301874" start="3300" end="3311" title="Ross Valory" label="Ross Valory"/>
<link wikidata="Q46185" start="3314" end="3325" title="bass guitar" label="bass guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q516251" start="3343" end="3357" title="Aynsley Dunbar" label="Aynsley Dunbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q128309" start="3360" end="3365" title="drum kit" label="drums"/>
<link wikidata="Q133163" start="3367" end="3377" title="percussion instrument" label="percussion"/>
<link wikidata="Q556032" start="3391" end="3407" title="Roy Thomas Baker" label="Roy Thomas Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q183945" start="3410" end="3418" title="record producer" label="producer"/>
<link wikidata="Q322503" start="3420" end="3426" title="audio mixing" label="mixing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101061" start="3428" end="3441" title="Geoff Workman" label="Geoff Workman"/>
<link wikidata="Q128124" start="3444" end="3455" title="recording engineer" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q368015" start="3505" end="3517" title="Alton Kelley" label="Alton Kelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496380" start="3519" end="3532" title="Stanley Mouse" label="Stanley Mouse"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143286" wikidata="Q579788" url="?curid=143286" title="Look into the Future">
<text>Look into the Future is the second studio album by Journey. It was released in January 1976 by Columbia Records.

For their second album, the members of Journey toned down the overt progressiveness of their first, self-titled release, in favor of a more focused approach. Despite that, &quot;Look into the Future&quot; still retains some of the experimental approach and sound of the debut, especially in the title track and &quot;I&#x27;m Gonna Leave You&quot;. The album also features a cover version of The Beatles&#x27; &quot;It&#x27;s All Too Much&quot; from the 1968 &quot;Yellow Submarine&quot; film and 1969 soundtrack. The title track is the longest recorded Journey song.

Rhythm guitarist George Tickner left the band after having co-written two songs for this album, leaving members Gregg Rolie (keyboards/lead vocals), Neal Schon (guitar), Ross Valory (bass) and Aynsley Dunbar (drums).

==Track listing==

==Personnel==
Journey
* Gregg Rolie – keyboards, vocals
* Neal Schon – guitar
* Ross Valory – bass guitar
* Aynsley Dunbar – drums

Production
* Glen Kolotkin – co-producer, engineer
* Mark Friedman – engineer
* George Horn – mastering
* Rick Narin – artwork
* Ethan Russell – photography

==Charts==
==References==
== External links ==
* Journey - &quot;Look into the Future&quot; (1976) album releases &amp; credits at Discogs.com
* Journey - &quot;Look into the Future&quot; (1976) album to be listened as stream at Play.Spotify.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q464749" start="51" end="58" title="Journey (band)" label="Journey"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="95" end="111" title="Columbia Records" label="Columbia Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="506" end="517" title="The Beatles" label="The Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348634" start="530" end="552" title="It&amp;#x27;s All Too Much" label="It&amp;#x27;s All Too Much"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131791" start="579" end="595" title="Yellow Submarine (film)" label="Yellow Submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q206097" start="616" end="626" title="Yellow Submarine (album)" label="soundtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545232" start="700" end="714" title="George Tickner" label="George Tickner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335067" start="795" end="806" title="Gregg Rolie" label="Gregg Rolie"/>
<link wikidata="Q389242" start="832" end="842" title="Neal Schon" label="Neal Schon"/>
<link wikidata="Q301874" start="853" end="864" title="Ross Valory" label="Ross Valory"/>
<link wikidata="Q516251" start="876" end="890" title="Aynsley Dunbar" label="Aynsley Dunbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335067" start="944" end="955" title="Gregg Rolie" label="Gregg Rolie"/>
<link wikidata="Q52954" start="958" end="967" title="keyboard instrument" label="keyboards"/>
<link wikidata="Q27939" start="969" end="975" title="singing" label="vocals"/>
<link wikidata="Q389242" start="978" end="988" title="Neal Schon" label="Neal Schon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607" start="991" end="997" title="guitar" label="guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q301874" start="1000" end="1011" title="Ross Valory" label="Ross Valory"/>
<link wikidata="Q46185" start="1014" end="1025" title="bass guitar" label="bass guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q516251" start="1028" end="1042" title="Aynsley Dunbar" label="Aynsley Dunbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q128309" start="1045" end="1050" title="drum kit" label="drums"/>
<link wikidata="Q504063" start="1341" end="1352" title="Discogs" label="Discogs.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q689141" start="1439" end="1455" title="Spotify" label="Play.Spotify.com"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143288" wikidata="Q614425" url="?curid=143288" title="Next (Journey album)">
<text>Next is the third studio album by Journey, released in February 1977. The band continued the formula from 1976&#x27;s &quot;Look into the Future&quot; but this album also retains some of their progressive rock style from the first album. It is the last album to feature Gregg Rolie as the primary lead singer, and the last album to feature members of the band on the cover. &quot;Spaceman&quot;/&quot;Nickel and Dime&quot; was the single released from &quot;Next&quot;.

The instrumental &quot;Cookie Duster&quot; was listed in very early pressings of the album, though not actually included on the album. It was later released on Journey&#x27;s &quot;Time³&quot; compilation.

&quot;Next&quot; reached No. 85 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 Albums charts.

Although he did not contribute to &quot;Next&quot;, lead vocalist Robert Fleischman joined Journey shortly after the album&#x27;s release as a songwriter and the group&#x27;s first dedicated frontman, sharing lead vocal duties with Rolie during subsequent live shows. All of the songs on the album vanished from the band&#x27;s live setlist after 1979 and two (&quot;Spaceman&quot; and &quot;Here We Are&quot;) have never been performed live.

==Reception==

Retrospectively, AllMusic Stephen Thomas Erlewine wrote that &quot;without a forceful lead vocalist like Steve Perry, the group lacks focus and a pop sensibility and its attempts at straight-ahead pop/rock suffer considerably as a result.&quot; Canadian journalist Martin Popoff praised the album&#x27;s variety and the &quot;profusion of good songs&quot;, with the musical styles ranging from prog to sophisticated balladry to pop metal.

==Track listing==


==Personnel==

===Band members===
* Gregg Rolie – keyboards, lead vocals
* Neal Schon – electric and acoustic guitars, lead vocals on &quot;I Would Find You&quot; and &quot;Karma&quot;
* Ross Valory – bass guitar, backing vocals
* Aynsley Dunbar – drums, percussion

===Additional personnel===
* Smiggy – engineer, mixing
* Bruce Botnick – mastering
* Herbie Herbert – director
* Bruce Steinberg – art direction, design, photography, cover design
* Ellie Oberzil – design
* Mansfield – sleeve art

==Charts==
==References==
== External links ==
* Journey - &quot;Next&quot; (1977) album releases &amp; credits at Discogs.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q464749" start="34" end="41" title="Journey (band)" label="Journey"/>
<link wikidata="Q579788" start="124" end="144" title="Look into the Future" label="Look into the Future"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335067" start="270" end="281" title="Gregg Rolie" label="Gregg Rolie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804844" start="652" end="657" title="Time 3" label="Time³"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="717" end="742" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344378" start="825" end="842" title="Robert Fleischman" label="Robert Fleischman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045845" start="950" end="958" title="frontman" label="frontman"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="1235" end="1243" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q976031" start="1244" end="1267" title="Stephen Thomas Erlewine" label="Stephen Thomas Erlewine"/>
<link wikidata="Q175857" start="1323" end="1334" title="Steve Perry" label="Steve Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q15454899" start="1483" end="1496" title="Martin Popoff" label="Martin Popoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335067" start="1714" end="1725" title="Gregg Rolie" label="Gregg Rolie"/>
<link wikidata="Q52954" start="1728" end="1737" title="keyboard instrument" label="keyboards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045845" start="1739" end="1750" title="lead vocalist" label="lead vocals"/>
<link wikidata="Q389242" start="1753" end="1763" title="Neal Schon" label="Neal Schon"/>
<link wikidata="Q78987" start="1766" end="1774" title="electric guitar" label="electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q31561" start="1779" end="1794" title="acoustic guitar" label="acoustic guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q301874" start="1865" end="1876" title="Ross Valory" label="Ross Valory"/>
<link wikidata="Q46185" start="1879" end="1890" title="bass guitar" label="bass guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q798487" start="1892" end="1906" title="backing vocalist" label="backing vocals"/>
<link wikidata="Q516251" start="1909" end="1923" title="Aynsley Dunbar" label="Aynsley Dunbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q128309" start="1926" end="1931" title="drum kit" label="drums"/>
<link wikidata="Q133163" start="1933" end="1943" title="percussion instrument" label="percussion"/>
<link wikidata="Q128124" start="1983" end="1991" title="recording engineer" label="engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q322503" start="1993" end="1999" title="audio mixing" label="mixing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301795" start="2002" end="2015" title="Bruce Botnick" label="Bruce Botnick"/>
<link wikidata="Q421031" start="2018" end="2027" title="audio mastering" label="mastering"/>
<link wikidata="Q7965128" start="2030" end="2044" title="Herbie Herbert" label="Herbie Herbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198887" start="2047" end="2055" title="musical director" label="director"/>
<link wikidata="Q706364" start="2076" end="2089" title="art direction" label="art direction"/>
<link wikidata="Q82604" start="2091" end="2097" title="design" label="design"/>
<link wikidata="Q11633" start="2099" end="2110" title="photography" label="photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333350" start="2112" end="2124" title="album cover" label="cover design"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302863" start="2164" end="2174" title="sleeve art" label="sleeve art"/>
<link wikidata="Q504063" start="2291" end="2302" title="Discogs" label="Discogs.com"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143289" wikidata="Q661867" url="?curid=143289" title="Michael Baius">
<text>Michael Baius (151316 September 1589) was a Belgian theologian. He formulated the school of thought now known as Baianism.

== Life ==
He was born at Meslin L&#x27;Eveque near Ath in Hainaut as Michel De Bay, the son of Jean de Bay, a farmer. De Bay studied humanities in Brugelette and in Enghien and in 1533 he began studying philosophy at the Grand College het Varken of Leuven University. From 1535 he also studied theology at the Pope Adrian VI College. He was an excellent student and was ordained a priest in 1542, and was appointed director of the Standonck-College in Leuven.

In 1544 De Bay obtained his doctorate in philosophy and became a teacher at the College het Varken. In 1549 De Bay was appointed professor of scholastic philosophy. The following year, De Bay also obtained a license in theology and became president of the College Adrian, and also substituted for the professor of Holy Scripture, who was then absent at the Council of Trent. From February to August 1553, he was the rector of the university. Baius had very early formed a close friendship with Jean Hessels.

While Chancellor Ruard Tapper and Josse Ravesteyn, Professor of Theology were at the Council of Trent, Baius and Hessels took the occasion to introduce new methods and new doctrines. They believed that Catholic apologists were seriously handicapped by their reliance on the authority and methods of the Scholastics, and that if instead of appealing to the writings of St. Thomas as the ultimate criterion of truth they were to insist more on the authority of the Bible and of the works of the Early Fathers, such as St. Cyprian, St. Jerome, and St. Augustine, they would find themselves on much safer ground, and their arguments would be more likely to command the respect of their opponents. 

On his return from Trent in 1552, Tapper asked Cardinal de Granvelle, archbishop of Mechelen, to intervene. Granvelle succeeded in quieting the innovators for a while. De Bay&#x27;s theories were very popular with theology students who spread it further. This was met with much opposition, and around 1558, later Cardinal Antoine Perrenot de Granvelle and Viglius tried unsuccessfully to persuade De Bay to make some adjustments to his positions. However, in 1560 at the request of the Franciscans, the Sorbonne condemned 18 of his statements. Baius answered the censure in a memoir now lost, and the controversy only increased in acridity. Pope Pius IV, through Cardinal Granvelle, imposed silence upon both Baius and the Franciscans, without, however, rendering any doctrinal decision.

== Career ==

In 1563 he was nominated one of the Belgian representatives at the Council of Trent, but arrived too late to play an important part in its deliberations. Indeed, there was resistance to his presence at the Council, and he was allowed to attend only as a theologian of the King of Spain. The Council Fathers looked upon him with not a little suspicion. Just before leaving for Trent, Baius had published his first tracts. The contents of those tracts were not within the programme of the last three sessions of the Council of Trent, so no public discussion of the disputed points took place. It is known, however, that Baius&#x27; and Hessels&#x27; views were distasteful to the Fathers, and that the Catholic king&#x27;s prestige alone saved them from formal condemnation.

Baius returned to Louvain in 1564 and published new tracts the same year. At Leuven, he obtained a great name as a leader in the anti-scholastic reaction of the 16th century. The champions of this reaction fought under the banner of Augustine of Hippo though paradoxically they undermined Augustine&#x27;s doctrine of grace; as a result, Baius&#x27; heterodox-Augustinian predilections brought him into conflict with Rome on questions of grace, free-will and the like. In various respects, Baius was seen as Pelagian. Ravestein, who had succeeded Tapper as chancellor, informed Rome, requesting decisive action. On 1 October 1567, Pope Pius V signed the papal bull &quot;Ex omnibus afflictionibus&quot;, in which he condemned seventy-nine propositions from Baius&#x27; writings, but without mention of Baius&#x27; name. To this Baius submitted; though certain indiscreet utterances on the part of himself and his supporters led to a renewal of the condemnation in 1579 by Pope Gregory XIII. Baius, however, was allowed to retain his professorship, and even became chancellor of Leuven in 1575.

== Death ==
He died, still holding these two offices, in 1589. His writings are described by Adolf Harnack as a curious mixture of Catholic orthodoxy and unconscious tendencies to Protestantism. His principal works were published in a collected form at Cologne, 1696; some large treatises were excluded. There is a study of both books and author by Linsenmann, &quot;Michael Baius und die Grundlegung des Jansenismus&quot;, published at Tübingen in 1867.

==Beliefs==
De Bay based his theology on Holy Scripture and the Fathers of the Church, especially on the teaching of Augustine of Hippo, introducing deviant scholastic terminologies. His doctrine, later referred to as &quot;Baianism&quot;, was based on sin, free will, and grace of God along with the fight against papal infallibility, saying that the episcopal legal power comes directly from God.
Joseph Sollier, writing in the &quot;Catholic Encyclopedia&quot; sees Baius&#x27; as a precursor to the Jansenism and the Port-Royal theologians such as Blaise Pascal.

==Further reading==
Henri de Lubac, &quot;Augustinianism and Modern Theology&quot; (Herder &amp; Herder) This has a treatment of Baius&#x27;s theology, especially his interpretations of Augustine and his relationship to Jansenius and Jansenism.

==References==


==External links==
* Alphonsus Ligouri. &quot;The Errors of Michael Baius&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q661867" start="0" end="13" title="Michael Baius" label="Michael Baius"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="44" end="51" title="Belgium" label="Belgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="52" end="62" title="theology" label="theologian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4406012" start="113" end="121" title="Baianism" label="Baianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q95130" start="272" end="282" title="Brugelette" label="Brugelette"/>
<link wikidata="Q666238" start="290" end="297" title="Enghien" label="Enghien"/>
<link wikidata="Q693380" start="374" end="391" title="Old University of Leuven" label="Leuven University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301059" start="435" end="457" title="Pope&amp;#x27;s College, Leuven" label="Pope Adrian VI College"/>
<link wikidata="Q716415" start="556" end="573" title="Jan Standonck" label="Standonck-College"/>
<link wikidata="Q172991" start="943" end="959" title="Council of Trent" label="Council of Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6170838" start="1080" end="1092" title="Jean Hessels" label="Jean Hessels"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583554" start="1112" end="1124" title="Ruard Tapper" label="Ruard Tapper"/>
<link wikidata="Q6291070" start="1129" end="1144" title="Josse Ravesteyn" label="Josse Ravesteyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q451178" start="1837" end="1858" title="Cardinal de Granvelle" label="Cardinal de Granvelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q47092186" start="1860" end="1882" title="archbishop of Mechelen" label="archbishop of Mechelen"/>
<link wikidata="Q451178" start="2112" end="2141" title="Antoine Perrenot de Granvelle" label="Antoine Perrenot de Granvelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q639344" start="2146" end="2153" title="Viglius" label="Viglius"/>
<link wikidata="Q165005" start="2276" end="2287" title="Franciscans" label="Franciscans"/>
<link wikidata="Q161983" start="2431" end="2443" title="Pope Pius IV" label="Pope Pius IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q172991" start="2660" end="2676" title="Council of Trent" label="Council of Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q118958" start="3444" end="3450" title="Leuven" label="Leuven"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="3600" end="3618" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="Augustine of Hippo"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="3784" end="3788" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q122398" start="3875" end="3883" title="Pelagian" label="Pelagian"/>
<link wikidata="Q131945" start="3998" end="4009" title="Pope Pius V" label="Pope Pius V"/>
<link wikidata="Q189867" start="4021" end="4031" title="papal bull" label="papal bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q83029" start="4339" end="4356" title="Pope Gregory XIII" label="Pope Gregory XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q164699" start="4555" end="4568" title="Adolf Harnack" label="Adolf Harnack"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="4642" end="4655" title="Protestantism" label="Protestantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q365" start="4715" end="4722" title="Cologne" label="Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3806" start="4899" end="4907" title="Tübingen" label="Tübingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q182603" start="4982" end="5003" title="Church Fathers" label="Fathers of the Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q4406012" start="5142" end="5150" title="Baianism" label="Baianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q275016" start="5233" end="5252" title="papal infallibility" label="papal infallibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287" start="5421" end="5430" title="Jansenism" label="Jansenism"/>
<link wikidata="Q652981" start="5439" end="5449" title="Port-Royal-des-Champs" label="Port-Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290" start="5470" end="5483" title="Blaise Pascal" label="Blaise Pascal"/>
<link wikidata="Q353956" start="5506" end="5520" title="Henri de Lubac" label="Henri de Lubac"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143290" wikidata="Q1934006" url="?curid=143290" title="Evolution (Journey album)">
<text>Evolution is the fifth studio album by American rock band Journey, released in March 1979 by Columbia Records. It is the band&#x27;s first album to feature drummer Steve Smith.

It was the band&#x27;s most successful album at the time, reaching No. 20 on the US Billboard 200 chart, and has sold three million copies in the US. They retained Roy Thomas Baker (best known for his work with Queen) as producer, but drummer Aynsley Dunbar was replaced with Smith, formerly with Ronnie Montrose&#x27;s band.

&quot;Evolution&quot; features their first top 20 hit, &quot;Lovin&#x27;, Touchin&#x27;, Squeezin&#x27;&quot;, which was inspired by the classic Sam Cooke top 20 hit &quot;Nothin&#x27; Can Change This Love&quot; and reached No. 16 in the US. &quot;Just the Same Way&quot; featured original lead vocalist Gregg Rolie along with Steve Perry.

==Critical reception==

&quot;Record World&quot; said that the single &quot;Too Late&quot; &quot;takes the rock ballad to new limits with a call &amp; response hookline and Neal Schon&#x27;s dashing guitar break.&quot; The magazine called &quot;Just the Same Way&quot; a &quot;hard but slick rocker.&quot;

&quot;The Globe and Mail&quot; concluded that &quot;all the songs here could well have originated at the same session as the numbers on the previous album, and that suggests stagnation.&quot;

== Track listing ==

== Personnel ==
;Journey
* Steve Perry – lead vocals
* Gregg Rolie – keyboards, piano, backing vocals, co-lead vocals (8)
* Neal Schon – guitars, Roland GR-500 guitar synthesizer, backing vocals
* Ross Valory – bass guitar, Moog bass, backing vocals
* Steve Smith – drums, percussion

=== Production ===
* Roy Thomas Baker – producer, mixing
* Geoff Workman – engineer
* George Tutko – second engineer
* Greg Schafer – production manager
* Larry Noggle, Jim Welch – package design
* Alton Kelley, Stanley Mouse – cover art
* Sam Emerson – back cover photography, liner photography
* Hiro Ito – liner photography
* Pat Morrow – liner notes

==Charts==


==Certifications==

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="48" end="52" title="Rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q464749" start="58" end="65" title="Journey (band)" label="Journey"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="93" end="109" title="Columbia Records" label="Columbia Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q943448" start="164" end="175" title="Steve Smith (musician)" label="Steve Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="262" end="275" title="Billboard 200" label="Billboard 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q556032" start="342" end="358" title="Roy Thomas Baker" label="Roy Thomas Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q15862" start="389" end="394" title="Queen (band)" label="Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q516251" start="421" end="435" title="Aynsley Dunbar" label="Aynsley Dunbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2160190" start="475" end="490" title="Ronnie Montrose" label="Ronnie Montrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q20649480" start="566" end="608" title="Lovin&amp;#x27;, Touchin&amp;#x27;, Squeezin&amp;#x27;" label="Lovin&amp;#x27;, Touchin&amp;#x27;, Squeezin&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q295919" start="650" end="659" title="Sam Cooke" label="Sam Cooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335067" start="809" end="820" title="Gregg Rolie" label="Gregg Rolie"/>
<link wikidata="Q175857" start="832" end="843" title="Steve Perry (musician)" label="Steve Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3422110" start="876" end="888" title="Record World" label="Record World"/>
<link wikidata="Q389242" start="1019" end="1029" title="Neal Schon" label="Neal Schon"/>
<link wikidata="Q604525" start="1159" end="1177" title="The Globe and Mail" label="The Globe and Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q175857" start="1394" end="1405" title="Steve Perry" label="Steve Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335067" start="1422" end="1433" title="Gregg Rolie" label="Gregg Rolie"/>
<link wikidata="Q389242" start="1491" end="1501" title="Neal Schon" label="Neal Schon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7360235" start="1513" end="1526" title="Roland GR-500" label="Roland GR-500"/>
<link wikidata="Q301874" start="1564" end="1575" title="Ross Valory" label="Ross Valory"/>
<link wikidata="Q426035" start="1591" end="1600" title="Moog synthesizer" label="Moog bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q943448" start="1619" end="1630" title="Steve Smith (American musician)" label="Steve Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q556032" start="1673" end="1689" title="Roy Thomas Baker" label="Roy Thomas Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101061" start="1711" end="1724" title="Geoff Workman" label="Geoff Workman"/>
<link wikidata="Q368015" start="1850" end="1862" title="Alton Kelley" label="Alton Kelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496380" start="1864" end="1877" title="Stanley Mouse" label="Stanley Mouse"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143293" wikidata="Q1922930" url="?curid=143293" title="Departure (Journey album)">
<text>Departure is the sixth studio album by American rock band Journey. It was released on February 29, 1980, by Columbia Records.

&quot;Departure&quot; was Journey&#x27;s highest-charting album to that point, giving them their first appearance in the top 10 of the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 album charts, peaking at No. 8. The album includes &quot;Any Way You Want It&quot;, the leadoff track and top 25 single.

The album featured an edgier sound, thanks partly to the &quot;live in studio&quot; way the songs were recorded. The band went into The Automatt studio with 19 tracks, eventually trimming down to 12.

Three singles were released off &quot;Departure&quot;. &quot;Any Way You Want It&quot; reached #23 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 and the follow-up &quot;Walks Like a Lady&quot; reached #32. The last single was a medley of &quot;Good Morning Girl&quot; and &quot;Stay Awhile&quot; which only reached #55. &quot;Record World&quot; called the medley &quot;an epic ballad&quot; with &quot;healthy amounts of pomp and bravado.&quot;

&quot;Departure&quot; would mark the last full-time studio album appearance of founding member Gregg Rolie, and his penultimate recording with the band: his final contributions would appear on &quot;Dream, After Dream&quot;, a soundtrack album to the Japanese film of the same name, which would also be released in 1980. Rolie had become tired of life on the road and decided to leave the band after assisting in the selection of his replacement, Jonathan Cain, then of The Babys. Rolie sang lead vocals on only one song on &quot;Departure&quot;, the ballad &quot;Someday Soon&quot;.

In 1986, Columbia reissued &quot;Departure&quot; on compact disc in the U.S. and Europe. They subsequently remastered the album in 1996. BMG/Columbia remastered &quot;Departure&quot; again in 2006 for European, Japanese and American listeners, adding bonus tracks 13 &quot;Natural Thing&quot; and 14 &quot;Little Girl&quot;. Dave Donnelly at DNA Mastering in New York City led the 2006 project.

==Track listing==


==Personnel==
Journey
* Steve Perry – lead vocals
* Neal Schon – guitars, co-lead vocals on &quot;People and Places&quot;, backing vocals
* Gregg Rolie – keyboards, harmonica, co-lead vocals on &quot;Someday Soon&quot;, backing vocals
* Ross Valory – bass guitar, bass pedals, backing vocals
* Steve Smith – drums, percussion

Production
* Geoff Workman – producer, engineer, mixing
* Kevin Elson – producer, live sound
* Ken Kessie – engineer
* Jim Welch – art direction

==Charts==
==Certifications==


==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="48" end="52" title="Rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q464749" start="58" end="65" title="Journey (band)" label="Journey"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="108" end="124" title="Columbia Records" label="Columbia Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="262" end="287" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q4778185" start="345" end="364" title="Any Way You Want It" label="Any Way You Want It"/>
<link wikidata="Q7714979" start="542" end="554" title="The Automatt" label="The Automatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4778185" start="672" end="691" title="Any Way You Want It" label="Any Way You Want It"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="717" end="746" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q116873358" start="771" end="788" title="Walks Like a Lady" label="Walks Like a Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q3422110" start="928" end="940" title="Record World" label="Record World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335067" start="1142" end="1153" title="Gregg Rolie" label="Gregg Rolie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039228" start="1246" end="1264" title="Dream, After Dream" label="Dream, After Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266567" start="1494" end="1507" title="Jonathan Cain" label="Jonathan Cain"/>
<link wikidata="Q592475" start="1517" end="1526" title="The Babys" label="The Babys"/>
<link wikidata="Q175857" start="2072" end="2083" title="Steve Perry" label="Steve Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q389242" start="2100" end="2110" title="Neal Schon" label="Neal Schon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335067" start="2188" end="2199" title="Gregg Rolie" label="Gregg Rolie"/>
<link wikidata="Q301874" start="2285" end="2296" title="Ross Valory" label="Ross Valory"/>
<link wikidata="Q943448" start="2342" end="2353" title="Steve Smith (musician)" label="Steve Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101061" start="2388" end="2401" title="Geoff Workman" label="Geoff Workman"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143294" wikidata="Q17444" url="?curid=143294" title="Nevermind">
<text>Nevermind is the second studio album by the American rock band Nirvana, released on September 24, 1991, by DGC Records. It was Nirvana&#x27;s first release on a major label and the first to feature drummer Dave Grohl. Produced by Butch Vig, &quot;Nevermind&quot; features a more polished, radio-friendly sound than the band&#x27;s prior work. It was recorded at Sound City Studios in Van Nuys, California, and Smart Studios in Madison, Wisconsin, in May and June 1991, and mastered that August at the Mastering Lab in Hollywood, California.

Written primarily by frontman Kurt Cobain, &quot;Nevermind&quot; is noted for channeling a range of emotions, being noted as dark, humorous, and disturbing. Its themes include anti-establishment and anti-sexism views, frustration, alienation, and troubled love inspired by Cobain&#x27;s broken relationship with Bikini Kill&#x27;s Tobi Vail. Contrary to the popular hedonistic themes of drugs and sex at the time, writers have observed that &quot;Nevermind&quot; promoted the image of the sensitive artist in mainstream rock. According to Cobain, the sound of the album was influenced by bands such as Pixies, R.E.M., the Smithereens, and Melvins. Though the album is considered a cornerstone of the grunge genre, it is noted for its musical diversity, which includes acoustic ballads (&quot;Polly&quot; and &quot;Something in the Way&quot;) and punk-influenced hard rock (&quot;Territorial Pissings&quot; and &quot;Stay Away&quot;).

&quot;Nevermind&quot; became an unexpected critical and commercial success, reaching the top 10 on charts across the world. On January 11, 1992, it replaced Michael Jackson&#x27;s &quot;Dangerous&quot; on the number one spot of the US &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 and was selling approximately 300,000 copies a week. The lead single, &quot;Smells Like Teen Spirit&quot;, reached the Top 10 of the US &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 and went on to be inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame. Its music video was also heavily rotated on MTV. Three other successful singles were released: &quot;Come as You Are&quot;, &quot;Lithium&quot;, and &quot;In Bloom&quot;. The album was voted the best album of the year in Pazz &amp; Jop critics&#x27; poll, while &quot;Smells Like Teen Spirit&quot; also topped the single-of-the-year and video-of-the-year polls. The album also garnered the band three Grammy Award nominations in total across the 34th and 35th Grammy Awards, including Best Alternative Music Album.

&quot;Nevermind&quot; propelled Nirvana into worldwide superstardom, with Cobain being dubbed the &quot;voice of his generation&quot;. It brought grunge and alternative rock to a mainstream audience while accelerating the decline of hair metal, drawing similarities to the early 1960s British Invasion of American popular music. It is also often credited with initiating a resurgence of interest in punk culture among teenagers and young adults of Generation X, becoming seminal to the counterculture of the decade. It has sold more than 30 million copies worldwide, making it one of the best-selling albums of all time. In March 1999, it was certified Diamond by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). Among the most acclaimed and influential albums in the history of music, &quot;Nevermind&quot; was added by the Library of Congress to the National Recording Registry in 2004 for being &quot;culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant&quot;, and is frequently ranked highly on lists of the greatest albums of all time, including being ranked number six on &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;″s 2020 and 2023 lists of the &quot;500 Greatest Albums of All Time&quot;. The album has since been reissued with alternate takes and live performances.

==Background and early sessions==
In early 1990, Nirvana began planning their second album for their record company Sub Pop, tentatively titled &quot;Sheep&quot;. At the suggestion of Sub Pop head Bruce Pavitt, Nirvana selected Butch Vig as producer. The band particularly liked Vig&#x27;s work with Killdozer. They traveled to Vig&#x27;s Smart Studios in Madison, Wisconsin, and recorded from April 2 to 6, 1990. Most of the basic arrangements were complete, but the songwriter Kurt Cobain was still working on lyrics and the band was unsure of which songs to record. Ultimately, eight were recorded, some of which were later rerecorded for &quot;Nevermind&quot;: &quot;Imodium&quot; (later renamed &quot;Breed&quot;), &quot;Dive&quot; (later released as the B-side to &quot;Sliver&quot;), &quot;In Bloom&quot;, &quot;Pay to Play&quot; (later renamed &quot;Stay Away&quot;), &quot;Sappy&quot;, &quot;Lithium&quot;, &quot;Here She Comes Now&quot; (released on &quot;Heaven &amp; Hell: A Tribute to the Velvet Underground&quot;), and &quot;Polly&quot;.

On April 6, Nirvana played a local show in Madison with the Seattle band Tad. Vig began to mix the recordings while the band gave an interview to Madison&#x27;s community radio station WORT on April 7. Cobain strained his voice, forcing Nirvana to end the recording. On April 8, they traveled to Milwaukee to begin an extensive midwest and east coast tour of 24 shows in 39 days.

The drummer Chad Channing left after the tour, putting additional recording on hold. During a show by the hardcore punk band Scream, Cobain and the bassist Krist Novoselic were impressed by their drummer Dave Grohl. When Scream unexpectedly disbanded, Grohl contacted Novoselic, traveled to Seattle, and was invited to join the band. Novoselic said in retrospect that, with Grohl, everything &quot;fell into place&quot;.

By the 1990s, Sub Pop was having financial problems. With rumors that they would become a subsidiary of a major record label, Nirvana decided to &quot;cut out the middleman&quot; and look for a major record label. Nirvana used the recordings as a demo tape to shop for a new label. Within a few months, the tape was circulating among major labels. A number of labels courted them; Nirvana signed with Geffen Records imprint DGC Records based on recommendations from Kim Gordon of Sonic Youth and their management company.

After Nirvana signed to DGC, a number of producers were suggested, including Scott Litt, David Briggs, Don Dixon, and Bob Mould. Novoselic said the band had been nervous about recording under a major label, and the producers suggested by DGC wanted percentage points. Instead, the band held out for Vig, with whom they felt comfortable collaborating.

== Recording ==
With a budget of $65,000, Nirvana recorded &quot;Nevermind&quot; at Sound City Studios in Van Nuys, California, in May and June 1991. To earn gas money to get to Los Angeles, they played a show where they performed &quot;Smells Like Teen Spirit&quot; for the first time. The band sent Vig rehearsal tapes prior to the sessions that featured songs recorded previously at Smart Studios, plus new songs including &quot;Smells Like Teen Spirit&quot; and &quot;Come as You Are&quot;.

Nirvana arrived in California and spent a few days rehearsing and working on arrangements. The only recording carried over from the Smart Studios sessions was &quot;Polly&quot;, including Channing&#x27;s cymbal crashes. Once recording commenced, the band worked eight to ten hours a day.

Despite receiving a $287,000 advance upon signing with Geffen, Cobain retained a preference for inexpensive equipment—particularly Japanese-made Fender guitars, due to their skinny necks and wider availability in lefthanded orientation. These included several Stratocasters fitted with humbucker pickups in the bridge positions, as well as a 1965 Jaguar with DiMarzio pickups and a 1969 Mustang, the latter of which Cobain cited as his favorite due to its design flaws. For the album, Cobain bought a rackmount system featuring a Mesa/Boogie Studio preamp, a Crown power amp, and Marshall cabinets. He also used a Vox AC30 and a Fender Bassman. Vig preferred not to use pedals, but he allowed Cobain to use a Boss DS-1 distortion pedal, which Cobain considered a key part of his sound, as well as an Electro-Harmonix Big Muff fuzz pedal and a Small Clone chorus.

Novoselic and Grohl finished their tracks in days, while Cobain worked longer on guitar overdubs, vocals, and lyrics. He sometimes finished lyrics minutes before recording. Vig recalled that Cobain was often reluctant to record overdubs, but he was persuaded to double-track his vocals when Vig told him that John Lennon did it. Though the sessions generally went well, Vig said Cobain would become difficult at times: &quot;He&#x27;d be great for an hour, and then he&#x27;d sit in a corner and say nothing for an hour.&quot;

=== Mixing and mastering ===
Vig and the band were unhappy with Vig&#x27;s initial mixes and decided to bring in someone else to oversee the mixing. DGC supplied a list of options, including Scott Litt (known for his work with R.E.M.) and Ed Stasium (known for his work with the Ramones and the Smithereens). Cobain was concerned about bringing in well known producers, and instead chose Andy Wallace, who had co-produced Slayer&#x27;s 1990 album &quot;Seasons in the Abyss&quot;. Novoselic recalled, &quot;We said, &#x27;Right on,&#x27; because those Slayer records were so heavy.&quot;

Wallace&#x27;s mixes most notably altered the drum and guitar sounds. According to Wallace and Vig, the band loved the results. However, they criticized it after the album was released. Steve Albini, who engineered Nirvana&#x27;s next album, &quot;In Utero&quot; (1993), said Vig&#x27;s initial mix &quot;sounded maybe 200 times more ass-kicking&quot; than the final version of &quot;Nevermind&quot; and that Nirvana referred to it while working on &quot;In Utero.&quot; He said that Vig was an excellent engineer who &quot;had a good, sympathetic relationship with all the noisy bands he recorded in the 80s&quot;, which was why Nirvana had hired him.

&quot;Nevermind&quot; was mastered by Howie Weinberg on the afternoon of August 2 at the Mastering Lab in Hollywood, California. Weinberg started working alone when no one else arrived at the appointed time in the studio; by the time Nirvana, Andy Wallace, and Gary Gersh arrived, he had almost finished. A hidden track, &quot;Endless, Nameless&quot;, intended to appear at the end of &quot;Something in the Way&quot;, was accidentally left off initial pressings of the album. Weinberg recalled, &quot;In the beginning, it was kind of a verbal thing to put that track at the end [...] Maybe I didn&#x27;t write it down when Nirvana or the record company said to do it. So, when they pressed the first twenty thousand or so CDs, albums, and cassettes, it wasn&#x27;t on there.&quot; Cobain called Weinberg and demanded he rectify the mistake.

==Music==
At the time of writing &quot;Nevermind&quot;, Cobain was listening to bands such as Melvins, R.E.M., the Smithereens, and Pixies, and was writing songs that were more melodic. A key development was the single &quot;Sliver&quot;, released on Sub Pop in 1990 before Grohl joined, which Cobain said &quot;was like a statement in a way. I had to write a pop song and release it on a single to prepare people for the next record. I wanted to write more songs like that.&quot; Grohl said that the band at that point likened their music to children&#x27;s music, in that they tried to make their songs as simple as possible.

Cobain fashioned chord sequences using primarily power chords and wrote songs that combined pop hooks with dissonant guitar riffs. His aim for &quot;Nevermind&quot;&#x27;s material was to sound like &quot;the Knack and the Bay City Rollers getting molested by Black Flag and Black Sabbath&quot;. Many songs feature shifts in dynamics, whereby the band changes from quiet verses to loud choruses. Grohl said this approach originated during a four-month period prior to the recording of the album, when the band would experiment with extreme dynamics during regular jam sessions.

&quot;Guitar World&quot; wrote, &quot;Kurt Cobain&#x27;s guitar sound on Nirvana&#x27;s &quot;Nevermind&quot; set the tone for Nineties rock music.&quot; Cobain played a 1960s Fender Mustang, a Fender Jaguar with DiMarzio pickups, and a few Fender Stratocasters with humbucker bridge pickups. He used distortion and chorus pedals as his main effects, the latter used to generate a &quot;watery&quot; sound on &quot;Come as You Are&quot; and the pre-choruses of &quot;Smells Like Teen Spirit&quot;. Novoselic tuned down his bass guitar one and a half steps to D flat &quot;to get this fat-ass sound&quot;.

After the release of &quot;Nevermind&quot;, members of Nirvana expressed dissatisfaction with the production for its perceived commercial sound. Cobain said, &quot;I&#x27;m embarrassed by it now. It&#x27;s closer to a Mötley Crüe record than it is a punk rock record.&quot; In 2011, Vig said that Nirvana had &quot;loved&quot; &quot;Nevermind&quot; when they finished it. He said Cobain had criticized it in the press &quot;because you can&#x27;t really go, &#x27;Hey, I love our record and I&#x27;m glad it sold 10 million copies.&#x27; That&#x27;s just not cool to do. And I think he felt like he wanted to do something more primal.&quot;

===Lyrics===
The album is dark, humorous, and disturbing. It includes anti-establishment views, and explores sexism, frustration, loneliness, sickness and troubled love. Cobain said that the lyrics were taken from two years of poetry which he had accumulated, and then cut up, choosing lines he preferred, noting that they&#x27;re &quot;not usually thematic at all&quot;. On the other hand, Grohl has said that Cobain told him, &quot;Music comes first and lyrics come second,&quot; and Grohl believes that above all Cobain focused on the melodies of his songs. Cobain was still working on the album&#x27;s lyrics well into the recording of &quot;Nevermind&quot;. Additionally, Cobain&#x27;s phrasing on the album is often difficult to understand. Vig asserted that clarity of Cobain&#x27;s singing was not paramount, saying that &quot;Even though you couldn&#x27;t quite tell what he was singing about, you knew it was intense as hell.&quot; Cobain later complained when rock journalists attempted to decipher his singing and extract meaning from his lyrics, writing: &quot;Why in the hell do journalists insist on coming up with a second-rate Freudian evaluation of my lyrics, when 90 percent of the time they&#x27;ve transcribed them incorrectly?&quot;

Charles R. Cross asserted in his 2001 biography of Cobain, &quot;Heavier Than Heaven&quot;, that many of the songs written for &quot;Nevermind&quot; were about Cobain&#x27;s dysfunctional relationship with Tobi Vail. After their relationship ended, Cobain began writing and painting violent scenes, many of which revealed a hatred for himself and others. Songs written during this period were less violent, but still reflected anger absent from Cobain&#x27;s earlier songs. Cross wrote, &quot;In the four months following their break-up, Kurt would write a half dozen of his most memorable songs, all of them about Tobi Vail.&quot; &quot;Drain You&quot; begins with the line, &quot;One baby to another said &#x27;I&#x27;m lucky to have met you,&#x27;&quot; quoting what Vail had once told Cobain, and the line &quot;It is now my duty to completely drain you&quot; refers to the power Vail had over Cobain in their relationship. According to Novoselic, &quot;&#x27;Lounge Act&#x27; is about Tobi,&quot; and the song contains the line &quot;I&#x27;ll arrest myself, I&#x27;ll wear a shield,&quot; referring to Cobain having the K Records logo tattooed on his arm to impress Vail. Though &quot;Lithium&quot; had been written before Cobain knew Vail, the lyrics of the song were changed to reference her. Cobain also said in an interview with &quot;Musician&quot; that &quot;some of my very personal experiences, like breaking up with girlfriends and having bad relationships, feeling that death void that the person in the song is feeling—very lonely, sick&quot;.

==Title==

The tentative title &quot;Sheep&quot; was something Cobain created as an inside joke directed towards the people he expected to buy the album. He wrote a fake advertisement for &quot;Sheep&quot; in his journal that read &quot;Because you want to not; because everyone else is.&quot; Novoselic said the inspiration for the title was the band&#x27;s cynicism about the public&#x27;s reaction to Operation Desert Storm. As recording ended, Cobain grew tired of the title and suggested to Novoselic that the album be named &quot;Nevermind&quot;. Cobain liked the title because it was a metaphor for his attitude on life and because it was grammatically incorrect. &quot;Sacagawea&quot;, after the Native American, was briefly considered so to reference the band&#x27;s intentions for a more widespread impact compared to their previous studio album &quot;Bleach&quot;.

&quot;Nevermind&quot; appears on the album liner notes as the last word in a paragraph of lyric fragments that ends with &quot;I found it hard, it was hard to find, oh well, whatever, nevermind&quot; from &quot;Smells Like Teen Spirit&quot;. The word &quot;nevermind&quot; also echoes the Sex Pistols&#x27; &quot;Never Mind the Bollocks, Here&#x27;s the Sex Pistols&quot;, one of Cobain&#x27;s favorite albums.

== Artwork ==
The album cover shows a naked baby boy swimming underwater with a U.S. dollar bill on a fishhook just out of his reach. According to Cobain, he conceived the idea while watching a television program on water births. Cobain mentioned it to Geffen&#x27;s art director Robert Fisher. Fisher found some stock footage of underwater births, but they were too graphic for the record company to use. Furthermore, the stock house that controlled the photo of a swimming baby that they chose wanted $7,500 a year for its use. Instead, Fisher sent a photographer, Kirk Weddle, to a pool for babies to take pictures. Five shots resulted and the band settled on the image of four-month-old Spencer Elden, the son of a friend of Weddle. Geffen was concerned that the infant&#x27;s penis, visible in the photo, would cause offense, and prepared an alternate cover without it; they relented when Cobain said the only compromise he would accept would be a sticker covering the penis reading: &quot;If you&#x27;re offended by this, you must be a closet pedophile.&quot; The cover has since been recognized as one of the most famous album covers in popular music. A few months after the original baby shot, Weddle also photographed the entire band underwater for a promotional poster.

The back cover features a photograph of a rubber monkey in front of a collage created by Cobain. The collage features photos of raw beef from a supermarket advertisement, images from Dante&#x27;s &quot;Inferno&quot;, and pictures of diseased vaginas from Cobain&#x27;s collection of medical photos. Cobain noted, &quot;If you look real close, there is a picture of Kiss in the back standing on a slab of beef.&quot; The album&#x27;s liner notes contain no complete lyrics; instead, the liner contains random song lyrics and unused lyrical fragments that Cobain arranged into a poem.

A year later, &quot;Weird Al&quot; Yankovic parodied the artwork for his album &quot;Off the Deep End&quot;, replacing the baby with himself wearing a hidden bathing suit, and the dollar with a donut. He would later jokingly state &quot;I never really anticipated going full-frontal on any of my album covers.&quot;

=== Spencer Elden lawsuits ===
In August 2021, Elden filed a lawsuit against Weddle, Cobain&#x27;s estate, Grohl and Novoselic, claiming that the use of his likeness on the album cover was made without his consent or that of his legal guardians, that it violated federal child pornography statutes, and that it resulted in &quot;lifelong damages&quot;. Elden said that, by refusing to censor the artwork with a sticker, Nirvana had failed to protect him from child sexual exploitation. The lawsuit also stated that &quot;Cobain chose the image depicting Spencer—like a sex worker—grabbing for a dollar bill that is positioned dangling from a fishhook in front of his nude body with his penis explicitly displayed&quot;.

Attorney Jamie White criticized the lawsuit as &quot;frivolous&quot; and &quot;really offensive to the true victims&quot; of child sexual abuse. Fordham Law School professor James Cohen said the context of the cover did not suggest pornography. White and Cohen concluded that Elden intended to make money with the lawsuit. In December, lawyers for the defendants sought to dismiss the lawsuit, saying it was filed too late and that its claim that the image depicts sexual abuse was &quot;not serious&quot;. They noted that Elden had &quot;spent three decades profiting from his celebrity as the self-anointed &#x27;Nirvana Baby, having recreated the artwork several times, and that he had the album title tattooed on his chest. They argued that the cover instead &quot;evokes themes of greed, innocence, and the motif of the cherub in western art&quot;. After Elden&#x27;s lawyers did not file an opposition, the lawsuit was dismissed by a judge on January 3, 2022. However, the judge did allow for future lawsuits.

Elden refiled again on January 14, 2022, amending the original suit by removing charges of child sex trafficking while arguing it was child pornography. On September 2, 2022, a judge ruled against Elden, saying he had waited too long to file the suit and cited a 10-year statute of limitations from the date the plaintiff becomes an adult at age 18, meaning Elden needed to file before he turned 28 (around 2019). In addition, the judge blocked any additional filings in the future, bringing the case to a &quot;final&quot; close at the district court level. On September 6, 2022, Elden appealed the dismissal of his case to the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit. The Ninth Circuit heard oral argument on Elden&#x27;s appeal on October 18, 2023. The court ruled in favor of Elden in December 2023, reversing the lower court&#x27;s ruling and allowing the suit to continue. The court determined that the special republication of the album on its 30th anniversary constituted a new claim that Elden could pursue in court.

==Release and sales==

&quot;Nevermind&quot; was released on September 24, 1991. American record stores received an initial shipment of 46,251 copies, while 35,000 copies were shipped in the United Kingdom, where &quot;Bleach&quot; had been successful. The lead single &quot;Smells Like Teen Spirit&quot; had been released on September 10 with the intention of building a base among alternative rock fans, while the next single &quot;Come as You Are&quot; would possibly garner more attention. Days before the release date, the band began a short American tour in support of the album. Geffen hoped that &quot;Nevermind&quot; would sell around 250,000 copies, matching sales of Sonic Youth&#x27;s Geffen debut &quot;Goo&quot;. The most optimistic estimate was that &quot;Nevermind&quot; could be certified gold (500,000 copies sold) by September 1992.

&quot;Nevermind&quot; debuted on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 at number 144. Geffen shipped about half of the initial U.S. pressing to the American Northwest, where it sold out quickly and was unavailable for days. Geffen put production of all other albums on hold to fulfill demand in the region. Over the next few months, sales increased significantly as &quot;Smells Like Teen Spirit&quot; unexpectedly increased in popularity. The song&#x27;s video had received a world premiere on MTV&#x27;s late-night alternative show &quot;120 Minutes,&quot; and soon became popular enough for the network to start broadcasting it during the daytime. &quot;Smells Like Teen Spirit&quot; reached number six on the US &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100. The album was soon certified gold, but the band was relatively uninterested. Novoselic recalled, &quot;Yeah I was happy about it. It was pretty cool. It was kind of neat. But I don&#x27;t give a shit about some kind of achievement like that. It&#x27;s cool—I guess.&quot;

As the band set out for their European tour at the start of November 1991, &quot;Nevermind&quot; entered the &quot;Billboard&quot; Top 40 for the first time at number 35. By this point, &quot;Smells Like Teen Spirit&quot; had become a hit and the album was selling so fast none of Geffen&#x27;s marketing strategies could be enacted. Geffen president Ed Rosenblatt told &quot;The New York Times&quot;, &quot;We didn&#x27;t do anything. It was just one of those &#x27;Get out of the way and duck&#x27; records.&quot; Nirvana found as they toured Europe during the end of 1991 that the shows were dangerously oversold, television crews became a constant presence onstage, and &quot;Smells Like Teen Spirit&quot; was almost omnipresent on radio and music television.

&quot;Nevermind&quot; became Nirvana&#x27;s first number-one album on January 11, 1992, replacing Michael Jackson&#x27;s &quot;Dangerous&quot; at the top of the &quot;Billboard&quot; charts. By this time, &quot;Nevermind&quot; was selling approximately 300,000 copies a week. It returned for a second week at number one in February. &quot;Come as You Are&quot; was released as the second single in March 1992; it reached number nine on the UK Singles Chart and number 32 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 singles chart. Two more singles, &quot;Lithium&quot; and &quot;In Bloom&quot;, reached number 11 and 28 on the UK Singles Chart.

&quot;Nevermind&quot; was certified gold and platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) in November 1991 and certified Diamond in March 1999. It was also certified Diamond in Canada (1,000,000 units sold) by the Canadian Recording Industry Association in March 2001 and six times platinum in the United Kingdom. It has gone on to sell more than 30 million copies worldwide, making it one of the best-selling albums of all time.

==Critical reception==
Geffen&#x27;s press promotion for &quot;Nevermind&quot; was lower than that typical of a major record label. The label&#x27;s publicist primarily targeted music publications with long lead times for publication as well as magazines in the Seattle area. The unexpectedly positive feedback from critics who had received the album convinced the label to consider increasing the album&#x27;s original print run.

At first, &quot;Nevermind&quot; did not receive many reviews, and many publications ignored the album. Months after its release and after &quot;Smells Like Teen Spirit&quot; garnered airplay, print media organizations were &quot;scrambling&quot; to cover the phenomenon the album had become. However, by that point, much of the attention fell on Cobain rather than the album itself. The reviews that did initially appear were largely positive. Karen Schoemer of &quot;The New York Times&quot; wrote, &quot;With &quot;Nevermind&quot;, Nirvana has certainly succeeded. There are enough intriguing textures, mood shifts, instrumental snippets and inventive word plays to provide for hours of entertainment ... &quot;Nevermind&quot; is more sophisticated and carefully produced than anything peer bands like Dinosaur Jr. and Mudhoney have yet offered.&quot;

&quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; gave &quot;Nevermind&quot; an A− rating. The reviewer, David Browne, wrote that Nirvana &quot;never entertain the notion&quot; of wanting to sound &quot;normal&quot;, compared to other contemporary alternative bands. Concluding his enthusiastic review for the British &quot;Melody Maker&quot;, Everett True wrote that &quot;When Nirvana released &quot;Bleach&quot; all those years ago, the more sussed among us figured they had the potential to make an album that would blow every other contender away. My God have they proved us right.&quot; &quot;Spin&quot; gave &quot;Nevermind&quot; a favorable review stating that &quot;you&#x27;ll be humming all the songs for the rest of your life—or at least until your CD-tape-album wears out.&quot; &quot;Select&quot; compared the band to Jane&#x27;s Addiction, Sonic Youth, and Pixies, stating that the album &quot;proves that Nirvana truly belong in such high company.&quot;

Some reviews were not entirely positive. &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; gave the album three out of five stars. Reviewer Ira Robbins wrote, &quot;If Nirvana isn&#x27;t onto anything altogether new, &quot;Nevermind&quot; does possess the songs, character and confident spirit to be much more than a reformulation of college radio&#x27;s high-octane hits.&quot; &quot;The Boston Globe&quot; was less enthusiastic about the album; reviewer Steve Morse wrote, &quot;Most of &quot;Nevermind&quot; is packed with generic punk-pop that had been done by countless acts from Iggy Pop to the Red Hot Chili Peppers,&quot; and added &quot;the band has little or nothing to say, settling for moronic ramblings by singer-lyricist Cobain.&quot;

&quot;Nevermind&quot; was voted the best album of the year in &quot;The Village Voice&quot; Pazz &amp; Jop critics&#x27; poll; &quot;Smells Like Teen Spirit&quot; also topped the single of the year and video of the year polls. &quot;Nevermind&quot; topped the poll by a large majority, and &quot;Village Voice&quot; critic Robert Christgau wrote in his companion piece to the poll, &quot;As a modest pop surprise they might have scored a modest victory, like De La Soul in 1990. Instead, their multi-platinum takeover constituted the first full-scale public validation of the Amerindie values—the noise, the toons, the &#x27;tude—the radder half of the [Pazz &amp; Jop poll] electorate came up on.&quot; In the United Kingdom, the album was ranked number one on NME&#x27;s Best Fifty LPs of 1991. The album garnered the band three Grammy Award nominations in total at the 34th and 35th Grammy Awards. Among the nominations was the Best Alternative Music Album award.

==Legacy==
===Cultural impact===

&quot;Nevermind&quot; popularized the Seattle grunge movement and brought alternative rock as a whole into the mainstream, establishing its commercial and cultural viability and leading to an alternative rock boom in the music industry. Though a short tenure from the album&#x27;s release to the death of Cobain, the album&#x27;s and singles&#x27; successes propelled Nirvana to being regarded by the media as the biggest band in the world—especially throughout 1992. As a grunge act, the band&#x27;s success over the popular hair metal acts of the time drew similarities to the early 1960s British Invasion of American popular music. The album also initiated a resurgence of interest in punk culture among teenagers and young adults of Generation X. Journalist Chuck Eddy cited &quot;Nevermind&quot;″s release as roughly the end of the &quot;high album era&quot;.

&quot;Billboard&quot; writer William Goodman lauds the album, particularly in comparison to the music and image of hair metal acts: &quot;Instead of the chest-beating, coke-blowing, women-objectifying macho rock star of the ’80s, Cobain popularized (or re-invigorated) the image of the sensitive artist, the pro-feminism, anti-authoritarian smart alec punk with a sweet smile and gentle soul.&quot; In its citation placing it at number 17 in its 2003 list of the 500 greatest albums of all time, &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; said, &quot;No album in recent history had such an overpowering impact on a generation—a nation of teens suddenly turned punk—and such a catastrophic effect on its main creator.&quot; Gary Gersh, who signed Nirvana to Geffen Records, added that &quot;There is a pre-Nirvana and post-Nirvana record business...&quot;&#x27;Nevermind&quot;&#x27; showed that this wasn&#x27;t some alternative thing happening off in a corner, and then back to reality. This is reality.&quot;

The album had an enormous impact towards youth culture. Goodman says that &quot;Nevermind&quot; &quot;killed off hair metal, and sparked a cultural revolution across the globe&quot;. Speaking to the BBC, Brazilian cultural studies academic Moyses Pinto stated that he was struck by &quot;Nevermind&quot;, saying &quot;I thought: &#x27;this is perfect&#x27;; it sounded like a bright synthesis of noise and pop music.&quot; In similar praise, Kgomotso Neto says that the impact of Nirvana, as well as MTV, during the time of &quot;Nevermind&quot;, caused a new youth who listened to the same music and dressed similarly (grunge fashion). Neto further remarks that &quot;there was a cultural homogeneity probably never experienced before&quot; and that &quot;grunge culture became dominant very quickly; all that had been &#x27;cool&#x27; suddenly became ugly and exaggerated, and Kurt [Cobain] was the symbol of transgression.&quot; Michael Azerrad argued in his Nirvana biography &quot;Come as You Are: The Story of Nirvana&quot; (1993) that &quot;Nevermind&quot; marked an epochal generational shift in music similar to the rock-and-roll explosion in the 1950s and the end of the dominance of the Baby Boomer Generation on popular music. Azerrad wrote, &quot;&quot;Nevermind&quot; came along at exactly the right time. This was music by, for, and about a whole new group of young people who had been overlooked, ignored, or condescended to.&quot;

The success of &quot;Nevermind&quot; surprised Nirvana&#x27;s contemporaries, who felt dwarfed by its influence. Fugazi frontman Guy Picciotto later said: &quot;It was like our record could have been a hobo pissing in the forest for the amount of impact it had ... It felt like we were playing ukuleles all of a sudden because of the disparity of the impact of what they did.&quot; Karen Schoemer of the &quot;New York Times&quot; wrote that &quot;What&#x27;s unusual about Nirvana&#x27;s &quot;Nevermind&quot; is that it caters to neither a mainstream audience nor the indie rock fans who supported the group&#x27;s debut album.&quot; In 1992, Jon Pareles of &quot;The New York Times&quot; described the aftermath of the album&#x27;s breakthrough: &quot;Suddenly, all bets are off. No one has the inside track on which of dozens, perhaps hundreds, of ornery, obstreperous, unkempt bands might next appeal to the mall-walking millions.&quot; Record company executives offered large advances and record deals to bands, and replaced their previous strategies of building audiences for alternative bands with the attempts to achieve mainstream popularity quickly.

===Reappraisal===
&quot;Nevermind&quot; has continued to garner critical praise, having been ranked highly on lists of the greatest albums of all time. The album was ranked number 17 on &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;″s list of The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time, maintaining the rating in a 2012 revised list, and upgrading to number 6 in the 2020 and 2023 revisions. In 2019, &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; also ranked &quot;Nevermind&quot; number one on its list of the 100 Best Albums of the &#x27;90s, calling it the &quot;album that guaranteed the nineties would not suck.&quot; Also in 2019, &quot;Nevermind&quot; was ranked number one on &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;&#x27;s 50 Greatest Grunge Albums list. The magazine ranked the album number 10 in its list of 40 Greatest Punk Albums of All Time too.

In 2001, VH1 conducted a poll of more than 500 journalists, music executives and artists which judged &quot;Nevermind&quot; the second-best album in rock &#x27;n&#x27; roll history, behind the Beatles&#x27; &quot;Revolver&quot;. &quot;Time&quot; placed &quot;Nevermind&quot;, which writer Josh Tyrangiel called &quot;the finest album of the 90s&quot;, on its 2006 list of &quot;The All-TIME 100 Albums&quot;. &quot;Pitchfork&quot; named the album the sixth best of the decade, noting that &quot;anyone who hates this record today is just trying to be cool, and needs to be trying harder.&quot; In 2004, the Library of Congress added &quot;Nevermind&quot; to the National Recording Registry, which collects &quot;culturally, historically or aesthetically important&quot; sound recordings from the 20th century. On the other hand, &quot;Nevermind&quot; was voted the &quot;Most Overrated Album in the World&quot; in a 2005 BBC public poll. &quot;Rock Hard&quot; ranked the album at number 88 on their list of the &quot;500 Greatest Rock &amp; Metal Albums of All Time&quot;. In 2006, readers of Guitar World ranked &quot;Nevermind&quot; 8th on a list of the 100 Greatest Guitar Recordings. &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; named it the 10th best album of all time on their 2013 list. It was voted number 17 in the third edition of Colin Larkin&#x27;s &quot;All Time Top 1000 Albums&quot; (2000). Christgau named it among his 10 best albums from the 1990s and said in retrospect it is an A-plus album. In 2017, &quot;Smells Like Teen Spirit&quot; was inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame. In October 2023, the Official Charts Company revealed that &quot;Nevermind&quot; was the fourth most streamed album from the 1990s in the United Kingdom. In 2024, Paste Magazine ranked &quot;Nevermind&quot; number 65 on its list of the greatest albums of all-time.

===Reissues===
In 1996, Mobile Fidelity Sound Labs released &quot;Nevermind&quot; on vinyl as part of its ANADISQ 200 series, and as a 24-karat gold CD. The CD pressings included &quot;Endless, Nameless&quot;. The LP version quickly sold out its limited pressing but the CD edition stayed in print for years. In 2009, Original Recordings Group released &quot;Nevermind&quot; on limited edition 180g blue vinyl and regular 180g black vinyl mastered and cut by Bernie Grundman from the original analog tapes.

In September 2011, the album&#x27;s 20th anniversary, Universal Music Enterprises reissued &quot;Nevermind&quot; in a two-CD &quot;deluxe edition&quot; and a four-CD/one-DVD &quot;Super Deluxe Edition&quot;. The first disc on both editions features the original album with studio and live B-sides. The second discs feature early session recordings, including the Smart Studio sessions and some band rehearsals recorded with a boombox, plus two BBC session recordings. The &quot;Super Deluxe Edition&quot; also includes Vig&#x27;s original mix of the album and CD and DVD versions of &quot;Live at the Paramount&quot;. IFPI reported that as of 2012, the 20th anniversary formats of the album that were released in 2011 had sold nearly 800,000 units. In June 2021, Novoselic revealed that he and Grohl were compiling the 30th-anniversary edition of the album. In September 2021, it was announced that BBC Two in the United Kingdom would celebrate the 30th anniversary with a documentary titled &quot;When Nirvana Came to Britain&quot;, which featured contributions from Noveselic and Grohl. That same month, a 30th-anniversary edition of &quot;Nevermind&quot; was announced, which became available in eight-LP and five-CD editions and contained 70 previously unreleased live songs. The CD edition also included a Blu-ray of &quot;Live in Amsterdam&quot;.

==Track listing==
Notes
==Personnel==
Personnel adapted from &quot;Nevermind&quot; liner notes
Nirvana
*Kurt Cobain – vocals, guitars
*Krist Novoselic (credited as Chris Novoselic) – bass, vocals on the intro of &quot;Territorial Pissings&quot;
*Dave Grohl (credited as David Grohl) – drums, backing vocals on &quot;In Bloom&quot;, &quot;Drain You&quot;, and &quot;On a Plain&quot;

Additional musicians
*Chad Channing – cymbals on &quot;Polly&quot; (uncredited), drums on the &quot;Smart Studio Sessions&quot; (Deluxe Edition)
*Kirk Canning – cello on &quot;Something in the Way&quot;

Technical staff and artwork
*Craig Doubet – assistant engineering, mixing
*Robin Sloane – DGC/Geffen Records Creative Director
*Kurt Cobain (credited for the &quot;Monkey Photo&quot; as Kurdt Kobain) – cover concept, photography
*Spencer Elden – infant in cover photo
*Robert Fisher – artwork, art direction, design, cover design
*Michael Lavine – photography
*Bob Ludwig – mastering on 20th Anniversary Edition
*Jeff Sheehan – assistant engineer
*Butch Vig – producer, engineer
*Nirvana – producer, engineer
*Andy Wallace – mixing
*Kirk Weddle – cover photo
*Howie Weinberg – mastering
*Paul Carlsen – engineering/digital editing
==Charts==

=== Weekly charts ===





=== Year-end charts ===

















===Decade-end charts===


==Certifications==










==See also==
*1991 in music
* Album era
*&quot;Classic Albums: Nirvana – Nevermind&quot;
*&quot;Nevermind It&#x27;s an Interview&quot;
*List of best-selling albums
*List of best-selling albums in Belgium
*List of best-selling albums in France
*List of best-selling albums in the United States
*List of 1990s albums considered the best
*List of Billboard 200 number-one albums of 1992
*List of diamond-certified albums in Canada
*List of 200 Definitive Albums in the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame

==References==
=== Sources ===
*&quot;Classic Albums—Nirvana: Nevermind&quot; [DVD]. Isis Productions, 2004.
*Azerrad, Michael. &quot;Come as You Are: The Story of Nirvana&quot;. Doubleday, 1993. 
*Berkenstadt, Jim; Cross, Charles. &quot;Classic Rock Albums: Nevermind&quot;. Schirmer, 1998. 
*Cross, Charles. &quot;Heavier Than Heaven: A Biography of Kurt Cobain&quot;. Hyperion, 2001. 
*Sandford, Christopher. &quot;Kurt Cobain&quot;. Carroll &amp; Graff, 1995. 

==Further reading==

==External links==

*&quot;Nevermind&quot; at YouTube (streamed copy where licensed)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11649" start="63" end="70" title="Nirvana (band)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311775" start="107" end="118" title="DGC Records" label="DGC Records"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="161" end="172" title="Record label#Major versus independent record labels" label="major label"/>
<link wikidata="Q12006" start="206" end="216" title="Dave Grohl" label="Dave Grohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q451084" start="230" end="239" title="Butch Vig" label="Butch Vig"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855065" start="362" end="380" title="Sound City Studios" label="Sound City Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q769446" start="384" end="392" title="Van Nuys" label="Van Nuys"/>
<link wikidata="Q3962978" start="410" end="423" title="Smart Studios" label="Smart Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q43788" start="427" end="445" title="Madison, Wisconsin" label="Madison, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q421031" start="473" end="481" title="audio mastering" label="mastered"/>
<link wikidata="Q34006" start="518" end="527" title="Hollywood, Los Angeles" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q8446" start="572" end="583" title="Kurt Cobain" label="Kurt Cobain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558113" start="718" end="736" title="anti-establishment" label="anti-establishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q192242" start="760" end="771" title="frustration" label="frustration"/>
<link wikidata="Q860153" start="854" end="865" title="Bikini Kill" label="Bikini Kill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530134" start="873" end="882" title="Tobi Vail" label="Tobi Vail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7064" start="908" end="918" title="Hedonism" label="hedonistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q188464" start="1144" end="1150" title="Pixies (band)" label="Pixies"/>
<link wikidata="Q134969" start="1152" end="1158" title="R.E.M." label="R.E.M."/>
<link wikidata="Q128443" start="1160" end="1175" title="the Smithereens" label="the Smithereens"/>
<link wikidata="Q385618" start="1181" end="1188" title="Melvins" label="Melvins"/>
<link wikidata="Q11365" start="1242" end="1248" title="grunge" label="grunge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5332963" start="1276" end="1293" title="Eclecticism in music" label="musical diversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575153" start="1334" end="1339" title="Polly (Nirvana song)" label="Polly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2716700" start="1356" end="1376" title="Something in the Way" label="Something in the Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="1388" end="1392" title="Punk rock" label="punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q83270" start="1404" end="1413" title="hard rock" label="hard rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831" start="1634" end="1649" title="Michael Jackson" label="Michael Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q44104" start="1663" end="1672" title="Dangerous (Michael Jackson album)" label="Dangerous"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="1712" end="1737" title="US Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q485907" start="1814" end="1837" title="Smells Like Teen Spirit" label="Smells Like Teen Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="1874" end="1903" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q81180" start="1940" end="1959" title="Grammy Hall of Fame" label="Grammy Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="2005" end="2008" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q910487" start="2062" end="2077" title="Come as You Are (Nirvana song)" label="Come as You Are"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130059" start="2091" end="2098" title="Lithium (Nirvana song)" label="Lithium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129976" start="2116" end="2124" title="In Bloom" label="In Bloom"/>
<link wikidata="Q4046553" start="2182" end="2196" title="Pazz &amp;amp; Jop" label="Pazz &amp;amp; Jop"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="2362" end="2374" title="Grammy Awards" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q117548" start="2407" end="2411" title="34th Annual Grammy Awards" label="34th"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542296" start="2416" end="2434" title="35th Annual Grammy Awards" label="35th Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542129" start="2446" end="2474" title="Grammy Award for Best Alternative Music Album" label="Best Alternative Music Album"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2634" end="2650" title="Alternative rock#Popularization in the 1990s" label="alternative rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q188539" start="2710" end="2720" title="hair metal" label="hair metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q211418" start="2762" end="2778" title="British Invasion" label="British Invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745518" start="2782" end="2804" title="American popular music" label="American popular music"/>
<link wikidata="Q153946" start="2876" end="2888" title="punk culture" label="punk culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q379689" start="2925" end="2937" title="Generation X" label="Generation X"/>
<link wikidata="Q188976" start="2963" end="2977" title="counterculture" label="counterculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q305282" start="3065" end="3096" title="List of best-selling albums" label="best-selling albums of all time"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503026" start="3130" end="3137" title="RIAA certification" label="Diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="3145" end="3186" title="Recording Industry Association of America" label="Recording Industry Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="3307" end="3326" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q253299" start="3334" end="3361" title="National Recording Registry" label="National Recording Registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="3568" end="3581" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q240550" start="3623" end="3654" title="Rolling Stone&amp;#x27;s 500 Greatest Albums of All Time" label="500 Greatest Albums of All Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q778673" start="3857" end="3864" title="Sub Pop" label="Sub Pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q612885" start="3938" end="3950" title="Bruce Pavitt" label="Bruce Pavitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q451084" start="3969" end="3978" title="Butch Vig" label="Butch Vig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336827" start="4041" end="4050" title="Killdozer (band)" label="Killdozer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3962978" start="4080" end="4093" title="Smart Studios" label="Smart Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q43788" start="4097" end="4104" title="Madison, Wisconsin" label="Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q8446" start="4220" end="4231" title="Kurt Cobain" label="Kurt Cobain"/>
<link wikidata="Q765421" start="4447" end="4452" title="Breed (song)" label="Breed"/>
<link wikidata="Q96376463" start="4467" end="4471" title="Dive (Nirvana song)" label="Dive"/>
<link wikidata="Q215233" start="4501" end="4507" title="A-side and B-side" label="B-side"/>
<link wikidata="Q1706908" start="4517" end="4523" title="Sliver (song)" label="Sliver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129976" start="4538" end="4546" title="In Bloom" label="In Bloom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068429" start="4623" end="4628" title="Sappy" label="Sappy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130059" start="4642" end="4649" title="Lithium (Nirvana song)" label="Lithium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2491037" start="4663" end="4681" title="Here She Comes Now/Venus in Furs" label="Here She Comes Now"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4707" end="4761" title="Heaven &amp;amp; Hell: A Tribute to the Velvet Underground" label="Heaven &amp;amp; Hell: A Tribute to the Velvet Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575153" start="4780" end="4785" title="Polly (Nirvana song)" label="Polly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="4854" end="4861" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q912127" start="4867" end="4870" title="Tad (band)" label="Tad"/>
<link wikidata="Q322503" start="4885" end="4888" title="Audio mixing" label="mix"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953969" start="4979" end="4983" title="WORT" label="WORT"/>
<link wikidata="Q37836" start="5090" end="5099" title="Milwaukee" label="Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q356938" start="5187" end="5200" title="Chad Channing" label="Chad Channing"/>
<link wikidata="Q10922" start="5281" end="5294" title="hardcore punk" label="hardcore punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030697" start="5300" end="5306" title="Scream (band)" label="Scream"/>
<link wikidata="Q428798" start="5331" end="5346" title="Krist Novoselic" label="Krist Novoselic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12006" start="5379" end="5389" title="Dave Grohl" label="Dave Grohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q212699" start="5998" end="6012" title="Geffen Records" label="Geffen Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311775" start="6021" end="6032" title="DGC Records" label="DGC Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q240570" start="6063" end="6073" title="Kim Gordon" label="Kim Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q188626" start="6077" end="6088" title="Sonic Youth" label="Sonic Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354218" start="6197" end="6207" title="Scott Litt" label="Scott Litt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017561" start="6209" end="6221" title="David Briggs (producer)" label="David Briggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463156" start="6223" end="6232" title="Don Dixon (musician)" label="Don Dixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q888152" start="6238" end="6247" title="Bob Mould" label="Bob Mould"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049848" start="6369" end="6385" title="percentage point" label="percentage point"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855065" start="6556" end="6574" title="Sound City Studios" label="Sound City Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q769446" start="6578" end="6586" title="Van Nuys" label="Van Nuys"/>
<link wikidata="Q485907" start="6709" end="6732" title="Smells Like Teen Spirit" label="Smells Like Teen Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q910487" start="6944" end="6959" title="Come as You Are (Nirvana song)" label="Come as You Are"/>
<link wikidata="Q175391" start="7402" end="7408" title="Fender (company)" label="Fender"/>
<link wikidata="Q208173" start="7517" end="7529" title="Stratocaster" label="Stratocaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q516104" start="7543" end="7552" title="humbucker" label="humbucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q775605" start="7604" end="7610" title="Fender Jaguar" label="Jaguar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207857" start="7616" end="7624" title="DiMarzio" label="DiMarzio"/>
<link wikidata="Q384486" start="7644" end="7651" title="Fender Mustang" label="Mustang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572433" start="7787" end="7798" title="Mesa/Boogie" label="Mesa/Boogie"/>
<link wikidata="Q671465" start="7837" end="7845" title="Marshall Amplification" label="Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122899" start="7871" end="7874" title="Vox (company)" label="Vox"/>
<link wikidata="Q430501" start="7875" end="7879" title="AC30" label="AC30"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342675" start="7893" end="7900" title="Fender Bassman" label="Bassman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911536" start="7966" end="7975" title="Boss DS-1" label="Boss DS-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q591457" start="8057" end="8073" title="Electro-Harmonix" label="Electro-Harmonix"/>
<link wikidata="Q859092" start="8074" end="8082" title="Big Muff" label="Big Muff"/>
<link wikidata="Q591457" start="8100" end="8111" title="Small Clone" label="Small Clone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760913" start="8349" end="8357" title="Overdubbing" label="overdubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300113" start="8383" end="8395" title="Double tracking" label="double-track"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="8430" end="8441" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q17085328" start="8790" end="8796" title="Audio mixing (recorded music)" label="mixing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354218" start="8840" end="8850" title="Scott Litt" label="Scott Litt"/>
<link wikidata="Q134969" start="8876" end="8882" title="R.E.M." label="R.E.M."/>
<link wikidata="Q1282525" start="8888" end="8898" title="Ed Stasium" label="Ed Stasium"/>
<link wikidata="Q483407" start="8924" end="8935" title="the Ramones" label="the Ramones"/>
<link wikidata="Q128443" start="8940" end="8955" title="the Smithereens" label="the Smithereens"/>
<link wikidata="Q527921" start="9037" end="9049" title="Andy Wallace (producer)" label="Andy Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q131231" start="9071" end="9077" title="Slayer" label="Slayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q584600" start="9102" end="9122" title="Seasons in the Abyss" label="Seasons in the Abyss"/>
<link wikidata="Q435060" start="9424" end="9436" title="Steve Albini" label="Steve Albini"/>
<link wikidata="Q222001" start="9486" end="9494" title="In Utero" label="In Utero"/>
<link wikidata="Q421031" start="9918" end="9926" title="audio mastering" label="mastered"/>
<link wikidata="Q5922144" start="9930" end="9944" title="Howie Weinberg" label="Howie Weinberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q927803" start="10199" end="10211" title="hidden track" label="hidden track"/>
<link wikidata="Q385618" start="10829" end="10836" title="Melvins" label="Melvins"/>
<link wikidata="Q134969" start="10838" end="10844" title="R.E.M." label="R.E.M."/>
<link wikidata="Q128443" start="10846" end="10861" title="the Smithereens" label="the Smithereens"/>
<link wikidata="Q188464" start="10867" end="10873" title="Pixies (band)" label="Pixies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130936" start="11413" end="11424" title="power chord" label="power chord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427240" start="11569" end="11578" title="the Knack" label="the Knack"/>
<link wikidata="Q812073" start="11587" end="11603" title="Bay City Rollers" label="Bay City Rollers"/>
<link wikidata="Q464476" start="11624" end="11634" title="Black Flag (band)" label="Black Flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q47670" start="11639" end="11652" title="Black Sabbath" label="Black Sabbath"/>
<link wikidata="Q930471" start="11949" end="11961" title="Guitar World" label="Guitar World"/>
<link wikidata="Q384486" start="12119" end="12133" title="Fender Mustang" label="Fender Mustang"/>
<link wikidata="Q775605" start="12137" end="12150" title="Fender Jaguar" label="Fender Jaguar"/>
<link wikidata="Q208173" start="12184" end="12203" title="Fender Stratocaster" label="Fender Stratocaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q516104" start="12210" end="12219" title="humbucker" label="humbucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076641" start="12259" end="12265" title="Chorus effect" label="chorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q486688" start="12767" end="12778" title="Mötley Crüe" label="Mötley Crüe"/>
<link wikidata="Q9215" start="14335" end="14343" title="Sigmund Freud" label="Freudian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4572489" start="14447" end="14463" title="Charles R. Cross" label="Charles R. Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q617600" start="14512" end="14531" title="Heavier Than Heaven" label="Heavier Than Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530134" start="14653" end="14662" title="Tobi Vail" label="Tobi Vail"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080929" start="15573" end="15582" title="K Records" label="K Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942594" start="15792" end="15800" title="Musician (magazine)" label="Musician"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="16413" end="16435" title="Operation Desert Storm" label="Operation Desert Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q238960" start="16709" end="16728" title="Sacagawea" label="the Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q218513" start="16871" end="16877" title="Bleach (Nirvana album)" label="Bleach"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263757" start="16929" end="16939" title="liner note" label="liner note"/>
<link wikidata="Q485907" start="17097" end="17120" title="Smells Like Teen Spirit" label="Smells Like Teen Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q82545" start="17175" end="17186" title="Sex Pistols" label="Sex Pistols"/>
<link wikidata="Q457275" start="17199" end="17251" title="Never Mind the Bollocks, Here&amp;#x27;s the Sex Pistols" label="Never Mind the Bollocks, Here&amp;#x27;s the Sex Pistols"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929914" start="17514" end="17525" title="water birth" label="water birth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634416" start="17721" end="17732" title="Stock photography" label="stock house"/>
<link wikidata="Q385278" start="17764" end="17777" title="infant swimming" label="swimming baby"/>
<link wikidata="Q8124" start="18079" end="18084" title="Human penis" label="penis"/>
<link wikidata="Q373342" start="18442" end="18455" title="popular music" label="popular music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067" start="18762" end="18767" title="Dante Alighieri" label="Dante"/>
<link wikidata="Q4509219" start="18781" end="18788" title="Inferno (Dante)" label="Inferno"/>
<link wikidata="Q124179" start="18944" end="18948" title="Kiss (band)" label="Kiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q8349" start="19177" end="19206" title="&amp;quot;Weird Al&amp;quot; Yankovic" label="&amp;quot;Weird Al&amp;quot; Yankovic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649762" start="19248" end="19264" title="Off the Deep End" label="Off the Deep End"/>
<link wikidata="Q660567" start="19751" end="19768" title="child pornography" label="child pornography"/>
<link wikidata="Q26553" start="20326" end="20344" title="child sexual abuse" label="child sexual abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q185569" start="21026" end="21032" title="cherub" label="cherub"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899048" start="21489" end="21511" title="statute of limitations" label="statute of limitations"/>
<link wikidata="Q910487" start="22692" end="22707" title="Come as You Are (Nirvana song)" label="Come as You Are"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011916" start="22974" end="22977" title="Goo (album)" label="Goo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503026" start="23054" end="23068" title="RIAA certification" label="certified gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="23148" end="23173" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="23598" end="23601" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q4548110" start="23643" end="23654" title="120 Minutes" label="120 Minutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="23819" end="23848" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="24499" end="24517" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831" start="24986" end="25001" title="Michael Jackson" label="Michael Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q44104" start="25015" end="25024" title="Dangerous (Michael Jackson album)" label="Dangerous"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="25328" end="25344" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="25366" end="25395" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="25587" end="25628" title="Recording Industry Association of America" label="Recording Industry Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q550619" start="25760" end="25799" title="Canadian Recording Industry Association" label="Canadian Recording Industry Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q751895" start="25818" end="25836" title="BPI certification" label="six times platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q305282" start="25943" end="25974" title="List of best-selling albums" label="best-selling albums of all time"/>
<link wikidata="Q622944" start="27213" end="27225" title="Dinosaur Jr." label="Dinosaur Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q898820" start="27230" end="27238" title="Mudhoney (band)" label="Mudhoney"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="27270" end="27290" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231828" start="27352" end="27364" title="David Browne (journalist)" label="David Browne"/>
<link wikidata="Q580896" start="27571" end="27583" title="Melody Maker" label="Melody Maker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417079" start="27591" end="27603" title="Everett True" label="Everett True"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025912" start="27846" end="27850" title="Spin (magazine)" label="Spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7447637" start="28045" end="28051" title="Select (magazine)" label="Select"/>
<link wikidata="Q622947" start="28079" end="28100" title="Jane&amp;#x27;s Addiction" label="Jane&amp;#x27;s Addiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q188626" start="28102" end="28113" title="Sonic Youth" label="Sonic Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q188464" start="28119" end="28125" title="Pixies (band)" label="Pixies"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="28265" end="28278" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q824451" start="28579" end="28595" title="The Boston Globe" label="The Boston Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q182665" start="28779" end="28787" title="Iggy Pop" label="Iggy Pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q10708" start="28795" end="28816" title="Red Hot Chili Peppers" label="Red Hot Chili Peppers"/>
<link wikidata="Q876158" start="29012" end="29029" title="The Village Voice" label="The Village Voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q4046553" start="29036" end="29050" title="Pazz &amp;amp; Jop" label="Pazz &amp;amp; Jop"/>
<link wikidata="Q314382" start="29267" end="29283" title="Robert Christgau" label="Robert Christgau"/>
<link wikidata="Q685595" start="29403" end="29413" title="De La Soul" label="De La Soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="29706" end="29709" title="NME" label="NME"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="29775" end="29787" title="Grammy Awards" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q117548" start="29816" end="29820" title="34th Annual Grammy Awards" label="34th"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542296" start="29825" end="29843" title="35th Annual Grammy Awards" label="35th Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542129" start="29875" end="29903" title="Best Alternative Music Album" label="Best Alternative Music Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q11365" start="29992" end="29998" title="grunge" label="grunge"/>
<link wikidata="Q11366" start="30020" end="30036" title="alternative rock" label="alternative rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616580" start="30242" end="30257" title="Suicide of Kurt Cobain" label="death of Cobain"/>
<link wikidata="Q188539" start="30472" end="30482" title="hair metal" label="hair metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q211418" start="30537" end="30553" title="British Invasion" label="British Invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q153946" start="30634" end="30646" title="punk culture" label="punk culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q379689" start="30683" end="30695" title="Generation X" label="Generation X"/>
<link wikidata="Q867101" start="30708" end="30718" title="Chuck Eddy" label="Chuck Eddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16960681" start="30794" end="30803" title="album era" label="album era"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="30812" end="30833" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q240550" start="31275" end="31306" title="Rolling Stone&amp;#x27;s 500 Greatest Albums of All Time" label="500 greatest albums of all time"/>
<link wikidata="Q8059289" start="31847" end="31860" title="youth culture" label="youth culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="32005" end="32008" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q29828873" start="32426" end="32440" title="grunge fashion" label="grunge fashion"/>
<link wikidata="Q647640" start="32738" end="32753" title="Michael Azerrad" label="Michael Azerrad"/>
<link wikidata="" start="32792" end="32829" title="Come as You Are: The Story of Nirvana" label="Come as You Are: The Story of Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q797819" start="33004" end="33026" title="Baby Boomer Generation" label="Baby Boomer Generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q277865" start="33368" end="33374" title="Fugazi" label="Fugazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640127" start="33384" end="33397" title="Guy Picciotto" label="Guy Picciotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q61285" start="33549" end="33556" title="ukulele" label="ukulele"/>
<link wikidata="Q6271357" start="33900" end="33911" title="Jon Pareles" label="Jon Pareles"/>
<link wikidata="Q240550" start="34639" end="34674" title="Rolling Stone&amp;#x27;s 500 Greatest Albums of All Time" label="The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q203078" start="35224" end="35227" title="VH1" label="VH1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="35404" end="35415" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q185121" start="35428" end="35436" title="Revolver (Beatles album)" label="Revolver"/>
<link wikidata="Q5688955" start="35504" end="35518" title="Josh Tyrangiel" label="Josh Tyrangiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q721140" start="35630" end="35639" title="Pitchfork (website)" label="Pitchfork"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="35822" end="35841" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q253299" start="35877" end="35904" title="National Recording Registry" label="National Recording Registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="36136" end="36139" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q455803" start="36159" end="36168" title="Rock Hard (magazine)" label="Rock Hard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145275" start="36544" end="36556" title="Colin Larkin" label="Colin Larkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4729825" start="36570" end="36594" title="All Time Top 1000 Albums" label="All Time Top 1000 Albums"/>
<link wikidata="Q81180" start="36781" end="36800" title="Grammy Hall of Fame" label="Grammy Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072376" start="36823" end="36846" title="Official Charts Company" label="Official Charts Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q3859724" start="37092" end="37118" title="Mobile Fidelity Sound Labs" label="Mobile Fidelity Sound Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q16629185" start="37153" end="37158" title="Gramophone record" label="vinyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401905" start="37206" end="37211" title="karat (purity)" label="karat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894019" start="37630" end="37657" title="Universal Music Enterprises" label="Universal Music Enterprises"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358666" start="38002" end="38009" title="boombox" label="boombox"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="38020" end="38023" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632149" start="38165" end="38186" title="Live at the Paramount (video)" label="Live at the Paramount"/>
<link wikidata="Q826858" start="38194" end="38198" title="IFPI" label="IFPI"/>
<link wikidata="Q216108" start="38475" end="38482" title="BBC Two" label="BBC Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q108795498" start="38574" end="38602" title="When Nirvana Came to Britain" label="When Nirvana Came to Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q47770" start="38887" end="38894" title="Blu-ray" label="Blu-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q8446" start="39034" end="39045" title="Kurt Cobain" label="Kurt Cobain"/>
<link wikidata="Q428798" start="39065" end="39080" title="Krist Novoselic" label="Krist Novoselic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12006" start="39176" end="39186" title="Dave Grohl" label="Dave Grohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129976" start="39246" end="39254" title="In Bloom" label="In Bloom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138406" start="39268" end="39277" title="Drain You" label="Drain You"/>
<link wikidata="Q611498" start="39295" end="39305" title="On a Plain" label="On a Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q356938" start="39335" end="39348" title="Chad Channing" label="Chad Channing"/>
<link wikidata="Q190172" start="39351" end="39357" title="cymbal" label="cymbal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575153" start="39368" end="39373" title="Polly (Nirvana song)" label="Polly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2716700" start="39489" end="39509" title="Something in the Way" label="Something in the Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q128124" start="39571" end="39582" title="Audio engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q17085328" start="39584" end="39590" title="Audio mixing (recorded music)" label="mixing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6832117" start="39848" end="39862" title="Michael Lavine" label="Michael Lavine"/>
<link wikidata="Q981970" start="39878" end="39888" title="Bob Ludwig" label="Bob Ludwig"/>
<link wikidata="Q421031" start="39891" end="39900" title="Audio mastering" label="mastering"/>
<link wikidata="Q451084" start="39965" end="39974" title="Butch Vig" label="Butch Vig"/>
<link wikidata="Q527921" start="40027" end="40039" title="Andy Wallace (producer)" label="Andy Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q5922144" start="40077" end="40091" title="Howie Weinberg" label="Howie Weinberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088301" start="40297" end="40310" title="1991 in music" label="1991 in music"/>
<link wikidata="Q16960681" start="40313" end="40322" title="Album era" label="Album era"/>
<link wikidata="" start="40330" end="40365" title="Classic Albums: Nirvana – Nevermind" label="Classic Albums: Nirvana – Nevermind"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938247" start="40379" end="40411" title="Nevermind It&amp;#x27;s an Interview" label="Nevermind It&amp;#x27;s an Interview"/>
<link wikidata="Q305282" start="40419" end="40446" title="List of best-selling albums" label="List of best-selling albums"/>
<link wikidata="Q30913310" start="40448" end="40486" title="List of best-selling albums in Belgium" label="List of best-selling albums in Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q16656296" start="40488" end="40525" title="List of best-selling albums in France" label="List of best-selling albums in France"/>
<link wikidata="Q468514" start="40527" end="40575" title="List of best-selling albums in the United States" label="List of best-selling albums in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q131384581" start="40577" end="40617" title="List of 1990s albums considered the best" label="List of 1990s albums considered the best"/>
<link wikidata="Q4431880" start="40619" end="40666" title="List of Billboard 200 number-one albums of 1992" label="List of Billboard 200 number-one albums of 1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q6616192" start="40668" end="40710" title="List of diamond-certified albums in Canada" label="List of diamond-certified albums in Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q108830891" start="40712" end="40775" title="List of 200 Definitive Albums in the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame" label="List of 200 Definitive Albums in the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143295" wikidata="Q1932577" url="?curid=143295" title="Escape (Journey album)">
<text>Escape (stylized as E5C4P3 on the album cover) is the seventh studio album by American rock band Journey, released on July 20, 1981, by Columbia Records. It topped the US &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 chart and featured four hit &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 singles – &quot;Don&#x27;t Stop Believin&quot; ( 9), &quot;Who&#x27;s Crying Now&quot; (No. 4), &quot;Still They Ride&quot; (No. 19) and &quot;Open Arms&quot; (No. 2) – plus rock radio staple &quot;Stone in Love&quot;. In July 2021, it was certified Diamond by the Recording Industry of America (RIAA) for at least ten million sales in the US, making it the band&#x27;s most successful studio album and second most successful album overall behind &quot;Greatest Hits&quot;. &quot;Escape&quot; was the fifth-highest selling album of 1981, just behind &quot;Bella Donna&quot; from Stevie Nicks.

==Background and writing==
&quot;Escape&quot; was the band&#x27;s first album with keyboardist Jonathan Cain, who replaced founding member Gregg Rolie after he left the band at the end of 1980. The album was co-produced by former Lynyrd Skynyrd sound technician Kevin Elson and one-time Queen engineer Mike Stone, who also engineered the album.

==Reception and legacy==
Mike DeGagne of AllMusic retrospectively awarded &quot;Escape&quot; four-and-a-half stars out of five, writing, &quot;The songs are timeless, and as a whole, they have a way of rekindling the innocence of youthful romance and the rebelliousness of growing up, built from heartfelt songwriting and sturdy musicianship.&quot; Colin Larkin awarded the album four out of five stars in the 2002 edition of the Virgin &quot;Encyclopedia of Popular Music&quot;. Contemporary &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; reviews were less favorable. The first review of 1981 by Deborah Frost marked Journey as heavy metal posers and the music in the album as easily playable by any session musician. In the 2004 edition of their album guide, &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; awarded the album two-and-a-half stars out of five, which was nonetheless an improvement from Dave Marsh&#x27;s one star rating in the 1983 edition of the publication.

In 1988, &quot;Kerrang!&quot; readers voted &quot;Escape&quot; the greatest AOR album of all time―&quot;Classic Rock&quot; expressed the same opinion in 2008. In 1989, &quot;Kerrang!&quot; ranked &quot;Escape&quot; number 32 in &quot;The 100 Greatest Heavy Metal Albums of All Time&quot;. A 2000 Virgin poll saw the album voted the 24th greatest heavy metal/alternative rock album of all time. In 2001, &quot;Classic Rock&quot; ranked the album 22 in &quot;The 100 Greatest Rock Albums of All Time&quot;. In 2006, the same publication included it in their &quot;200 Greatest Albums of the 80s&quot;, as one of the twenty greatest albums of 1981. &quot;Q&quot; magazine ranked &quot;Escape&quot; 15th among its &quot;Records it&#x27;s OK to Love&quot; in 2006.

&quot;Cash Box&quot; described &quot;Still They Ride&quot; as a &quot;bluesy lament&quot; with a &quot;sad, almost mournful&quot; vocal, &quot;doleful acoustic piano work&quot; and &quot;crying guitar notes.&quot; &quot;Billboard&quot; called &quot;Still They Ride&quot; a &quot;soft, lyrical ballad&quot; with similar &quot;tone and style&quot; to &quot;Open Arms&quot;.

An Atari 2600 game based on the album, &quot;Journey Escape&quot;, was released in 1982.

==Track listing==


==Personnel==
===Journey===
*Steve Perry – lead vocals, producer (tracks 12–14)
*Neal Schon – lead guitar, backing vocals
*Jonathan Cain – keyboards, rhythm guitar, backing vocals
*Ross Valory – bass, backing vocals
*Steve Smith – drums

===Production===
*Mike Stone, Kevin Elson – producers, engineers, mixing
*Wally Buck – assistant engineer
*Bob Ludwig – original mastering, remastering
*Brian Lee – remastering
*Herbie Herbert – management
*Jim Welch – photography, art direction
*Stanley Mouse – illustrations

==Charts==
===Weekly charts===


===Year-end charts===


==Certifications==

==See also==
* Billboard Year-End
* List of &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 number-one albums of 1981
* List of best-selling albums in the United States

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="87" end="91" title="Rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q464749" start="97" end="104" title="Journey (band)" label="Journey"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="136" end="152" title="Columbia Records" label="Columbia Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="171" end="196" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="225" end="254" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307832" start="271" end="295" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Stop Believin&amp;#x27;" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Stop Believin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997014" start="314" end="335" title="Who&amp;#x27;s Crying Now" label="Who&amp;#x27;s Crying Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q834969" start="398" end="407" title="Open Arms (Journey song)" label="Open Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503026" start="505" end="512" title="Diamond (RIAA certification)" label="Diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="520" end="549" title="Recording Industry Association of America" label="Recording Industry of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116017" start="708" end="721" title="Greatest Hits (Journey)" label="Greatest Hits"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703590" start="811" end="822" title="Bella Donna (album)" label="Bella Donna"/>
<link wikidata="Q234691" start="834" end="846" title="Stevie Nicks" label="Stevie Nicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266567" start="944" end="957" title="Jonathan Cain" label="Jonathan Cain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335067" start="988" end="999" title="Gregg Rolie" label="Gregg Rolie"/>
<link wikidata="Q158462" start="1079" end="1093" title="Lynyrd Skynyrd" label="Lynyrd Skynyrd"/>
<link wikidata="Q15862" start="1136" end="1141" title="Queen (band)" label="Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q834558" start="1151" end="1161" title="Mike Stone (record producer)" label="Mike Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="1236" end="1244" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145275" start="1544" end="1556" title="Colin Larkin" label="Colin Larkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q494917" start="1625" end="1631" title="Virgin Group" label="Virgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375715" start="1638" end="1667" title="Encyclopedia of Popular Music" label="Encyclopedia of Popular Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="1694" end="1707" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q753476" start="2055" end="2065" title="Dave Marsh" label="Dave Marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q43281" start="2145" end="2153" title="Kerrang!" label="Kerrang!"/>
<link wikidata="Q428656" start="2206" end="2209" title="Album-oriented rock" label="AOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q509854" start="2234" end="2246" title="Classic Rock (magazine)" label="Classic Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q494917" start="2426" end="2432" title="Virgin Group" label="Virgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="2476" end="2487" title="heavy metal music" label="heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11366" start="2488" end="2504" title="alternative rock" label="alternative rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q217629" start="2776" end="2798" title="Q (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Q&amp;quot; magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q656903" start="2897" end="2905" title="Cash Box" label="Cash Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="2961" end="2966" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="3111" end="3120" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q206261" start="3267" end="3277" title="Atari 2600" label="Atari 2600"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995120" start="3309" end="3323" title="Journey Escape" label="Journey Escape"/>
<link wikidata="Q175857" start="3403" end="3414" title="Steve Perry" label="Steve Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045845" start="3417" end="3428" title="lead vocals" label="lead vocals"/>
<link wikidata="Q183945" start="3430" end="3438" title="record producer" label="producer"/>
<link wikidata="Q389242" start="3455" end="3465" title="Neal Schon" label="Neal Schon"/>
<link wikidata="Q61046048" start="3468" end="3479" title="lead guitar" label="lead guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q798487" start="3481" end="3495" title="backing vocals" label="backing vocals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266567" start="3497" end="3510" title="Jonathan Cain" label="Jonathan Cain"/>
<link wikidata="Q52954" start="3513" end="3522" title="keyboard instrument" label="keyboards"/>
<link wikidata="Q670969" start="3524" end="3537" title="rhythm guitar" label="rhythm guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q301874" start="3555" end="3566" title="Ross Valory" label="Ross Valory"/>
<link wikidata="Q943448" start="3591" end="3602" title="Steve Smith (American musician)" label="Steve Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q834558" start="3630" end="3640" title="Mike Stone (record producer)" label="Mike Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q128124" start="3667" end="3676" title="recording engineer" label="engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q322503" start="3678" end="3684" title="audio mixing" label="mixing"/>
<link wikidata="Q981970" start="3719" end="3729" title="Bob Ludwig" label="Bob Ludwig"/>
<link wikidata="Q421031" start="3732" end="3750" title="audio mastering" label="original mastering"/>
<link wikidata="Q7965128" start="3790" end="3804" title="Walter Herbert (manager)" label="Herbie Herbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920921" start="3807" end="3817" title="management" label="management"/>
<link wikidata="Q11633" start="3831" end="3842" title="photography" label="photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q706364" start="3844" end="3857" title="art direction" label="art direction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496380" start="3859" end="3872" title="Stanley Mouse" label="Stanley Mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q178659" start="3875" end="3887" title="illustration" label="illustration"/>
<link wikidata="Q4035104" start="3982" end="4000" title="Billboard Year-End" label="Billboard Year-End"/>
<link wikidata="Q4431872" start="4003" end="4062" title="List of Billboard 200 number-one albums of 1981" label="List of &amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200 number-one albums of 1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q468514" start="4065" end="4113" title="List of best-selling albums in the United States" label="List of best-selling albums in the United States"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143296" wikidata="Q1753788" url="?curid=143296" title="Frontiers (Journey album)">
<text>Frontiers is the eighth studio album by the American rock band Journey, released in February 1983, by Columbia Records. This was the band&#x27;s last album to feature bassist Ross Valory until 1996&#x27;s &quot;Trial by Fire&quot;.

The album reached No. 2 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 chart and would garner four top 40 singles: &quot;After the Fall&quot; (No. 23), &quot;Send Her My Love&quot; (No. 23), &quot;Faithfully&quot; (No. 12), and &quot;Separate Ways (Worlds Apart)&quot; (No. 8), and a rock radio hit in &quot;Chain Reaction&quot;. The album would later achieve the RIAA certification of six times platinum.

The album had been sequenced and prepped for pressing when, in a last-minute conference with Journey&#x27;s A&amp;R man Michael Dillbeck, two songs were pulled from the original lineup, &quot;Ask the Lonely&quot; and &quot;Only the Young&quot;. These two tracks were replaced with &quot;Back Talk&quot; and &quot;Troubled Child&quot;. &quot;Ask the Lonely&quot; was utilized in the soundtrack for the film &quot;Two of a Kind&quot;. &quot;Only the Young&quot; would find its way into the Top Ten two years later, as part of the soundtrack of the movie &quot;Vision Quest&quot;.

The band recorded a song called &quot;All That Really Matters,&quot; with keyboardist Jonathan Cain singing lead, during the album sessions. It didn&#x27;t see release until the 1992 release of the &quot;Time3&quot; box set.

&quot;Frontiers&quot; was the band&#x27;s highest-charting album in the United Kingdom, reaching No. 6 on the UK Albums Chart in 1983.

== Album artwork ==
Jim Welch designed the album cover. This was the first album cover since &quot;Next&quot; that did not employ the talents of Stanley Mouse and Alton Kelley.

Welch, who has been Journey&#x27;s art designer for more than 30 years (as of 2022), commented: &quot;&quot;Frontiers&quot; was a subtle shift. Mouse and Kelley were not involved with that cover. My vision for &quot;Frontiers&quot; was based on &quot;tunnels&quot; and the relativity of time and motion. Light stays the same, but time bends. It was Einstein theories for artist interpretation. The alien in &quot;Frontiers&quot; wasn&#x27;t really an alien at all, he was a connection to a higher level of listening to Journey.&quot;

==Critical reception==
In 2005, &quot;Frontiers&quot; was ranked number 363 in &quot;Rock Hard&quot; magazine&#x27;s book &quot;The 500 Greatest Rock &amp; Metal Albums of All Time&quot;.

==Track listing==


==Personnel==
;Band members
*Steve Perry - lead vocals
*Neal Schon - lead guitar, backing vocals
*Jonathan Cain - keyboards, rhythm guitar, backing vocals
*Ross Valory - bass guitar, backing vocals
*Steve Smith - drums, percussion

;Additional Musicians
*Randy Jackson - bass guitar on &quot;After the Fall&quot;

;Production
*Mike Stone - producer, engineer, mixing
*Kevin Elson - producer, mixing
*Wally Buck - assistant engineer
*Bob Ludwig - mastering

== Charts ==


==Certifications==

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="53" end="57" title="Rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q464749" start="63" end="70" title="Journey (band)" label="Journey"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="102" end="118" title="Columbia Records" label="Columbia Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q301874" start="175" end="186" title="Ross Valory" label="Ross Valory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623481" start="211" end="224" title="Trial by Fire (Journey album)" label="Trial by Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="264" end="289" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q4690636" start="340" end="354" title="After the Fall (song)" label="After the Fall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7450125" start="377" end="393" title="Send Her My Love (song)" label="Send Her My Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q5431307" start="416" end="426" title="Faithfully (song)" label="Faithfully"/>
<link wikidata="Q3006550" start="453" end="481" title="Separate Ways (Worlds Apart)" label="Separate Ways (Worlds Apart)"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="583" end="587" title="Recording Industry Association of America" label="RIAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q17058348" start="1038" end="1051" title="Two of a Kind (soundtrack)" label="Two of a Kind"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139277" start="1184" end="1196" title="Vision Quest (soundtrack)" label="Vision Quest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804844" start="1409" end="1414" title="Time3" label="Time3"/>
<link wikidata="Q719415" start="1541" end="1556" title="UK Albums Chart" label="UK Albums Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q614425" start="1666" end="1670" title="Next (Journey album)" label="Next"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496380" start="1712" end="1725" title="Stanley Mouse" label="Stanley Mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q368015" start="1730" end="1742" title="Alton Kelley" label="Alton Kelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q455803" start="2365" end="2374" title="Rock Hard (magazine)" label="Rock Hard"/>
<link wikidata="Q175857" start="2518" end="2529" title="Steve Perry" label="Steve Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q389242" start="2545" end="2555" title="Neal Schon" label="Neal Schon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266567" start="2587" end="2600" title="Jonathan Cain" label="Jonathan Cain"/>
<link wikidata="Q301874" start="2645" end="2656" title="Ross Valory" label="Ross Valory"/>
<link wikidata="Q943448" start="2688" end="2699" title="Steve Smith (musician)" label="Steve Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q337521" start="2744" end="2757" title="Randy Jackson" label="Randy Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q834558" start="2816" end="2826" title="Mike Stone (record producer)" label="Mike Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q981970" start="2922" end="2932" title="Bob Ludwig" label="Bob Ludwig"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143298" wikidata="Q19176" url="?curid=143298" title="Sarah Churchill, Duchess of Marlborough">
<text>Sarah Churchill, Duchess of Marlborough, Princess of Mindelheim, Countess of Nellenburg (née Jenyns, spelt Jennings in most modern references; 5 June 1660 (Old Style) – 18 October 1744), was an English courtier who rose to be one of the most influential women of her time through her close relationship with Anne, Queen of Great Britain. The Duchess of Marlborough&#x27;s relationship and influence with Anne were widely known, and leading public figures often turned their attentions to her, hoping for favour from Anne. 

The Duchess enjoyed a &quot;long and devoted&quot; relationship with her husband of more than 40 years, the great general John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough. After Anne&#x27;s father, King James II, was deposed during the Glorious Revolution, Sarah Churchill acted as Anne&#x27;s agent, promoting her interests during the reigns of William III and Mary II. When Anne came to the throne after William&#x27;s death in 1702, the Duke of Marlborough, together with Sidney Godolphin, 1st Earl of Godolphin, rose to head the government partly owing to his wife.

While the Duke of Marlborough was fighting the War of the Spanish Succession, the Duchess kept him informed of court intrigue and conveyed his requests and political advice to the Queen. The Duchess campaigned tirelessly on behalf of the Whigs, while also devoting herself to building projects such as Blenheim Palace. A strong-willed woman, she strained her relationship with the Queen whenever they disagreed on political, court, or church appointments. After her final break with Anne in 1711, the Duke and Duchess were dismissed from court, and the Duchess no longer had any communication with Anne, who died in 1714. The Duchess later had famous disagreements with many important people, including her daughter Henrietta Godolphin, 2nd Duchess of Marlborough; the architect of Blenheim Palace, John Vanbrugh; Prime Minister Robert Walpole; King George II; and his wife, Queen Caroline. The money she inherited from the Marlborough trust left her one of the richest women in Europe. She died in 1744, aged 84.

== Early life ==
Sarah Jennings was born on 5 June 1660, probably at Holywell House in St Albans, Hertfordshire. She was the daughter of Richard Jennings (or Jenyns), a Member of Parliament, and Frances Thornhurst (daughter of Susanna Temple, a maid of honour of Anne of Denmark). Her paternal grandfather was Sir John Jennings. Her uncle Martin Lister was a prominent naturalist. 

In 1664 Sarah&#x27;s sister, Frances, was appointed maid of honour to the Duchess of York, Anne Hyde. Although James forced Frances to give up the post because of her marriage to a Catholic, James did not forget the family. In 1673, Sarah entered court as maid of honour to James&#x27;s second wife, Mary of Modena.

Sarah Jennings became close to the young Princess Anne in about 1675, and the friendship grew stronger as the two grew older. In late 1675, when she was fifteen, she met John Churchill, 10 years her senior, who fell in love with her. Churchill had previously been a lover of Charles II&#x27;s mistress Barbara Palmer, 1st Duchess of Cleveland, and his estates were deeply in debt. Jennings had a rival for Churchill in Catherine Sedley, a wealthy mistress of James II and the choice of Churchill&#x27;s father, Sir Winston Churchill, who was anxious to restore the family&#x27;s fortune. John Churchill may have hoped to take Jennings as a mistress in place of the Duchess of Cleveland, who had recently departed for France, but surviving letters from Jennings to Churchill show her unwillingness to assume that role.

== Marriage ==
In 1677, Jennings&#x27;s brother Ralph died, and she and her sister Frances became co-heirs of the family estates in Hertfordshire and Kent. Churchill chose Sarah Jennings over Catherine Sedley, but both Churchill&#x27;s and Jennings&#x27;s families disapproved of the match. They married secretly in the winter of 1677–78.

John and Sarah Churchill were both Protestants in a predominantly Catholic court, a circumstance that would complicate their political allegiances. Although no date was recorded, the marriage was announced only to the Duchess of York and a small circle of friends, so that Sarah could keep her court position as Maid of Honour.

When Churchill became pregnant, her marriage was announced publicly (on 1 October 1678), and she retired from the court to give birth to her first child, Harriet, who died in infancy. When the Duke of York went into self-imposed exile to Scotland as a result of the furore surrounding the Popish Plot, the Churchills accompanied him, and Charles II rewarded John&#x27;s loyalty by creating him Baron Churchill of Eyemouth in Scotland. As a result, Sarah became Lady Churchill. The Duke of York returned to England after the religious tension had eased, and Sarah was appointed a Lady of the Bedchamber to Anne after the latter&#x27;s marriage in 1683.

== Reign of James II ==
The early reign of James II was relatively successful; it was not expected that a Catholic king could assert control in a fiercely Protestant, anti-Catholic country. In addition, his daughter and heir was a Protestant. However, when James attempted to reform the national religion, popular discontent against him and his government became widespread. The level of alarm increased when Queen Mary gave birth to a Roman Catholic son and heir, Prince James Francis Edward, on 10 June 1688. A group of politicians known as the Immortal Seven invited Prince William of Orange, husband of James&#x27;s Protestant daughter Mary, to invade England and remove James from power, a plan that became public knowledge very quickly. James still retained some influence, and he ordered that both Lady Churchill and Princess Anne be placed under house arrest at Anne&#x27;s residence (the Cockpit) in the Palace of Whitehall. Both their husbands, though previously loyal to James, had switched their allegiances to William of Orange. In her memoirs, Sarah Churchill described how the two easily escaped captivity and fled to Nottingham:
Although Churchill implied that she had encouraged the escape for Anne&#x27;s safety, it is more likely that she was protecting herself and her husband. If James had succeeded in defeating Prince William of Orange in battle, he might have imprisoned and even executed Lord and Lady Churchill for treason, whereas it was unlikely he would have condemned his daughter to a similar fate. But James fled to France in December 1688 rather than confront the invading army, allowing William to take over his throne.

== Reign of William III and Mary II ==
Life for Sarah during the reign of William and Mary was difficult. William and Mary awarded her husband the title Earl of Marlborough, but the new earl and countess enjoyed considerably less favour than they had during the reign of James II. The Earl of Marlborough had supported the now exiled James, and by this time, the Countess&#x27;s influence on Anne, and her cultivation of high members of the government to promote Anne&#x27;s interests, was widely known. Mary II responded to this by demanding that Anne dismiss Lady Marlborough. However, Anne refused. This created a rift between Mary and Anne that never healed.

Other problems also emerged. In 1689, Anne&#x27;s supporters (including the Marlboroughs and the Duke of Somerset) demanded that she be granted a parliamentary annuity of £50,000, a sum that would end her dependence on William and Mary. The Countess of Marlborough was seen as the driving force behind this bill, creating further ill-feeling towards her at court. William responded to the demand by offering the same sum from the Privy Purse to keep Anne dependent on his generosity. However, Anne, through the Countess, refused, pointing out that a parliamentary grant would be more secure than charity from the Privy Purse. Eventually Anne received the grant from Parliament and felt she owed this to the Countess&#x27;s efforts.

The Countess&#x27;s success as a leader of the opposition only intensified Queen Mary&#x27;s animosity towards the Marlboroughs. Although she could not dismiss the Countess from Anne&#x27;s service, Mary responded by evicting the Countess from her court lodgings at the Palace of Whitehall. Anne responded by leaving the court as well, and she and the Countess went to stay with their friends the Duke and Duchess of Somerset at Syon House. Anne continued to defy Mary&#x27;s demand for the Countess&#x27;s dismissal, even though an incriminating document signed by the Earl of Marlborough supporting the recently exiled James II and his supporters had been discovered. This document is likely to have been forged by Robert Young, a known forger and disciple of Titus Oates; Oates was famous for having stirred a strongly anti-Catholic atmosphere in England between 1679 and the early 1680s. The Earl was imprisoned in the Tower of London. The loneliness the Countess suffered during these events drew her and Anne closer together.

Following the death of Mary II from smallpox in 1694, William III restored Anne&#x27;s honours, as she was now heir apparent, and provided her with apartments at St. James&#x27;s Palace. He also restored the Earl of Marlborough to all his offices and honours and exonerated him from any past accusations. However, fearing the Countess&#x27;s powerful influence, William kept Anne out of government affairs and did not make her regent.

== Reign of Anne ==

In 1702, William III died, and Anne became queen. Anne immediately offered John Churchill a dukedom, which Sarah initially refused. Sarah was concerned that a dukedom would strain the family&#x27;s finances; a ducal family at the time was expected to show off its rank through lavish entertainments. Anne countered by offering the Marlboroughs a pension of £5,000 a year for life from Parliament, as well as an extra £2,000 a year from the Privy Purse, and they accepted the dukedom. The Duchess of Marlborough was promptly created Mistress of the Robes (the highest office in the royal court that could be held by a woman), Groom of the Stool, Keeper of the Privy Purse, and Ranger of Windsor Great Park. She was the first of only two women ever to be Keeper of the Privy Purse and the only woman ever to be Ranger of Windsor Great Park. As Keeper of the Privy Purse, she was replaced by the only other woman to hold the position: her cousin and rival Abigail Masham, Baroness Masham. The Duke accepted the Order of the Garter as well as the office of Captain-General of the army.

During much of Anne&#x27;s reign, the Duke of Marlborough was abroad fighting the War of the Spanish Succession, while the Duchess remained in England. Despite being the most powerful woman in England besides the Queen, she appeared at court only rarely, preferring to oversee the construction of her new estate, Woodstock Manor (the site of the later Blenheim Palace), a gift from Queen Anne after the Duke&#x27;s victory at the Battle of Blenheim. Nevertheless, Anne sent her news of political developments in letters and consulted the Duchess&#x27;s advice in most matters.

The Duchess was famous for telling the Queen exactly what she thought, and did not offer her flattery. The two women had invented pet names for themselves during their youth which they continued to use after Anne became queen: &quot;Mrs Freeman&quot; (Sarah) and &quot;Mrs Morley&quot; (Anne). Effectively a business manager, the Duchess had control over the Queen&#x27;s position, from her finances to people admitted to the royal presence.

=== Wavering influence ===

Anne, however, expected kindness and compassion from her closest friend. The Duchess was not forthcoming in this regard and frequently overpowered and dominated Anne. One major political disagreement occurred when the Duchess insisted that her son-in-law Charles Spencer, 3rd Earl of Sunderland, be admitted into the Privy Council. The Duchess allied herself more strongly with the Whigs, who supported the Duke of Marlborough in the war, and the Whigs hoped to utilise the Duchess&#x27;s position as royal favourite.

Anne refused to appoint Sunderland. She disliked the radical Whigs, whom she saw as a threat to her royal prerogative. The Duchess used her close friendship with Sidney Godolphin, 1st Earl of Godolphin, whom Anne trusted, to eventually secure such appointments, but continued to lobby Anne herself. She sent Whig reading materials to Anne in an attempt to win her over to her own preferred political party.
The Duchess&#x27;s frankness and indifference for rank, so admired by Anne earlier in their friendship, was now seen to be intrusive. The Duchess had a powerful intimacy with the two most powerful men in the country, the Duke of Marlborough (her husband) and the Earl of Godolphin. Godolphin, though a great friend of the Duchess, had considered refusing high office after Anne&#x27;s accession, preferring to live quietly and away from the Duchess of Marlborough&#x27;s political side. The Earl considered the Duchess bossy, interfering, and presuming to tell him what to do when the Duke was away.

The Duchess was always ready to give her advice, express her opinions, antagonize with outspoken censure, and insist on having her say on every possible occasion. However, she had a charm and vivaciousness admired by many, and she could easily delight those she met with her wit.

Anne&#x27;s apparent withdrawal of genuine affection occurred for a number of reasons. She was frustrated by the Duchess of Marlborough&#x27;s long absences from court. There was also a political difference between them: the Queen was a Tory (the party known as the &quot;Church party&quot;, religion being one of Anne&#x27;s chief concerns), and the Duchess was a Whig (the party known to support Marlborough&#x27;s wars). The Duchess did not share Anne&#x27;s deep interest in religion, a subject she rarely mentioned, although at their last fraught interview she did warn Anne that she risked God&#x27;s vengeance for her unreasoning cruelty to the Duchess. The Queen did not want this difference to come between them, but the Duchess, always thinking of her husband, wanted Anne to give more support to the Whigs, which she was not prepared to do.

The Duchess of Marlborough was called to Cambridge in 1703, where her only surviving son, John, Marquess of Blandford, was taken ill with smallpox. The Duke was recalled from the war and was at his bedside when he died on 20 February 1703. The Duchess was heartbroken over the loss of her son and became reclusive for a period, expressing her grief by closing herself off from Anne and either not answering her letters or doing so in a cold and formal manner.

After the death of Anne&#x27;s husband, Prince George of Denmark, in 1708, the Duchess arrived, uninvited, at Kensington Palace to find Anne with the prince&#x27;s body. She pressed the heartbroken Queen to move from Kensington to St James&#x27;s Palace in London, which Anne bluntly refused, and instead commanded the Duchess to call Abigail Masham to attend her. Aware that Masham was gaining more influence with Anne, the Duchess disobeyed the Queen, and instead scolded her for grieving over Prince George&#x27;s death. Although Anne eventually submitted and allowed herself to be taken to St James&#x27;s Palace, the Duchess&#x27;s insensitivity greatly offended her and added to the already significant strain on the relationship.

=== Abigail Masham ===
The Duchess had previously introduced her impoverished cousin, then known as Abigail Hill, to court, with the intention of finding a role for her. Abigail, the eldest daughter of the Duchess&#x27;s aunt Elizabeth Hill (née Jennings), was working as a servant to Sir John Rivers of Kent when the Duchess first learned of her existence. Because the Duchess&#x27;s grandfather Sir John Jennings had fathered twenty-two children, she had a multitude of cousins and did not know them all. Out of kindness and a sense of family solidarity, she gave Abigail Hill employment within her own household at St Albans, and after a tenure of satisfactory service, Hill was made a Lady of the Bedchamber to Queen Anne in 1704. The Duchess later claimed in her memoirs that she had raised Hill &quot;in all regards as a sister&quot;, though there were implications that she only assisted her cousin out of embarrassment of her difficult circumstances.

Hill was also a second cousin, on her father&#x27;s side, to the Tory leader Robert Harley, later first Earl of Oxford and Mortimer. Flattering, subtle and retiring, Hill was the complete opposite of the Duchess of Marlborough, who was dominating, blunt and scathing. During the Duchess&#x27;s frequent absences from court, Hill and Anne grew close. Not only was Hill happy to give the Queen the kindness and compassion that Anne had longed for from the Duchess, she also never pressured the Queen about politics. Anne responded to Hill&#x27;s flattery and charm. She was present at Hill&#x27;s secret wedding, in 1707, to Samuel Masham, groom of the bedchamber to Prince George, without the Duchess&#x27;s knowledge.

The Duchess was completely oblivious to any friendship between Anne and Masham and was therefore surprised when she discovered that Masham frequently saw the Queen in private. The Duchess found out about Masham&#x27;s marriage several months after it had occurred and immediately went to see Anne with the intention of informing her of the event. It was at that interview that Anne let slip that she had begged Masham to tell the Duchess of the marriage, and the Duchess became suspicious about what had really happened. After questioning servants and the Royal Household for a week about Masham&#x27;s marriage, the Duchess discovered that the Queen had been present and had given Abigail a dowry of £2,000 from the Privy Purse. That proved to the Duchess that Anne was duplicitous. Despite being Keeper of the Privy Purse, the Duchess had been unaware of any such payment.

=== Strained relationship ===

In July 1708, the Duke of Marlborough and his ally Prince Eugene of Savoy won a great victory at the Battle of Oudenarde. On the way to the thanksgiving service at St Paul&#x27;s Cathedral, the Duchess of Marlborough argued with the Queen about the jewels Anne wore to the service, and showed her a letter from the Duke which expressed hope that the Queen would make good political use of the victory. The implication that she should publicly express her support for the Whigs offended Anne; at the service the Duchess told the Queen to &quot;be quiet&quot; after Anne continued the argument, thus offending the Queen still further.

Anne&#x27;s next letter to the Duchess referred sarcastically to the &quot;command&quot; the Duchess had given her to be silent. As a result the Duchess, who rarely admitted that she was in the wrong, apologised for her rudeness, but her apology had little effect. Anne wrote to the Duke of Marlborough, encouraging him not to let her rift with the Duchess become public knowledge, but he could not prevent his wife&#x27;s indiscretion.

The Duchess continued vehemently supporting the Whigs in writing and speaking to Anne, with the support of Godolphin and the other Whig ministers. The news of the public&#x27;s support for the Whigs reached the Duke in letters from the Duchess and Godolphin, which influenced the Duke&#x27;s political advice to the Queen. Anne, already in ill health, felt used and harassed and was desperate for escape. She found refuge in the gentle and quiet comfort of Abigail Masham.

Anne had explained before that she did not wish the public to know that her relationship with the Duchess of Marlborough was failing, because any sign that the Duchess was out of favour would have a damaging impact on the Duke&#x27;s authority as captain-general. The Duchess was kept in all of her offices – purely for the sake of her husband&#x27;s position as Captain-General of the army – and the tension between the two women lingered until early in 1711.

The Duchess had always been jealous of Anne&#x27;s affection for Abigail Masham after she learned of it. With the Duke of Marlborough and most of the Whig party, she had tried to force Anne to dismiss Masham. All these attempts failed, even when Anne was threatened with an official parliamentary demand from the Whigs, who were suspicious of Masham&#x27;s Tory influence with Anne. The whole scenario echoed Anne&#x27;s refusal to give up Sarah Churchill during the reign of William and Mary, but the threat of parliamentary interference exceeded anything tried against Anne in the 1690s.

Anne was ultimately triumphant; she conducted interviews with high-ranking politicians of both political parties and begged them &quot;with tears in her eyes&quot; to oppose the motion. The general view was that the Marlboroughs had made themselves look ridiculous over a trivial matter.

The passion Anne showed for Masham, and the Queen&#x27;s stubborn refusal to dismiss her, angered the Duchess to the point that she implied that a sexual affair was taking place between the two women. During the mourning period for Anne&#x27;s husband, the Duchess was the only one who refused to wear suitable mourning clothes. This gave the impression that she did not consider Anne&#x27;s grief over his death to be genuine. Eventually, because of the mass support for peace in the War of the Spanish Succession, Anne decided she no longer needed the Duke of Marlborough and took the opportunity to dismiss him on trumped-up charges of embezzlement.

=== Final dismissal ===

The Duchess&#x27;s last attempt to re-establish her friendship with Anne came in 1710 when they had their final meeting. An account written by the Duchess shortly afterwards shows that she pleaded to be given an explanation of why their friendship was at an end, but Anne was unmoved, coldly repeating a few set phrases such as &quot;I shall make no answer to anything you say&quot; and &quot;you may put it in writing&quot;.

The Duchess was so appalled by the Queen&#x27;s &quot;inhuman&quot; conduct that she was reduced to tears, and most unusually for a woman who rarely spoke of religion, ended by threatening the Queen with the judgment of God. Anne replied that God&#x27;s judgment on her concerned herself only, but later admitted that this was the one remark from the Duchess that hurt her deeply.

After hearing this, the Duke, realising that Anne intended to dismiss him and his wife, begged the Queen to keep them in their offices for nine months until the campaign was over, so that they could retire honourably. However, Anne told the Duke that &quot;for her [Anne&#x27;s] honour&quot; the Duchess was to resign immediately and return her gold key – the symbol of her authority within the royal household – within two days. Years of trying the Queen&#x27;s patience finally had resulted in her dismissal. When told the news, the Duchess, in a fit of pride, told the Duke to return the key to the Queen immediately.

In January 1711, the Duchess of Marlborough lost the offices of Mistress of the Robes and Groom of the Stool and was replaced by Elizabeth Seymour, Duchess of Somerset. Abigail Masham was made Keeper of the Privy Purse. This broke a promise Anne had made to distribute these court offices to the Duchess of Marlborough&#x27;s children.

The Marlboroughs also lost state funding for Blenheim Palace, and the building came to a halt for the first time since it was begun in 1705. They left England and travelled in Europe. As a result of his success in the War of the Spanish Succession, the Duke was a favourite among the German courts and with the Holy Roman Empire, and the family was received in those places with full honours. The Duchess, however, did not like being away from England and often complained that she and the Duke were received with full honours in Europe, but were in disgrace at home. The Duchess found life travelling the royal courts difficult, remarking that they were full of dull company. She took the waters at Aachen in Germany on account of her ill health, corresponded with those in England who could supply her with political gossip, and indulged in her fascination with Catholicism.

The Duchess and Queen Anne never made up their differences, although one eyewitness claimed to have heard Anne asking whether the Marlboroughs had reached the shore, leading to rumours that she had called them home herself. Anne died on 1 August 1714 at Kensington Palace.

== Later years ==

The Marlboroughs returned home on the afternoon of Anne&#x27;s death. The Act of Settlement 1701 ensured a Protestant succession by passing over more than 50 stronger Catholic claimants and proclaiming George Ludwig, Elector of Hanover (the great-grandson of James I through George&#x27;s mother Sophia of Hanover), King George I of Great Britain.

The new reign was supported by the Whigs, who were mostly staunch Protestants. The Tories were suspected of supporting the Pretender, a Roman Catholic. George I rewarded the Whigs by forming a Whig government; at his welcome in Queen&#x27;s House at Greenwich, he conversed with the Whigs but not with the Tories. The Duchess of Marlborough approved of his choice of Whig ministers.

King George also had a personal friendship with the Marlboroughs; the Duke had fought with him in the War of the Spanish Succession, and John and Sarah made frequent visits to the Hanoverian court during their effective exile from England. George&#x27;s first words to the Duke as king of Great Britain were, &quot;My lord Duke, I hope your troubles are now over.&quot; Marlborough was restored to his old office of Captain-General of the Army.
The Duchess was relieved to move back to England. The Duke became one of the King&#x27;s close advisers, and the Duchess moved back into Marlborough House, where she flaunted her eldest granddaughter, Lady Henrietta Godolphin, in the hope of finding her a suitable marriage partner. Henrietta eventually married Thomas Pelham-Holles, 1st Duke of Newcastle-upon-Tyne, in April 1717, and the rest of the Marlboroughs&#x27; grandchildren made successful marriages.

The Duchess of Marlborough&#x27;s concern for her grandchildren briefly came to a halt when in 1716 her husband had two strokes, the second of which left him without the ability to speak. The Duchess spent much of her time with him, accompanying him to Tunbridge Wells and Bath, and he recovered shortly afterwards. Even after his recovery, the Duchess opened his correspondence and filtered the letters the Duke received, lest their contents precipitate another stroke.

The Duchess had a good relationship with her daughter Anne Spencer, Countess of Sunderland, whereas she later became estranged from her daughters Henrietta, Elizabeth and Mary. Heartbroken when Anne died in 1716, the Duchess kept her favourite cup and a lock of her hair and adopted the Sunderlands&#x27; youngest child, Lady Diana.
The Duke of Marlborough died at Windsor in 1722, and the Duchess arranged a large funeral for him. Their daughter Henrietta became duchess in her own right. The Dowager Duchess became one of the trustees of the Marlborough estate, and she used her business sense to distribute the family fortune, including the income for her daughter Henrietta.

The Dowager Duchess&#x27;s personal income was now considerable, and she used the money to invest in land; she believed this would protect her from currency devaluation. She purchased Wimbledon manor in 1723, and rebuilt the manor house. Her wealth was so considerable that she hoped to marry her granddaughter Lady Diana Spencer to Frederick, Prince of Wales, for which she would pay a massive dowry of £100,000.

However, Robert Walpole, First Lord of the Treasury (analogous to a modern Prime Minister), vetoed the plan. Walpole, although a Whig, had alienated the Dowager Duchess by supporting peace in Europe; she was also suspicious of his financial probity and Walpole, in turn, mistrusted the Dowager Duchess. Despite this, good relations with the royal family continued and the Dowager Duchess was occasionally invited to court by Queen Caroline, who attempted to cultivate her friendship.

Sarah Churchill was a capable business manager, unusual in a period when women were excluded from most things outside the management of their household. Her friend Arthur Maynwaring wrote that she was more capable of business than any man. Although she never came to like Blenheim Palace – describing it as &quot;that great heap of stones&quot; – she became more enthusiastic about its construction and wrote to the Duke of Somerset about the new waterworks: &quot;I believe it will be beautiful. The Canal and Bason (which is already don[e]) look very fine. There is to be a lake &amp; a cascade ... which I think will bee a great addition to the place&quot;.
The Duchess of Marlborough fought against anything she thought was extravagant. She wrote to the Duke of Somerset, &quot;I have reduced the stables to one-third of what was intended by Sir John [Vanbrugh] yet I have room for forty fine horses&quot;.

The Duchess allowed only two features of extravagance: the Marlboroughs&#x27; tomb in the Blenheim chapel, designed by William Kent, and the Doric Column of Victory in the park, designed by Henry Herbert, 9th Earl of Pembroke, and finished by Roger Morris. The latter rose to a height of , complete with fine embellishments. The Duchess carefully monitored the construction of all Blenheim&#x27;s features and she fell out with anyone who did not do exactly what she wanted.

These detailed inspections extended to the Duchess&#x27;s smaller land purchases. After buying the Wimbledon estate (which she described as &quot;upon clay, an ill sod, very damp and ... an unhealthy place&quot;) and Holdenby House near Althorp, she kept detailed accounts of her finances and expenditure, as well as a sharp look-out for any dishonesty in her agents.
The Dowager Duchess&#x27;s friendship with Queen Caroline ended when she refused the Queen access through her Wimbledon estate, which resulted in the loss of her £500 income as Ranger of Windsor Great Park. The Dowager Duchess was also rude to King George II – making it clear that he was &quot;too much of a German&quot; – which further alienated her from the court. Her &quot;persona non-grata&quot; status at the Walpole-controlled court prevented her from suppressing the rise of the Tories; Walpole&#x27;s taxes and peace with Spain were deeply unpopular with ruling-class English society, and the Tories were gaining much more support as a result.

The Dowager Duchess never lost her good looks and, despite failing popularity, received many offers of marriage after the death of her husband, including one from her old enemy, the Duke of Somerset. Ultimately, she decided against remarriage, preferring to keep her independence. The Dowager Duchess continued to appeal against court decisions which ruled that funding for Blenheim should come from the Marlboroughs&#x27; personal estate, and not the government. This made her unpopular; as a trustee of her family&#x27;s estate, she could easily have afforded the payments herself. She was surprised by the grief she felt following the death of her eldest living daughter, Henrietta, in 1733. The Dowager Duchess lived to see her enemy Robert Walpole fall in 1742, and in the same year attempted to improve her reputation by approving a biographical publication titled &quot;An Account of the Dowager Duchess of Marlborough from her first coming to Court to the year 1710&quot;. She died at the age of 84, on 18 October 1744, at Marlborough House; she was buried at Blenheim. Her husband&#x27;s body was exhumed from Westminster Abbey and buried beside her.

== Assessment ==

Although the Duchess of Marlborough&#x27;s downfall is primarily attributed to her own self-serving relationship with Queen Anne, she promoted Anne&#x27;s interests when she was princess. The Duchess believed that she had a right to enforce her political advice regardless of Anne&#x27;s opinions. She seems to have underestimated Anne&#x27;s strength of character, continuing to believe she could dominate a woman whom foreign ambassadors noted had become &quot;very determined and quite ferocious&quot;. Apart from her notorious bad temper, the Duchess&#x27;s main weakness has been described as &quot;an almost pathological inability to admit the validity of anyone else&#x27;s point of view&quot;.

Abigail Masham also played a key role in the Duchess&#x27;s downfall. Modest and retiring, she promoted the Tory policies of her cousin Robert Harley. Despite Masham&#x27;s owing her position at court to the Duchess of Marlborough, the Duchess soon saw Masham as her enemy who supplanted her in Anne&#x27;s affections when the Duchess spent more and more time away from the Queen.

During her lifetime, the Duchess of Marlborough drafted 26 wills, the last of which was written only a few months before her death, and purchased 27 estates. With a wealth of over £4 million in land, £17,000 in rent rolls, and a further £12,500 in annuities, she made financial bequests to rising Whig ministers such as William Pitt, later the first Earl of Chatham, and Philip Stanhope, 4th Earl of Chesterfield. Although she left little to the poor and even less to charity, she left her servants&#x27; annuities far above the average for the time; her favourite, Grace Ridley, received £16,000, equivalent to approximately £1.32 million in today&#x27;s money.
Much of the money left after the Duchess&#x27;s numerous bequests was inherited by her grandson John Spencer, with the condition that he could not accept a political office under the government. He also inherited the remainder of the Duchess&#x27;s numerous estates, including Wimbledon. Marlborough House remained empty for 14 years, with the exception of James Stephens, one of her executors, before it became the property of the Dukes of Marlborough upon Stephens&#x27;s death.

In 1817, Marlborough House became a royal residence, and passed through members of the British royal family until it became the Commonwealth Secretariat in 1959. Wimbledon Park House succumbed to fire in 1785, and Holywell House, the Duchess of Marlborough&#x27;s birthplace in St Albans, was demolished in 1827. Today, much of St Albans is named after the Marlboroughs because of the Duchess&#x27;s influence.

The Duchess died, in the words of Tobias Smollett, &quot;immensely rich and very little regretted, either by her own family or the world in general&quot;.

== Children ==
The Duke and Duchess of Marlborough&#x27;s children who survived childhood married into the most important families in Great Britain:

==In popular culture==

In her own time, Sarah Churchill was satirised by many well-known writers in the period, such as Delarivier Manley in her influential political satire, &quot;The New Atalantis&quot; (1709), and also by Charles Gildon in the first fully-fledged it-narrative in English, &quot;The Golden Spy; or, A Political Journal of the British Nights Entertainments&quot; (1709), to name just a few.

Churchill is portrayed by actress Rachel Weisz in the 2018 film &quot;The Favourite&quot;, which centres on the competition between the Duchess and Lady Masham (Emma Stone) for the affections of Queen Anne (Olivia Colman). Weisz won the BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Supporting Role and was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress for her portrayal.

Churchill was played by Romola Garai in the Royal Shakespeare Company West End production of Helen Edmundson&#x27;s &quot;Queen Anne&quot; at the Theatre Royal Haymarket in 2017.

Churchill was played by Susannah York in the 1983 comedy &quot;Yellowbeard&quot;.

Churchill was played by Susan Hampshire in the 1969 BBC mini-series &quot;The First Churchills&quot;.

==References==
===Notes===
===Citations===
===Bibliography===
* 
* Churchill, Sir Winston. &quot;Marlborough: His Life and Times&quot;. 2 vols. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2002. ()
* Field, Ophelia. &quot;The Favourite: Sarah, Duchess of Marlborough&quot;. London: Hodder and Stoughton, 2002. ()
* 
*
* Harris, Frances. &quot;A Passion For Government: The Life of Sarah, Duchess of Marlborough&quot;. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1991. ()
* Harris, Tim. &quot;Revolution: The Great Crisis of the British Monarchy, 1685–1720&quot;, Penguin Books, Ltd., 2006. .
* Hibbert, Christopher. &quot;The Marlboroughs: John and Sarah Churchill (1650–1744)&quot;. London: Viking Press, 2001. ()
* Miller, John. &quot;James II&quot; (3rd ed. 2000) .
*Murdoch, Tessa, ed. &quot;Noble Households: Eighteenth-Century Inventories of Great English Houses&quot; (Cambridge, John Adamson, 2006) . For inventories of Blenheim Palace and Marlborough House, taken for the duchess in 1740, see pp. 275–83 and 284–7.
* Murray, Hon. Sir George, ed. &quot;The Letters and Dispatches of John Churchill, First Duke of Marlborough, from 1702–1712&quot;. 5 vols. New York: Greenwood Press, 1968.
* Pointon, Marcia, &quot;Material Manoeuvres: Sarah Churchill, Duchess of Marlborough and the Power of Artefacts,&quot; &quot;Art History&quot;, 32,3 (2009), 485–515.
* Reid, Stuart. &quot;John and Sarah, Duke and Duchess of Marlborough&quot; 1914 edition
* Rowse, A. L. &quot;The Early Churchills&quot; Macmillan, 1956; Penguin, 1969
*
*
== External links ==
* Berkshire History biography about Sarah Churchill, Duchess of Marlborough
* Encyclopædia Britannica &quot;additional reading&quot; article about Sarah Churchill, Duchess of Marlborough</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q19176" start="0" end="87" title="Sarah Churchill, Duchess of Marlborough" label="Sarah Churchill, Duchess of Marlborough, Princess of Mindelheim, Countess of Nellenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q19176" start="93" end="99" title="Sarah Churchill, Duchess of Marlborough" label="Jenyns"/>
<link wikidata="Q19176" start="107" end="115" title="Sarah Churchill, Duchess of Marlborough" label="Jennings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922815" start="155" end="166" title="Old Style and New Style dates" label="(Old Style)"/>
<link wikidata="Q119702" start="308" end="336" title="Anne, Queen of Great Britain" label="Anne, Queen of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q153803" start="646" end="685" title="John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough" label="John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q126188" start="713" end="726" title="King James II" label="King James II"/>
<link wikidata="Q189508" start="751" end="770" title="Glorious Revolution" label="Glorious Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q129987" start="861" end="872" title="William III of England" label="William III"/>
<link wikidata="Q130812" start="877" end="884" title="Mary II" label="Mary II"/>
<link wikidata="Q947776" start="990" end="1029" title="Sidney Godolphin, 1st Earl of Godolphin" label="Sidney Godolphin, 1st Earl of Godolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q150701" start="1133" end="1162" title="War of the Spanish Succession" label="War of the Spanish Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q108700" start="1324" end="1329" title="Whig (British political party)" label="Whigs"/>
<link wikidata="Q208181" start="1388" end="1403" title="Blenheim Palace" label="Blenheim Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q151628" start="1802" end="1849" title="Henrietta Godolphin, 2nd Duchess of Marlborough" label="Henrietta Godolphin, 2nd Duchess of Marlborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q333398" start="1885" end="1898" title="John Vanbrugh" label="John Vanbrugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q104190" start="1915" end="1929" title="Robert Walpole" label="Robert Walpole"/>
<link wikidata="Q131981" start="1931" end="1945" title="George II of Great Britain" label="King George II"/>
<link wikidata="Q76961" start="1961" end="1975" title="Caroline of Ansbach" label="Queen Caroline"/>
<link wikidata="Q854022" start="2022" end="2027" title="Trust law" label="trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139550" start="2170" end="2184" title="Holywell House" label="Holywell House"/>
<link wikidata="Q6226" start="2188" end="2197" title="St Albans" label="St Albans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430912" start="2238" end="2254" title="Richard Jennings (politician)" label="Richard Jennings"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="2270" end="2290" title="Member of Parliament" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q61813409" start="2328" end="2342" title="Susanna Temple" label="Susanna Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q6735310" start="2346" end="2360" title="maid of honour" label="maid of honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q158248" start="2364" end="2379" title="Anne of Denmark" label="Anne of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q6241808" start="2415" end="2428" title="John Jennings (St Albans MP)" label="John Jennings"/>
<link wikidata="Q513593" start="2440" end="2453" title="Martin Lister" label="Martin Lister"/>
<link wikidata="Q957116" start="2513" end="2520" title="Frances Talbot, Countess of Tyrconnel" label="Frances"/>
<link wikidata="Q6735310" start="2536" end="2550" title="maid of honour" label="maid of honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600829" start="2558" end="2573" title="Duchess of York" label="Duchess of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q145609" start="2575" end="2584" title="Anne Hyde" label="Anne Hyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q232475" start="2784" end="2798" title="Mary of Modena" label="Mary of Modena"/>
<link wikidata="Q119702" start="2842" end="2855" title="Anne, Queen of Great Britain" label="Princess Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q153803" start="2971" end="2985" title="John Churchill" label="John Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q235092" start="3103" end="3143" title="Barbara Palmer, 1st Duchess of Cleveland" label="Barbara Palmer, 1st Duchess of Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q275061" start="3220" end="3236" title="Catherine Sedley" label="Catherine Sedley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916076" start="3312" end="3333" title="Winston Churchill (Cavalier)" label="Sir Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5125769" start="3916" end="3932" title="married secretly" label="married secretly"/>
<link wikidata="Q835884" start="4456" end="4471" title="died in infancy" label="died in infancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540578" start="4578" end="4589" title="Popish Plot" label="Popish Plot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020260" start="4702" end="4710" title="Eyemouth" label="Eyemouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3216038" start="4868" end="4890" title="Lady of the Bedchamber" label="Lady of the Bedchamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q211681" start="5407" end="5434" title="James Francis Edward Stuart" label="Prince James Francis Edward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1954419" start="5489" end="5503" title="Immortal Seven" label="Immortal Seven"/>
<link wikidata="Q129987" start="5512" end="5536" title="Prince William of Orange" label="Prince William of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q130812" start="5582" end="5586" title="Mary II of England" label="Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q320994" start="5796" end="5808" title="house arrest" label="house arrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981291" start="5839" end="5846" title="Cockpit-in-Court" label="Cockpit"/>
<link wikidata="Q391620" start="5855" end="5874" title="Palace of Whitehall" label="Palace of Whitehall"/>
<link wikidata="Q41262" start="6075" end="6085" title="Nottingham" label="Nottingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="6383" end="6390" title="treason" label="treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264586" start="6750" end="6769" title="Duke of Marlborough (title)" label="Earl of Marlborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066062" start="7354" end="7374" title="Charles Seymour, 6th Duke of Somerset" label="the Duke of Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q2510714" start="7421" end="7428" title="Life annuity" label="annuity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376011" start="7691" end="7702" title="Privy Purse" label="Privy Purse"/>
<link wikidata="Q529441" start="8400" end="8419" title="Elizabeth Seymour, Duchess of Somerset" label="Duchess of Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121329" start="8423" end="8433" title="Syon House" label="Syon House"/>
<link wikidata="Q212983" start="8628" end="8642" title="Jacobitism" label="his supporters"/>
<link wikidata="Q734446" start="8756" end="8767" title="Titus Oates" label="Titus Oates"/>
<link wikidata="Q62378" start="8917" end="8932" title="Tower of London" label="Tower of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="9063" end="9071" title="smallpox" label="smallpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2762318" start="9138" end="9151" title="heir apparent" label="heir apparent"/>
<link wikidata="Q272162" start="9189" end="9212" title="St. James&amp;#x27;s Palace" label="St. James&amp;#x27;s Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="9454" end="9460" title="regent" label="regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q156223" start="9830" end="9837" title="pension" label="pension"/>
<link wikidata="Q930374" start="10016" end="10037" title="Mistress of the Robes" label="Mistress of the Robes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918893" start="10109" end="10127" title="Groom of the Stool" label="Groom of the Stool"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896813" start="10129" end="10154" title="Keeper of the Privy Purse" label="Keeper of the Privy Purse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3418944" start="10160" end="10188" title="Ranger of Windsor Great Park" label="Ranger of Windsor Great Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387965" start="10437" end="10468" title="Abigail Masham, Baroness Masham" label="Abigail Masham, Baroness Masham"/>
<link wikidata="Q215248" start="10492" end="10511" title="Order of the Garter" label="Order of the Garter"/>
<link wikidata="Q56923" start="10537" end="10552" title="Captain-General" label="Captain-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q150701" start="10649" end="10678" title="War of the Spanish Succession" label="War of the Spanish Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q752111" start="10880" end="10889" title="Woodstock, Oxfordshire" label="Woodstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743089" start="10890" end="10895" title="Woodstock Palace" label="Manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q208181" start="10919" end="10934" title="Blenheim Palace" label="Blenheim Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q154635" start="10997" end="11015" title="Battle of Blenheim" label="Battle of Blenheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q332619" start="11871" end="11910" title="Charles Spencer, 3rd Earl of Sunderland" label="Charles Spencer, 3rd Earl of Sunderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q683120" start="11933" end="11946" title="Privy Council of the United Kingdom" label="Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q108700" start="11998" end="12003" title="Whigs (British political party)" label="Whigs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042529" start="12235" end="12252" title="royal prerogative" label="royal prerogative"/>
<link wikidata="Q947776" start="12297" end="12336" title="Sidney Godolphin, 1st Earl of Godolphin" label="Sidney Godolphin, 1st Earl of Godolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q499956" start="13661" end="13665" title="Tories (British political party)" label="Tory"/>
<link wikidata="Q108700" start="13789" end="13793" title="Whigs (British political party)" label="Whig"/>
<link wikidata="Q350" start="14318" end="14327" title="Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q13544196" start="14367" end="14394" title="John Churchill, Marquess of Blandford" label="John, Marquess of Blandford"/>
<link wikidata="Q317499" start="14778" end="14802" title="Prince George of Denmark" label="Prince George of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q272162" start="14969" end="14991" title="St James&amp;#x27;s Palace" label="St James&amp;#x27;s Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="15780" end="15784" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q332499" start="16513" end="16526" title="Robert Harley, 1st Earl of Oxford and Earl Mortimer" label="Robert Harley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326352" start="16540" end="16567" title="Earl of Oxford and Mortimer" label="Earl of Oxford and Mortimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3471187" start="17059" end="17072" title="Samuel Masham" label="Samuel Masham"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146103" start="17711" end="17726" title="Royal Household" label="Royal Household"/>
<link wikidata="Q45803" start="17847" end="17852" title="dowry" label="dowry"/>
<link wikidata="Q152428" start="18113" end="18135" title="Prince Eugene of Savoy" label="Prince Eugene of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q316139" start="18163" end="18182" title="Battle of Oudenarde" label="Battle of Oudenarde"/>
<link wikidata="Q173882" start="18226" end="18250" title="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Cathedral" label="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q56923" start="19855" end="19870" title="captain-general" label="captain-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q750652" start="21261" end="21277" title="mourning clothes" label="mourning clothes"/>
<link wikidata="Q157833" start="21589" end="21601" title="embezzlement" label="embezzlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918893" start="23150" end="23168" title="Groom of the Stool" label="Groom of the Stool"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017" start="24097" end="24103" title="Aachen" label="Aachen"/>
<link wikidata="Q207385" start="24529" end="24546" title="Kensington Palace" label="Kensington Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q316537" start="24642" end="24664" title="Act of Settlement 1701" label="Act of Settlement 1701"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="24675" end="24685" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q706018" start="24785" end="24803" title="Elector of Hanover" label="Elector of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="24827" end="24834" title="James VI and I" label="James I"/>
<link wikidata="Q57224" start="24864" end="24881" title="Sophia of Hanover" label="Sophia of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q130805" start="24889" end="24914" title="George I of Great Britain" label="George I of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q564981" start="25145" end="25163" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s House" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s House"/>
<link wikidata="Q179385" start="25167" end="25176" title="Greenwich" label="Greenwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q565532" start="25883" end="25900" title="Marlborough House" label="Marlborough House"/>
<link wikidata="Q5664287" start="25947" end="25971" title="Lady Henrietta Godolphin" label="Lady Henrietta Godolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923231" start="26011" end="26027" title="arranged marriage" label="marriage partner"/>
<link wikidata="Q273809" start="26058" end="26111" title="Thomas Pelham-Holles, 1st Duke of Newcastle-upon-Tyne" label="Thomas Pelham-Holles, 1st Duke of Newcastle-upon-Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q665489" start="26462" end="26477" title="Tunbridge Wells" label="Tunbridge Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q22889" start="26482" end="26486" title="Bath, Somerset" label="Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755975" start="26735" end="26771" title="Anne Spencer, Countess of Sunderland (1683–1716)" label="Anne Spencer, Countess of Sunderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q929350" start="27002" end="27012" title="Diana Spencer (1710–1735)" label="Lady Diana"/>
<link wikidata="Q151628" start="27128" end="27137" title="Henrietta Godolphin, 2nd Duchess of Marlborough" label="Henrietta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699324" start="27153" end="27169" title="in her own right" label="in her own right"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633173" start="27175" end="27190" title="Dowager" label="Dowager Duchess"/>
<link wikidata="Q220788" start="27509" end="27529" title="currency devaluation" label="currency devaluation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17066524" start="27545" end="27560" title="Wimbledon Manor House" label="Wimbledon manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q165349" start="27694" end="27720" title="Frederick, Prince of Wales" label="Frederick, Prince of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q104190" start="27785" end="27799" title="Robert Walpole" label="Robert Walpole"/>
<link wikidata="Q609884" start="27801" end="27827" title="First Lord of the Treasury" label="First Lord of the Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="27851" end="27865" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q76961" start="28201" end="28215" title="Caroline of Ansbach" label="Queen Caroline"/>
<link wikidata="Q16859394" start="28425" end="28442" title="Arthur Maynwaring" label="Arthur Maynwaring"/>
<link wikidata="Q603925" start="28677" end="28693" title="Duke of Somerset" label="Duke of Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29116" end="29125" title="[Vanbrugh" label="[Vanbrugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q445433" start="29292" end="29304" title="William Kent" label="William Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q192664" start="29314" end="29319" title="Doric order" label="Doric"/>
<link wikidata="Q4018406" start="29363" end="29398" title="Henry Herbert, 9th Earl of Pembroke" label="Henry Herbert, 9th Earl of Pembroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139305" start="29866" end="29880" title="Holdenby House" label="Holdenby House"/>
<link wikidata="Q441079" start="29886" end="29893" title="Althorp" label="Althorp"/>
<link wikidata="Q736742" start="30127" end="30136" title="Wimbledon, London" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q131981" start="30261" end="30275" title="George II of Great Britain" label="King George II"/>
<link wikidata="Q183424" start="30395" end="30412" title="persona non-grata" label="persona non-grata"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="31791" end="31808" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q155656" start="32995" end="33000" title="Will (law)" label="wills"/>
<link wikidata="Q845132" start="33085" end="33092" title="Landed estate" label="estates"/>
<link wikidata="Q208663" start="33256" end="33268" title="William Pitt, 1st Earl of Chatham" label="William Pitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q513569" start="33286" end="33301" title="Earl of Chatham" label="Earl of Chatham"/>
<link wikidata="Q332487" start="33307" end="33348" title="Philip Stanhope, 4th Earl of Chesterfield" label="Philip Stanhope, 4th Earl of Chesterfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q781502" start="33695" end="33707" title="John Spencer (British politician)" label="John Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920346" start="33876" end="33885" title="Wimbledon Park" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q645968" start="34168" end="34188" title="British royal family" label="British royal family"/>
<link wikidata="Q3954348" start="34209" end="34233" title="Commonwealth Secretariat" label="Commonwealth Secretariat"/>
<link wikidata="Q356283" start="34527" end="34542" title="Tobias Smollett" label="Tobias Smollett"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="34783" end="34796" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q299871" start="34920" end="34937" title="Delarivier Manley" label="Delarivier Manley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2959213" start="35025" end="35039" title="Charles Gildon" label="Charles Gildon"/>
<link wikidata="Q134077" start="35244" end="35256" title="Rachel Weisz" label="Rachel Weisz"/>
<link wikidata="Q22001133" start="35280" end="35293" title="The Favourite" label="The Favourite"/>
<link wikidata="Q147077" start="35371" end="35381" title="Emma Stone" label="Emma Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7088045" start="35417" end="35430" title="Olivia Colman" label="Olivia Colman"/>
<link wikidata="Q787123" start="35447" end="35496" title="BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Supporting Role" label="BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Supporting Role"/>
<link wikidata="Q106301" start="35523" end="35564" title="Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress" label="Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q234546" start="35609" end="35621" title="Romola Garai" label="Romola Garai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146254" start="35629" end="35654" title="Royal Shakespeare Company" label="Royal Shakespeare Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5702185" start="35678" end="35693" title="Helen Edmundson" label="Helen Edmundson"/>
<link wikidata="Q21203270" start="35707" end="35717" title="Queen Anne (play)" label="Queen Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q540426" start="35731" end="35754" title="Theatre Royal Haymarket" label="Theatre Royal Haymarket"/>
<link wikidata="Q225509" start="35789" end="35802" title="Susannah York" label="Susannah York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251251" start="35828" end="35839" title="Yellowbeard" label="Yellowbeard"/>
<link wikidata="Q435040" start="35872" end="35887" title="Susan Hampshire" label="Susan Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7734103" start="35922" end="35942" title="The First Churchills" label="The First Churchills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221670" start="36519" end="36539" title="Hibbert, Christopher" label="Hibbert, Christopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q109659656" start="36715" end="36799" title="Noble Households" label="&amp;quot;Noble Households: Eighteenth-Century Inventories of Great English Houses&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q19585314" start="36812" end="36824" title="John Adamson (publisher)" label="John Adamson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37124" end="37139" title="Pointon, Marcia" label="Pointon, Marcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q335484" start="37380" end="37392" title="Rowse, A. L." label="Rowse, A. L."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143299" wikidata="Q582670" url="?curid=143299" title="Captured (Journey album)">
<text>Captured is Journey&#x27;s first live album. It was released on January 30, 1981 on the Columbia Records label. The album reached No. 9 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 albums chart and went on to sell two million copies.

This album was recorded during the band&#x27;s Departure Tour in 1980. Tracks 1 to 4 were taken from a performance recorded at The Forum in Montreal, Quebec, Canada on August 8, 1980. Tracks 5 &amp; 6 were from the performance at the end of the tour in Koseinenkin Hall, Shinjyuku, Tokyo, Japan on October 13, 1980 and tracks 7 to 16 came from two shows at Cobo Hall in Detroit, Michigan on August 4 &amp; 5, 1980. The song &quot;Dixie Highway&quot; had not previously been (nor was it subsequently) recorded on any Journey studio album. Closing the album is the lone studio track, &quot;The Party&#x27;s Over (Hopelessly in Love)&quot;, which was released as a single.

In the liner notes, the album is dedicated to AC/DC lead singer Bon Scott, who died in February 1980. Scott is referred to as &quot;a friend from the highway,&quot; as AC/DC had supported Journey the previous year on their &quot;If You Want Blood&quot; tour.

This was the last Journey album for keyboard player and founder Gregg Rolie.

&quot;Record World&quot; called the single &quot;The Party&#x27;s Over (Hopelessly in Love)&quot; a &quot;shining testimony to the band&#x27;s commanding stage presence.&quot; 

==Track listing==
All tracks written by Steve Perry and Neal Schon, except where noted. 

Note: this was not the full concert set list that was played during the tour. The missing songs include &quot;Of a Lifetime&quot;, &quot;Kohoutek&quot;, &quot;Lovin&#x27; You Is Easy&quot;, &quot;People and Places&quot;, &quot;Patiently&quot;, &quot;Opened the Door&quot;, &quot;Precious Time&quot;, &quot;I&#x27;m Cryin&#x27;&quot;, &quot;Homemade Love&quot;, &quot;Moon Theme&quot; (intro to &quot;Wheel in the Sky&quot;) and &quot;Winds of March&quot;. &quot;Majestic&quot; is a recorded version played as the introduction of the band arriving on stage.

==Personnel==
;Band members
*Steve Perry - lead vocals
*Neal Schon - guitar, vocals
*Gregg Rolie - keyboards, vocals
*Ross Valory - bass, vocals
*Steve Smith - drums, percussion

;Additional musicians
*Stevie &quot;Keys&quot; Roseman - acoustic piano and keyboards on &quot;The Party&#x27;s Over (Hopelessly in Love)&quot;

;Production
*Kevin Elson - producer, engineer, mixing, live sound
*Clifford Bonnell, Daniel Aumais, Guy Charbonneau, Akira Fukuda, Tom Suzuki - live recordings assistant engineers
*Wally Buck - studio recording assistant engineer
*Bob Ludwig - mastering

==Charts==
==Certifications==


==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q464749" start="12" end="19" title="Journey (band)" label="Journey"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="88" end="104" title="Columbia Records" label="Columbia Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="143" end="168" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q27593" start="940" end="945" title="AC/DC" label="AC/DC"/>
<link wikidata="Q204162" start="958" end="967" title="Bon Scott" label="Bon Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335067" start="1218" end="1229" title="Gregg Rolie" label="Gregg Rolie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3422110" start="1238" end="1250" title="Record World" label="Record World"/>
<link wikidata="Q175857" start="1450" end="1461" title="Steve Perry" label="Steve Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q389242" start="1466" end="1476" title="Neal Schon" label="Neal Schon"/>
<link wikidata="Q175857" start="2087" end="2098" title="Steve Perry (musician)" label="Steve Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q389242" start="2114" end="2124" title="Neal Schon" label="Neal Schon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335067" start="2143" end="2154" title="Gregg Rolie" label="Gregg Rolie"/>
<link wikidata="Q301874" start="2176" end="2187" title="Ross Valory" label="Ross Valory"/>
<link wikidata="Q943448" start="2204" end="2215" title="Steve Smith (musician)" label="Steve Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7615564" start="2260" end="2291" title="Stevie &amp;quot;Keys&amp;quot; Roseman" label="Stevie &amp;quot;Keys&amp;quot; Roseman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994" start="2294" end="2308" title="acoustic piano" label="acoustic piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q981970" start="2613" end="2623" title="Bob Ludwig" label="Bob Ludwig"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143301" wikidata="Q1935514" url="?curid=143301" title="Raised on Radio">
<text>Raised on Radio is the ninth studio album by the American rock band Journey, released in April 1986 on the Columbia Records label. It is the first album not to feature founding bassist Ross Valory, who was replaced initially by session bassist Bob Glaub and then by Randy Jackson. Drummer Steve Smith contributed to a few tracks, but was replaced during the recording by session drummer Larrie Londin and then Mike Baird for the subsequent tour.

The album spawned three top 20 singles in the US: &quot;Girl Can&#x27;t Help It&quot; (No. 17), &quot;I&#x27;ll Be Alright Without You&quot; (No. 14), and &quot;Suzanne&quot; (No. 17). It also spawned a top ten single &quot;Be Good to Yourself&quot; (No. 9) It went to No. 4 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 chart, and it was certified double platinum in the USA.

==Background==
&quot;Raised on Radio&quot; was released three years after &quot;Frontiers&quot; (1983). In 1984, both lead guitarist Neal Schon and lead singer Steve Perry released albums on their own; Schon in the band HSAS (&quot;Through the Fire&quot;), and Perry with his debut solo album, &quot;Street Talk&quot;. Perry considered leaving Journey following the release of &quot;Street Talk&quot; which he has referred to as &quot;one of the most fun experiences I&#x27;ve had&quot;. Perry decided to return to working with Journey when he received a call from keyboardist Jonathan Cain, who wanted him to work on some unfinished songs.

Following Perry&#x27;s return to Journey, he began to take more control over the band&#x27;s direction. Bassist Ross Valory and drummer Steve Smith were fired from the band, against the wishes of manager Herbie Herbert. According to Perry, Valory and Smith &quot;weren&#x27;t pleased with the kind of music we were playing and weren&#x27;t too keen on touring&quot;. Smith later said of the initial recording process: &quot;There was a lot of pressure to do it the way Steve Perry wanted, which I had a lot of problems with because I felt it should be a group record, like all the other records.&quot; Valory was replaced by Randy Jackson (bass guitar) and Smith was replaced by session musician Larrie Londin (drums). In the VH-1 &quot;Behind the Music&quot; episode featuring the band, Perry expressed regret over his decision, stating if he could do it over, he&#x27;d have done things differently. Smith did record three tracks with Journey on the album, and he and Valory still received revenues from the record and subsequent tour. Both returned to Journey in 1995.

The band decided that Perry, who had proved his production capabilities on &quot;Street Talk&quot;, was the best fit to produce the album. According to Perry, this gave the rest of the band members as much creative control as possible: &quot;Journey knows what it should sound like, so we all agreed I would be a good, safe, nondictator-type producer.&quot;

Perry changed the original title of this project from &quot;Freedom&quot; to &quot;Raised on Radio&quot;, which drew the ire of Herbert and some of the band members, as it varied from the one-word general theme in most of their previous albums. The band would end up using the &quot;Freedom&quot; title 36 years later for their fifteenth studio album.

The subsequent tour featured Schon, Perry, Cain, and Jackson, with drummer Mike Baird .

==Artwork==
The cover of the album (by Prairie Prince, an early member of the band) was modeled after the studios and antennas for KNGS in Hanford, California, which was owned by Perry&#x27;s parents, Ray and Mary Perry.

==Songs==
&quot;Cash Box&quot; said of &quot;Suzanne&quot; that &quot;Somewhat brooding verses give way to explosive choruses which feature Steve Perry’s potent singing&quot; and that &quot;Journey has captured the essence of teen romance.&quot; &quot;Billboard&quot; said of it that Journey&#x27;s &quot;power rock style gets adapted just a bit here toward the techno-dance idiom.&quot;

&quot;Cash Box&quot; said of &quot;Why Can&#x27;t This Night Go On Forever&quot; that it&#x27;s a &quot;rousing, emotional ballad is pure Journey&quot; with a &quot;bracing, high-wire vocal&quot; from Steve Perry.

==Track listing==


== Personnel ==
Credits for &quot;Raised on Radio&quot; adapted from liner notes.

Journey
* Steve Perry – lead vocals
* Jonathan Cain – keyboards, backing vocals
* Neal Schon – guitars, guitar synthesizer, backing vocals, keyboards (10)
* Randy Jackson – bass (all tracks except 2, 10 and 11), backing vocals (all tracks except 2, 10 and 11)
* Steve Smith – drums (2, 10 and 11)

Additional musicians
* Bob Glaub – bass (2, 10 and 11)
* Larrie Londin – drums (all tracks except 2, 10 and 11)
* Mike Baird – drums (12 and 13) (2006 CD reissue only)
* Steve Minkins – percussion (3)
* Danny Hull (credited as Dan Hull) – saxophone (2 and 7), harp (7)

Production
* Steve Perry – producer 
* Jonathan Cain – additional vocal co-production
* Randy Goodrum – additional vocal co-production
* Jim Gaines – associate producer, engineer
* Mark McKenna – engineer
* Steve Rinkoff – engineer
* Robert Missbach – assistant engineer
* Bob Clearmountain – mixing at Bearsville Studios and The Power Station (New York, NY)
* Bob Ludwig – mastering at Masterdisk (New York, NY), remastering
* Brian Lee – remastering

== Charts ==
==Certifications==

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q482994" start="29" end="41" title="studio album" label="studio album"/>
<link wikidata="Q464749" start="68" end="75" title="Journey (band)" label="Journey"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="107" end="123" title="Columbia Records" label="Columbia Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q301874" start="185" end="196" title="Ross Valory" label="Ross Valory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932552" start="244" end="253" title="Bob Glaub" label="Bob Glaub"/>
<link wikidata="Q337521" start="266" end="279" title="Randy Jackson" label="Randy Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q943448" start="289" end="300" title="Steve Smith (American musician)" label="Steve Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q6489817" start="387" end="400" title="Larrie Londin" label="Larrie Londin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3857351" start="410" end="420" title="Mike Baird (musician)" label="Mike Baird"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="729" end="754" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753788" start="892" end="901" title="Frontiers (Journey album)" label="Frontiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q389242" start="945" end="955" title="Neal Schon" label="Neal Schon"/>
<link wikidata="Q175857" start="972" end="983" title="Steve Perry" label="Steve Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565900" start="1032" end="1036" title="Hagar Schon Aaronson Shrieve" label="HSAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3990903" start="1044" end="1060" title="Through the Fire (Hagar Schon Aaronson Shrieve album)" label="Through the Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3975954" start="1112" end="1123" title="Street Talk" label="Street Talk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266567" start="1389" end="1402" title="Jonathan Cain" label="Jonathan Cain"/>
<link wikidata="Q301874" start="1566" end="1577" title="Ross Valory" label="Ross Valory"/>
<link wikidata="Q943448" start="1590" end="1601" title="Steve Smith (musician)" label="Steve Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7965128" start="1658" end="1672" title="Herbie Herbert" label="Herbie Herbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q337521" start="2079" end="2092" title="Randy Jackson" label="Randy Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6489817" start="2150" end="2163" title="Larrie Londin" label="Larrie Londin"/>
<link wikidata="Q203078" start="2180" end="2184" title="VH-1" label="VH-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234176" start="2191" end="2207" title="Behind the Music" label="Behind the Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q112030136" start="3214" end="3236" title="Freedom (Journey album)" label="fifteenth studio album"/>
<link wikidata="Q3857351" start="3314" end="3324" title="Mike Baird (musician)" label="Mike Baird"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107607" start="3367" end="3381" title="Prairie Prince" label="Prairie Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q6330709" start="3459" end="3463" title="KIGS" label="KNGS"/>
<link wikidata="Q375185" start="3467" end="3486" title="Hanford, California" label="Hanford, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q656903" start="3566" end="3574" title="Cash Box" label="Cash Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="3802" end="3811" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q656903" start="3945" end="3953" title="Cash Box" label="Cash Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q175857" start="4267" end="4278" title="Steve Perry" label="Steve Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266567" start="4295" end="4308" title="Jonathan Cain" label="Jonathan Cain"/>
<link wikidata="Q389242" start="4339" end="4349" title="Neal Schon" label="Neal Schon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527709" start="4361" end="4379" title="guitar synthesizer" label="guitar synthesizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q337521" start="4414" end="4427" title="Randy Jackson" label="Randy Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q943448" start="4519" end="4530" title="Steve Smith (musician)" label="Steve Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932552" start="4578" end="4587" title="Bob Glaub" label="Bob Glaub"/>
<link wikidata="Q6489817" start="4612" end="4625" title="Larrie Londin" label="Larrie Londin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3857351" start="4669" end="4679" title="Mike Baird (musician)" label="Mike Baird"/>
<link wikidata="Q51290" start="4815" end="4819" title="Harmonica" label="harp"/>
<link wikidata="Q7292214" start="4913" end="4926" title="Randy Goodrum" label="Randy Goodrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7615198" start="5032" end="5045" title="Steven Rinkoff" label="Steve Rinkoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q370490" start="5098" end="5115" title="Bob Clearmountain" label="Bob Clearmountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4876788" start="5128" end="5146" title="Bearsville Studios" label="Bearsville Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661000" start="5151" end="5168" title="Power Station (recording studio)" label="The Power Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q981970" start="5186" end="5196" title="Bob Ludwig" label="Bob Ludwig"/>
<link wikidata="Q6785358" start="5212" end="5222" title="Masterdisk" label="Masterdisk"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143302" wikidata="Q431324" url="?curid=143302" title="Walter Map">
<text>Walter Map (; 1130 – 1209/1210) was a medieval writer. He wrote &quot;De nugis curialium&quot;, which takes the form of a series of anecdotes of people and places, offering insights into the history of his time.

Map was a courtier of King Henry II of England, who sent him on missions to Louis VII of France and to Pope Alexander III. Map became the Archdeacon of Oxford in 1196.

==Life==
Map claimed Welsh origins and called himself a man of the Welsh Marches (&quot;marchio sum Walensibus&quot;); He was probably born in southwestern Herefordshire. Medievalist Joshua Byron Smith suggests that Map may have begun his studies at St Peter&#x27;s Abbey in Gloucester before continuing at the University of Paris, apparently around 1154, when Gerard la Pucelle was teaching there. After his return from France Map was employed as a clerk by Gilbert Foliot, the Bishop of Hereford, who was a former Abbot of St Peter&#x27;s. When Foliot was translated to the Diocese of London in 1163 Map followed him.

Map then became one of the clerks of the royal household and by 1173 he was an itinerant justice. As a courtier of King Henry II of England, he was sent on missions to Louis VII of France and to Pope Alexander III, and attended the Third Lateran Council in 1179, encountering a delegation of Waldensians. On this journey he stayed with Henry I of Champagne, who was then about to undertake his last journey to the East.

Map held a prebend in the Diocese of Lincoln by 1183 and was Chancellor of the Diocese by 1186. He later became Precentor of Lincoln, a canon of St Paul&#x27;s, London, and of Hereford, and Archdeacon of Oxford in 1196.

Map was a candidate to succeed William de Vere as Bishop of Hereford in 1199, but was unsuccessful. He was once again a candidate for a bishopric in 1203, this time as Bishop of St David&#x27;s, but was not chosen. He was still alive on 28 May 1208 but died sometime between 1209 and 1210. His death is commemorated at Hereford Cathedral on 1 April.

==Writings==
A man of the world, with a large circle of courtly acquaintances, including Gerald of Wales, &quot;Map had a contemporary reputation as a wit and story teller.&quot; His only surviving work, &quot;De Nugis Curialium&quot; (&quot;Trifles of Courtiers&quot;) is a collection of anecdotes and trivia, containing court gossip and a little real history, and written in a satirical vein. &quot;In its form hardly more than the undigested reminiscences and notes of a man of the world with a lively sense of humour, ... it is, indeed, in some sense a keen satire on the condition of church and state in the writer&#x27;s own day ... [and] of considerable interest; especially noticeable are his accounts of the Templars and Hospitallers, and his sketch of the English court and kings from the reign of William II to his own time.&quot;

Along with William of Newburgh, Map recorded the earliest stories of English vampires. The French-language Prose Lancelot cycle claims &quot;Gautier Map&quot; as an author, though this is contradicted by internal evidence; some scholars have suggested that he wrote a Lancelot romance, now lost, that was the source for the later cycle. Others say that, since Map&#x27;s supposed patron was the King of England, it would have been more likely for him to have written an English tale about King Arthur, Gawain or some other “English” hero, rather than a French one. Map was also said to have written a quantity of Goliardic poetry, including the satirical &quot;Apocalypse of Golias&quot;.

==Notes==
==References==
* British History Online Archdeacons of Oxford accessed on October 28, 2007
* British History Online Chancellors of Lincoln accessed on October 28, 2007
* British History Online Precentors of Lincoln accessed on October 28, 2007
* Gransden, Antonia &quot;Historical writing in England, c. 550 to c. 1307&quot; (London: Routledge, 1974) pp. 242–244.
* Map, Walter, and M.R. James and C.N.L. Brooke and R.A.B. Mynors. De Nugis Curialium — Courtiers. 6th ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1983.
*J.B. Smith, &quot;Walter Map and the Matter of Britain&quot;, Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania Press, 2017
*G. Candela, &quot;L&#x27;offerta letteraria del De nugis curialium di Walter Map. L&#x27;anatomia dell&#x27;opera e la sua proposta estetica nel contesto culturale latino, romanzo e celtico del XII secolo&quot;, Palermo, 2019


==External links==
* Latin Chroniclers from the Eleventh to the Thirteenth Centuries: Walter Map from The Cambridge History of English and American Literature, Volume I, 1907–21.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q431324" start="0" end="10" title="Walter Map" label="Walter Map"/>
<link wikidata="Q5773318" start="38" end="53" title="English historians in the Middle Ages" label="medieval writer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5244962" start="70" end="88" title="De nugis curialium" label="De nugis curialium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511216" start="223" end="231" title="courtier" label="courtier"/>
<link wikidata="Q102140" start="240" end="259" title="Henry II of England" label="Henry II of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q134259" start="289" end="308" title="Louis VII of France" label="Louis VII of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q160116" start="316" end="334" title="Pope Alexander III" label="Pope Alexander III"/>
<link wikidata="Q11722477" start="351" end="371" title="Archdeacon of Oxford" label="Archdeacon of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="403" end="408" title="Wales" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q427862" start="449" end="462" title="Welsh Marches" label="Welsh Marches"/>
<link wikidata="Q23129" start="538" end="551" title="Herefordshire" label="Herefordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q262500" start="632" end="653" title="Gloucester Abbey" label="St Peter&amp;#x27;s Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q209842" start="693" end="712" title="University of Paris" label="University of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3785339" start="743" end="760" title="Gerard la Pucelle" label="Gerard la Pucelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5560910" start="841" end="855" title="Gilbert Foliot" label="Gilbert Foliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3997751" start="940" end="950" title="Translation (ecclesiastical)" label="translated"/>
<link wikidata="Q102140" start="1123" end="1142" title="Henry II of England" label="Henry II of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q134259" start="1171" end="1190" title="Louis VII of France" label="Louis VII of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q160116" start="1198" end="1216" title="Pope Alexander III" label="Pope Alexander III"/>
<link wikidata="Q338611" start="1235" end="1256" title="Third Lateran Council" label="Third Lateran Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q201620" start="1295" end="1306" title="Waldensians" label="Waldensians"/>
<link wikidata="Q364517" start="1339" end="1359" title="Henry I of Champagne" label="Henry I of Champagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q12640328" start="1435" end="1442" title="Prebendary" label="prebend"/>
<link wikidata="Q2501001" start="1450" end="1468" title="Diocese of Lincoln" label="Diocese of Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031332" start="1536" end="1545" title="Precentor" label="Precentor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104153" start="1560" end="1565" title="Canon (priest)" label="canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576524" start="1569" end="1591" title="Old St Paul&amp;#x27;s Cathedral" label="St Paul&amp;#x27;s, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q869446" start="1600" end="1608" title="diocese of Hereford" label="Hereford"/>
<link wikidata="Q11722477" start="1614" end="1634" title="Archdeacon of Oxford" label="Archdeacon of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2581169" start="1676" end="1691" title="William de Vere" label="William de Vere"/>
<link wikidata="Q460988" start="1695" end="1713" title="Bishop of Hereford" label="Bishop of Hereford"/>
<link wikidata="Q21791459" start="1813" end="1838" title="Bishop of St David&amp;#x27;s" label="Bishop of St David&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q429379" start="1964" end="1982" title="Hereford Cathedral" label="Hereford Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q357824" start="2085" end="2100" title="Gerald of Wales" label="Gerald of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q5244962" start="2206" end="2224" title="De Nugis Curialium" label="De Nugis Curialium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234687" start="2850" end="2869" title="William of Newburgh" label="William of Newburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q17097794" start="2888" end="2904" title="Medieval revenants" label="earliest stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q46721" start="2916" end="2924" title="vampires" label="vampires"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467333" start="2946" end="2960" title="Prose Lancelot" label="Prose Lancelot"/>
<link wikidata="Q215681" start="3107" end="3115" title="Lancelot" label="Lancelot"/>
<link wikidata="Q767975" start="3452" end="3468" title="Goliardic poetry" label="Goliardic poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780094" start="3500" end="3520" title="Apocalypse of Golias" label="Apocalypse of Golias"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734877" start="4496" end="4552" title="The Cambridge History of English and American Literature" label="The Cambridge History of English and American Literature"/>
</links>
</doc>
