<doc id="142937" wikidata="Q11808" url="?curid=142937" title="Castles in Great Britain and Ireland">
<text>Castles have played an important military, economic and social role in Great Britain and Ireland since their introduction following the Norman invasion of England in 1066. Although a small number of castles had been built in England in the 1050s, the Normans began to build motte and bailey and ringwork castles in large numbers to control their newly occupied territories in England and the Welsh Marches. During the 12th century the Normans began to build more castles in stone – with characteristic square keep – that played both military and political roles. Royal castles were used to control key towns and the economically important forests, while baronial castles were used by the Norman lords to control their widespread estates. David I invited Anglo-Norman lords into Scotland in the early 12th century to help him colonise and control areas of his kingdom such as Galloway; the new lords brought castle technologies with them and wooden castles began to be established over the south of the kingdom. Following the Norman invasion of Ireland in the 1170s, under Henry II, castles were established there too.

Castles continued to grow in military sophistication and comfort during the 12th century, leading to a sharp increase in the complexity and length of sieges in England. While in Ireland and Wales castle architecture continued to follow that of England, after the death of Alexander III the trend in Scotland moved away from the construction of larger castles towards the use of smaller tower houses. The tower house style would also be adopted in the north of England and Ireland in later years. In North Wales Edward I built a sequence of militarily powerful castles after the destruction of the last Welsh polities in the 1270s. By the 14th century castles were combining defences with luxurious, sophisticated living arrangements and heavily landscaped gardens and parks.

Many royal and baronial castles were left to decline, so that by the 15th century only a few were maintained for defensive purposes. A small number of castles in England and Scotland were developed into Renaissance Era palaces that hosted lavish feasts and celebrations amid their elaborate architecture. Such structures were, however, beyond the means of all but royalty and the richest of the late-medieval barons. Although gunpowder weapons were used to defend castles from the late 14th century onwards it became clear during the 16th century that, provided artillery could be transported and brought to bear on a besieged castle, gunpowder weapons could also play an important attack role. The defences of coastal castles around the British Isles were improved to deal with this threat, but investment in their upkeep once again declined at the end of the 16th century. Nevertheless, in the widespread civil and religious conflicts across the British Isles during the 1640s and 1650s, castles played a key role in England. Modern defences were quickly built alongside existing medieval fortifications and, in many cases, castles successfully withstood more than one siege. In Ireland the introduction of heavy siege artillery by Oliver Cromwell in 1649 brought a rapid end to the utility of castles in the war, while in Scotland the popular tower houses proved unsuitable for defending against civil war artillery – although major castles such as Edinburgh put up strong resistance. At the end of the war many castles were slighted to prevent future use.

Military use of castles rapidly decreased over subsequent years, although some were adapted for use by garrisons in Scotland and key border locations for many years to come, including during the Second World War. Other castles were used as county gaols, until parliamentary legislation in the 19th closed most of them down. For a period in the early 18th century, castles were shunned in favour of Palladian architecture, until they re-emerged as an important cultural and social feature of England, Wales and Scotland and were frequently &quot;improved&quot; during the 18th and 19th centuries. Such renovations raised concerns over their protection so that today castles across the British Isles are safeguarded by legislation. Primarily used as tourist attractions, castles form a key part of the national heritage industry. Historians and archaeologists continue to develop our understanding of British castles, while vigorous academic debates in recent years have questioned the interpretation of physical and documentary material surrounding their original construction and use.

==Norman Invasion==

===Earlier castles and fortifications===
The English word &quot;castle&quot; derives from the Latin word &quot;castellum&quot; and is used to refer to the private fortified residence of a lord or noble. The term tends not to be used for buildings earlier than the 11th century, but such defensive structures are known to have existed before the Norman conquest. A lack of archaeological evidence for timber buildings has tended to disguise the extent of castle-building throughout Europe prior to 1066, and many of the early wooden castles were built on the site of earlier fortifications.

Before the arrival of the Normans the Anglo-Saxons had built burhs, fortified structures with their origins in 9th-century Wessex. Most of these, especially in urban areas, were large enough to be best described as fortified townships rather than private dwellings and are therefore not usually classed as castles. Rural &quot;burhs&quot; were smaller and usually consisted of a wooden hall with a wall enclosing various domestic buildings along with an entrance tower called a &quot;burh-geat&quot;, which was apparently used for ceremonial purposes. Although rural &quot;burhs&quot; were relatively secure their role was primarily ceremonial and they too are not normally classed as castles. 

The presence of castles in Britain and Ireland dates primarily from the Norman invasion of 1066. There were, however, a small number of castles built in England during the 1050s, by Norman knights in the service of Edward the Confessor. These include Hereford, Clavering, Richard&#x27;s Castle and possibly Ewyas Harold Castle and Dover.

=== Invasion ===

William, Duke of Normandy, invaded England in 1066 and one of his first actions after landing was to build Hastings Castle to protect his supply routes. Following their victory at the battle of Hastings the Normans began three phases of castle building. The first of these was the establishment, by the new king, of a number of royal castles in key strategic locations. This royal castle programme focused on controlling the towns and cities of England and the associated lines of communication, including Cambridge, Huntingdon, Lincoln, Norwich, Nottingham, Wallingford, Warwick and York. Of the castles built by William the Conqueror two-thirds were built in towns and cities, often those with the former Anglo-Saxon mints. These urban castles could make use of the existing town&#x27;s walls and fortifications, but typically required the demolition of local houses to make space for them. This could cause extensive damage, and records suggest that in Lincoln 166 houses were destroyed, with 113 in Norwich and 27 in Cambridge. Some of these castles were deliberately built on top of important local buildings, such as the &quot;burhs&quot; or halls of local nobles, and might be constructed so as to imitate aspects of the previous buildings – such as the gatehouse at Rougemont Castle in Exeter, which closely resembled the previous Anglo-Saxon &quot;burh&quot; tower – this was probably done to demonstrate to the local population that they now answered to their new Norman rulers.

The second and third waves of castle building were led by the major magnates, and then by the more junior knights on their new estates. The apportionment of the conquered lands by the king influenced where these castles were built. In a few key locations the king gave his followers compact groups of estates including the six rapes of Sussex and the three earldoms of Chester, Shrewsbury and Hereford; intended to protect the line of communication with Normandy and the Welsh border respectively. In these areas a baron&#x27;s castles were clustered relatively tightly together, but in most of England the nobles&#x27; estates, and therefore their castles, were more widely dispersed. As the Normans pushed on into South Wales they advanced up the valleys building castles as they went and often using the larger castles of the neighbouring earldoms as a base.
As a result, castle building by the Norman nobility across England and the Marches lacked a grand strategic plan, reflecting local circumstances such as military factors and the layout of existing estates and church lands. Castles were often situated along the old Roman roads that still formed the backbone for travel across the country, both to control the lines of communication and to ensure easy movement between different estates. Many castles were built close to inland river ports and those built on the coast were usually located at the mouths of rivers or in ports, Pevensey and Portchester being rare exceptions. Some groups of castles were located so as to be mutually reinforcing – for example the castles of Littledean Camp, Glasshouse Woods and Howle Hill Camp were intended to act as an integrated defence for the area around Gloucester and Gloucester Castle for Gloucester city itself, while Windsor was one of a ring of castles built around London, each approximately a day&#x27;s march apart. Some regional patterns in castle building can also be seen – relatively few castles were built in East Anglia compared to the west of England or the Marches; this was probably due to the relatively settled and prosperous nature of the east of England and reflected a shortage of available serfs, or unfree labour.

Not all of the castles were occupied simultaneously. Some were built during the invasions and then abandoned while other new castles were constructed elsewhere, especially along the western borders. Recent estimates suggest that between 500 and 600 castles were occupied at any one time in the post-conquest period.

===Architecture===

There was a large degree of variation in the size and exact shape of the castles built in England and Wales after the invasion. One popular form was the motte and bailey, in which earth would be piled up into a mound (called a &quot;motte&quot;) to support a wooden tower, and a wider enclosed area built alongside it (called a bailey); Stafford Castle is a typical example of a post-invasion motte castle. Another widespread design was the ring work in which earth would be built up in a circular or oval shape and topped with a wooden rampart; Folkestone Castle is a good example of a Norman ring work, in this case built on top of a hill although most post-invasion castles were usually sited on lower ground. Around 80 per cent of Norman castles in this period followed the motte-and-bailey pattern, but ring works were particularly popular in certain areas, such as south-west England and south Wales. One theory put forward to explain this variation is that ringworks were easier to build in these shallow-soil areas than the larger mottes.

The White Tower in London and the keep of Colchester Castle were the only stone castles to be built in England immediately after the conquest, both with the characteristic square Norman keep. Both these castles were built in the Romanesque style and were intended to impress as well as provide military protection. In Wales the first wave of the Norman castles were again made of wood, in a mixture of motte-and-bailey and ringwork designs, with the exception of the stone built Chepstow Castle. Chepstow too was heavily influenced by Romanesque design, reusing numerous materials from the nearby &quot;Venta Silurum&quot; to produce what historian Robert Liddiard has termed &quot;a play upon images from Antiquity&quot;.

The size of these castles varied depending on the geography of the site, the decisions of the builder and the available resources. Analysis of the size of mottes has shown some distinctive regional variation; East Anglia, for example, saw much larger mottes being built than the Midlands or London. While motte-and-bailey and ring-work castles took great effort to build, they required relatively few skilled craftsmen allowing them to be raised using forced labour from the local estates; this, in addition to the speed with which they could be built – a single season, made them particularly attractive immediately after the conquest. The larger earthworks, particularly mottes, required an exponentially greater quantity of manpower than their smaller equivalents and consequently tended to be either royal, or belong to the most powerful barons who could muster the required construction effort. Despite motte-and-bailey and ringworks being common designs amongst Norman castles, each fortification was slightly different – some castles were designed with two baileys attached to a single motte, and some ring works were built with additional towers added on; yet other castles were built as ringworks and later converted to motte-and-bailey structures.

==12th century==
=== Developments in castle design ===

From the early 12th century onwards the Normans began to build new castles in stone and convert existing timber designs. This was initially a slow process, picking up speed towards the second half of the century. Traditionally this transition was believed to have been driven by the more crude nature of wooden fortifications, the limited life of timber in wooden castles and its vulnerability to fire; recent archaeological studies have however shown that many wooden castles were as robust and as complex as their stone equivalents. Some wooden castles were not converted into stone for many years and instead expanded in wood, such as at Hen Domen.

Several early stone keeps had been built after the conquest, with somewhere between ten and fifteen in existence by 1100, and more followed in the 12th century until around 100 had been built by 1216. Typically these were four sided designs with the corners reinforced by pilaster buttresses. Keeps were up to four storeys high, with the entrance on the first storey to prevent the door from being easily broken down. The strength of the design typically came from the thickness of the walls: usually made of rag-stone, as in the case of Dover Castle, these walls could be up to thick. The larger keeps were subdivided by an internal wall while the smaller versions, such as that at Goodrich, had a single, slightly cramped chamber on each floor. Stone keeps required skilled craftsmen to build them; unlike unfree labour or serfs, these men had to be paid and stone keeps were therefore expensive. They were also relatively slow to erect – a keep&#x27;s walls could usually only be raised by a maximum of a year, the keep at Scarborough was typical in taking ten years to build.

Norman stone keeps played both a military and a political role. Most of the keeps were physically extremely robust and, while they were not designed as an intended location for the final defence of a castle, they were often placed near weak points in the walls to provide supporting fire. Many keeps made compromises to purely military utility: Norwich Castle included elaborate blind arcading on the outside of the building, in a Roman style, and appears to had a ceremonial entrance route; The interior of the keep at Hedingham could have hosted impressive ceremonies and events, but contained numerous flaws from a military perspective. Similarly there has been extensive debate over the role of Orford Castle whose expensive, three-cornered design most closely echoes imperial Byzantine palaces and may have been intended by Henry II to be more symbolic than military in nature.

Another improvement from the 12th century onwards was the creation of shell keeps, involving replacing the wooden keep on the motte with a circular stone wall. Buildings could be built around the inside of the shell, producing a small inner courtyard. Restormel Castle is a classic example of this development with a perfectly circular wall and a square entrance tower while the later Launceston Castle, although more ovoid than circular, is another good example of the design and one of the most formidable castles of the period. Round castles were unusually popular throughout Cornwall and Devon. Although the circular design held military advantages, these only really mattered in the 13th century onwards; the origins of 12th-century circular design were the circular design of the mottes; indeed, some designs were less than circular in order to accommodate irregular mottes, such as that at Windsor Castle.

=== Economy and society ===

English castles during the period were divided into those royal castles owned by the king, and baronial castles controlled by the Anglo-Norman lords. According to chronicler William of Newburgh royal castles formed the &quot;bones of the kingdom&quot;. A number of royal castles were also designated as shrieval castles, forming the administrative hub for a particular county – for example Winchester Castle served as the centre of Hampshire. These castles formed a base for the royal sheriff, responsible for enforcing royal justice in the relevant shire; the role of the sheriff became stronger and clearer as the century progressed.

A number of royal castles were linked to forests and other key resources. Royal forests in the early medieval period were subject to special royal jurisdiction; forest law was, as historian Robert Huscroft describes it, &quot;harsh and arbitrary, a matter purely for the King&#x27;s will&quot; and forests were expected to supply the king with hunting grounds, raw materials, goods and money. Forests were typically tied to castles, both to assist with the enforcement of the law and to store the goods being extracted from the local economy: Peveril Castle was linked to the Peak Forest and the local lead mining there; St Briavels was tied to the Forest of Dean; and Knaresborough, Rockingham and Pickering to their eponymous forests respectively. In the south-west, where the Crown oversaw the lead mining industry, castles such as Restormel played an important role running the local stannery courts.

Baronial castles were of varying size and sophistication; some were classed as a &quot;caput&quot;, or the key stronghold of a given lord, and were usually larger and better fortified than the norm and usually held the local baronial honorial courts. The king continued to exercise the right to occupy and use any castle in the kingdom in response to external threats, in those cases he would staff the occupied castles with his own men; the king also retained the right to authorise the construction of new castles through the issuing of licenses to crenellate. It was possible for bishops to build or control castles, such as the important Devizes Castle linked to the Bishop of Salisbury, although this practice was challenged on occasion. In the 12th century the practice of castle-guards emerged in England and Wales, under which lands were assigned to local lords on condition that the recipient provided a certain number of knights or sergeants for the defence of a named castle. In some cases, such as at Dover, this arrangement became quite sophisticated with particular castle towers being named after particular families owing castle-guard duty.

The links between castles and the surrounding lands and estates was particularly important during this period. Many castles, both royal and baronial, had deer parks or chases attached to them for the purposes of hunting. These usually stretched away from the village or borough associated with the castle, but occasionally a castle was placed in the centre of a park, such as at Sandal.

===The Anarchy===

Civil war broke out in England and raged between 1139 and 1153, forming a turbulent period in which the rival factions of King Stephen and the Empress Matilda struggled for power. Open battles were relatively rare during the war, with campaigns instead centred on a sequence of raids and sieges as commanders attempted to gain control over the vital castles that controlled the territory in the rival regions. Siege technology during the Anarchy centred on basic stone-throwing machines such as ballistae and mangonels, supported by siege towers and mining, combined with blockade and, occasionally, direct assault. The phase of the conflict known as &quot;the Castle War&quot; saw both sides attempting to defeat each other through sieges, such as Stephen&#x27;s attempts to take Wallingford, the most easterly fortress in Matilda&#x27;s push towards London, or Geoffrey de Mandeville&#x27;s attempts to seize East Anglia by taking Cambridge Castle.

Both sides responded to the challenge of the conflict by building many new castles, sometimes as sets of strategic fortifications. In the south-west Matilda&#x27;s supporters built a range of castles to protect the territory, usually motte and bailey designs such as those at Winchcombe, Upper Slaughter, or Bampton. Similarly, Stephen built a new chain of fen-edge castles at Burwell, Lidgate, Rampton, Caxton, and Swavesey – all about six to nine miles (10–15 km) apart – in order to protect his lands around Cambridge. Many of these castles were termed &quot;adulterine&quot; (unauthorised), because no formal permission was given for their construction. Contemporary chroniclers saw this as a matter of concern; Robert of Torigny suggested that as many as 1,115 such castles had been built during the conflict, although this was probably an exaggeration as elsewhere he suggests an alternative figure of 126. Another feature of the war was the creation of many &quot;counter-castles&quot;. These had been used in English conflicts for several years before the civil war and involved building a basic castle during a siege, alongside the main target of attack. Typically these would be built in either a ringwork or a motte-and-bailey design between 200 and 300 yards (180 and 270 metres) away from the target, just beyond the range of a bow. Counter-castles could be used to either act as firing platforms for siege weaponry, or as bases for controlling the region in their own right. Most counter-castles were destroyed after their use but in some cases the earthworks survived, such as the counter-castles called Jew&#x27;s Mount and Mount Pelham built by Stephen in 1141 outside Oxford Castle.

Matilda&#x27;s son Henry II assumed the throne at the end of the war and immediately announced his intention to eliminate the adulterine castles that had sprung up during the war, but it is unclear how successful this effort was. Robert of Torigny recorded that 375 were destroyed, without giving the details behind the figure; recent studies of selected regions have suggested that fewer castles were probably destroyed than once thought and that many may simply have been abandoned at the end of the conflict. Certainly many of the new castles were transitory in nature: Archaeologist Oliver Creighton observes that 56 per cent of those castles known to have been built during Stephen&#x27;s reign have &quot;entirely vanished&quot;.

===The spread of castles in Scotland, Wales and Ireland===
Castles in Scotland emerged as a consequence of the centralising of royal authority in the 12th century. Prior to the 1120s there is very little evidence of castles having existed in Scotland, which had remained less politically centralised than in England with the north still ruled by the kings of Norway. David I of Scotland spent time at the court of Henry I in the south, until he became the Earl of Huntingdon, and returned to Scotland with the intention of extending royal power across the country and modernising Scotland&#x27;s military technology, including the introduction of castles. The Scottish king encouraged Norman and French nobles to settle in Scotland, introducing a feudal mode of landholding and the use of castles as a way of controlling the contested lowlands. The quasi-independent polity of Galloway, which had resisted the rule of David and his predecessors, was a particular focus for this colonisation. The size of these Scottish castles, primarily wooden motte-and-bailey constructions, varied considerably from larger designs, such as the Bass of Inverurie, to smaller castles like Balmaclellan. As historian Lise Hull has suggested, the creation of castles in Scotland was &quot;less to do with conquest&quot; and more to do with &quot;establishing a governing system&quot;.

The Norman expansion into Wales slowed in the 12th century, but remained an ongoing threat to the remaining native rulers. In response the Welsh princes and lords began to build their own castles, usually in wood. There are indications that this may have begun from 1111 onwards under Prince Cadwgan ap Bleddyn with the first documentary evidence of a native Welsh castle being at Cymmer in 1116. These timber castles, including Tomen y Rhodwydd, Tomen y Faerdre and Gaer Penrhôs, were of equivalent quality to the Norman fortifications in the area and it can prove difficult to distinguish the builders of some sites from the archaeological evidence alone. At the end of the 12th century the Welsh rulers began to build castles in stone, primarily in the principality of North Wales.
Ireland remained ruled by native kings into the 12th century, largely without the use of castles. There was a history of Irish fortifications called &quot;ráths&quot;, a type of ringfort, some of which were very heavily defended but which are not usually considered to be castles in the usual sense of the word. The kings of Connacht constructed fortifications from 1124 which they called &quot;caistel&quot; or &quot;caislen&quot;, from the Latin and French for castle, and there has been considerable academic debate over how far these resembled European castles.

The Norman invasion of Ireland began between 1166 and 1171, under first Richard de Clare and then Henry II of England, with the occupation of southern and eastern Ireland by a number of Anglo-Norman barons. The rapid Norman success depended on key economic and military advantages, with castles enabling them to control the newly conquered territories. The new lords rapidly built castles to protect their possessions, many of these were motte-and-bailey constructions; in Louth at least 23 of these were built. It remains uncertain how many ringwork castles were built in Ireland by the Anglo-Normans. Other castles, such as Trim and Carrickfergus, were built in stone as the &quot;caput&quot; centres for major barons. Analysis of these stone castles suggests that building in stone was not simply a military decision; indeed, several of the castles contain serious defensive flaws. Instead the designs, including their focus on large stone keeps, were intended both to increase the prestige of the baronial owners and to provide adequate space for the administrative apparatus of the new territories. Unlike in Wales the indigenous Irish lords do not appear to have constructed their own castles in any significant number during the period.

==13th–14th centuries==
===Military developments===

Castle design in Britain continued to change towards the end of the 12th century. After Henry II mottes ceased to be built in most of England, although they continued to be erected in Wales and along the Marches. Square keeps remained common across much of England in contrast to the circular keeps increasingly prevailing in France; in the Marches, however, circular keep designs became more popular. Castles began to take on a more regular, enclosed shape, ideally quadrilateral or at least polygonal in design, especially in the more prosperous south. Flanking towers, initially square and latterly curved, were introduced along the walls and gatehouses began to grow in size and complexity, with portcullises being introduced for the first time. Castles such as Dover and the Tower of London were expanded in a concentric design in what Cathcart King has labelled the early development of &quot;scientific fortification&quot;.

The developments spread to Anglo-Norman possessions in Ireland where this English style of castles dominated throughout the 13th century, although the deteriorating Irish economy of the 14th century brought this wave of building to an end. In Scotland Alexander II and Alexander III undertook a number of castle building projects in the modern style, although Alexander III&#x27;s early death sparked conflict in Scotland and English intervention under Edward I in 1296. In the ensuing wars of Scottish Independence castle building in Scotland altered path, turning away from building larger, more conventional castles with curtain walls. The Scots instead adopted the policy of slighting, or deliberately destroying, castles captured in Scotland from the English to prevent their re-use in subsequent invasions – most of the new Scottish castles built by nobles were of the tower house design; the few larger castles built in Scotland were typically royal castles, built on the command of Scottish kings.
Some of these changes were driven by developments in military technology. Before 1190 mining was used rarely and the siege engines of the time were largely incapable of damaging the thicker castle walls. The introduction of the trebuchet began to change this situation; it was able to throw much heavier balls, with remarkable accuracy, and reconstructed devices have been shown to be able to knock holes in walls. Trebuchets were first recorded in England in 1217, and were probably used the year before as well. Richard I used them in his sieges during the Third Crusade and appears to have started to alter his castle designs to accommodate the new technology on his return to Europe. The trebuchet seems to have encouraged the shift towards round and polygonal towers and curved walls. In addition to having fewer or no dead zones, and being easier to defend against mining, these castle designs were also much less easy to attack with trebuchets as the curved surfaces could deflect some of the force of the shot.

Castles saw an increasing use of arrowslits by the 13th century, especially in England, almost certainly linked to the introduction of crossbows. These arrow slits were combined with firing positions from the tops of the towers, initially protected by wooden hoarding until stone machicolations were introduced in England in the late 13th century. The crossbow was an important military advance on the older short bow and was the favoured weapon by the time of Richard I; many crossbows and vast numbers of quarrels were needed to supply royal forces, in turn requiring larger scale iron production. In England, crossbows were primarily made at the Tower of London but St Briavels Castle, with the local Forest of Dean available to provide raw materials, became the national centre for quarrel manufacture. In Scotland, Edinburgh Castle became the centre for the production of bows, crossbows and siege engines for the king.

One result of this was that English castle sieges grew in complexity and scale. During the First Barons&#x27; War from 1215 to 1217, the prominent sieges of Dover and Windsor Castle showed the ability of more modern designs to withstand attack; King John&#x27;s successful siege of Rochester required an elaborate and sophisticated assault, reportedly costing around 60,000 marks, or £40,000. The siege of Bedford Castle in 1224 required Henry III to bring siege engines, engineers, crossbow bolts, equipment and labourers from across all of England. The Siege of Kenilworth Castle in 1266, during the Second Barons&#x27; War, was larger and longer still. Extensive water defences withstood the attack of the future Edward I, despite the prince targeting the weaker parts of the castle walls, employing huge siege towers and attempting a night attack using barges brought from Chester. The costs of the siege exhausted the revenues of ten English counties. Sieges in Scotland were initially smaller in scale, with the first recorded such event being the 1230 siege of Rothesay Castle where the besieging Norwegians were able to break down the relatively weak stone walls with axes after only three days. When Edward I invaded Scotland he brought with him the siege capabilities which had evolved south of the border: Edinburgh Castle fell within three days, and Roxburgh, Jedburgh, Dunbar, Stirling, Lanark and Dumbarton castles surrendered to the king. Subsequent English sieges, such as the attacks on Bothwell and Stirling, again used considerable resources including giant siege engines and extensive teams of miners and masons.

=== Economy and society ===

A number of royal castles, from the 12th century onwards, formed an essential network of royal storehouses in the 13th century for a wide range of goods including food, drink, weapons, armour and raw materials. Castles such as Southampton, Winchester, Bristol and the Tower of London were used to import, store and distribute royal wines. The English royal castles also became used as gaols – the Assize of Clarendon in 1166 insisted that royal sheriffs establish their own gaols and, in the coming years, county gaols were placed in all the shrieval royal castles. Conditions in these gaols were poor and claims of poor treatment and starvation were common; Northampton Castle appears to have seen some of the worst abuses.

The development of the baronial castles in England were affected by the economic changes during the period. During the 13th and 14th centuries the average incomes of the English barons increased but wealth became concentrated in the hands of a smaller number of individuals, with a greater discrepancy in incomes. At the same time the costs of maintaining and staffing a modern castle were increasing. The result was that although there were around 400 castles in England in 1216, the number of castles continued to diminish over the coming years; even the wealthier barons were inclined to let some castles slide into disuse and to focus their resources on the remaining stock. The castle-guard system faded into abeyance in England, being replaced by financial rents, although it continued in the Welsh Marches well into the 13th century and saw some limited use during Edward I&#x27;s occupation of Scotland in the early 14th century.
The remaining English castles became increasingly comfortable. Their interiors were often painted and decorated with tapestries, which would be transported from castle to castle as nobles travelled around the country. There were an increasing number of garderobes built inside castles, while in the wealthier castles the floors could be tiled and the windows furnished with Sussex Weald glass, allowing the introduction of window seats for reading. Food could be transported to castles across relatively long distances; fish was brought to Okehampton Castle from the sea some away, for example. Venison remained the most heavily consumed food in most castles, particularly those surrounded by extensive parks or forests such as Barnard Castle, while prime cuts of venison were imported to those castles that lacked hunting grounds, such as Launceston.

By the late 13th century some castles were built within carefully &quot;designed landscapes&quot;, sometimes drawing a distinction between an inner core of a &quot;herber&quot;, a small enclosed garden complete with orchards and small ponds, and an outer region with larger ponds and high status buildings such as &quot;religious buildings, rabbit warrens, mills and settlements&quot;, potentially set within a park. A &quot;gloriette&quot;, or a suite of small rooms, might be built within the castle to allow the result to be properly appreciated, or a viewing point constructed outside. At Leeds Castle the redesigned castle of the 1280s was placed within a large water garden, while at Ravensworth at the end of the 14th century an artificial lake was enclosed by a park to produce an aesthetically and symbolically pleasing entrance to the fortification. The wider parklands and forests were increasingly managed and the proportion of the smaller fallow deer consumed by castle inhabitants in England increased as a result.

=== Welsh castles ===

During the 13th century the native Welsh princes built a number of stone castles. The size of these varied considerably from smaller fortifications, such as Dinas Emrys in Snowdonia, to more substantial castles like Dinefwr and the largest, Castell y Bere. Native Welsh castles typically maximised the defensive benefits of high, mountainous sites, often being built in an irregular shape to fit a rocky peak. Most had deep ditches cut out of the rock to protect the main castle. The Welsh castles were usually built with a relatively short keep, used as living accommodation for princes and nobility, and with distinctive &#x27;apsidal&#x27; D-shaped towers along the walls. In comparison to Norman castles the gatehouses were much weaker in design, with almost no use of portcullises or spiral staircases, and the stonework of the outer walls was also generally inferior to Norman built castles. The later native Welsh castles, built in the 1260s, more closely resemble Norman designs; including round towers and, in the case of Criccieth and Dinas Brân, twin-towered gatehouse defences.

=== Edward I&#x27;s castles in Wales ===
In 1277 Edward I launched a final invasion of the remaining native Welsh strongholds in North Wales, intending to establish his rule over the region on a permanent basis. As part of this occupation he instructed his leading nobles to construct eight new castles across the region; Aberystwyth and Builth in mid-Wales and Beaumaris, Conwy, Caernarfon, Flint, Harlech and Rhuddlan Castle in North Wales. Historian R. Allen Brown has described these as &quot;amongst the finest achievements of medieval military architecture [in England and Wales]&quot;. The castles varied in design but were typically characterised by powerful mural towers along the castle walls, with multiple, over-lapping firing points and large and extremely well defended barbicans. The castles were intended to be used by the king when in the region and included extensive high-status accommodation. Edward also established various new English towns, and in several cases the new castles were designed to be used alongside the fortified town walls as part of an integrated defence. Historian Richard Morris has suggested that &quot;the impression is firmly given of an elite group of men-of-war, long-standing comrades in arms of the king, indulging in an orgy of military architectural expression on an almost unlimited budget&quot;.
James of Saint George, a famous architect and engineer from Savoy, was probably responsible for the bulk of the construction work across the region. The castles were extremely costly to build and required labourers, masons, carpenters, diggers, and building resources to be gathered by local sheriffs from across England, mustered at Chester and Bristol, before being sent on to North Wales in the spring, returning home each winter. The number of workers involved placed a significant drain on the country&#x27;s national labour force. The total financial cost cannot be calculated with certainty, but estimates suggest that Edward&#x27;s castle building programme cost at least £80,000 – four times the total royal expenditure on castles between 1154 and 1189.

The Edwardian castles also made strong symbolic statements about the nature of the new occupation. For example, Caernarvon was decorated with carved eagles, equipped with polygonal towers and expensive banded masonry, all designed to imitate the Theodosian Walls of Constantinople, then the idealised image of imperial power. The actual site of the castle may also have been important as it was positioned close to the former Roman fort of &quot;Segontium&quot;. The elaborate gatehouse, with an excessive five sets of doors and six portcullises, also appears to have been designed to impress visitors and to invoke an image of an Arthurian castle, then believed to have been Byzantine in character.

===Palace-fortresses===

In the middle of the 13th century Henry III began to redesign his favourite castles, including Winchester and Windsor, building larger halls, grander chapels, installing glass windows and decorating the palaces with painted walls and furniture. This marked the beginning of a trend towards the development of grand castles designed for elaborate, elite living. Life in earlier keeps had been focused around a single great hall, with privacy for the owner&#x27;s family provided by using an upper floor for their own living accommodation. By the 14th century nobles were travelling less, bringing much larger households with them when they did travel and entertaining visitors with equally large retinues. Castles such as Goodrich were redesigned in the 1320s to provide greater residential privacy and comfort for the ruling family, while retaining strong defensive features and a capacity to hold over 130 residents at the castle. The design influenced subsequent conversions at Berkeley and by the time that Bolton Castle was being built, in the 1380s, it was designed to hold up to eight different noble households, each with their own facilities. Royal castles such as Beaumaris, although designed with defence in mind, were designed to hold up to eleven different households at any one time.

Kings and the most wealthy lords could afford to redesign castles to produce palace-fortresses. Edward III spent £51,000 on renovating Windsor Castle; this was over one and a half times Edward&#x27;s typical annual income. In the words of Steven Brindle the result was a &quot;great and apparently architecturally unified palace... uniform in all sorts of ways, as to roof line, window heights, cornice line, floor and ceiling heights&quot;, echoing older designs but without any real defensive value. The wealthy John of Gaunt redesigned the heart of Kenilworth Castle, like Windsor the work emphasised a unifying, rectangular design and the separation of ground floor service areas from the upper stories and a contrast of austere exteriors with lavish interiors, especially on the 1st floor of the inner bailey buildings. By the end of the 14th century a distinctive English perpendicular style had emerged.
In the south of England private castles were being built by newly emerging, wealthy families; like the work at Windsor, these castles drew on the architectural themes of earlier martial designs, but were not intended to form a serious defence against attack. These new castles were heavily influenced by French designs, involving a rectangular or semi-rectangular castle with corner towers, gatehouses and moat; the walls effectively enclosing a comfortable courtyard plan not dissimilar to that of an unfortified manor. Bodiam Castle built in the 1380s possessed a moat, towers and gunports but, rather than being a genuine military fortification, the castle was primarily intended to be admired by visitors and used as a luxurious dwelling – the chivalric architecture implicitly invoking comparisons with Edward I&#x27;s great castle at Beaumaris.

In the north of England improvements in the security of the Scottish border, and the rise of major noble families such as the Percies and the Nevilles, encouraged a surge in castle building at the end of the 14th century. Palace-fortresses such as Raby, Bolton and Warkworth Castle took the quadrangular castle styles of the south and combined them with exceptionally large key towers or keeps to form a distinctive northern style. Built by major noble houses these castles were typically even more opulent than those built by the nouveau riche of the south. They marked what historian Anthony Emery has described as a &quot;second peak of castle building in England and Wales&quot;, after the Edwardian designs at the end of the 14th century.

===Introduction of gunpowder===
Early gunpowder weapons were introduced to England from the 1320s onwards and began to appear in Scotland by the 1330s. By the 1340s the English Crown was regularly spending money on them and the new technology began to be installed in English castles by the 1360s and 1370s, and in Scottish castles by the 1380s. Cannons were made in various sizes, from smaller hand cannons to larger guns firing stone balls of up to . Medium-sized weapons weighing around 20 kg each were more useful for the defence of castles, although Richard II eventually established 600 pound (272 kilo) guns at the Tower of London and the 15,366 pound (6,970 kilo) heavy Mons Meg bombard was installed at Edinburgh Castle.

Early cannons had only a limited range and were unreliable; in addition early stone cannonballs were relatively ineffective when fired at stone castle walls. As a result, early cannon proved most useful for defence, particularly against infantry assaults or to fire at the crews of enemy trebuchets. Indeed, early cannons could be quite dangerous to their own soldiers; James II of Scotland was killed besieging Roxburgh Castle in 1460 when one of his cannons, called &quot;Lion&quot;, exploded next to him. The expense of early cannons meant that they were primarily a weapon deployed by royalty rather than the nobility.

Cannons in English castles were initially deployed along the south coast where the Channel ports, essential for English trade and military operations in Europe, were increasingly threatened by French raids. Carisbrooke, Corfe, Dover, Portchester, Saltwood and Southampton Castle received cannon during the late 14th century, small circular &quot;keyhole&quot; gunports being built in the walls to accommodate the new weapons. Carisbrooke Castle was subject to an unsuccessful French siege in 1377, the Crown reacting by equipping the castle with cannon and a mill for producing gunpowder in 1379. Some further English castles along the Welsh borders and Scotland were similarly equipped, with the Tower of London and Pontefract Castle acting as supply depots for the new weapons. In Scotland the first cannon for a castle appears to have been bought for Edinburgh in 1384, which also became an arsenal for the new devices.

==15th–16th centuries==
===Decline of English castles===
By the 15th century very few castles were well maintained by their owners. Many royal castles were receiving insufficient investment to allow them to be maintained – roofs leaked, stone work crumbled, lead or wood was stolen. The Crown was increasingly selective about which royal castles it maintained, with others left to decay. By the 15th century only Windsor, Leeds, Rockingham and Moor End were kept up as comfortable accommodation; Nottingham and York formed the backbone for royal authority in the north, and Chester, Gloucester and Bristol forming the equivalents in the west. Even major fortifications such as the castles of North Wales and the border castles of Carlisle, Bamburgh and Newcastle upon Tyne saw funding and maintenance reduced. Many royal castles continued to have a role as the county gaol, with the gatehouse frequently being used as the principal facility.

The ranks of the baronage continued to reduce in the 15th century, producing a smaller elite of wealthier lords but reducing the comparative wealth of the majority. and many baronial castles fell into similar decline. John Leland&#x27;s 16th-century accounts of English castles are replete with descriptions of castles being &quot;sore decayed&quot;, their defences &quot;in ruine&quot; or, where the walls might still be in good repair, the &quot;logginges within&quot; were &quot;decayed&quot;. English castles did not play a decisive role during the Wars of the Roses, fought between 1455 and 1485, which were primarily in the form of pitched battles between the rival factions of the Lancastrians and the Yorkists.

===Renaissance palaces===

The 15th and 16th centuries saw a small number of British castles develop into still grander structures, often drawing on the Renaissance views on architecture that were increasing in popularity on the continent. Tower keeps, large solid keeps used for private accommodation, probably inspired by those in France had started to appear in the 14th century at Dudley and Warkworth. In the 15th century the fashion spread with the creation of very expensive, French-influenced palatial castles featuring complex tower keeps at Wardour, Tattershall and Raglan Castle. In central and eastern England castles began to be built in brick, with Caister, Kirby Muxloe and Tattershall forming examples of this new style. North of the border the construction of Holyrood Great Tower between 1528 and 1532 picked up on this English tradition, but incorporated additional French influences to produce a highly secure but comfortable castle, guarded by a gun park.

Royal builders in Scotland led the way in adopting further European Renaissance styles in castle design. James IV and James V used exceptional one-off revenues, such as the forfeiture of key lands, to establish their power across their kingdom in various ways including constructing grander castles such as Linlithgow, almost invariably by extending and modifying existing fortifications. These Scottish castle palaces drew on Italian Renaissance designs, in particular the fashionable design of a quadrangular court with stair-turrets on each corner, using harling to giving them a clean, Italian appearance. Later the castles drew on Renaissance designs in France, such as the work at Falkland and Stirling Castle. The shift in architectural focus reflected changing political alliances, as James V had formed a close alliance with France during his reign. In the words of architectural historian John Dunbar the results were the &quot;earliest examples of coherent Renaissance design in Britain&quot;.
These changes also included shifts in social and cultural beliefs. The period saw the disintegration of the older feudal order, the destruction of the monasteries and widespread economic changes, altering the links between castles and the surrounding estates. Within castles, the Renaissance saw the introduction of the idea of public and private spaces, placing new value on castles having private spaces for the lord or his guests away from public view. Although the elite in Britain and Ireland continued to maintain and build castles in the style of the late medieval period there was a growing understanding through the Renaissance, absent in the 14th century, that domestic castles were fundamentally different from the military fortifications being built to deal with the spread of gunpowder artillery. Castles continued to be built and reworked in what cultural historian Matthew Johnson has described as a &quot;conscious attempt to invoke values seen as being under threat&quot;. The results, as at Kenilworth Castle for example, could include huge castles deliberately redesigned to appear old and sporting chivalric features, but complete with private chambers, Italian loggias and modern luxury accommodation.

Although the size of noble households shrank slightly during the 16th century, the number of guests at the largest castle events continued to grow. 2,000 came to a feast at Cawood Castle in 1466, while the Duke of Buckingham routinely entertained up to 519 people at Thornbury Castle at the start of the 16th century. When Elizabeth I visited Kenilworth in 1575 she brought an entourage of 31 barons and 400 staff for a visit that lasted an exceptional 19 days; Leicester, the castle&#x27;s owner, entertained the Queen and much of the neighbouring region with pageants, fireworks, bear baiting, mystery plays, hunting and lavish banquets. With this scale of living and entertainment the need to find more space in older castles became a major issue in both England and Scotland.

===Tower houses===

Tower houses were a common feature of British and Irish castle building in the late medieval period: over 3,000 were constructed in Ireland, around 800 in Scotland and over 250 in England. A tower house would typically be a tall, square, stone-built, crenelated building; Scottish and Ulster tower houses were often also surrounded by a barmkyn or bawn, a walled courtyard designed to hold valuable animals securely, but not necessarily intended for serious defence. Many of the gateways in these buildings were guarded with yetts, grill-like doors made out of metal bars. Smaller versions of tower houses in northern England and southern Scotland were known as Peel towers, or pele houses, and were built along both sides of the border regions. In Scotland a number were built in Scottish towns. It was originally argued that Irish tower houses were based on the Scottish design, but the pattern of development of such castles in Ireland does not support this hypothesis.

The defences of tower houses were primarily aimed to provide protection against smaller raiding parties and were not intended to put up significant opposition to an organised military assault, leading historian Stuart Reid to characterise them as &quot;defensible rather than defensive&quot;. Gunports for heavier guns were built into some Scottish tower houses by the 16th century but it was more common to use lighter gunpowder weapons, such as muskets, to defend Scottish tower houses. Unlike Scotland, Irish tower houses were only defended with relatively light handguns and frequently reused older arrow-loops, rather than more modern designs, to save money.

Analysis of the construction of tower houses has focused on two key driving forces. The first is that the construction of these castles appears to have been linked to periods of instability and insecurity in the areas concerned. In Scotland James IV&#x27;s forfeiture of the Lordship of the Isles in 1494 led to an immediate burst of castle building across the region and, over the longer term, an increased degree of clan warfare, while the subsequent wars with England in the 1540s added to the level of insecurity over the rest of the century. Irish tower houses were built from the end of the 14th century onward as the countryside disintegrated into the unstable control of a large number of small lordships and Henry VI promoted their construction with financial rewards in a bid to improve security. English tower houses were built along the frontier with Scotland in a dangerous and insecure period. Secondly, and paradoxically, appears to have been the periods of relative prosperity. Contemporary historian William Camden observed of the northern English and the Scots, &quot;there is not a man amongst them of a better sort that hath not his little tower or pile&quot;, and many tower houses seem to have been built as much as status symbols as defensive structures. Along the English-Scottish borders the construction pattern follows the relative prosperity of the different side: the English lords built tower houses primarily in the early 15th century, when northern England was particularly prosperous, while their Scottish equivalents built them in late 15th and early 16th centuries, boom periods in the economy of Scotland. In Ireland the growth of tower houses during the 15th century mirrors the rise of cattle herding and the resulting wealth that this brought to many of the lesser lords in Ireland.

===Further development of gunpowder artillery===

Cannons continued to be improved during the 15th and 16th centuries. Castle loopholes were adapted to allow cannons and other firearms to be used in a defensive role, but offensively gunpowder weapons still remained relatively unreliable. England had lagged behind Europe in adapting to this new form of warfare; Dartmouth and Kingswear Castles, built in the 1490s to defend the River Dart, and Bayard&#x27;s Cover, designed in 1510 to defend Dartmouth harbour itself, were amongst the few English castles designed in the continental style during the period, and even these lagged behind the cutting edge of European design. Scottish castles were more advanced in this regard, partially as a result of the stronger French architectural influences. Ravenscraig Castle in Scotland, for example, was an early attempt in the 1460s to deploy a combination of &quot;letter box&quot; gun-ports and low-curved stone towers for artillery weapons. These letter box gun-ports, common in mainland Europe, rapidly spread across Scotland but were rarely used in England during the 15th century. Scotland also led the way in adopting the new caponier design for castle ditches, as constructed at Craignethan Castle.

Henry VIII became concerned with the threat of French invasion during 1539 and was familiar with the more modern continental designs. He responded to the threat by building a famous sequence of forts, called the Device Forts or Henrician Castles, along the south coast of England specifically designed to be equipped with, and to defend against, gunpowder artillery. These forts still lacked some of the more modern continental features, such as angled bastions. Each fort had a slightly different design, but as a group they shared common features, with the fortification formed around a number of compact lobes, often in a quatrefoil or trefoil shape, designed to give the guns a 360-degree angle of fire. The forts were usually tiered to allow the guns to fire over one another and had features such as vents to disperse the gunpowder smoke. It is probable that many of the forts were also originally protected by earth bulwarks, although these have not survived. The resulting forts have been described by historian Christopher Duffy as having &quot;an air at once sturdy and festive, rather like a squashed wedding cake&quot;.
These coastal defences marked a shift away from castles, which were both military fortifications and domestic buildings, towards forts, which were garrisoned but not domestic; often the 1540s are chosen as a transition date for the study of castles as a consequence. The subsequent years also marked almost the end of indigenous English fortification design – by the 1580s English castle improvements were almost entirely dominated by imported European experts. The superiority of Scottish castle design also diminished; the Half Moon battery built at Edinburgh Castle in 1574, for example, was already badly dated in continental terms by the time it was built. The limited number of modern fortifications built in Ireland, such as those with the first gunports retrofitted to Carrickfergus Castle in the 1560s and at Corkbeg in Cork Harbour and built in the 1570s in fear of an invasion, were equally unexceptional by European standards.

Nonetheless, improved gunpowder artillery played a part in the reconquest of Ireland in the 1530s, where the successful English siege of Maynooth Castle in 1530 demonstrated the power of the new siege guns. There were still relatively few guns in Ireland however and, during the Nine Years&#x27; War at the end of the century, the Irish were proved relatively unskilled in siege warfare with artillery used mainly by the English. In both Ireland and Scotland the challenge was how to transport artillery pieces to castle sieges; the poor state of Scottish roads required expensive trains of pack horses, which only the king could afford, and in Ireland the river network had to be frequently used to transport the weapons inland. In these circumstances older castles could frequently remain viable defensive features, although the siege of Cahir Castle in 1599 and the attack on Dunyvaig Castle on Islay in 1614 proved that if artillery could be brought to bear, previously impregnable castle walls might fall relatively quickly.

==17th century==
===Wars of the Three Kingdoms===

In 1603 James VI of Scotland inherited the crown of England, bringing a period of peace between the two countries. The royal court left for London and, as a result – with the exceptions of occasional visits, building work on royal castles north of the border largely ceased. Investment in English castles, especially royal castles, declined dramatically. James sold off many royal castles in England to property developers, including York and Southampton Castle. A royal inspection in 1609 highlighted that the Edwardian castles of North Wales, including Conwy, Beaumaris and Caernarfon were &quot;[u]tterlie decayed&quot;.; a subsequent inspection of various English counties in 1635 found a similar picture: Lincoln, Kendal, York, Nottingham, Bristol, Queenborough, Southampton and Rochester were amongst those in a state of dilapidation. In 1642 one pamphlet described many English castles as &quot;muche decayed&quot; and as requiring &quot;much provision&quot; for &quot;warlike defence&quot;. Those maintained as private homes; such as Arundel, Berkeley, Carlisle and Winchester were in much better condition, but not necessarily defendable in a conflict; while some such as Bolsover were redesigned as more modern dwellings in a Palladian style. A handful of coastal forts and castles, amongst them Dover Castle, remained in good military condition with adequate defences.

In 1642 the English Civil War broke out, initially between supporters of Parliament and the Royalist supporters of Charles I. The war expanded to include Ireland and Scotland, and dragged on into three separate conflicts in England itself. The war was the first prolonged conflict in Britain to involve the use of artillery and gunpowder. English castles were used for various purposes during the conflict. York Castle formed a key part of the city defences, with a military governor; rural castles such as Goodrich could be used a bases for raiding and for control of the surrounding countryside; larger castles, such as Windsor, became used for holding prisoners of war or as military headquarters. During the war castles were frequently brought back into fresh use: existing defences would be renovated, while walls would be &quot;countermured&quot;, or backed by earth, in order to protect from cannons. Towers and keeps were filled with earth to make gun platforms, such as at Carlisle and Oxford Castle. New earth bastions could be added to existing designs, such as at Cambridge and Carew Castle and at the otherwise unfortified Basing House the surrounding Norman ringwork was brought back into commission. The costs could be considerable, with the work at Skipton Castle coming to over £1000.
Sieges became a prominent part of the war with over 300 occurring during the period, many of them involving castles. Indeed, as Robert Liddiard suggests, the &quot;military role of some castles in the seventeenth century is out of all proportion to their medieval histories&quot;. Artillery formed an essential part of these sieges, with the &quot;characteristic military action&quot; according to military historian Stephen Bull, being &quot;an attack on a fortified strongpoint&quot; supported by artillery. The ratio of artillery pieces to defenders varied considerably in sieges, but in all cases there were more guns than in previous conflicts; up to one artillery piece for every nine defenders was not unknown in extreme cases, such as near Pendennis Castle. The growth in the number and size of siege artillery favoured those who had the resources to purchase and deploy these weapons. Artillery had improved by the 1640s but was still not always decisive, as the lighter cannon of the period found it hard to penetrate earth and timber bulwarks and defences – demonstrated in the siege of Corfe. Mortars, able to lob fire over the taller walls, proved particularly effective against castles – in particular those more compact ones with smaller courtyards and open areas, such as at Stirling Castle.

The heavy artillery introduced in England eventually spread to the rest of the British Isles. Although up to a thousand Irish soldiers who had served in Europe returned during the war, bringing with them experience of siege warfare from the Thirty Years&#x27; War in Europe, it was the arrival of Oliver Cromwell&#x27;s train of siege guns in 1649 that transformed the conflict, and the fate of local castles. None of the Irish castles could withstand these Parliamentary weapons and most quickly surrendered. In 1650 Cromwell invaded Scotland and again his heavily artillery proved decisive.

===The Restoration===

The English Civil War resulted in Parliament issuing orders to slight or damage many castles, particularly in prominent royal regions. This was particularly in the period of 1646 to 1651, with a peak in 1647. Around 150 fortifications were slighted in this period, including 38 town walls and a great many castles. Slighting was quite expensive and took some considerable effort to carry out, so damage was usually done in the most cost-effective fashion with only selected walls being destroyed. In some cases the damage was almost total, such as Wallingford Castle or Pontefract Castle which had been involved in three major sieges and in this case at the request of the townsfolk who wished to avoid further conflict.

By the time that Charles II was restored to the throne in 1660, the major palace-fortresses in England that had survived slighting were typically in a poor state. As historian Simon Thurley has described, the shifting &quot;functional requirements, patterns of movement, modes of transport, aesthetic taste and standards of comfort&quot; amongst royal circles were also changing the qualities being sought in a successful castle. Palladian architecture was growing in popularity, which sat awkwardly with the typical design of a medieval castle. Furthermore, the fashionable French court etiquette at the time required a substantial number of enfiladed rooms, in order to satisfy court protocol, and it was impractical to fit these rooms into many older buildings. A shortage of funds curtailed Charles II&#x27;s attempts to remodel his remaining castles and the redesign of Windsor was the only one to be fully completed in the Restoration years.

Many castles still retained a defensive role. Castles in England, such as Chepstow and York Castle, were repaired and garrisoned by the king. As military technologies progressed the costs of upgrading older castles could be prohibitive – the estimated £30,000 required for the potential conversion of York in 1682, approximately £4,050,000 in 2009 terms, gives a scale of the potential costs. Castles played a minimal role in the Glorious Revolution of 1688, although some fortifications such as Dover Castle were attacked by mobs unhappy with the religious beliefs of their Catholic governors, and the sieges of King John&#x27;s Castle in Limerick formed part of the endgame to the war in Ireland. In the north of Britain security problems persisted in Scotland. Cromwellian forces had built a number of new modern forts and barracks, but the royal castles of Edinburgh, Dumbarton and Stirling, along with Dunstaffnage, Dunollie and Ruthven Castle, also continued in use as practical fortifications. Tower houses were being built until the 1640s; after the Restoration the fortified tower house fell out of fashion, but the weak state of the Scottish economy was such that while many larger properties were simply abandoned, the more modest castles continued to be used and adapted as houses, rather than rebuilt. In Ireland tower houses and castles remained in use until after the Glorious Revolution, when events led to a dramatic shift in land ownership and a boom in the building of Palladian country houses; in many cases using timbers stripped from the older, abandoned generation of castles and tower houses.

==18th century==
===Military and governmental use===

Some castles in Britain and Ireland continued to have modest military utility into the 18th century. Until 1745 a sequence of Jacobite risings threatened the Crown in Scotland, culminating in the rebellion in 1745. Various royal castles were maintained during the period either as part of the English border defences, like Carlisle, or forming part of the internal security measures in Scotland itself, like Stirling Castle. Stirling was able to withstand the Jacobite attack in 1745, although Carlisle was taken; the siege of Blair Castle, at the end of the rebellion in 1746, was the final castle siege to occur in the British Isles. In the aftermath of the conflict Corgaff and many others castles were used as barracks for the forces sent to garrison the Highlands. Some castles, such as Portchester, were used for holding prisoners of war during the Napoleonic Wars at the end of the century and were re-equipped in case of a popular uprising during this revolutionary period. In Ireland Dublin Castle was rebuilt following a fire and reaffirmed as the centre of British administrative and military power.

Many castles remained in use as county gaols, run by gaolers as effectively private businesses; frequently this involved the gatehouse being maintained as the main prison building, as at Cambridge, Bridgnorth, Lancaster, Newcastle and St Briavels. During the 1770s the prison reformer John Howard conducted his famous survey of prisons and gaols, culminating in his 1777 work &quot;The State of the Prisons&quot;. This documented the poor quality of these castle facilities; prisoners in Norwich Castle lived in a dungeon, with the floor frequently covered by an inch of water; Oxford was &quot;close and offensive&quot;; Worcester was so subject to jail fever that the castle surgeon would not enter the prison; Gloucester was &quot;wretched in the extreme&quot;. Howard&#x27;s work caused a shift in public opinion against the use of these older castle facilities as gaols.

===Social and cultural use===

By the middle of the century medieval ruined castles had become fashionable once again. They were considered an interesting counterpoint to the now conventional Palladian classical architecture, and a way of giving a degree of medieval allure to their new owners. Historian Oliver Creighton suggests that the ideal image of a castle by the 1750s included &quot;broken, soft silhouettes and [a] decayed, rough appearance&quot;. In some cases the countryside surrounding existing castles was remodelled to highlight the ruins, as at Henderskelfe Castle, or at &quot;Capability&quot; Brown&#x27;s reworking of Wardour Castle. Alternatively, ruins might be repaired and reinforced to present a more suitable appearance, as at Harewood Castle. In other cases mottes, such as that at Groby Castle, were reused as the bases for dramatic follies, or alternatively entirely new castle follies could be created; either from scratch or by reusing original stonework, as occurred during the building of Conygar Tower for which various parts of Dunster Castle were cannibalised.

At the same time castles were becoming tourist attractions for the first time. By the 1740s Windsor Castle had become an early tourist attraction; wealthier visitors who could afford to pay the castle keeper could enter, see curiosities such as the castle&#x27;s narwhal horn, and by the 1750s buy the first guidebooks. The first guidebook to Kenilworth Castle followed in 1777 with many later editions following in the coming decades. By the 1780s and 1790s visitors were beginning to progress as far as Chepstow, where an attractive female guide escorted tourists around the ruins as part of the popular Wye Tour. In Scotland Blair Castle became a popular attraction on account of its landscaped gardens, as did Stirling Castle with its romantic connections. Caernarfon in North Wales appealed to many visitors, especially artists. Irish castles proved less popular, partially because contemporary tourists regarded the country as being somewhat backward and the ruins therefore failed to provide the necessary romantic contrast with modern life.

The appreciation of castles developed as the century progressed. During the 1770s and 1780s the concept of the picturesque ruin was popularised by the English clergyman William Gilpin. Gilpin published several works on his journeys through Britain, expounding the concept of the &quot;correctly picturesque&quot; landscape. Such a landscape, Gilpin argued, usually required a building such as a castle or other ruin to add &quot;consequence&quot; to the natural picture. Paintings in this style usually portrayed castles as indistinct, faintly coloured objects in the distance; in writing, the picturesque account eschewed detail in favour of bold first impressions on the sense. The ruins of Goodrich particularly appealed to Gilpin and his followers; Conwy was, however, too well preserved and uninteresting. By contrast the artistic work of antiquarians James Bentham and James Essex at the end of the century, while stopping short of being genuine archaeology, was detailed and precise enough to provide a substantial base of architectural fine detail on medieval castle features and enabled the work of architects such as Wyatt.

==19th century==
===Military and governmental use===

The military utility of the remaining castles in Britain and Ireland continued to diminish. Some castles became regimental depots, including Carlisle Castle and Chester Castle. Carrickfergus Castle was re-equipped with gunports in order to provide coastal defences at the end of the Napoleonic period. Political instability was a major issue during the early 19th century and the popularity of the Chartist movement led to proposals to refortify the Tower of London in the event of civil unrest. In Ireland Dublin Castle played an increasing role in Ireland as Fenian pressures for independence grew during the century.

The operation of local prisons in locations such as castles had been criticised, since John Howard&#x27;s work in the 1770s, and pressure for reform continued to grow in the 1850s and 1860s. Reform of the legislation surrounding bankruptcy and debt in 1869 largely removed the threat of imprisonment for unpaid debts, and in the process eliminated the purpose of the debtor&#x27;s prisons in castles such as St Briavels. Efforts were made to regularise conditions in local prisons but without much success, and these failures led to prison reform in 1877 which nationalised British prisons, including prisons at castles like York. Compensation was paid to the former owners, although in cases such as York where the facilities were considered so poor as to require complete reconstruction, this payment was denied. In the short term this led to a 39 per cent reduction in the number of prisons in England, including some famous castle prisons such as Norwich; over the coming years, centralisation and changes in prison design led to the closure of most remaining castle prisons.

===Social and cultural use===

Many castles saw increased visitors by tourists, helped by better transport links and the growth of the railways. The armouries at the Tower of London opened for tourists in 1828 with 40,000 visitors in their first year; by 1858 the numbers had grown to over 100,000 a year. Attractions such as Warwick Castle received 6,000 visitors during 1825 to 1826, many of them travelling from the growing industrial towns in the nearby Midlands, while Victorian tourists recorded being charged six-pence to wander around the ruins of Goodrich Castle. The spread of the railway system across Wales and the Marches strongly influenced the flow of tourists to the region&#x27;s castles. In Scotland tourist tours became increasingly popular during the 19th century, usually starting at Edinburgh complete with Edinburgh Castle, and then spending up to two weeks further north, taking advantage of the expanding rail and steamer network. Blair Castle remained popular, but additional castles joined the circuit – Cawdor Castle became popular once the railway line reached north to Fort William.

Purchasing and reading guidebooks became an increasingly important part of visiting castles; by the 1820s visitors could buy an early guidebook at Goodrich outlining the castle&#x27;s history, the first guidebook to the Tower of London was published in 1841 and Scottish castle guidebooks became well known for providing long historical accounts of their sites, often drawing on the plots of Romantic novels for the details. Indeed, Sir Walter Scott&#x27;s historical novels &quot;Ivanhoe&quot; and &quot;Kenilworth&quot; helped to establish the popular Victorian image of a Gothic medieval castle. Scott&#x27;s novels set in Scotland also popularised several northern castles, including Tantallon which was featured in &quot;Marmion&quot;. Histories of Ireland began to stress the role of castles in the rise of Protestantism and &quot;British values&quot; in Ireland, although tourism remained limited.
One response to this popularity was in commissioning the construction of replica castles. These were particularly popular at beginning of the 19th century, and again later in the Victorian period. Design manuals were published offering details of how to recreate the appearance of an original Gothic castles in a new build, leading to a flurry of work, such as Eastnor in 1815, the fake Norman castle of Penrhyn between 1827 and 1837 and the imitation Edwardian castle of Goodrich Court in 1828. The later Victorians built the Welsh Castell Coch in the 1880s as a fantasy Gothic construction and the last such replica, Castle Drogo, was built as late as 1911.

Another response was to improve existing castles, bringing their often chaotic historic features into line with a more integrated architectural aesthetic in a style often termed Gothic Revivalism. There were numerous attempts to restore or rebuild castles so as to produce a consistently Gothic style, informed by genuine medieval details, a movement in which the architect Anthony Salvin was particularly prominent – as illustrated by his reworking of Alnwick and much of Windsor Castle. A similar trend can be seen at Rothesay where William Burges renovated the older castle to produce a more &quot;authentic&quot; design, heavily influenced by the work of the French architect Eugène Viollet-le-Duc. North of the border this resulted in the distinctive style of Scots Baronial Style architecture, which took French and traditional medieval Scottish features and reinvented them in a baroque style. The style also proved popular in Ireland with George Jones&#x27; Oliver Castle in the 1850s, for example, forming a good example of the fashion. As with Gothic Revivalism, Scots Baronial architects frequently &quot;improved&quot; existing castles: Floors Castle was transformed in 1838 by William Playfair who added grand turrets and cupolas. In a similar way the 16th-century tower house of Lauriston Castle was turned into the Victorian ideal of a &quot;rambling medieval house&quot;. The style spread south and the famous architect Edward Blore added a Scots Baronial touch to his work at Windsor.

With this pace of change concerns had begun to grow by the middle of the century about the threat to medieval buildings in Britain, and in 1877 William Morris established the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings. One result of public pressure was the passing of the Ancient Monuments Protection Act 1882, but the provisions of the act focused on unoccupied prehistoric structures and medieval buildings such as castles were exempted from it leaving no legal protection.

==20th–21st century==
===1900–1945===
During the first half of the century several castles were maintained, or brought back into military use. During the Irish War of Independence Dublin Castle remained the centre of the British administration, military and intelligence operations in Ireland until the transfer of power and the castle to the Irish Free State in 1922. During the Second World War the Tower of London was used to hold and execute suspected spies, and was used to briefly detain Rudolf Hess, Adolf Hitler&#x27;s deputy, in 1941. Edinburgh Castle was used as a prisoner of war facility, while Windsor Castle was stripped of more delicate royal treasures and used to guard the British royal family from the dangers of the Blitz. Some coastal castles were used to support naval operations: Dover Castle&#x27;s medieval fortifications used as basis for defences across the Dover Strait; Pitreavie Castle in Scotland was used to support the Royal Navy; and Carrickfergus Castle in Ireland was used as a coastal defence base. Some castles, such as Cambridge and Pevensey, were brought into local defence plans in case of a German invasion. A handful of these castles retained a military role after the war; Dover was used as a nuclear war command centre into the 1950s, while Pitreavie was used by NATO until the turn of the 21st century.

The strong cultural interest in British castles persisted in the 20th century. In some cases this had destructive consequences as wealthy collectors bought and removed architectural features and other historical artefacts from castles for their own collections, a practice that produced significant official concern. Some of the more significant cases included St Donat&#x27;s Castle, bought by William Randolph Hearst in 1925 and then decorated with numerous medieval buildings removed from their original sites around Britain, and the case of Hornby, where many parts of the castle were sold off and sent to buyers in the United States. Partially as a result of these events, increasing legal powers were introduced to protect castles – acts of parliament in 1900 and 1910 widened the terms of the earlier legislation on national monuments to allow the inclusion of castles. An act of Parliament in 1913 introduced preservation orders for the first time and these powers were extended in 1931. Similarly, after the end of the Irish Civil War, the new Irish state took early action to extend and strengthen the previous British legislation to protect Irish national monuments.

Around the beginning of the century there were a number of major restoration projects on British castles. Before the outbreak of the First World War work was undertaken at Chepstow, Bodiam, Caernarfon and Tattershal; after the end of the war various major state funded restoration projects occurred in the 1920s with Pembroke, Caerphilly and Goodrich amongst the largest of these. This work typically centred on cutting back the vegetation encroaching on castle ruins, especially ivy, and removing damaged or unstable stonework; castles such as Beaumaris saw their moats cleaned and reflooded. Some castles such as Eilean Donan in Scotland were substantially rebuilt in the inter-war years. The early UK film industry took an interest in castles as potential sets, starting with Ivanhoe filmed at Chepstow Castle in 1913 and starring US leading actor King Baggot.

=== 1945–21st century ===

After the Second World War picturesque ruins of castles became unfashionable. The conservation preference was to restore castles so as to produce what Oliver Creighton and Robert Higham have described as a &quot;meticulously cared for fabric, neat lawns and [a] highly regulated, visitor-friendly environment&quot;, although the reconstruction or reproduction of the original appearance of castles was discouraged. As a result, the stonework and walls of today&#x27;s castles, used as tourist attractions, are usually in much better condition than would have been the case in the medieval period. Preserving the broader landscapes of the past also rose in importance, reflected in the decision by the UNESCO World Heritage Site programme to internationally recognise several British castles including Beaumaris, Caernarfon, Conwy, Harlech, Durham and the Tower of London as deserving of special international cultural significance in the 1980s.

The single largest group of English castles are now those owned by English Heritage, created out of the former Ministry of Works in 1983. The National Trust increasingly acquired castle properties in England in the 1950s, and is the second largest single owner, followed by the various English local authorities and finally a small number of private owners. Royal castles such as the Tower of London and Windsor are owned by the Occupied Royal Palaces Estate on behalf of the nation. Similar organisations exist in Scotland, where the National Trust for Scotland was established 1931, and in Ireland, where An Taisce was created in 1948 to working alongside the Irish Ministry of Works to maintain castles and other sites. Some new organisations have emerged in recent years to manage castles, such as the Landmark Trust and the Irish Landmark Trust, which have restored a number of castles in Britain and Ireland over the last few decades.

Castles remain highly popular attractions: in 2018 nearly 2.9 million people visited the Tower of London, 2.1 million visited Edinburgh Castle, 466,000 visited Leeds Castle and 365,000 visited Dover Castle. Ireland, which for many years had not exploited the tourist potential of its castle heritage, began to encourage more tourists in the 1960s and 1970s and Irish castles are now a core part of the Irish tourist industry. British and Irish castles are today also closely linked to the international film industry, with tourist visits to castles now often involving not simply a visit to a historic site, but also a visit to the location of a popular film.
The management and handling of Britain&#x27;s historic castles has at times been contentious. Castles in the late 20th and early 21st century are usually considered part of the heritage industry, in which historic sites and events are commercially presented as visitor attractions. Some academics, such as David Lowenthal, have critiqued the way in which these histories are constantly culturally and socially reconstructed and condemned the &quot;commercial debasement&quot; of sites such as the Tower of London. The challenge of how to manage these historic properties has often required very practical decisions. At one end of the spectrum owners and architects have had to deal with the practical challenges of repairing smaller decaying castles used as private houses, such as that at Picton Castle where damp proved a considerable problem. At the other end of the scale the fire at Windsor Castle in 1992 opened up a national debate about how the burnt-out castle wing should be replaced, the degree to which modern designs should be introduced and who should pay the £37 million costs (£50.2 million in 2009 terms). At Kenilworth the speculative and commercial reconstruction of the castle gardens in an Elizabethan style led to a vigorous academic debate over the interpretation of archaeological and historical evidence. Trends in conservation have altered and, in contrast to the prevailing post-war approach to conservation, recent work at castles such as Wigmore, acquired by English Heritage in 1995, has attempted to minimise the degree of intervention to the site.

==Historiography==

The earliest histories of British and Irish castles were recorded, albeit in a somewhat fragmented fashion, by John Leland in the 16th century and, by the 19th century, historical analysis of castles had become popular. Victorian historians such as George Clark and John Parker concluded that British castles had been built for the purposes of military defence, but believed that their history was pre-Conquest – concluding that the mottes across the countryside had been built by either the Romans or Celts.

The study of castles by historians and archaeologists developed considerably during the 20th century. The early-20th-century historian and archaeologist Ella Armitage published a ground-breaking book in 1912, arguing convincingly that British castles were in fact a Norman introduction, while historian Alexander Thompson also published in the same year, charting the course of the military development of English castles through the Middle Ages. The Victoria County History of England began to document the country&#x27;s castles on an unprecedented scale, providing an additional resource for historical analysis.

After the Second World War the historical analysis of British castles was dominated by Arnold Taylor, R. Allen Brown and D. J. Cathcart King. These academics made use of a growing amount of archaeological evidence, as the 1940s saw an increasing number of excavations of motte and bailey castles, and the number of castle excavations as a whole went on to double during the 1960s. With an increasing number of castle sites under threat in urban areas, a public scandal in 1972 surrounding the development of the Baynard&#x27;s Castle site in London contributed to reforms and a re-prioritisation of funding for rescue archaeology. Despite this the number of castle excavations fell between 1974 and 1984, with the archaeological work focusing on conducting excavations on a greater number of small-scale, but fewer large-scale sites. The study of British castles remained primarily focused on analysing their military role, however, drawing on the evolutionary model of improvements suggested by Thompson earlier in the century.

In the 1990s a wide-reaching reassessment of the interpretation of British castles took place. A vigorous academic discussion over the history and meanings behind Bodiam Castle began a debate, which concluded that many features of castles previously seen as primarily military in nature were in fact constructed for reasons of status and political power. As historian Robert Liddiard has described it, the older paradigm of &quot;Norman militarism&quot; as the driving force behind the formation of Britain&#x27;s castles was replaced by a model of &quot;peaceable power&quot;. The next twenty years was characterised by an increasing number of major publications on castle studies, examining the social and political aspects of the fortifications, as well as their role in the historical landscape. Although not unchallenged, this &quot;revisionist&quot; perspective remains the dominant theme in the academic literature today.

==Notes==
==References==
;Bibliography

*Abels, Richard Philip and Bernard S. Bachrach. (eds) (2001) &quot;The Normans and their Adversaries at War.&quot; Woodbridge, UK: Boydell. 
*Amt, Emilie. (1993) &quot;The Accession of Henry II in England: royal government restored, 1149–1159.&quot; Woodbridge, UK: Boydell Press. 
*Andrews, Malcolm. (1989) &quot;The Search for the Picturesque.&quot; Stanford, US: Stanford University Press. 
*Armitage, Ella S. (1912) &quot;The Early Norman Castles of the British isles.&quot; London: J. Murray. OCLC 458514584
*Bailey, Elaine. (2003) &quot;Building for growth&quot;, in Fairweather and McConville (eds) (2003)
*Barry, Terry. (1995) &quot;The Last Frontier: Defence and Settlement in Late Medieval Ireland&quot;, in Barry, Frame and Simms (eds) (1995)
*Barry, Terry, Robin Frame and Katharine Simms. (eds) (1995) &quot;Colony and Frontier in Medieval Ireland: Essays Presented to J.F. Lydon.&quot; London: Hambledon Press. 
*Bartlett, Thomas. (2010) &quot;Ireland: A History.&quot; Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
*Bradbury, Jim. (2009) &quot;Stephen and Matilda: the Civil War of 1139–53.&quot; Stroud, UK: The History Press. 
*Brindle, Steven and Kerr, Brian. (1997) &quot;Windsor Revealed: New light on the history of the castle.&quot; London: English Heritage. 
*Brown, James Baldwin. (1823) &quot;Memoirs of the Public and Private Life of John Howard, the Philanthropist.&quot; London: T. and G. Underwood. OCLC 60719334
*Brown, R. Allen. (1962) &quot;English Castles.&quot; London: Batsford. OCLC 1392314
*Bruce, David M. (2010) &quot;Baedeker – the Perceived &#x27;Inventor&#x27; of the Formal Guidebook: a Bible for Travellers in the 19th Century&quot;, in Butler and Russell (eds) (2010)
*Bull, Stephen. (2008) &quot;&quot;The Furie of the Ordnance&quot;: Artillery in the English Civil Wars.&quot; Woodbridge UK: Boydell Press. 
*Butler, Richard and Rosylyn A. Russell (eds) (2010) &quot;Giants of Tourism.&quot; Wallingford, UK: CAB. 
*Butler, Lawrence. (1997) &quot;Clifford&#x27;s Tower and the Castles of York.&quot; London: English Heritage. 
*Carpenter, David. (2004) &quot;The Struggle for Mastery: The Penguin History of Britain 1066–1284.&quot; London: Penguin. 
*Clark, Geo. T. (1874) &quot;The Defences of York&quot;, in &quot;The Archaeological Journal&quot;, XXXI (1874)
*Clark, Geo. T. (1884) &quot;Medieval Military Architecture.&quot; London: Wyman &amp; Sons. OCLC 2600376/
*Cooper, Thomas Parsons. (1911) &quot;The History of the Castle of York, from its Foundation to the Current Day with an Account of the Building of Clifford&#x27;s Tower.&quot; London: Elliot Stock. OCLC 59345650
*Cottrell, Peter. (2006) &quot;The Anglo-Irish War: The Troubles of 1913–1922.&quot; Botley, UK: Osprey Publishing. 
*Coulson, Charles. (1994) &quot;The Castles of the Anarchy&quot;, in King (ed) (1994)
*Coulson, Charles. (2003) &quot;Castles in Medieval Society: Fortresses in England, France, and Ireland in the Central Middle Ages.&quot; Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
*Creighton, Oliver Hamilton and Robert Higham. (2003) &quot;Medieval Castles.&quot; Princes Risborough, UK: Shire Publications. 
*Creighton, Oliver Hamilton. (2005) &quot;Castles and Landscapes: Power, Community and Fortification in Medieval England.&quot; London: Equinox. 
*Cruickshanks, Eveline. (ed) (2009) &quot;The Stuart Courts.&quot; Stroud, UK: The History Press. 
*Curnow, P.E. and E.A. Johnson. (1985) &quot;St Briavels Castle&quot;, in &quot;Chateau Gaillard: études de castellologie médiévale.&quot; Caen: Centre de Recherches Archéologiques Médiévales. 
*Danziger, Danny and John Gillingham. (2003) &quot;1215: The Year of Magna Carta.&quot; London: Coronet Books. 

*Davies, Paul R. (2007) &quot;Castles of the Welsh Princes.&quot; Wales: Y Lolfa. 
*Delafons, John. (1997) &quot;Politics and Preservation: a policy history of the built heritage, 1882–1996.&quot; London: Chapman and Hall. 
*Dobres, Marcia-Anne and John E. Robb. (eds) (2000) &quot;Agency in Archaeology.&quot; London: Routledge. 
*Duffy, Christopher. (1997) &quot;Siege Warfare: The Fortress in the Early Modern World, 1494–1660.&quot; London: Routledge. 
*Dunbar, John G. (1999) &quot;Scottish Royal Palaces: the Architecture of the Royal Residences during the Late Medieval and Early Renaissance Periods.&quot; East Lothian, UK: Tuckwell Press. 
*Eales, Richard. (2003) &quot;Royal power and castles in Norman England&quot;, in Liddiard (ed) (2003a)
*Eales, Richard. (2006) &quot;Peveril Castle.&quot; London: English Heritage. 
*Eltis, David. &quot;The Military Revolution in Sixteenth-Century Europe.&quot; London: Tauris. 
*Emery, Anthony. (1996) &quot;Greater Medieval Houses of England and Wales, 1300–1500: Northern England.&quot; Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. .
*Emery, Anthony. (2006) &quot;Greater Medieval Houses of England and Wales, 1300–1500: Southern England.&quot; Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
*Fairweather, Leslie and Seán McConville. (eds) (2003) &quot;Prison Architecture: Policy, Design, and Experience.&quot; Oxford: Architectural Press. 
*Fielding, Theodore Henry. (1825) &quot;British castles: or, a compendious history of the ancient military structures of Great Britain.&quot; London: Rowlett and Brimmer. OCLC 6049730
*Fox, Lionel. (2001) &quot;The English Prison and Borstal Systems: an account of the prison and Borstal systems.&quot; London: Routledge. 
*Gerrard, Christopher M. (2003) &quot;Medieval Archaeology: Understanding Traditions and Contemporary Approaches.&quot; London: Routledge. 
*Glendinning, Miles, Ranald MacInnes and Aonghus MacKechnie. (2002) &quot;A History of Scottish Architecture: from the Renaissance to the Present Day.&quot; Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. .
*Gilmour, Tony. (2007) &quot;Sustaining Heritage: giving the past a future.&quot; Sydney: Sydney University Press. .
*Gomme, Andor and Alison Maguire. (2008) &quot;Design and Plan in the Country House: from castle donjons to Palladian boxes.&quot; Yale: Yale University Press. 
*Goodrich, Samuel Griswold. (2005) &quot;Recollections of a Lifetime Or Men and Things I Have Seen in a Series of Familiar Letters to a Friend.&quot; Kessinger. 
*Gravett, Christopher and Adam Hook. (2003) &quot;Norman Stone Castles: The British Isles, 1066–1216.&quot; Botley, UK: Osprey. 
*Greene, Kevin and Tom Moore. (2010) &quot;Archaeology: An Introduction.&quot; Abingdon, UK: Routledge. 
*Grenier, Katherine Haldane. (2005) &quot;Tourism and Identity in Scotland, 1770–1914: Creating Caledonia.&quot; Aldershot, UK: Ashgate. 
*Harding, Christopher, Bill Hines, Richard Ireland and Philip Rawlings. (1985) &quot;Imprisonment in England and Wales: a Concise History.&quot; Beckenham, UK: Croon Helm. 
*Harrington, Peter. (2003) &quot;English Civil War Fortifications 1642–51.&quot; Oxford, UK: Osprey Publishing. 
*Harrington, Peter. (2007) &quot;The Castles of Henry VIII.&quot; Oxford, UK: Osprey Publishing. 
*Harris, John. (2007) &quot;Moving Rooms: the Trade in Architectural Salvages.&quot; Yale: Yale University Press. 
*Hassard, John Rose Greene. (1881) &quot;A Pickwickian Pilgrimage.&quot; Boston: Osgood. OCLC 3217047.
*Hayton, David. (2004) &quot;Ruling Ireland, 1685–1742: politics, politicians and parties.&quot; Woodbridge, UK: Boydell Press. .
*Hearne, Thomas. (1711) &quot;The itinerary of John Leland the Antiquary.&quot; Oxford: The Theatre. OCLC 655596199
*House of Commons Public Accounts Committee. (2009) &quot;Maintaining the Occupied Royal Palaces: twenty-fourth report of session 2008–09, report, together with formal minutes, oral and written evidence.&quot; London: The Stationery Office. 
*Hull, Lise E. (2006) &quot;Britain&#x27;s Medieval Castles.&quot; Westport: Praeger. 
*Hull, Lise E. and Whitehorne, Stephen. (2008) &quot;Great Castles of Britain &amp; Ireland.&quot; London: New Holland Publishers. 
*Hull, Lise E. (2009) &quot;Understanding the Castle Ruins of England and Wales: How to Interpret the History and Meaning of Masonry and Earthworks.&quot; Jefferson, US: MacFarland. 
*Hulme, Richard. (2008) &quot;Twelfth Century Great Towers – The Case for the Defence,&quot; The Castle Studies Group Journal, No. 21, 2007–8.
*Huscroft, Richard. (2005) &quot;Ruling England, 1042–1217.&quot; Harlow: Pearson. .
*Impey, Edward and Geoffrey Parnell. (2000) &quot;The Tower of London: The Official Illustrated History.&quot; London: Merrell Publishers. 
*Insall, Donald. (2008) &quot;Living Buildings: architectural conservation : philosophy, principles and practice.&quot; Victoria, Australia: Images Publishing. 
*Janssens, G. A. M. and Flor Aarts. (eds) (1984) &quot;Studies in Seventeenth-Century English Literature, History, and Bibliography.&quot; Amsterdam: Rodopi. 
*Johnson, Matthew. (2000) &quot;Self-made men and the staging of agency&quot;, in Dobres and Robb (eds) 2000
*Johnson, Matthew. (2002) &quot;Behind the castle gate: from Medieval to Renaissance.&quot; Abingdon, UK: Routledge. 
*Jones, Nigel R. (2005) &quot;Architecture of England, Scotland, and Wales.&quot; Westport, US: Greenwood Publishing. 
*King, D. J. Cathcart. (1991) &quot;The Castle in England and Wales: An Interpretative History.&quot; London: Routledge. 
*King, Edmund. (ed) (1994) &quot;The Anarchy of King Stephen&#x27;s Reign.&quot; Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
*Lenihan, Pádraig. (2001) &quot;Conclusion: Ireland&#x27;s Military Revolution(s)&quot;, in Lenihan (ed) (2001)
*Lenihan, Pádraig. (ed) (2001) &quot;Conquest and Resistance: War in Seventeenth-Century Ireland.&quot; Leiden, Netherlands: BRILL. 
*Liddiard, Robert. (ed) (2003a) &quot;Anglo-Norman Castles.&quot; Woodbridge, UK: Boydell Press. .
*Liddiard, Robert (2003b) &quot;Introduction&quot;, in Liddiard (ed) (2003a)
*Liddiard, Robert. (2005) &quot;Castles in Context: Power, Symbolism and Landscape, 1066 to 1500.&quot; Macclesfield, UK: Windgather Press. 
*Lowenthal, David. (1985) &quot;The Past is a Foreign Country.&quot; Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
*Lowenthal, David. (1996) &quot;Possessed by the Past: the heritage industry and the spoils of history.&quot; New York: Free Press. 
*Lowry, Bernard. &quot;Discovering Fortifications: From the Tudors to the Cold War.&quot; Risborough, UK: Shire Publications. 
*Mackenzie, James D. (1896) &quot;The Castles of England: Their Story and Structure, Vol II.&quot; New York: Macmillan. OCLC 504892038
*Mackworth-Young, Robin. (1992) &quot;The History and Treasures of Windsor Castle.&quot; Andover, UK: Pitkin. 
*Mallgrave, Harry Francis. (2005) &quot;Modern Architectural Theory: a Historical Survey, 1673–1968.&quot; Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
*McConville, Seán. (1995) &quot;English Local Prisons, 1860–1900: Next Only to Death.&quot; London: Routledge. 
*McNeill, Tom. (2000) &quot;Castles in Ireland: Feudal Power in a Gaelic World.&quot; London: Routledge. 
*Morris, Richard K. (1998) &quot;The Architecture of Arthurian Enthusiasm: Castle Symbolism in the Reigns of Edward I and his Successors&quot;, in Strickland (ed) (1998)
*Morris, Richard K. (2010) &quot;Kenilworth Castle.&quot; London: English Heritage. 
*Musty, A. E. S. (2007) &quot;Roaring Meg: Test Firing a Copy of Colonel Birch&#x27;s Civil War Mortar.&quot; Hereford, UK: Archaeological and Archival, with Mainmast Conservation. 
*Mynors, Charles. (2006) &quot;Listed Buildings, Conservation Areas and Monuments.&quot; London: Sweet and Maxwell. 
*Nicolson, Adam. (1997) &quot;Restoration: The Rebuilding of Windsor Castle.&quot; London: Michael Joseph. 
*O&#x27;Dwyer, Frederick. (1997) &quot;The Architecture of Deane and Woodward.&quot; Cork, Ireland: Cork University Press. .
*Omar, Paul J. (ed) (2008) &quot;International insolvency law: themes and perspectives.&quot; London: Ashgate. 
*Parker, John Henry. (1882) &quot;Some account of domestic architecture in England from Edward I to Richard II.&quot; Oxford: J. H. Parker. OCLC 11791317
*Pettifer, Adrian. (2000) &quot;Welsh Castles: a Guide by Counties.&quot; Woodbridge, UK: Boydell Press. 
*Pettifer, Adrian. (2002) &quot;English Castles: a Guide by Counties.&quot; Woodbridge, UK: Boydell Press. 
*Prestwich, Michael. (2001) &quot;The Garrisoning of English Medieval Castles&quot;, in Abels and Bachrach (eds) (2001)
*Pounds, Norman John Greville. (1994) &quot;The Medieval Castle in England and Wales: a social and political history.&quot; Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
*Purton, Peter. (2009) &quot;A History of the Early Medieval Siege, c.450–1200.&quot; Woodbridge, UK: Boydell Press. 
*Prestwich, Michael. (1988) &quot;Edward I.&quot; Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press. .
*Rakoczy, Lila. (2007) &quot;Archaeology of destruction: a reinterpretation of castle slightings in the English Civil War&quot;. York: University of York (PhD thesis)
*Rajak, Harry. (2008) &quot;The culture of bankruptcy&quot;, in Omar (ed) (2008)
*Reid, Stuart. (2006) &quot;Castles and Tower Houses of the Scottish Clans, 1450–1650.&quot; Botley, UK: Osprey Publishing. 
*Robinson, John Martin. (2010) &quot;Windsor Castle: the Official Illustrated History.&quot; London: Royal Collection Publications. 
*Rowse, Alfred Leslie. (1974) &quot;Windsor Castle in the History of the Nation.&quot; London: Book Club Associates. 
*Rudge, Thomas. (1803) &quot;The history of the county of Gloucester brought down to the year 1803.&quot; Gloucester, UK: Harris. OCLC 260199931
*Ryan, Chris. (2003) &quot;Recreational Tourism: Demand and Impacts.&quot; Clevedon, UK: Channel View Publications. 
*Scott-Garrett, C. &quot;Littledean Camp ,&quot; in &quot;Transactions of the Bristol and Gloucestershire Archaeological Society&quot;, 1958, Vol. 77
*Shawcross, William. (2009) &quot;Queen Elizabeth: the Queen Mother: the official biography.&quot; London: Macmillan. 
*Simpson, Grant G. and Bruce Webster. (2003) &quot;Charter Evidence and the Distribution of Mottes in Scotland&quot;, in Liddiard (ed) (2003a)
*Stell, Geoffrey. (2000) &quot;War-damaged Castles: the evidence from Medieval Scotland&quot;, in &quot;Chateau Gaillard: Actes du colloque international de Graz (Autriche), 22–29 août 1998.&quot; Caen, France: Publications du CRAHM. 
*Strickland, Matthew. (ed) (1998) &quot;Armies, Chivalry and Warfare in Medieval England and France.&quot; Stamford, UK: Paul Watkins. .
*Stokstad, Marilyn. (2005) &quot;Medieval Castles.&quot; Westport, US: Greenwood Press. 
*Tabraham, Chris J. (2004) &quot;Edinburgh Castle: Prisons of War.&quot; Historic Scotland. 
*Tabraham, Chris J. (2005) &quot;Scotland&#x27;s Castles.&quot; London: Batsford. 
*Tabraham, Chris J. and Doreen Grove. (2001) &quot;Fortress Scotland and the Jacobites.&quot; London: Batsford. 
*Taylor, Arnold. (1989) &quot;Caernarfon Castle.&quot; Cardiff, UK: Cadw. 
*Thompson, Alexander. (1912) &quot;Military Architecture in England during the Middle Ages.&quot; London: H. Frowde. OCLC 458292198.
*Thompson, M. W. (1991) &quot;The Rise of the Castle.&quot; Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
*Thurley, Simon. (2009) &quot;A Country Seat Fit For a King: Charles II, Greenwich and Winchester&quot;, in Cruickshanks (ed) 2009.
*Timbs, John and Alexander Gunn. (2008) &quot;Abbeys, Castles and Ancient Halls of England and Wales: Their Legendary Lore and Popular History, Volume 3.&quot; Alcester, UK: Read Books. 
*Tite, Catherine. (2010) &quot;Portraiture, Dynasty and Power: Art Patronage in Hanoverian Britain, 1714–1759.&quot; Amherst, US: Cambria Press. 
*Toy, Sidney. (1933) &quot;The round castles of Cornwall&quot;, in &quot;Archaeologia&quot; 83 (1933)
*Toy, Sidney. (1985) &quot;Castles: Their Construction and History.&quot; New York: Dover Publications. 
*Turner, Ralph V. (2009) &quot;King John: England&#x27;s Evil King?&quot; Stroud, UK: History Press. 
*Turner, Rick. (2006) &quot;Chepstow Castle.&quot; Cardiff, UK: Cadw. 
*Walker, David. (1991) &quot;Gloucestershire Castles ,&quot; in &quot;Transactions of the Bristol and Gloucestershire Archaeological Society&quot;, 1991, Vol. 109
*West, T. W. (1985) &quot;Discovering Scottish Architecture.&quot; Aylesbury, UK: Shire Publications. 
*Whyte, Ian D. and Kathleen A. Whyte. (1991) &quot;The Changing Scottish Landscape, 1500–1800.&quot; London: Routledge. 
*Wiener, Martin J. (1994) &quot;Reconstructing the Criminal: Culture, Law, and Policy in England, 1830–1914.&quot; Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
*Williams, J. Anthony. (1984) &quot;No-Popery Violence in 1688- Revolt in the provinces&quot;, in Janssens and Aarts (eds) (1984)
*Williams, William H. A. (2008) &quot;Tourism, Landscape, and the Irish character: British Travel Writers in Pre-Famine Ireland.&quot; Wisconsin: Wisconsin University Press. 
*Zuelow, Eric. (2009) &quot;Making Ireland Irish: Tourism and National Identity since the Irish Civil War.&quot; New York: Syracuse University Press. .
==Further reading==

*Dempsey, Karen; Gilchrist, Roberta; Ashbee, Jeremy; Sagrott, Stefan; Stones, Samantha (2019), &quot;Beyond the martial façade: gender, heritage and medieval castles&quot;, &quot;International Journal of Heritage Studies&quot;, .
*Goodall, John (2011), &quot;The English Castle&quot;, New Haven: Yale University Press.
*Higham, Robert; Barker Philip A. (1992), &quot;Timber Castles&quot;, London: Batsford.
*Marshall, Pamela (2002), &quot;The ceremonial Function of the Donjon in the Twelfth Century&quot;, &quot;Château Gaillard. Etudes de castellologie médiévale&quot;, 20: 141–151.
*McNeill, Tom (1997), &quot;Castles in Ireland: Feudal Power in a Gaelic World&quot;, London: Routledge.
*Speight, Sarah (2000), &quot;Castle warfare in the &quot;Gesta Stephani&quot;&quot;, &quot;Château Gaillard. Etudes de castellologie médiévale&quot;, 19: 269–274.
*Sweetman, P. David (1999), &quot;The medieval castles of Ireland&quot;, Woodbridge: The Boydell Press.
*Thorstad, Audrey (2019), &quot;The Culture of Castles in Tudor England and Wales&quot;, Woodbridge: Boydell &amp; Brewer.
*Wheatley, Abigail (2004), &quot;The Idea of the Castle in Medieval England&quot;, York: York Medieval Press.
==External links==
*Cadw 
*English Heritage
*The National Trust
*The National Trust for Scotland
*An Taisce, the National Trust for Ireland
*The Castle Studies Group
*A photo record of Castles in England, Scotland, Wales and Ireland</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11808" start="0" end="7" title="Castles in Great Britain and Ireland" label="Castles"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="71" end="84" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="89" end="96" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q200485" start="136" end="162" title="Norman invasion of England" label="Norman invasion of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q23413" start="199" end="205" title="castle" label="castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q83418" start="251" end="258" title="Normans" label="Normans"/>
<link wikidata="Q92062" start="274" end="290" title="motte and bailey" label="motte and bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7335033" start="295" end="311" title="ringwork" label="ringwork castles"/>
<link wikidata="Q427862" start="392" end="405" title="Welsh Marches" label="Welsh Marches"/>
<link wikidata="Q91165" start="509" end="513" title="keep" label="keep"/>
<link wikidata="Q165503" start="654" end="659" title="baron" label="baron"/>
<link wikidata="Q216787" start="738" end="745" title="David I of Scotland" label="David I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342092" start="875" end="883" title="Galloway" label="Galloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q901714" start="1025" end="1051" title="Norman invasion of Ireland" label="Norman invasion of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q102140" start="1072" end="1080" title="Henry II of England" label="Henry II"/>
<link wikidata="Q188055" start="1269" end="1274" title="siege" label="siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q211109" start="1391" end="1404" title="Alexander III of Scotland" label="Alexander III"/>
<link wikidata="Q91312" start="1505" end="1516" title="tower house" label="tower house"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892770" start="1618" end="1629" title="North Wales" label="North Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="1630" end="1638" title="Edward I of England" label="Edward I"/>
<link wikidata="Q236122" start="2098" end="2113" title="Renaissance architecture" label="Renaissance Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q2525814" start="2321" end="2338" title="Early modern warfare" label="gunpowder weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577772" start="2791" end="2831" title="Wars of the Three Kingdoms" label="widespread civil and religious conflicts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6639474" start="3104" end="3125" title="List of siege artillery" label="heavy siege artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q44279" start="3129" end="3144" title="Oliver Cromwell" label="Oliver Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2238935" start="3423" end="3431" title="slighting" label="slighted"/>
<link wikidata="Q40357" start="3703" end="3707" title="gaol" label="gaol"/>
<link wikidata="Q264649" start="3854" end="3876" title="Palladian architecture" label="Palladian architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q570116" start="4204" end="4222" title="tourist attraction" label="tourist attraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q210272" start="4265" end="4282" title="Cultural heritage" label="heritage industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="4299" end="4313" title="archaeology" label="archaeologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q23413" start="4627" end="4633" title="castle" label="castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="4657" end="4662" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q83418" start="5180" end="5187" title="Normans" label="Normans"/>
<link wikidata="Q32768" start="5192" end="5204" title="Anglo-Saxons" label="Anglo-Saxons"/>
<link wikidata="Q88034" start="5215" end="5219" title="burh" label="burh"/>
<link wikidata="Q105313" start="5277" end="5283" title="Wessex" label="Wessex"/>
<link wikidata="Q200485" start="5922" end="5945" title="Norman conquest of England" label="Norman invasion of 1066"/>
<link wikidata="Q130005" start="6065" end="6085" title="Edward the Confessor" label="Edward the Confessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5737950" start="6101" end="6109" title="Hereford Castle" label="Hereford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5129609" start="6111" end="6120" title="Clavering Castle" label="Clavering"/>
<link wikidata="Q3784235" start="6122" end="6143" title="Richard&amp;#x27;s Castle" label="Richard&amp;#x27;s Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419097" start="6157" end="6176" title="Ewyas Harold Castle" label="Ewyas Harold Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q950970" start="6181" end="6186" title="Dover Castle" label="Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q37594" start="6207" end="6214" title="William the Conqueror" label="William"/>
<link wikidata="Q460244" start="6216" end="6232" title="Duke of Normandy" label="Duke of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5680295" start="6314" end="6329" title="Hastings Castle" label="Hastings Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q83224" start="6391" end="6409" title="battle of Hastings" label="battle of Hastings"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025375" start="6713" end="6722" title="Cambridge Castle" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5945108" start="6724" end="6734" title="Huntingdon Castle" label="Huntingdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q727760" start="6736" end="6743" title="Lincoln Castle" label="Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672292" start="6745" end="6752" title="Norwich Castle" label="Norwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q17642916" start="6754" end="6764" title="Nottingham Castle" label="Nottingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632423" start="6766" end="6777" title="Wallingford Castle" label="Wallingford"/>
<link wikidata="Q941276" start="6779" end="6786" title="Warwick Castle" label="Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q80637" start="6791" end="6795" title="York Castle" label="York"/>
<link wikidata="Q464780" start="6926" end="6931" title="Mint (coin)" label="mints"/>
<link wikidata="Q180057" start="7163" end="7170" title="Lincoln, England" label="Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q7370785" start="7481" end="7497" title="Rougemont Castle" label="Rougemont Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q134672" start="7501" end="7507" title="Exeter" label="Exeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627346" start="8024" end="8029" title="Rape (county subdivision)" label="rapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q23346" start="8033" end="8039" title="Sussex" label="Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q170263" start="8066" end="8073" title="Chester" label="Chester"/>
<link wikidata="Q201970" start="8075" end="8085" title="Shrewsbury" label="Shrewsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q204720" start="8090" end="8098" title="Hereford" label="Hereford"/>
<link wikidata="Q15878" start="8151" end="8159" title="Normandy" label="Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394805" start="8398" end="8424" title="Norman invasion of Wales" label="pushed on into South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q2179671" start="8820" end="8835" title="Roman roads in Britain" label="old Roman roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q2970215" start="9135" end="9143" title="Pevensey Castle" label="Pevensey"/>
<link wikidata="Q732249" start="9148" end="9159" title="Portchester Castle" label="Portchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q6652928" start="9281" end="9296" title="Littledean Camp" label="Littledean Camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q170497" start="9401" end="9411" title="Gloucester" label="Gloucester"/>
<link wikidata="Q5572016" start="9416" end="9433" title="Gloucester Castle" label="Gloucester Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q42646" start="9468" end="9475" title="Windsor Castle" label="Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q103350" start="9860" end="9864" title="serf" label="serf"/>
<link wikidata="Q705818" start="9870" end="9883" title="unfree labour" label="unfree labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q92062" start="10376" end="10392" title="Motte-and-bailey" label="motte and bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q11814" start="10560" end="10575" title="Stafford Castle" label="Stafford Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7335033" start="10664" end="10673" title="ringwork" label="ring work"/>
<link wikidata="Q5464516" start="10769" end="10786" title="Folkestone Castle" label="Folkestone Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528473" start="11275" end="11286" title="White Tower (Tower of London)" label="White Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q198287" start="11313" end="11330" title="Colchester Castle" label="Colchester Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q91165" start="11457" end="11461" title="keep" label="keep"/>
<link wikidata="Q46261" start="11500" end="11510" title="Romanesque architecture" label="Romanesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070187" start="11750" end="11765" title="Chepstow Castle" label="Chepstow Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q15932056" start="11874" end="11887" title="Venta Silurum" label="Venta Silurum"/>
<link wikidata="Q580631" start="12204" end="12215" title="East Anglia" label="East Anglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q850235" start="12270" end="12282" title="English Midlands" label="the Midlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5712905" start="13951" end="13960" title="Hen Domen" label="Hen Domen"/>
<link wikidata="Q175112" start="14235" end="14243" title="pilaster" label="pilaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q331900" start="14244" end="14252" title="buttress" label="buttress"/>
<link wikidata="Q7282754" start="14472" end="14481" title="rag-stone" label="rag-stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q950970" start="14501" end="14513" title="Dover Castle" label="Dover Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5583571" start="14646" end="14654" title="Goodrich Castle" label="Goodrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963850" start="14989" end="15000" title="Scarborough Castle" label="Scarborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672292" start="15389" end="15403" title="Norwich Castle" label="Norwich Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q883746" start="15423" end="15437" title="Blind arcade" label="blind arcading"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146583" start="15564" end="15573" title="Hedingham Castle" label="Hedingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964047" start="15743" end="15756" title="Orford Castle" label="Orford Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q47591" start="15825" end="15834" title="Byzantine architecture" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q102140" start="15873" end="15881" title="Henry II of England" label="Henry II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7493718" start="15998" end="16008" title="shell keep" label="shell keep"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140030" start="16180" end="16196" title="Restormel Castle" label="Restormel Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q402848" start="16313" end="16330" title="Launceston Castle" label="Launceston Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q42646" start="16825" end="16839" title="Windsor Castle" label="Windsor Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234687" start="17045" end="17064" title="William of Newburgh" label="William of Newburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888937" start="17174" end="17182" title="High Sheriff" label="shrieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q1704670" start="17261" end="17278" title="Winchester Castle" label="Winchester Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q23204" start="17303" end="17312" title="Hampshire" label="Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q578478" start="17356" end="17363" title="sheriff" label="sheriff"/>
<link wikidata="Q255574" start="18051" end="18065" title="Peveril Castle" label="Peveril Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2522594" start="18084" end="18095" title="Peak Forest" label="Peak Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7592704" start="18129" end="18140" title="St Briavels Castle" label="St Briavels"/>
<link wikidata="Q902997" start="18157" end="18171" title="Forest of Dean" label="Forest of Dean"/>
<link wikidata="Q6421781" start="18177" end="18190" title="Knaresborough Castle" label="Knaresborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q3939808" start="18192" end="18202" title="Rockingham Castle" label="Rockingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7190805" start="18207" end="18216" title="Pickering Castle" label="Pickering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140030" start="18343" end="18352" title="Restormel Castle" label="Restormel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600119" start="18396" end="18410" title="stannary law" label="stannery court"/>
<link wikidata="Q23640" start="18501" end="18506" title="caput" label="caput"/>
<link wikidata="Q6543023" start="18953" end="18975" title="Licence to crenellate" label="licenses to crenellate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5267588" start="19056" end="19070" title="Devizes Castle" label="Devizes Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636762" start="19085" end="19104" title="Bishop of Salisbury" label="Bishop of Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q5049963" start="19193" end="19205" title="castle-guard" label="castle-guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q950970" start="19427" end="19432" title="Dover Castle" label="Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662247" start="19726" end="19736" title="Medieval deer park" label="deer parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087090" start="19740" end="19746" title="Chase (land)" label="chases"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760652" start="19951" end="19957" title="Sandal Castle" label="Sandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q743768" start="19979" end="19988" title="The Anarchy" label="Civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q60849" start="20101" end="20113" title="Stephen of England" label="King Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q150872" start="20122" end="20137" title="Empress Matilda" label="Empress Matilda"/>
<link wikidata="Q219433" start="20474" end="20482" title="ballista" label="ballista"/>
<link wikidata="Q921249" start="20488" end="20496" title="mangonel" label="mangonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q622666" start="20512" end="20523" title="siege tower" label="siege tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q88222" start="20529" end="20535" title="Mining (military)" label="mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632423" start="20760" end="20771" title="Wallingford Castle" label="Wallingford"/>
<link wikidata="Q936911" start="20842" end="20864" title="Geoffrey de Mandeville, 1st Earl of Essex" label="Geoffrey de Mandeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025375" start="20912" end="20928" title="Cambridge Castle" label="Cambridge Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q92062" start="21165" end="21181" title="motte and bailey" label="motte and bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023747" start="21207" end="21217" title="Winchcombe Castle" label="Winchcombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2017906" start="21219" end="21234" title="Upper Slaughter" label="Upper Slaughter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4853529" start="21239" end="21246" title="Bampton Castle, Oxfordshire" label="Bampton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21308" end="21315" title="Burwell, Cambridgeshire#Burwell Castle" label="Burwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3206482" start="21317" end="21324" title="Lidgate" label="Lidgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2127074" start="21326" end="21333" title="Rampton, Cambridgeshire" label="Rampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4902358" start="21335" end="21341" title="Caxton, Cambridgeshire" label="Caxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2522814" start="21347" end="21355" title="Swavesey" label="Swavesey"/>
<link wikidata="Q281966" start="21647" end="21664" title="Robert of Torigny" label="Robert of Torigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484801" start="21902" end="21917" title="counter-castles" label="counter-castles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600886" start="22617" end="22630" title="Oxford Castle" label="Oxford Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q102140" start="22652" end="22660" title="Henry II of England" label="Henry II"/>
<link wikidata="Q189955" start="23720" end="23735" title="List of Norwegian monarchs" label="kings of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q216787" start="23737" end="23756" title="David I of Scotland" label="David I of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170228" start="23826" end="23844" title="Earl of Huntingdon" label="Earl of Huntingdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q92062" start="24415" end="24431" title="motte-and-bailey" label="motte-and-bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017537" start="24500" end="24517" title="Inverurie" label="Bass of Inverurie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4852330" start="24543" end="24555" title="Balmaclellan" label="Balmaclellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2614469" start="25030" end="25048" title="Cadwgan ap Bleddyn" label="Cadwgan ap Bleddyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5199740" start="25119" end="25125" title="Cymmer, Rhondda Cynon Taf" label="Cymmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6661071" start="25185" end="25200" title="Llanarmon-yn-Iâl" label="Tomen y Faerdre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5516655" start="25205" end="25217" title="Gaer Penrhôs" label="Gaer Penrhôs"/>
<link wikidata="Q92383" start="25678" end="25682" title="ráth" label="ráth"/>
<link wikidata="Q92383" start="25701" end="25709" title="ringfort" label="ringfort"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670232" start="25839" end="25856" title="List of kings of Connacht" label="kings of Connacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q437952" start="26162" end="26178" title="Richard de Clare, 2nd Earl of Pembroke" label="Richard de Clare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165568" start="26716" end="26720" title="Trim Castle" label="Trim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368960" start="26725" end="26738" title="Carrickfergus Castle" label="Carrickfergus"/>
<link wikidata="Q950970" start="28154" end="28159" title="Dover Castle" label="Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q62378" start="28168" end="28183" title="Tower of London" label="Tower of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064905" start="28203" end="28213" title="Concentric castle" label="concentric"/>
<link wikidata="Q237889" start="28572" end="28584" title="Alexander II of Scotland" label="Alexander II"/>
<link wikidata="Q211109" start="28589" end="28602" title="Alexander III of Scotland" label="Alexander III"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="28773" end="28781" title="Edward I of England" label="Edward I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368240" start="28806" end="28835" title="wars of Scottish Independence" label="wars of Scottish Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2238935" start="28999" end="29008" title="slighting" label="slighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q19776" start="29554" end="29563" title="trebuchet" label="trebuchet"/>
<link wikidata="Q42305" start="29840" end="29849" title="Richard I of England" label="Richard I"/>
<link wikidata="Q51655" start="29885" end="29898" title="Third Crusade" label="Third Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q16082085" start="30379" end="30388" title="arrowslit" label="arrowslit"/>
<link wikidata="Q19783" start="30605" end="30613" title="Hoarding (castles)" label="hoarding"/>
<link wikidata="Q23398" start="30626" end="30639" title="machicolation" label="machicolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q181947" start="30698" end="30706" title="crossbow" label="crossbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137956" start="30754" end="30763" title="short bow" label="short bow"/>
<link wikidata="Q62378" start="30995" end="31010" title="Tower of London" label="Tower of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q902997" start="31050" end="31064" title="Forest of Dean" label="Forest of Dean"/>
<link wikidata="Q212065" start="31166" end="31182" title="Edinburgh Castle" label="Edinburgh Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086498" start="31363" end="31385" title="First Barons&amp;#x27; War" label="First Barons&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q950970" start="31429" end="31434" title="Dover Castle" label="Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q42646" start="31439" end="31453" title="Windsor Castle" label="Windsor Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q129308" start="31517" end="31526" title="John of England" label="King John"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125527" start="31554" end="31563" title="Rochester Castle" label="Rochester"/>
<link wikidata="Q4879112" start="31678" end="31692" title="Bedford Castle" label="Bedford Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q160311" start="31710" end="31719" title="Henry III of England" label="Henry III"/>
<link wikidata="Q3625487" start="31827" end="31846" title="Siege of Kenilworth" label="Siege of Kenilworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q657967" start="31874" end="31897" title="Second Barons&amp;#x27; War" label="Second Barons&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="31988" end="31996" title="Edward I of England" label="Edward I"/>
<link wikidata="Q622666" start="32080" end="32091" title="siege tower" label="siege tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q170263" start="32149" end="32156" title="Chester" label="Chester"/>
<link wikidata="Q866902" start="32340" end="32355" title="Rothesay Castle" label="Rothesay Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q212065" start="32589" end="32605" title="Edinburgh Castle" label="Edinburgh Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q17846423" start="32634" end="32642" title="Roxburgh Castle" label="Roxburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1602945" start="32644" end="32652" title="Jedburgh Castle" label="Jedburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2969165" start="32654" end="32660" title="Dunbar Castle" label="Dunbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q756268" start="32662" end="32670" title="Stirling Castle" label="Stirling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002124" start="32672" end="32678" title="Lanark" label="Lanark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2177200" start="32683" end="32692" title="Dumbarton Castle" label="Dumbarton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2412005" start="32776" end="32784" title="Bothwell Castle" label="Bothwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569104" start="33162" end="33173" title="Southampton Castle" label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1704670" start="33175" end="33185" title="Winchester Castle" label="Winchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968836" start="33187" end="33194" title="Bristol Castle" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q62378" start="33203" end="33218" title="Tower of London" label="Tower of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q3625646" start="33332" end="33351" title="Assize of Clarendon" label="Assize of Clarendon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057595" start="33594" end="33612" title="Northampton Castle" label="Northampton Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5049963" start="34344" end="34356" title="castle-guard" label="castle-guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q184296" start="34716" end="34726" title="tapestry" label="tapestries"/>
<link wikidata="Q323034" start="34852" end="34861" title="garderobe" label="garderobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q468402" start="34936" end="34940" title="tile" label="tile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298322" start="34973" end="34985" title="Sussex Weald" label="Sussex Weald"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001579" start="35022" end="35034" title="window seat (type of sofa)" label="window seats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419982" start="35139" end="35156" title="Okehampton Castle" label="Okehampton Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296872" start="35194" end="35201" title="Venison" label="Venison"/>
<link wikidata="Q4185811" start="35327" end="35341" title="Barnard Castle (castle)" label="Barnard Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q402848" start="35439" end="35449" title="Launceston Castle" label="Launceston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011110" start="35877" end="35886" title="gloriette" label="gloriette"/>
<link wikidata="Q746876" start="36045" end="36057" title="Leeds Castle" label="Leeds Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246582" start="36142" end="36153" title="Ravensworth" label="Ravensworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q912336" start="36404" end="36415" title="Fallow Deer" label="fallow deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q354820" start="36662" end="36673" title="Dinas Emrys" label="Dinas Emrys"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713117" start="36721" end="36728" title="Dinefwr Castle" label="Dinefwr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048693" start="36746" end="36760" title="Castell y Bere" label="Castell y Bere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139896" start="37536" end="37545" title="Criccieth Castle" label="Criccieth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226281" start="37550" end="37560" title="Castell Dinas Brân" label="Dinas Brân"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="37645" end="37653" title="Edward I of England" label="Edward I"/>
<link wikidata="Q319745" start="37918" end="37929" title="Aberystwyth Castle" label="Aberystwyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4986692" start="37934" end="37940" title="Builth Castle" label="Builth"/>
<link wikidata="Q756815" start="37958" end="37967" title="Beaumaris Castle" label="Beaumaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q756830" start="37969" end="37974" title="Conwy Castle" label="Conwy"/>
<link wikidata="Q275128" start="37976" end="37986" title="Caernarfon Castle" label="Caernarfon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428846" start="37988" end="37993" title="Flint Castle" label="Flint"/>
<link wikidata="Q540964" start="37995" end="38002" title="Harlech Castle" label="Harlech"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585938" start="38007" end="38022" title="Rhuddlan Castle" label="Rhuddlan Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681343" start="38944" end="38965" title="James of Saint George" label="James of Saint George"/>
<link wikidata="Q14118" start="39004" end="39009" title="Savoy" label="Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q89917" start="39954" end="39970" title="Theodosian Walls" label="Theodosian Walls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309657" start="40154" end="40163" title="Segontium" label="Segontium"/>
<link wikidata="Q160311" start="40468" end="40477" title="Henry III of England" label="Henry III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1704670" start="40529" end="40539" title="Winchester Castle" label="Winchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q42646" start="40544" end="40551" title="Windsor Castle" label="Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5583571" start="41155" end="41163" title="Goodrich Castle" label="Goodrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q4891993" start="41414" end="41422" title="Berkeley Castle" label="Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q495086" start="41444" end="41457" title="Bolton Castle" label="Bolton Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q756815" start="41607" end="41616" title="Beaumaris Castle" label="Beaumaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q129247" start="41828" end="41838" title="Edward III of England" label="Edward III"/>
<link wikidata="Q193752" start="42246" end="42259" title="John of Gaunt" label="John of Gaunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738764" start="42284" end="42301" title="Kenilworth Castle" label="Kenilworth Castle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42610" end="42629" title="Perpendicular Period#Perpendicular Gothic" label="perpendicular style"/>
<link wikidata="Q639208" start="43164" end="43177" title="Bodiam Castle" label="Bodiam Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q756815" start="43483" end="43492" title="Beaumaris Castle" label="Beaumaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398378" start="43621" end="43628" title="Henry Percy, 1st Earl of Northumberland" label="Percies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1217421" start="43637" end="43645" title="House of Neville" label="Nevilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4583646" start="43743" end="43747" title="Raby Castle" label="Raby"/>
<link wikidata="Q495086" start="43749" end="43755" title="Bolton Castle" label="Bolton"/>
<link wikidata="Q922422" start="43760" end="43776" title="Warkworth Castle" label="Warkworth Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898394" start="44026" end="44039" title="nouveau riche" label="nouveau riche"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430251" start="44635" end="44646" title="hand cannon" label="hand cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q81000" start="44795" end="44805" title="Richard II of England" label="Richard II"/>
<link wikidata="Q952412" start="44918" end="44926" title="Mons Meg" label="Mons Meg"/>
<link wikidata="Q317939" start="44927" end="44934" title="bombard (weapon)" label="bombard"/>
<link wikidata="Q212065" start="44952" end="44968" title="Edinburgh Castle" label="Edinburgh Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q272864" start="45341" end="45361" title="James II of Scotland" label="James II of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q17846423" start="45383" end="45398" title="Roxburgh Castle" label="Roxburgh Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484069" start="45788" end="45800" title="English Channel naval campaign (1338–1339)" label="French raids"/>
<link wikidata="Q328595" start="45802" end="45813" title="Carisbrooke Castle" label="Carisbrooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236511" start="45815" end="45820" title="Corfe Castle" label="Corfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q950970" start="45822" end="45827" title="Dover Castle" label="Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q732249" start="45829" end="45840" title="Portchester Castle" label="Portchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q402419" start="45842" end="45850" title="Saltwood Castle" label="Saltwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569104" start="45855" end="45873" title="Southampton Castle" label="Southampton Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q328595" start="46021" end="46039" title="Carisbrooke Castle" label="Carisbrooke Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949590" start="46312" end="46329" title="Pontefract Castle" label="Pontefract Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q42646" start="46932" end="46939" title="Windsor Castle" label="Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q746876" start="46941" end="46946" title="Leeds Castle" label="Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3939808" start="46948" end="46958" title="Rockingham Castle" label="Rockingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6908028" start="46963" end="46971" title="Moor End Castle" label="Moor End"/>
<link wikidata="Q17642916" start="47015" end="47025" title="Nottingham Castle" label="Nottingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q80637" start="47030" end="47034" title="York Castle" label="York"/>
<link wikidata="Q505858" start="47093" end="47100" title="Chester Castle" label="Chester"/>
<link wikidata="Q5572016" start="47102" end="47112" title="Gloucester Castle" label="Gloucester"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968836" start="47117" end="47124" title="Bristol Castle" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q614836" start="47249" end="47257" title="Carlisle Castle" label="Carlisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026185" start="47259" end="47267" title="Bamburgh Castle" label="Bamburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721569" start="47272" end="47291" title="The Castle, Newcastle" label="Newcastle upon Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398356" start="47680" end="47691" title="John Leland (antiquary)" label="John Leland"/>
<link wikidata="Q127751" start="48015" end="48032" title="Wars of the Roses" label="Wars of the Roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q743488" start="48100" end="48114" title="pitched battle" label="pitched battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q105278" start="48150" end="48162" title="House of Lancaster" label="Lancastrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q105285" start="48171" end="48179" title="House of York" label="Yorkists"/>
<link wikidata="Q236122" start="48335" end="48346" title="Renaissance architecture" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311832" start="48567" end="48573" title="Dudley Castle" label="Dudley"/>
<link wikidata="Q922422" start="48578" end="48587" title="Warkworth Castle" label="Warkworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7969192" start="48733" end="48740" title="Wardour Castle" label="Wardour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628361" start="48742" end="48753" title="Tattershall Castle" label="Tattershall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630723" start="48758" end="48771" title="Raglan Castle" label="Raglan Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5017844" start="48845" end="48852" title="Caister Castle" label="Caister"/>
<link wikidata="Q17674633" start="48854" end="48866" title="Kirby Muxloe Castle" label="Kirby Muxloe"/>
<link wikidata="Q505950" start="48959" end="48979" title="Holyrood Palace" label="Holyrood Great Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q137906" start="49265" end="49273" title="James IV of Scotland" label="James IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q137814" start="49278" end="49285" title="James V of Scotland" label="James V"/>
<link wikidata="Q536118" start="49333" end="49343" title="Asset forfeiture" label="forfeiture"/>
<link wikidata="Q564868" start="49467" end="49477" title="Linlithgow Palace" label="Linlithgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q74327" start="49718" end="49722" title="harl" label="harl"/>
<link wikidata="Q565345" start="49847" end="49855" title="Falkland Palace" label="Falkland"/>
<link wikidata="Q756268" start="49860" end="49875" title="Stirling Castle" label="Stirling Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q759837" start="50297" end="50327" title="Dissolution of the Monasteries" label="destruction of the monasteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738764" start="51174" end="51191" title="Kenilworth Castle" label="Kenilworth Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q466544" start="51347" end="51353" title="loggia" label="loggia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055225" start="51562" end="51575" title="Cawood Castle" label="Cawood Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q726243" start="51595" end="51613" title="Edward Stafford, 3rd Duke of Buckingham" label="Duke of Buckingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7796332" start="51656" end="51672" title="Thornbury Castle" label="Thornbury Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="51712" end="51723" title="Elizabeth I of England" label="Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q318017" start="51851" end="51860" title="Robert Dudley, 1st Earl of Leicester" label="Leicester"/>
<link wikidata="Q2041094" start="51971" end="51983" title="Bear-baiting" label="bear baiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q240911" start="51985" end="51997" title="mystery play" label="mystery play"/>
<link wikidata="Q3635044" start="52527" end="52534" title="Barmkin" label="barmkyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752089" start="52538" end="52542" title="bawn" label="bawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q8053050" start="52715" end="52719" title="yett" label="yett"/>
<link wikidata="Q3898745" start="52852" end="52862" title="Peel tower" label="Peel tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q137906" start="54070" end="54078" title="James IV of Scotland" label="James IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869930" start="54104" end="54125" title="Lord of the Isles" label="Lordship of the Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q160337" start="54546" end="54554" title="Henry VI of England" label="Henry VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q364239" start="54846" end="54860" title="William Camden" label="William Camden"/>
<link wikidata="Q81641" start="55778" end="55787" title="Embrasure" label="loopholes"/>
<link wikidata="Q675259" start="56015" end="56024" title="Dartmouth Castle" label="Dartmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2969487" start="56029" end="56045" title="Kingswear Castle" label="Kingswear Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q374873" start="56081" end="56091" title="River Dart" label="River Dart"/>
<link wikidata="Q812103" start="56097" end="56116" title="Bayard&amp;#x27;s Cove Fort" label="Bayard&amp;#x27;s Cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q3994788" start="56450" end="56468" title="Ravenscraig Castle" label="Ravenscraig Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q89441" start="56829" end="56837" title="caponier" label="caponier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092053" start="56883" end="56901" title="Craignethan Castle" label="Craignethan Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="56904" end="56914" title="Henry VIII of England" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q5267014" start="57116" end="57128" title="Device Forts" label="Device Forts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3413441" start="57529" end="57539" title="quatrefoil" label="quatrefoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q905612" start="57543" end="57550" title="trefoil" label="trefoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q57821" start="58165" end="58169" title="fort" label="fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q212065" start="58588" end="58604" title="Edinburgh Castle" label="Edinburgh Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368960" start="58813" end="58833" title="Carrickfergus Castle" label="Carrickfergus Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q932369" start="58865" end="58877" title="Cork Harbour" label="Cork Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088784" start="59039" end="59060" title="Tudor conquest of Ireland" label="reconquest of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6797465" start="59113" end="59128" title="Maynooth Castle" label="Maynooth Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361354" start="59255" end="59275" title="Nine Years&amp;#x27; War (Ireland)" label="Nine Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q815127" start="59807" end="59828" title="siege of Cahir Castle" label="siege of Cahir Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266322" start="59855" end="59870" title="Dunyvaig Castle" label="Dunyvaig Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="60066" end="60086" title="James VI of Scotland" label="James VI of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q80637" start="60492" end="60496" title="York Castle" label="York"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569104" start="60501" end="60519" title="Southampton Castle" label="Southampton Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q756830" start="60613" end="60618" title="Conwy Castle" label="Conwy"/>
<link wikidata="Q756815" start="60620" end="60629" title="Beaumaris Castle" label="Beaumaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q275128" start="60634" end="60644" title="Caernarfon Castle" label="Caernarfon"/>
<link wikidata="Q727760" start="60768" end="60775" title="Lincoln Castle" label="Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q6388845" start="60777" end="60783" title="Kendal Castle" label="Kendal"/>
<link wikidata="Q17642916" start="60791" end="60801" title="Nottingham Castle" label="Nottingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968836" start="60803" end="60810" title="Bristol Castle" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q17643879" start="60812" end="60824" title="Queenborough Castle" label="Queenborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569104" start="60826" end="60837" title="Southampton Castle" label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125527" start="60842" end="60851" title="Rochester Castle" label="Rochester"/>
<link wikidata="Q716667" start="61100" end="61107" title="Arundel Castle" label="Arundel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4891993" start="61109" end="61117" title="Berkeley Castle" label="Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q614836" start="61119" end="61127" title="Carlisle Castle" label="Carlisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1704670" start="61132" end="61142" title="Winchester Castle" label="Winchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q2968590" start="61239" end="61247" title="Bolsover Castle" label="Bolsover"/>
<link wikidata="Q264649" start="61294" end="61303" title="Palladian architecture" label="Palladian"/>
<link wikidata="Q950970" start="61364" end="61376" title="Dover Castle" label="Dover Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="61451" end="61468" title="English Civil War" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130553" start="61512" end="61522" title="Roundheads" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2284765" start="61531" end="61539" title="Cavaliers" label="Royalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="61554" end="61563" title="Charles I of England" label="Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q80637" start="61846" end="61857" title="York Castle" label="York Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5583571" start="61946" end="61954" title="Goodrich Castle" label="Goodrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q42646" start="62061" end="62068" title="Windsor Castle" label="Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165733" start="62273" end="62285" title="Contramure" label="countermured"/>
<link wikidata="Q614836" start="62421" end="62429" title="Carlisle Castle" label="Carlisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600886" start="62434" end="62447" title="Oxford Castle" label="Oxford Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025375" start="62515" end="62524" title="Cambridge Castle" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q752721" start="62529" end="62541" title="Carew Castle" label="Carew Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867508" start="62575" end="62587" title="Basing House" label="Basing House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7335033" start="62611" end="62619" title="ringwork" label="ringwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q7535853" start="62704" end="62718" title="Skipton Castle" label="Skipton Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2371954" start="63489" end="63505" title="Pendennis Castle" label="Pendennis Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236511" start="63839" end="63844" title="Corfe Castle" label="Corfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7905205" start="63846" end="63853" title="Mortar (weapon)" label="Mortars"/>
<link wikidata="Q756268" start="64032" end="64047" title="Stirling Castle" label="Stirling Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487" start="64291" end="64313" title="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q44279" start="64347" end="64362" title="Oliver Cromwell" label="Oliver Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="64671" end="64688" title="English Civil War" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2238935" start="64730" end="64736" title="slighting" label="slight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632423" start="65215" end="65233" title="Wallingford Castle" label="Wallingford Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949590" start="65237" end="65254" title="Pontefract Castle" label="Pontefract Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="65406" end="65416" title="Charles II of England" label="Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q846848" start="65421" end="65443" title="Restoration (England)" label="restored to the throne"/>
<link wikidata="Q264649" start="65819" end="65841" title="Palladian architecture" label="Palladian architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341702" start="66032" end="66041" title="Enfilade (architecture)" label="enfiladed"/>
<link wikidata="Q42646" start="66264" end="66271" title="Windsor Castle" label="Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070187" start="66412" end="66420" title="Chepstow Castle" label="Chepstow"/>
<link wikidata="Q80637" start="66425" end="66436" title="York Castle" label="York Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q189508" start="66768" end="66787" title="Glorious Revolution" label="Glorious Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q950970" start="66834" end="66846" title="Dover Castle" label="Dover Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2533198" start="66951" end="66974" title="King John&amp;#x27;s Castle (Limerick)" label="King John&amp;#x27;s Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q133315" start="66978" end="66986" title="Limerick" label="Limerick"/>
<link wikidata="Q212065" start="67199" end="67208" title="Edinburgh Castle" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2177200" start="67210" end="67219" title="Dumbarton Castle" label="Dumbarton"/>
<link wikidata="Q178522" start="67245" end="67257" title="Dunstaffnage Castle" label="Dunstaffnage"/>
<link wikidata="Q43374" start="67259" end="67267" title="Dunollie Castle" label="Dunollie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475039" start="67272" end="67286" title="Huntingtower Castle" label="Ruthven Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q212983" start="68136" end="68152" title="Jacobite risings" label="Jacobite risings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049945" start="68206" end="68223" title="Jacobite rising of 1745" label="rebellion in 1745"/>
<link wikidata="Q614836" start="68333" end="68341" title="Carlisle Castle" label="Carlisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q756268" start="68418" end="68433" title="Stirling Castle" label="Stirling Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q532627" start="68537" end="68549" title="Blair Castle" label="Blair Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157892" start="68679" end="68686" title="Corgarff Castle" label="Corgaff"/>
<link wikidata="Q106652" start="68765" end="68778" title="Scottish Highlands" label="the Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q732249" start="68802" end="68813" title="Portchester Castle" label="Portchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="68865" end="68880" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q742767" start="69003" end="69016" title="Dublin Castle" label="Dublin Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025375" start="69309" end="69318" title="Cambridge Castle" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4966903" start="69320" end="69330" title="Bridgnorth Castle" label="Bridgnorth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2969640" start="69332" end="69341" title="Lancaster Castle" label="Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721569" start="69343" end="69352" title="The Castle, Newcastle" label="Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7592704" start="69357" end="69368" title="St Briavels Castle" label="St Briavels"/>
<link wikidata="Q980343" start="69407" end="69418" title="John Howard (prison reformer)" label="John Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672292" start="69610" end="69624" title="Norwich Castle" label="Norwich Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600886" start="69700" end="69706" title="Oxford Castle" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q8034150" start="69744" end="69753" title="Worcester Castle" label="Worcester"/>
<link wikidata="Q160649" start="69772" end="69782" title="Typhus" label="jail fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q5572016" start="69835" end="69845" title="Gloucester Castle" label="Gloucester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049514" start="70561" end="70580" title="Castle Howard" label="Henderskelfe Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q454635" start="70588" end="70616" title="Lancelot &amp;quot;Capability&amp;quot; Brown" label="&amp;quot;Capability&amp;quot; Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7969192" start="70637" end="70651" title="Wardour Castle" label="Wardour Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5656954" start="70752" end="70767" title="Harewood Castle" label="Harewood Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5609924" start="70808" end="70820" title="Groby Castle" label="Groby Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q180174" start="70860" end="70867" title="Folly" label="follies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166785" start="71021" end="71034" title="Conygar Tower" label="Conygar Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q2969173" start="71062" end="71076" title="Dunster Castle" label="Dunster Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q159426" start="71360" end="71367" title="narwhal" label="narwhal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070187" start="71602" end="71610" title="Chepstow Castle" label="Chepstow"/>
<link wikidata="Q532627" start="71725" end="71737" title="Blair Castle" label="Blair Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q756268" start="71811" end="71826" title="Stirling Castle" label="Stirling Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q275128" start="71858" end="71868" title="Caernarfon Castle" label="Caernarfon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627825" start="72258" end="72269" title="picturesque" label="picturesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336319" start="72316" end="72330" title="William Gilpin (priest)" label="William Gilpin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5583571" start="72840" end="72848" title="Goodrich Castle" label="Goodrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q756830" start="72900" end="72905" title="Conwy Castle" label="Conwy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15994298" start="73004" end="73017" title="James Bentham" label="James Bentham"/>
<link wikidata="Q15999824" start="73022" end="73033" title="James Essex" label="James Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q7308407" start="73448" end="73464" title="regimental depot" label="regimental depot"/>
<link wikidata="Q614836" start="73477" end="73492" title="Carlisle Castle" label="Carlisle Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q505858" start="73497" end="73511" title="Chester Castle" label="Chester Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368960" start="73513" end="73533" title="Carrickfergus Castle" label="Carrickfergus Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q193974" start="73734" end="73751" title="Chartism" label="Chartist movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q742767" start="73843" end="73856" title="Dublin Castle" label="Dublin Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349762" start="73897" end="73903" title="Fenian" label="Fenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5248629" start="74148" end="74205" title="Debtors&amp;#x27; Act 1869" label="Reform of the legislation surrounding bankruptcy and debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q427276" start="74324" end="74344" title="debtor&amp;#x27;s prison" label="debtor&amp;#x27;s prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q7592704" start="74365" end="74376" title="St Briavels Castle" label="St Briavels"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245725" start="74490" end="74511" title="Prison Act 1877" label="prison reform in 1877"/>
<link wikidata="Q80637" start="74582" end="74586" title="York Castle" label="York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672292" start="74908" end="74915" title="Norwich Castle" label="Norwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q62378" start="75204" end="75219" title="Tower of London" label="Tower of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q941276" start="75364" end="75378" title="Warwick Castle" label="Warwick Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5583571" start="75594" end="75609" title="Goodrich Castle" label="Goodrich Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q212065" start="75867" end="75883" title="Edinburgh Castle" label="Edinburgh Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q532627" start="75994" end="76006" title="Blair Castle" label="Blair Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051919" start="76069" end="76082" title="Cawdor Castle" label="Cawdor Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q848909" start="76137" end="76149" title="Fort William, Scotland" label="Fort William"/>
<link wikidata="Q223638" start="76286" end="76295" title="guidebook" label="guidebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q79025" start="76589" end="76601" title="Walter Scott" label="Walter Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q840974" start="76633" end="76640" title="Ivanhoe" label="Ivanhoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600597" start="76657" end="76667" title="Kenilworth (novel)" label="Kenilworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q57803" start="76840" end="76849" title="Tantallon Castle" label="Tantallon"/>
<link wikidata="Q919929" start="76878" end="76885" title="Marmion (poem)" label="Marmion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330815" start="77418" end="77425" title="Eastnor Castle" label="Eastnor"/>
<link wikidata="Q136693" start="77444" end="77450" title="Norman architecture" label="Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3402621" start="77461" end="77468" title="Penrhyn Castle" label="Penrhyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="77509" end="77518" title="Edward I of England" label="Edwardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5583573" start="77529" end="77543" title="Goodrich Court" label="Goodrich Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704850" start="77590" end="77602" title="Castell Coch" label="Castell Coch"/>
<link wikidata="Q746819" start="77676" end="77688" title="Castle Drogo" label="Castle Drogo"/>
<link wikidata="Q186363" start="77896" end="77913" title="Gothic Revival architecture" label="Gothic Revivalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q573967" start="78092" end="78106" title="Anthony Salvin" label="Anthony Salvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320427" start="78171" end="78178" title="Alnwick Castle" label="Alnwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q42646" start="78191" end="78205" title="Windsor Castle" label="Windsor Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q866902" start="78238" end="78246" title="Rothesay Castle" label="Rothesay"/>
<link wikidata="Q186265" start="78253" end="78267" title="William Burges" label="William Burges"/>
<link wikidata="Q272912" start="78398" end="78419" title="Eugène Viollet-le-Duc" label="Eugène Viollet-le-Duc"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476363" start="78483" end="78516" title="Scots Baronial Style architecture" label="Scots Baronial Style architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5539391" start="78665" end="78677" title="George Fowler Jones" label="George Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q15263937" start="78684" end="78697" title="Oliver Castle" label="Oliver Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11838960" start="78867" end="78880" title="Floors Castle" label="Floors Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q706350" start="78908" end="78924" title="William Henry Playfair" label="William Playfair"/>
<link wikidata="Q2969689" start="79011" end="79027" title="Lauriston Castle" label="Lauriston Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291717" start="79154" end="79166" title="Edward Blore" label="Edward Blore"/>
<link wikidata="Q182589" start="79365" end="79379" title="William Morris" label="William Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q834601" start="79396" end="79443" title="Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings" label="Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752879" start="79498" end="79535" title="Ancient Monuments Protection Act 1882" label="Ancient Monuments Protection Act 1882"/>
<link wikidata="Q208297" start="79857" end="79882" title="Irish War of Independence" label="Irish War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q742767" start="79883" end="79896" title="Dublin Castle" label="Dublin Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q31747" start="80046" end="80062" title="Irish Free State" label="Irish Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q62378" start="80104" end="80119" title="Tower of London" label="Tower of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q75866" start="80197" end="80208" title="Rudolf Hess" label="Rudolf Hess"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="80210" end="80222" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q212065" start="80247" end="80263" title="Edinburgh Castle" label="Edinburgh Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q42646" start="80310" end="80324" title="Windsor Castle" label="Windsor Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q645968" start="80393" end="80413" title="British Royal Family" label="British royal family"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900329" start="80434" end="80443" title="the Blitz" label="the Blitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q950970" start="80505" end="80517" title="Dover Castle" label="Dover Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q159898" start="80587" end="80599" title="Dover Strait" label="Dover Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q7199034" start="80601" end="80617" title="Pitreavie Castle" label="Pitreavie Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368960" start="80670" end="80690" title="Carrickfergus Castle" label="Carrickfergus Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025375" start="80760" end="80769" title="Cambridge Castle" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2970215" start="80774" end="80782" title="Pevensey Castle" label="Pevensey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571844" start="80939" end="80965" title="Fallout shelter" label="nuclear war command centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485119" start="81413" end="81435" title="St Donat&amp;#x27;s Castle" label="St Donat&amp;#x27;s Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q294931" start="81447" end="81470" title="William Randolph Hearst" label="William Randolph Hearst"/>
<link wikidata="Q5904123" start="81597" end="81603" title="Hornby Castle, Yorkshire" label="Hornby"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752882" start="81813" end="81817" title="Ancient Monuments Act (1900)" label="1900"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752884" start="81822" end="81826" title="Ancient Monuments Protection Act (1910)" label="1910"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752881" start="81932" end="81957" title="Ancient Monuments Act (1913)" label="act of Parliament in 1913"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752878" start="82042" end="82046" title="Ancient Monuments Act 1931" label="1931"/>
<link wikidata="Q748042" start="82080" end="82095" title="Irish Civil War" label="Irish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070187" start="82403" end="82411" title="Chepstow Castle" label="Chepstow"/>
<link wikidata="Q639208" start="82413" end="82419" title="Bodiam Castle" label="Bodiam"/>
<link wikidata="Q275128" start="82421" end="82431" title="Caernarfon Castle" label="Caernarfon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628361" start="82436" end="82446" title="Tattershall Castle" label="Tattershal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422235" start="82548" end="82556" title="Pembroke Castle" label="Pembroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q682601" start="82558" end="82568" title="Caerphilly Castle" label="Caerphilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5583571" start="82573" end="82581" title="Goodrich Castle" label="Goodrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q756815" start="82776" end="82785" title="Beaumaris Castle" label="Beaumaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q79182" start="82846" end="82858" title="Eilean Donan" label="Eilean Donan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987496" start="83010" end="83017" title="Ivanhoe (1913 U.S. film)" label="Ivanhoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070187" start="83028" end="83043" title="Chepstow Castle" label="Chepstow Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265323" start="83082" end="83093" title="King Baggot" label="King Baggot"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="83831" end="83850" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q756815" start="83924" end="83933" title="Beaumaris Castle" label="Beaumaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q275128" start="83935" end="83945" title="Caernarfon Castle" label="Caernarfon"/>
<link wikidata="Q756830" start="83947" end="83952" title="Conwy Castle" label="Conwy"/>
<link wikidata="Q540964" start="83954" end="83961" title="Harlech Castle" label="Harlech"/>
<link wikidata="Q752266" start="83963" end="83969" title="Durham Castle" label="Durham"/>
<link wikidata="Q62378" start="83978" end="83993" title="Tower of London" label="Tower of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q936287" start="84136" end="84152" title="English Heritage" label="English Heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q17110533" start="84180" end="84197" title="Ministry of Works (United Kingdom)" label="Ministry of Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973042" start="84198" end="84205" title="National Heritage Act 1983" label="in 1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q333515" start="84211" end="84225" title="National Trust for Places of Historic Interest or Natural Beauty" label="National Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q599997" start="84604" end="84631" title="National Trust for Scotland" label="National Trust for Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4750223" start="84676" end="84685" title="An Taisce" label="An Taisce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2689124" start="84875" end="84889" title="Landmark Trust" label="Landmark Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q54870066" start="84898" end="84918" title="Irish Landmark Trust" label="Irish Landmark Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q212065" start="85137" end="85153" title="Edinburgh Castle" label="Edinburgh Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q746876" start="85171" end="85183" title="Leeds Castle" label="Leeds Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q950970" start="85204" end="85216" title="Dover Castle" label="Dover Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415395" start="85514" end="85527" title="film industry" label="film industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191106" start="86461" end="86474" title="Picton Castle" label="Picton Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4588008" start="86547" end="86573" title="1992 Windsor Castle fire" label="the fire at Windsor Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738764" start="86797" end="86807" title="Kenilworth Castle" label="Kenilworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7999673" start="87138" end="87145" title="Wigmore Castle" label="Wigmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398356" start="87383" end="87394" title="John Leland (antiquary)" label="John Leland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5512496" start="87521" end="87533" title="G. T. Clark" label="George Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q92062" start="87705" end="87711" title="motte and bailey" label="mottes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="87764" end="87770" title="Ancient Rome" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="87774" end="87779" title="Celts" label="Celts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4936482" start="87935" end="87948" title="Ella Sophia Armitage" label="Ella Armitage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7926668" start="88233" end="88256" title="Victoria County History" label="Victoria County History"/>
<link wikidata="Q4652110" start="88486" end="88499" title="A. J. Taylor" label="Arnold Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q812569" start="88911" end="88932" title="Baynard&amp;#x27;s Castle" label="Baynard&amp;#x27;s Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q653838" start="89010" end="89028" title="rescue archaeology" label="rescue archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q639208" start="89592" end="89605" title="Bodiam Castle" label="Bodiam Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6255625" start="97433" end="97458" title="John Rose Greene Hassard" label="Hassard, John Rose Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q18784012" start="103642" end="103655" title="Thomas Rudge" label="Rudge, Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4652110" start="105066" end="105080" title="A. J. Taylor" label="Taylor, Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q42350436" start="107646" end="107662" title="Pamela Marshall (archaeologist)" label="Marshall, Pamela"/>
<link wikidata="Q42350530" start="107929" end="107943" title="Sarah Speight" label="Speight, Sarah"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="142942" wikidata="Q1276023" url="?curid=142942" title="Paxton House, Berwickshire">
<text>Paxton House is a historic house at Paxton, Berwickshire, in the Scottish Borders, a few miles south-west of Berwick-upon-Tweed, overlooking the River Tweed.

It is a country house built for Patrick Home of Billie in an unsuccessful attempt to woo a Prussian heiress. Attributed to James Adam (possibly in concert with John Adam), it was built between 1758 and 1766, under the supervision of James Nisbet, with extensive interiors (c1773) by Robert Adam, as well as furniture by Thomas Chippendale. The East Wing was added in 1812-13 by architect Robert Reid to house the library and picture gallery.

Other inhabitants were Alexander Home and his son George Home WS FRSE (of Wedderburn and Paxton).

In 1852 Jean Milne, the wife of David Milne, inherited the house and he renamed himself David Milne-Home.

Formerly the seat of the Paxton family, who became Forman-Home, Milne-Home, and finally Home-Robertson as the direct male lines failed and the inheritance progressed through a female. In 1988, the last laird, John David Home Robertson, a socialist member of Parliament, placed the house and grounds into the Paxton House Historic Building Preservation Trust. It is now open to the public and is a Partner Gallery of National Galleries Scotland.

==Paxton House Gallery==
In 1780 Patrick Home of Wedderburn returned from his eight-year-long Grand Tour with an extensive collection of British and European paintings and died before the paintings were unpacked. Later on, Jean Home, who was to inherit the house and the paintings, employed the Master of Work to the Crown of Scotland, architect Robert Reid (1776–1856), to build what is now the East Wing of Paxton House to accommodate a library and a gallery. The gallery is now the only room housing a collection of paintings.

The Paxton Trust in association with National Galleries Scotland have restored the Gallery to its original colour scheme. Patrick Home&#x27;s pictures are now dispersed; a collection from the National Gallery has been hung in their place in the 19th-century manner.

==See also==
* Wedderburn Castle

==References==

&quot;Borders and Berwick&quot;, by Charles A Strang, Rutland Press, 1994, p. 54, 

==External links==
*Official site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1276023" start="0" end="12" title="Paxton House, Berwickshire" label="Paxton House"/>
<link wikidata="Q5773747" start="18" end="32" title="historic house" label="historic house"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156513" start="36" end="42" title="Paxton, Scottish Borders" label="Paxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q786649" start="44" end="56" title="Berwickshire" label="Berwickshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q211113" start="65" end="81" title="Scottish Borders" label="Scottish Borders"/>
<link wikidata="Q504678" start="109" end="127" title="Berwick-upon-Tweed" label="Berwick-upon-Tweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q503262" start="145" end="156" title="River Tweed" label="River Tweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="250" end="257" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618073" start="282" end="292" title="James Adam (architect)" label="James Adam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6218149" start="319" end="328" title="John Adam (architect)" label="John Adam"/>
<link wikidata="Q312635" start="442" end="453" title="Robert Adam" label="Robert Adam"/>
<link wikidata="Q314278" start="479" end="497" title="Thomas Chippendale" label="Thomas Chippendale"/>
<link wikidata="Q15452830" start="547" end="558" title="Robert Reid (architect)" label="Robert Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="667" end="671" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q5237592" start="789" end="805" title="David Milne-Home" label="David Milne-Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700483" start="1017" end="1042" title="John David Home Robertson" label="John David Home Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2051997" start="1224" end="1251" title="National Galleries Scotland" label="National Galleries Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682302" start="1348" end="1358" title="Grand Tour" label="Grand Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303319" start="1549" end="1588" title="Master of Work to the Crown of Scotland" label="Master of Work to the Crown of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q15452830" start="1600" end="1611" title="Robert Reid (architect)" label="Robert Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007870" start="1707" end="1714" title="Art gallery" label="gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2051997" start="1822" end="1849" title="National Galleries Scotland" label="National Galleries Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979038" start="2067" end="2084" title="Wedderburn Castle" label="Wedderburn Castle"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="142946" wikidata="Q11809" url="?curid=142946" title="List of castles in Wales">
<text>Wales is sometimes called the &quot;castle capital of the world&quot; because of the large number of castles in a relatively small area. Wales had about 600 castles, of which over 100 are still standing, either as ruins or as restored buildings. The rest have returned to nature, and today consist of ditches, mounds, and earthworks, often in commanding positions. Many of the sites in Wales are cared for by Cadw, the Welsh government&#x27;s historic environment service.

The four castles of Beaumaris, Caernarfon, Conwy, and Harlech together make up the Castles and Town Walls of King Edward in Gwynedd World Heritage Site, considered to be the &quot;finest examples of late 13th century and early 14th century military architecture in Europe&quot;.

==Bridgend==

Castles of which only earthworks, fragments, or nothing remains include:


==Caerphilly==

==Cardiff==
Castles of which only earthworks or nothing remains include:


==Carmarthenshire==

Castles of which only earthworks or nothing remains include:


==Ceredigion==

Castles of which only earthworks or nothing remains include:


==Conwy==

==Denbighshire==

==Flintshire==

==Gwynedd==

==Isle of Anglesey==

==Merthyr Tydfil==

==Monmouthshire==

==Neath Port Talbot==

==Newport==

Castle with only earthworks, Wentloog Castle.

==Pembrokeshire==

==Powys==

Castles of which only earthworks, fragments or nothing remains include:


==Rhondda Cynon Taf==
Castles of which only earthworks, fragments or nothing remains include:


==Swansea==

==Vale of Glamorgan==

Castles of which only earthworks, fragments or nothing remains include:


==Wrexham==

==See also==
*List of castles
*Castles in Great Britain and Ireland
*Castles in England
*Castles in Scotland
*Castles in Northern Ireland
*Castles in the Isle of Man

==References==
==External links==
*Cadw , the Welsh Government&#x27;s historic environment service Cadw
*Coflein, the database of the Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical Monuments of Wales</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="0" end="5" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q23413" start="101" end="107" title="castle" label="castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025341" start="409" end="413" title="Cadw" label="Cadw"/>
<link wikidata="Q756815" start="494" end="503" title="Beaumaris Castle" label="Beaumaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q275128" start="505" end="515" title="Caernarfon Castle" label="Caernarfon"/>
<link wikidata="Q756830" start="517" end="522" title="Conwy Castle" label="Conwy"/>
<link wikidata="Q540964" start="528" end="535" title="Harlech Castle" label="Harlech"/>
<link wikidata="Q837627" start="557" end="605" title="Castles and Town Walls of King Edward in Gwynedd" label="Castles and Town Walls of King Edward in Gwynedd"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="606" end="625" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q697126" start="756" end="764" title="Bridgend County Borough" label="Bridgend"/>
<link wikidata="Q748065" start="845" end="855" title="Caerphilly County Borough" label="Caerphilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690" start="861" end="868" title="Cardiff" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q217840" start="936" end="951" title="Carmarthenshire" label="Carmarthenshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q217829" start="1020" end="1030" title="Ceredigion" label="Ceredigion"/>
<link wikidata="Q817971" start="1099" end="1104" title="Conwy County Borough" label="Conwy"/>
<link wikidata="Q650682" start="1110" end="1122" title="Denbighshire" label="Denbighshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q505610" start="1128" end="1138" title="Flintshire" label="Flintshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q109128" start="1144" end="1151" title="Gwynedd" label="Gwynedd"/>
<link wikidata="Q168159" start="1157" end="1173" title="Anglesey" label="Isle of Anglesey"/>
<link wikidata="Q752762" start="1179" end="1193" title="Merthyr Tydfil" label="Merthyr Tydfil"/>
<link wikidata="Q207176" start="1199" end="1212" title="Monmouthshire" label="Monmouthshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q748078" start="1218" end="1235" title="Neath Port Talbot" label="Neath Port Talbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q101254" start="1241" end="1248" title="Newport, Wales" label="Newport"/>
<link wikidata="Q213361" start="1301" end="1314" title="Pembrokeshire" label="Pembrokeshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q156150" start="1320" end="1325" title="Powys" label="Powys"/>
<link wikidata="Q817960" start="1405" end="1422" title="Rhondda Cynon Taf" label="Rhondda Cynon Taf"/>
<link wikidata="Q23051" start="1501" end="1508" title="Swansea" label="Swansea"/>
<link wikidata="Q844784" start="1514" end="1531" title="Vale of Glamorgan" label="Vale of Glamorgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q843868" start="1611" end="1618" title="Wrexham County Borough" label="Wrexham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323186" start="1636" end="1651" title="List of castles" label="List of castles"/>
<link wikidata="Q11808" start="1653" end="1689" title="Castles in Great Britain and Ireland" label="Castles in Great Britain and Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q11808" start="1691" end="1709" title="Castles in England" label="Castles in England"/>
<link wikidata="Q7438059" start="1711" end="1730" title="Castles in Scotland" label="Castles in Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q11892" start="1732" end="1759" title="Castles in Northern Ireland" label="Castles in Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247991" start="1761" end="1787" title="Castles in the Isle of Man" label="Castles in the Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025341" start="1888" end="1892" title="Cadw" label="Cadw"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374037" start="1923" end="1988" title="Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical Monuments of Wales" label="Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical Monuments of Wales"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="142950" wikidata="Q1024931" url="?curid=142950" title="1994 Group">
<text>The 1994 Group was a coalition of smaller research-intensive universities in the United Kingdom, founded in 1994 to defend these universities&#x27; interests following the creation of the Russell Group by larger research-intensive universities earlier that year. The 1994 Group originally represented seventeen universities, rising to nineteen, and then dropping to eleven. The group started to falter in 2012, when a number of high performing members left to join the Russell Group. The 1994 Group ultimately dissolved in November 2013.

==Role==
The group sought &quot;to represent the views of its members on the current state and the future of higher education through discussions with the government, funding bodies, and other higher education interest groups&quot; and &quot;[made] its views known through its research publications and in the media&quot;. University Alliance, million+, GuildHE and the Russell Group were its fellow university membership groups across the UK higher education sector.

==Members at time of dissolution==
==Historical membership==
The following table shows the membership of the group since its formation in 1994.
The University of Manchester Institute of Science and Technology (UMIST), which merged with the Victoria University of Manchester to form the University of Manchester, was a member of the 1994 Group until October 2004. The London School of Economics was also a member until 2006, and the University of Warwick until July 2008. Durham University, University of Exeter, Queen Mary, University of London and University of York left the 1994 group in 2012. All have now joined the Russell Group. In October, the University of St Andrews and University of Bath withdrew from membership of the group. The University of Surrey also announced its intention to leave the group on 6 November 2012. On 19 December 2012 the University of Reading announced that it would cease to participate in the group, although its membership formally ended in July 2013.

==1994 Group position in league tables==

==Governance and management structure==
The 1994 Group was headed by a board made up of the heads of member institutions. The board met formally five times a year. In addition, an annual residential conference took place in the summer where longer-term strategic issues were discussed. The board had responsibility for determining strategy and agreeing all policy papers, position statements and consultation responses, and responsibility for the governance of all joint activity.

The chair was elected by board members for a three-year term of office. Professor Michael Farthing, vice-chancellor of University of Sussex, was elected chair in 2011. The chair was the national spokesperson for the group and represented its interests where a senior representative of the group was required. The chair had overall responsibility for the development and delivery of the communication strategy on behalf of the board.
Previous chairs included: 
1997-2000 Sir Ivor Crewe (Essex);
2000-03 Alisdair Smith (Sussex);
2003-06 Sir David Eastwood (UEA);
2006-09 Sir Steve Smith (Exeter);
2009-12 Paul Wellings CBE (Lancaster);
2012- close Michael Farthing (Sussex). 

The chair was assisted by a Chair&#x27;s Advisory Group (CAG) elected from the board for a three-year period of office (initial membership was staggered to ensure a rolling change of membership). The CAG met on four occasions each year. CAG members had a general brief for assisting the chair in the development of all areas of group policy (including management of the relationship with the Policy Groups). The CAG had a central role in the development of relationships with government, funding bodies, and HE stakeholder organisations.

==Policy groups==
The 1994 Group had three high-level Policy Groups that met three times a year to discuss longer-term strategy and policy issues. The 1994 Group&#x27;s Student Experience Policy Group aimed to identify the key issues surrounding student experience in the HE sector, defining the 1994 Group&#x27;s own position in this context, and identifying potential areas for research and activity in the future. The Research and Enterprise Policy Group aimed to strengthen the research carried out by its members by investigating funding and other issues. The Strategic Planning and Resources Policy Group developed policies and guidelines in response legislative and financial changes affecting the group&#x27;s members.

==See also==
* British university
* List of universities in the United Kingdom

Types of UK university
* Ancient university
* Red brick university
* Plate glass university
* Technological university
* Campus university

International groups of universities
* Association of American Universities
* Group of Eight
* Innovative Research Universities Australia
* U15 Group of Canadian Research Universities
* U15 (German universities)
* Universitas 21

==References==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1024931" start="4" end="14" title="1994 Group" label="1994 Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q590631" start="188" end="201" title="Russell Group" label="Russell Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q590631" start="469" end="482" title="Russell Group" label="Russell Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894508" start="862" end="881" title="University Alliance" label="University Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024681" start="883" end="891" title="million+" label="million+"/>
<link wikidata="Q5615726" start="893" end="900" title="GuildHE" label="GuildHE"/>
<link wikidata="Q590631" start="909" end="922" title="Russell Group" label="Russell Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q4272498" start="1156" end="1216" title="University of Manchester Institute of Science and Technology" label="University of Manchester Institute of Science and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q867530" start="1248" end="1281" title="Victoria University of Manchester" label="Victoria University of Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q230899" start="1294" end="1318" title="University of Manchester" label="University of Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q174570" start="1375" end="1401" title="London School of Economics" label="London School of Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q865528" start="1440" end="1461" title="University of Warwick" label="University of Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q458393" start="1479" end="1496" title="Durham University" label="Durham University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414861" start="1498" end="1518" title="University of Exeter" label="University of Exeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q195668" start="1520" end="1552" title="Queen Mary, University of London" label="Queen Mary, University of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q967165" start="1557" end="1575" title="University of York" label="University of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q590631" start="1629" end="1642" title="Russell Group" label="Russell Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q216273" start="1660" end="1684" title="University of St Andrews" label="University of St Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422458" start="1689" end="1707" title="University of Bath" label="University of Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q546976" start="1751" end="1771" title="University of Surrey" label="University of Surrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432632" start="1864" end="1885" title="University of Reading" label="University of Reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q6099351" start="2997" end="3007" title="Ivor Crewe" label="Ivor Crewe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5233243" start="3062" end="3076" title="David Eastwood" label="David Eastwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7613965" start="3096" end="3107" title="Steve Smith (political scientist)" label="Steve Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q15969857" start="3126" end="3139" title="Paul Wellings" label="Paul Wellings"/>
<link wikidata="Q6830225" start="3169" end="3185" title="Michael Farthing" label="Michael Farthing"/>
<link wikidata="Q918342" start="4480" end="4498" title="British university" label="British university"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746976" start="4501" end="4543" title="List of universities in the United Kingdom" label="List of universities in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667285" start="4570" end="4588" title="Ancient university" label="Ancient university"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202123" start="4591" end="4611" title="Red brick university" label="Red brick university"/>
<link wikidata="Q1902446" start="4614" end="4636" title="Plate glass university" label="Plate glass university"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371037" start="4639" end="4663" title="Technological university" label="Technological university"/>
<link wikidata="Q5028741" start="4666" end="4683" title="Campus university" label="Campus university"/>
<link wikidata="Q743812" start="4724" end="4760" title="Association of American Universities" label="Association of American Universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377311" start="4763" end="4777" title="Group of Eight (Australian universities)" label="Group of Eight"/>
<link wikidata="Q6036279" start="4780" end="4822" title="Innovative Research Universities Australia" label="Innovative Research Universities Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q774093" start="4825" end="4868" title="U15 Group of Canadian Research Universities" label="U15 Group of Canadian Research Universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699438" start="4871" end="4896" title="U15 (German universities)" label="U15 (German universities)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202548" start="4899" end="4913" title="Universitas 21" label="Universitas 21"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="142959" wikidata="Q571959" url="?curid=142959" title="Ribnitz-Damgarten">
<text>Ribnitz-Damgarten () is a town in Mecklenburg-Vorpommern, Germany, situated on Lake Ribnitz (&quot;Ribnitzer See&quot;). Ribnitz-Damgarten is in the west of the district Vorpommern-Rügen.

The border between the historical regions of Mecklenburg and Pomerania goes directly through the town; &quot;Damgarten&quot; is the eastern and Pomeranian part, and &quot;Ribnitz&quot; is the western and Mecklenburgian part.

==Geography==
The town is situated between the two Hanseatic cities Rostock and Stralsund, on the mouth of the river Recknitz. The &quot;Ribnitzer See&quot;, into which the Recknitz empties, is a bay of the &quot;Saaler Bodden&quot; (Bay of Saal). The Saaler Bodden in turn is the south-western end of a chain of bays leading to the Baltic Sea.

Touristically relevant is Ribnitz-Damgarten&#x27;s situation at the southern end of the Fischland, the peninsula dividing the chain of bays from the Baltic Sea.

==History==
The town&#x27;s name derives in the Slavic settlements Rybanis (&quot;ryba&quot; means &quot;fish&quot;) and Damgor (&quot;dǫbǔ&quot; means &quot;oak tree&quot;, &quot;gora&quot; means &quot;hill&quot;), located on opposite sides of the mouth of the Recknitz river.

In ancient times, the Recknitz formed the border between Mecklenburg and Pomerania. At the ford a castle was built about 1200 on the Mecklenburg side, being the precursor of Ribnitz. The Danish princes of Rügen responded by erecting a fortress on the opposite side that later became the town of Damgarten.

Ribnitz as a town is first documented in 1233, documents point to town privileges under Lübeck law being established before 1257. Damgarten was granted such privileges in 1258 by Jaromar II, Duke of Rügen, as &quot;Damechore&quot;.
In 1934, Walter Bachmann moved his airplane repair and production business from Rostock to Ribnitz. The company was specialized in seaplanes, for which nearness to open water was essential. The Walter-Bachmann-Flugzeugbau KG, as it was later called, turned the fisher&#x27;s and farmer&#x27;s town into a seat of war-essential production. The influx of workers for the factory, among other factors, increased the population of Ribnitz from 4772 in 1930 to 8925 in 1942.

At the same time as the Bachmann works in Pütnitz, near Damgarten, an air force base was built. Like the Bachmann works for Ribnitz, so did they increase Damgarten&#x27;s population, which doubled from 1933 to 1939. Primarily it was a training center for seaplane personnel. After World War II, this base became one of the major deployments of the Soviet Air Forces in East Germany. 16th Guards Fighter Aviation Division of 16th Air Army was headquartered at the base from the 1950s until 1993.

On the 5th of July 1950, the former towns of Ribnitz and Damgarten were merged. As both towns&#x27; councils had previously voted against the merger, it can be supposed that this decision was made under political pressure.

==Amber Town==

Ribnitz-Damgarten calls itself the &quot;Bernsteinstadt&quot; (Amber Town), due to its history of manufacturing jewelry and other things from amber. With the adoption of said title came also the introduction of a new town logo, the &quot;Bernsteinlogo&quot;, which is now used on official correspondence. It can also be seen on the &quot;Stadtblatt&quot;, an informational paper issued by the town council. The coat of arms shown in the information box is based on the blazon found in the &quot;Hauptsatzung&quot; (main charter) of Ribnitz-Damgarten.

Today, amber is processed in the so-called &quot;Schaumanufaktur&quot; (Show Manufacture), where its processing can be watched by visitors. The resulting jewelry can also be bought. A number of shops sell amber and handicraft made of amber.

Ribnitz is home to the German Amber Museum, which is seated in the former Poor Clare Convent. This museum contains a permanent exhibition that illustrates the origins and the applications of amber. Contemporary pieces of art made of amber are showcased in a separate room. A part of the museum is dedicated to the town&#x27;s history.

==Sights==

===In Ribnitz===
* &quot;Marienkirche&quot; (Saint Mary&#x27;s Church, 1233)
* &quot;Rostocker Tor&quot; (Rostock Town Gate, 1290)
* &quot;Klarissenkloster&quot; (Poor Clare Convent, 1323)
* German Amber Museum

===In Damgarten===
* Church &quot;St. Bartholomäus&quot; (St. Bartholomew)
* &quot;Bernstein-Schaumanufaktur&quot; (Amber Show Manufacture)

;Gallery
==International relations==
Ribnitz-Damgarten is twinned with:
* Buxtehude, Germany
* Sławno, Poland

==Notes==
==External links==

* Town of Ribnitz-Damgarten
* The German Amber Museum&#x27;s homepage
*Google Map of Ribnitz, Damgarten and Pütnitz</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q571959" start="0" end="17" title="Ribnitz-Damgarten" label="Ribnitz-Damgarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196" start="34" end="56" title="Mecklenburg-Vorpommern" label="Mecklenburg-Vorpommern"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="58" end="65" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q896801" start="79" end="91" title="Lake Ribnitz" label="Lake Ribnitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909" start="170" end="186" title="Vorpommern-Rügen" label="Vorpommern-Rügen"/>
<link wikidata="Q109057" start="234" end="245" title="Mecklenburg" label="Mecklenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q104520" start="250" end="259" title="Pomerania" label="Pomerania"/>
<link wikidata="Q42908" start="466" end="475" title="Hanseatic League" label="Hanseatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2861" start="483" end="490" title="Rostock" label="Rostock"/>
<link wikidata="Q4065" start="495" end="504" title="Stralsund" label="Stralsund"/>
<link wikidata="Q696745" start="532" end="540" title="Recknitz" label="Recknitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="748" end="758" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q702188" start="849" end="858" title="Fischland-Darss-Zingst" label="Fischland"/>
<link wikidata="Q696745" start="1185" end="1193" title="Recknitz" label="Recknitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q109057" start="1259" end="1270" title="Mecklenburg" label="Mecklenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q104520" start="1275" end="1284" title="Pomerania" label="Pomerania"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="1389" end="1395" title="Denmark" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237" start="1407" end="1412" title="Rügen" label="Rügen"/>
<link wikidata="Q28942" start="1575" end="1590" title="town privileges" label="town privileges"/>
<link wikidata="Q686235" start="1597" end="1607" title="Lübeck law" label="Lübeck law"/>
<link wikidata="Q658147" start="1688" end="1698" title="Jaromar II, Prince of Rügen" label="Jaromar II"/>
<link wikidata="Q571428" start="1708" end="1713" title="Principality of Rügen" label="Rügen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2861" start="1821" end="1828" title="Rostock" label="Rostock"/>
<link wikidata="Q115940" start="1872" end="1880" title="seaplane" label="seaplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2493" end="2505" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q921432" start="2560" end="2577" title="Soviet Air Forces" label="Soviet Air Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="2581" end="2593" title="German Democratic Republic" label="East Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q4029031" start="2595" end="2632" title="16th Guards Fighter Aviation Division" label="16th Guards Fighter Aviation Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4029028" start="2636" end="2649" title="16th Air Army" label="16th Air Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q25381" start="3090" end="3095" title="amber" label="amber"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="3359" end="3371" title="coat of arms" label="coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q120083528" start="3417" end="3423" title="blazon" label="blazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q733658" start="3816" end="3834" title="Order of Poor Ladies" label="Poor Clare Convent"/>
<link wikidata="Q43982" start="4360" end="4375" title="Bartholomew" label="St. Bartholomew"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="4501" end="4508" title="town twinning" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q14868" start="4517" end="4526" title="Buxtehude" label="Buxtehude"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="4528" end="4535" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q161967" start="4538" end="4544" title="Sławno" label="Sławno"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="4546" end="4552" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="142961" wikidata="Q408044" url="?curid=142961" title="Soman">
<text>Soman (or GD, EA 1210, Zoman, PFMP, A-255, systematic name: &quot;O&quot;-pinacolyl methylphosphonofluoridate) is an extremely toxic chemical substance. It is a nerve agent, interfering with normal functioning of the mammalian nervous system by inhibiting the enzyme cholinesterase. It is an inhibitor of both acetylcholinesterase and butyrylcholinesterase. As a chemical weapon, it is classified as a weapon of mass destruction by the United Nations according to UN Resolution 687. Its production is strictly controlled, and stockpiling is outlawed by the Chemical Weapons Convention of 1993 where it is classified as a Schedule 1 substance. Soman was the third of the so-called &quot;G-series&quot; nerve agents to be discovered along with GA (tabun), GB (sarin), and GF (cyclosarin).

When pure, soman is a volatile, corrosive, and colorless liquid with a faint odor like that of mothballs or rotten fruit. More commonly, it is a yellow to brown color and has a strong odor described as similar to camphor. The LCt50 for soman is 70 mg·min/m3 in humans. 

GD can be thickened for use as a chemical spray using an acryloid copolymer. It can also be deployed as a binary chemical weapon; its precursor chemicals are methylphosphonyl difluoride and a mixture of pinacolyl alcohol and an amine.

== History ==
After World War I, during which mustard gas and phosgene were used as chemical warfare agents, the 1925 Geneva Protocol was signed in an attempt to ban chemical warfare. Nevertheless, research into chemical warfare agents and the use of them continued. In 1936 a new, more dangerous chemical agent was discovered when Gerhard Schrader of IG Farben in Germany isolated tabun (named GA for German Agent A by the United States), the first nerve agent, while developing new insecticides. This discovery was followed by the isolation of sarin (designated GB by the United States) in 1938, also discovered by Schrader.

During World War II, research into nerve agents continued in the United States and Germany. In summer 1944, soman, a colorless liquid with a camphor odor (designated GD by the United States), was developed by the Germans. Soman proved to be even more toxic than tabun and sarin. Nobel Laureate Richard Kuhn together with Konrad Henkel discovered soman during research into the pharmacology of tabun and sarin at the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Medical Research at Heidelberg. This research was commissioned by the German Army. Soman was produced in small quantities at a pilot plant at the IG Farben factory in Ludwigshafen. It was never used in World War II.

Producing or stockpiling soman was banned by the 1993 Chemical Weapons Convention. When the convention entered force, the parties declared worldwide stockpiles of 9,057 tonnes of soman. The stockpiles were destroyed by 2018.

The crystal structure of soman complexed with acetylcholinesterase was determined by Millard et al. in 1999 by X-ray crystallography: 1som. Other solved acetylcholinesterase structures with soman bound to them include 2wfz, 2wg0 and 2wg1.

==Structure and reactivity==

Soman (C(±)P(±)-soman) has four stereoisomers, each with a different toxicity, though largely similar. The stereoisomers are C(+)P(+)-soman, C(+)P(−)-soman C(−)P(−)-soman and C(−)P(+)-soman.

Soman has a phosphonyl group with a fluoride and a (large) hydrocarbon covalently bound to it. The structure is thus similar to that of sarin, which has only a smaller hydrocarbon group attached (isopropyl). Because of the similarity between the chemical structures, the reactivity of the two compounds is almost the same. Soman and sarin will both react using the phospho oxygen group, which can bind to amino acids like serine.

== Synthesis ==
The manufacture of soman is very similar to the manufacture of sarin. The difference is that the isopropanol from the sarin processes is replaced with pinacolyl alcohol:

Soman is synthesized by reacting pinacolyl alcohol with methylphosphonyl difluoride. The result of this reaction is the forming of soman which is described as “colorless liquid with a somewhat fruity odor.” The low vapor pressure of soman will also produce the volatile gas form of soman. Also, the acid hydrogen fluoride will form due to the elimination of fluoride and a proton. This acid is indirectly dangerous to humans. Skin contact with hydrogen fluoride will cause an immediate reaction with water which produces hydrofluoric acid.

== Mechanisms of action==

Soman is an organophosphorus nerve agent with a mechanism of action similar to tabun. Nerve agents inhibit acetylcholine esterase (AChE) by forming an adduct with the enzyme via a serine residue on that enzyme. These adducts may be decomposed hydrolytically or, for example, by the action of some oximes and thereby regenerate the enzyme. A second reaction type, one in which the enzyme–organophosphate (OP) complex undergoes a subsequent reaction, is usually described as &quot;aging&quot;. Once the enzyme–OP complex has aged it is no longer regenerated by the common, oxime reactivators. The rate of this process is dependent on the OP. Soman is an OP that stimulates the rate of aging most rapidly decreasing the half-life to just a few minutes.

AChE is an enzyme involved with neurotransmission. Because of the severe decrease of the half-life of this enzyme, neurotransmission is abolished in a matter of minutes.

==Metabolism==
Once taken up in the human body, soman not only inhibits AChE, but it is also a substrate for other esterases. Reaction of soman with these esterases allows for the detoxication of the compound. No metabolic toxification reactions are known for soman.

Soman can be hydrolyzed by a so-called A-esterase, more specific a diisopropylfluorophosphatase. This esterase, also called somanase, reacts with the anhydride bond between phosphorus and fluorine and accounts for the hydrolysis of the fluoride. Somanase also hydrolyses the methyl group of soman resulting in the formation of pinacolyl methylphosphonic acid (PMPA), which is a less potent AChE inhibitor.

Soman can also bind to other esterases, e.g., AChE, cholinesterase (ChE) and carboxylesterases (CarbE). In this binding, soman loses its fluoride. After binding to AChE or ChE soman also loses its phosphoryl group, leading to the formation of methylphosphonic acid (MPA). Binding to CarbE reduce the total concentration of soman in the blood, thus resulting in a lower toxicity. Furthermore, CarbE are involved in the detoxication by hydrolysing soman to PMPA. So CarbE account for the detoxication of soman in two ways.

The importance of the detoxication of soman after exposure was illustrated in experiments of Fonnum and Sterri (1981). They reported that only 5% of LD50 inhibited AChE in rats, resulting in acute toxic effects. This shows that metabolic reactions accounted for the detoxification of the remaining 95% of the dose.

==Signs and symptoms==
As soman is closely related to compounds such as sarin, indications for a soman poisoning are relatively similar. One of the first observable signs of a soman poisoning is miosis. Some, but not all of the later indications are vomiting, extreme muscle pain and peripheral nervous system problems. Those symptoms show as soon as 10 minutes after exposure and may last for many days.

In addition to the direct toxic effects on the nervous system, people exposed to soman may experience long-term effects, most of which are psychological. Subjects who were exposed to a small dose of soman suffered severe toxic effects; once treated, the subjects often developed depression, had antisocial thoughts, were withdrawn and subdued, slept restlessly and had bad dreams. These symptoms lasted six months after exposure but disappeared without lasting damage.

==Toxicity and efficacy==
The LC50 of soman in air is estimated to be 70 mg min per m3. Compared with the LC50 value for a rat, the human lethal concentration is much lower (954.3 mg min/m3 versus 70 mg min/m3). For compounds such as soman, which may also be used as a weapon, often a fraction of the LC50 dose is where the first effects appear. Miosis is one of the first symptoms of soman intoxication and can be seen in doses of less than 1% of the LC50.

==Effects on animals==
Experiments have been done in which rats were exposed to soman to test if behavioral effects could be seen at low doses without generating overt symptoms. Exposure of the rats to soman in a dose of less than 3 percent of the LD50 caused alterations of the behavior. The active avoidance of the exposed rats was less than the avoidance of non-exposed rats (two-way shuttlebox experiment). Also the motor coordination (hurdle-stepping task), open field behavior and active as well as passive avoidance behavior were affected. One can conclude that rats that are exposed to soman performed with less success in tasks that require motor activity as well as the function of higher structures of the central nervous system (CNS) on the same time. In this, soman has a predominantly central effect.

The knowledge of the effects of low doses of soman and other choline esterase inhibitors on rats could possibly be used to explain the relatively high incidence of airplane accidents due to errors of agricultural pilots. If this knowledge could be applied to humans, one could explain this high incidence with depressed choline esterase activity due to exposure to pesticides. It is not known whether the extrapolation from rats to humans can be made.

== References ==
==External links==
* United States Senate, 103d Congress, 2d Session (May 25, 1994). Material Safety Data Sheet -- Lethal Nerve Agents Somain (GD and Thickened GD) (). Retrieved Nov. 6, 2004.
* AChE inhibitors and substrates in Proteopedia
* 2wfz in Proteopedia 
* 2wg0 in Proteopedia
* 2wg1 in Proteopedia
* 1som in Proteopedia
* https://somantoxicologia.wixsite.com/meusite </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q408044" start="0" end="5" title="Soman" label="Soman"/>
<link wikidata="Q408044" start="10" end="12" title="Soman" label="GD"/>
<link wikidata="Q408044" start="14" end="21" title="Soman" label="EA 1210"/>
<link wikidata="Q408044" start="23" end="28" title="Soman" label="Zoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q408044" start="30" end="34" title="Soman" label="PFMP"/>
<link wikidata="Q408044" start="36" end="41" title="Soman" label="A-255"/>
<link wikidata="Q2612896" start="161" end="172" title="nerve agent" label="nerve agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q9404" start="227" end="241" title="nervous system" label="nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q415635" start="267" end="281" title="cholinesterase" label="cholinesterase"/>
<link wikidata="Q22676679" start="310" end="330" title="acetylcholinesterase" label="acetylcholinesterase"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679015" start="335" end="356" title="butyrylcholinesterase" label="butyrylcholinesterase"/>
<link wikidata="Q3639228" start="363" end="378" title="chemical weapon" label="chemical weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q49394" start="402" end="428" title="weapon of mass destruction" label="weapon of mass destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="436" end="450" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355527" start="464" end="481" title="UN Resolution 687" label="UN Resolution 687"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090508" start="487" end="497" title="Chemical weapon proliferation" label="production"/>
<link wikidata="Q547896" start="557" end="584" title="Chemical Weapons Convention" label="Chemical Weapons Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q4431359" start="621" end="641" title="List of Schedule 1 substances (CWC)" label="Schedule 1 substance"/>
<link wikidata="Q143289" start="742" end="744" title="tabun (nerve agent)" label="GA"/>
<link wikidata="Q187695" start="754" end="756" title="sarin" label="GB"/>
<link wikidata="Q418763" start="770" end="772" title="cyclosarin" label="GF"/>
<link wikidata="Q908990" start="810" end="818" title="Volatility (chemistry)" label="volatile"/>
<link wikidata="Q181559" start="1001" end="1008" title="camphor" label="camphor"/>
<link wikidata="Q711849" start="1014" end="1019" title="LD50" label="LCt50"/>
<link wikidata="Q911138" start="1069" end="1078" title="thickening" label="thickened"/>
<link wikidata="Q864110" start="1165" end="1187" title="binary chemical weapon" label="binary chemical weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331638" start="1217" end="1244" title="methylphosphonyl difluoride" label="methylphosphonyl difluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q4026741" start="1262" end="1279" title="pinacolyl alcohol" label="pinacolyl alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q167198" start="1287" end="1292" title="amine" label="amine"/>
<link wikidata="Q81166" start="1341" end="1352" title="mustard gas" label="mustard gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q189090" start="1357" end="1365" title="phosgene" label="phosgene"/>
<link wikidata="Q605626" start="1413" end="1428" title="Geneva Protocol" label="Geneva Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q77539" start="1627" end="1643" title="Gerhard Schrader" label="Gerhard Schrader"/>
<link wikidata="Q156152" start="1647" end="1656" title="IG Farben" label="IG Farben"/>
<link wikidata="Q143289" start="1677" end="1682" title="Tabun (nerve agent)" label="tabun"/>
<link wikidata="Q181322" start="1779" end="1790" title="insecticide" label="insecticide"/>
<link wikidata="Q187695" start="1841" end="1846" title="sarin" label="sarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q78483" start="2217" end="2229" title="Richard Kuhn" label="Richard Kuhn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664078" start="2244" end="2257" title="Konrad Henkel" label="Konrad Henkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2966" start="2388" end="2398" title="Heidelberg" label="Heidelberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q156152" start="2514" end="2523" title="IG Farben" label="IG Farben"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910" start="2535" end="2547" title="Ludwigshafen" label="Ludwigshafen"/>
<link wikidata="Q547896" start="2639" end="2666" title="Chemical Weapons Convention" label="Chemical Weapons Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q22676679" start="2857" end="2877" title="acetylcholinesterase" label="acetylcholinesterase"/>
<link wikidata="Q47455153" start="3113" end="3126" title="Stereoisomerism" label="stereoisomers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16392" start="3817" end="3828" title="isopropanol" label="isopropanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4026741" start="3871" end="3888" title="pinacolyl alcohol" label="pinacolyl alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4026741" start="3924" end="3941" title="pinacolyl alcohol" label="pinacolyl alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331638" start="3947" end="3974" title="methylphosphonyl difluoride" label="methylphosphonyl difluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468" start="4195" end="4212" title="hydrogen fluoride" label="hydrogen fluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q209569" start="4412" end="4429" title="hydrofluoric acid" label="hydrofluoric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q22676679" start="4566" end="4588" title="acetylcholine esterase" label="acetylcholine esterase"/>
<link wikidata="Q418750" start="6085" end="6093" title="esterase" label="esterase"/>
<link wikidata="Q22676679" start="6102" end="6106" title="Acetylcholinesterase" label="AChE"/>
<link wikidata="Q415635" start="6108" end="6122" title="cholinesterase" label="cholinesterase"/>
<link wikidata="Q409840" start="6133" end="6149" title="carboxylesterase" label="carboxylesterase"/>
<link wikidata="Q15634110" start="6299" end="6320" title="methylphosphonic acid" label="methylphosphonic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q103135" start="6490" end="6501" title="Hydrolysis" label="hydrolysing"/>
<link wikidata="Q711849" start="6727" end="6731" title="Median lethal dose" label="LD50"/>
<link wikidata="Q596899" start="7089" end="7095" title="miosis" label="miosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q711849" start="7800" end="7804" title="Median lethal dose" label="LC50"/>
<link wikidata="Q596899" start="8116" end="8122" title="Miosis" label="Miosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407965" start="9743" end="9754" title="Proteopedia" label="Proteopedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407965" start="9765" end="9776" title="Proteopedia" label="Proteopedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407965" start="9788" end="9799" title="Proteopedia" label="Proteopedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407965" start="9810" end="9821" title="Proteopedia" label="Proteopedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407965" start="9832" end="9843" title="Proteopedia" label="Proteopedia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="142962" wikidata="Q674192" url="?curid=142962" title="Lester Patrick Trophy">
<text>The Lester Patrick Trophy has been presented by the National Hockey League and USA Hockey since 1966 to honor a recipient&#x27;s contribution to ice hockey in the United States. It is considered a non-NHL trophy because it may be awarded to players, coaches, officials, and other personnel outside the NHL. The trophy is named after Lester Patrick (1883–1960), player and longtime coach of the New York Rangers, who was a developer of ice hockey.

==History==
The Lester Patrick Trophy was presented by the New York Rangers in 1966. It honors the late Lester Patrick, who was a general manager and coach of the club. It is presented annually for &quot;outstanding service to hockey in the United States&quot;. Players, coaches, referees, and executives are eligible to receive the trophy, and are chosen by a committee including the National Hockey League (NHL) commissioner and a governor, a representative of the New York Rangers; and a previous inductee into the Hockey Hall of Fame&#x27;s builder section, Hockey Hall of Fame player&#x27;s section, U.S. Hockey Hall of Fame, NHL Broadcasters&#x27; Association, and the Professional Hockey Writers&#x27; Association. The trophy&#x27;s first recipient was Jack Adams.

108 individuals, and three teams, have been given the trophy. The trophy has been given to women on two occasions; in 1999, the 1998 U.S. Olympic Women&#x27;s Ice Hockey Team was presented the trophy along with Harry Sinden, and in 2007, Cammi Granato individually won the trophy. Granato was also a member of the 1998 U.S. Olympic Women&#x27;s Ice Hockey Team that received the trophy in 1998.

==Recipients==
&quot;† - Trophy was awarded posthumously.&quot;




==Notes and references==

;General
*
;Specific</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q674192" start="4" end="25" title="Lester Patrick Trophy" label="Lester Patrick Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="52" end="74" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760180" start="79" end="89" title="USA Hockey" label="USA Hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="145" end="155" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="163" end="176" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366313" start="333" end="347" title="Lester Patrick" label="Lester Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q188984" start="394" end="410" title="New York Rangers" label="New York Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q188984" start="507" end="523" title="New York Rangers" label="New York Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366313" start="552" end="566" title="Lester Patrick" label="Lester Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="833" end="855" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136687" start="966" end="985" title="Hockey Hall of Fame" label="Hockey Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="993" end="1008" title="List of members of the Hockey Hall of Fame#Builders" label="builder section"/>
<link wikidata="Q974497" start="1123" end="1168" title="Professional Hockey Writers&amp;#x27; Association" label="Professional Hockey Writers&amp;#x27; Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354191" start="1208" end="1218" title="Jack Adams" label="Jack Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586821" start="1432" end="1444" title="Harry Sinden" label="Harry Sinden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2935186" start="1459" end="1472" title="Cammi Granato" label="Cammi Granato"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="142964" wikidata="Q1122871" url="?curid=142964" title="Cowboys from Hell">
<text>Cowboys from Hell is the fifth studio album and major label debut by American heavy metal band Pantera, released on July 24, 1990, by Atco Records. It marked the first of many collaborations with producer Terry Date. This was also the album where Pantera fully abandoned the glam metal style of their previous albums in favor of a heavier sound. It has been recognized as one of the first ever groove metal albums.

==Writing and recording==
Writing sessions for &quot;Cowboys from Hell&quot; took place throughout 1988 and 1989. Seeking a record label to release their album, the group received firm contract offers from both Epic and Roadracer, who had expressed some interest in signing them. However, they were ultimately recommended to music producers with a &quot;more commercial type&quot; of approach, as explained by drummer Vinnie Paul. After being turned down &quot;28 times by every major label on the face of the Earth&quot;, Atco Records representative Mark Ross was asked by his boss, Derek Shulman (who was interested in signing Pantera), to see the band perform after Hurricane Hugo stranded him in Texas. Ross was so impressed by the band&#x27;s performance that he called his boss that night, suggesting that Pantera be signed to the label.

Ross on the performance:

&quot;By the end of the first song, my jaw was on the floor. The sonic power of it all — the attitude and the musicianship — blew me away. Basically, you had to be an idiot to not think they&#x27;re amazing. I mean, how could you see these guys and not think, &#x27;Holy shit!&#x27;?&quot;

Atco Records accepted but the band had to wait a six month period before they commenced recording at Pantego Sound Studio in Pantego, Texas. Accounts vary as to how long the recording sessions of &quot;Cowboys from Hell&quot; lasted; bassist Rex Brown stated in a 2010 interview with &quot;Metal Hammer&quot; that the recording sessions took place from February to April 1990, however vocalist Phil Anselmo has also claimed that the album was recorded in 1989. Pantera&#x27;s initial choice as the producer for &quot;Cowboys from Hell&quot; was Max Norman based on his work with Ozzy Osbourne. Norman, who flew to Houston to watch the band perform, initially agreed to work on the album, but right before the recording sessions started, he was offered to produce Lynch Mob&#x27;s debut album &quot;Wicked Sensation&quot; instead. Pantera then proposed Terry Date to produce the album on the strength of his work with Soundgarden, Metal Church and Overkill, the latter of whose latest album at the time &quot;The Years of Decay&quot; had influenced Dimebag Darrell&#x27;s guitar tone, as well as the band&#x27;s transition away from glam/traditional heavy metal to thrash/groove metal.

Pantera adopted a new sound and attitude, and the writing of what would become &quot;Cowboys from Hell&quot; saw the band exploring darker subject matters, while the guitar would be notably heavier. Influences and inspirations to the making of the album, as well as its musical direction, were Black Sabbath, Judas Priest, ZZ Top, Metallica, Slayer, Megadeth, Anthrax, Testament, Overkill, Faith No More, King&#x27;s X, Soundgarden, Minor Threat, Mercyful Fate, Savatage, Voivod and then-upcoming band Exhorder. The band recorded a self-produced demo album in 1989 which featured 11 tracks, 10 of which would make the album cut. &quot;The last tracks to be written were &quot;Primal Concrete Sledge&quot; and &quot;Clash with Reality&quot; whilst a song titled &quot;The Will to Survive&quot; was discarded early in the recording sessions.&quot; During recording sessions, the band chose an unorthodox method: Paul recorded the drum tracks first, then Darrell recorded the guitar, and Brown recorded the bass with the guitars only. This resulted in a tighter sound; slight inaccuracies were fixed by manually editing the tapes.

The band were feeling confident about their material and themselves, finally feeling that they were making the kind of album they believed in. One key track to emerge during the writing was &quot;Cemetery Gates&quot;, a seven-minute power ballad that would be the first song to show both their diversity and Anselmo&#x27;s vocal range; the acoustic intro was written last by Brown. Although they had already recorded four albums prior to &quot;Cowboys from Hell&quot;, the members of Pantera have since acknowledged this as their official debut album, working with a professional producer and a major label for the first time and creating music that was not simply stealing from other similar bands in an attempt to attract attention.

==Artwork==

The cover art depicts the band in a quaint Western saloon. In reality, it is a 1910 photo of the &quot;Cosmopolitan Saloon&quot; in Telluride, Colorado, with the bandmembers pasted over it. Diamond Darrell is pictured in the center playing guitar, while Vinnie Paul is standing to his right counting money, Rex Brown is leaning against the counter top and Phil Anselmo is shown jumping in the air to Brown&#x27;s left. Anselmo states that he jumped off a bar stool to get high up in the air and that it took him about ten takes until the cameramen got the shot of the desired style.

==Release and reception==

The album was released on July 24, 1990, and was available on tape, CD, vinyl and a limited edition version (same album but in a long box). 

===Commercial performance===
Despite being the band&#x27;s commercial breakthrough, &quot;Cowboys from Hell&quot; sold slowly and steadily for most of the 1990s, first charting on &quot;Billboard&quot; in 1992, two years after its release. The album did not receive platinum certification in the United States until July 1997. It has since gone on to attain a double platinum (2,000,000 units) certification in the U.S. as well as gold status in the U.K. for sales of 100,000.

As far as specific charting, &quot;Cowboys from Hell&quot; reached No. 27 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Top Heatseekers chart in 1992, and in March 1995, entered the Swedish Charts for one week at No. 46.

===Critical reception===
&quot;Cowboys from Hell&quot; is widely considered one of Pantera&#x27;s best albums, as well as one of the greatest metal albums of all time. It has been praised by most critics, as it would prove to be extremely influential in the development of groove metal in the 1990s. The album is also credited for reviving heavy metal music at a time when it was diminishing in relevance. &quot;Cowboys from Hell&quot; would inspire a generation of musicians, particularly guitarists. IGN named &quot;Cowboys from Hell&quot; the 19th-most-influential heavy metal album of all time.

They said of the album:

AllMusic said of the album:

==Reissue==
On September 14, 2010, a 20th anniversary edition was released with a remastered mix from the original analog recordings. The expanded edition features a bonus CD of previously unreleased live recordings and the &quot;Alive and Hostile EP&quot;. The deluxe edition features an additional third CD with the previously unreleased demo track &quot;The Will to Survive&quot; (parts of the song were later used in the song &quot;This Love&quot; from &quot;Vulgar Display of Power&quot;) along with demo versions of ten songs from the original album.

The third disc of the deluxe set, &quot;Cowboys from Hell: The Demos&quot;, was released as a separate limited edition vinyl LP at the same time. It was exclusively available at Metal Club record stores. The 2010 reissue of the album managed to reach No. 117 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 and No. 8 on Catalog Albums, selling 4,200.

==Legacy==

The album was ranked No. 11 on the October 2006 issue of &quot;Guitar World&quot; magazine&#x27;s list of the greatest 100 guitar albums of all time. It was ranked the 85th-best heavy metal album of all time by Metal-Rules.com. IGN named &quot;Cowboys from Hell&quot; the 19th-most-influential heavy metal album of all time. It is also credited as &quot;defining&quot; groove metal. The album has also been praised by Ozzy Osbourne, who in 2017 listed it among his ten favorite metal albums.

==Touring==
Pantera toured for nearly two years in support of &quot;Cowboys from Hell&quot;. The band embarked on their first national tour in the summer of 1990, supporting Exodus and Suicidal Tendencies. In 1991, Rob Halford performed with the band onstage, which led Pantera (along with Annihilator) to open for Judas Priest on its first show in Europe. They also opened for bands like Skid Row, Sepultura, Fates Warning, Prong, Mind Over Four, Morbid Angel, White Zombie and Sanctuary, and co-headlined a North American tour with Wrathchild America. The band eventually landed a billing for the Monsters of Rock festival with AC/DC, Mötley Crüe, Metallica and The Black Crowes in September 1991, where they played to a crowd of over 500,000 in celebration of the new freedom of performing Western music in the former Soviet Union shortly before its collapse three months later.

==Track listing==
===Disc 2: Expanded Edition bonus CD===

===Disc 3: &quot;Cowboys from Hell: The Demos&quot;===
Only available on the &#x27;Deluxe&#x27; and &#x27;Ultimate&#x27; editions of the album.
==&quot;Cowboys from Hell: The Demos&quot;==
The demos were recorded in 1989 and re-released on Black Friday 2010. Copies were limited to 3,000 180-gram pressings, with the vinyl including the custom cover and demos of the original tracks, as well as the previously unreleased demo cut &quot;The Will to Survive&quot;.

=== Track listing ===

Note
*Demos of the album&#x27;s tracks were also released in 2010, in the 20th anniversary edition of &quot;Cowboys from Hell&quot;, but with a different track listing.

==Personnel==
Pantera
*Phil Anselmo – vocals
*Diamond Darrell – guitars
*Rex – bass, acoustic guitar and piano (&quot;Cemetery Gates&quot;)
*Vinnie Paul – drums

Technical
*Terry Date – producer, engineer, mixing
*Pantera – co-producer, mixing
*Matt Lane – assistant engineer
*Matt Gililland – assistant engineer
*Howie Weinberg – audio mastering

==Charts==


==Certifications==

|-

==References==
== External links==
*Complete Guide to Pantera &#x27;Cowboys From Hell&#x27; at Ultimate-Guitar.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="78" end="89" title="heavy metal music" label="heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q180880" start="95" end="102" title="Pantera" label="Pantera"/>
<link wikidata="Q585643" start="134" end="146" title="Atco Records" label="Atco Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q30567" start="205" end="215" title="Terry Date" label="Terry Date"/>
<link wikidata="Q188539" start="275" end="285" title="glam metal" label="glam metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q241662" start="394" end="406" title="groove metal" label="groove metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q216364" start="627" end="631" title="Epic Records" label="Epic"/>
<link wikidata="Q380531" start="834" end="845" title="Vinnie Paul" label="Vinnie Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200131" start="1000" end="1013" title="Derek Shulman" label="Derek Shulman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638615" start="1085" end="1099" title="Hurricane Hugo" label="Hurricane Hugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q978239" start="1703" end="1717" title="Pantego, Texas" label="Pantego, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q465196" start="1820" end="1829" title="Rex Brown" label="Rex Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q248283" start="1868" end="1880" title="Metal Hammer" label="Metal Hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q314535" start="1972" end="1984" title="Phil Anselmo" label="Phil Anselmo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857303" start="2123" end="2133" title="Max Norman" label="Max Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q133151" start="2157" end="2170" title="Ozzy Osbourne" label="Ozzy Osbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107729" start="2341" end="2350" title="Lynch Mob (band)" label="Lynch Mob"/>
<link wikidata="Q4019668" start="2376" end="2392" title="Wicked Sensation" label="Wicked Sensation"/>
<link wikidata="Q30567" start="2430" end="2440" title="Terry Date" label="Terry Date"/>
<link wikidata="Q174817" start="2495" end="2506" title="Soundgarden" label="Soundgarden"/>
<link wikidata="Q212448" start="2508" end="2520" title="Metal Church" label="Metal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q648949" start="2525" end="2533" title="Overkill (band)" label="Overkill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933325" start="2586" end="2604" title="The Years of Decay" label="The Years of Decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q311050" start="2626" end="2641" title="Dimebag Darrell" label="Dimebag Darrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q188539" start="2710" end="2714" title="glam metal" label="glam"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="2715" end="2738" title="heavy metal music" label="traditional heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q483352" start="2742" end="2748" title="thrash metal" label="thrash"/>
<link wikidata="Q241662" start="2749" end="2761" title="groove metal" label="groove metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q47670" start="3058" end="3071" title="Black Sabbath" label="Black Sabbath"/>
<link wikidata="Q83468" start="3073" end="3085" title="Judas Priest" label="Judas Priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q136591" start="3087" end="3093" title="ZZ Top" label="ZZ Top"/>
<link wikidata="Q15920" start="3095" end="3104" title="Metallica" label="Metallica"/>
<link wikidata="Q131231" start="3106" end="3112" title="Slayer" label="Slayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q83431" start="3114" end="3122" title="Megadeth" label="Megadeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q109871" start="3124" end="3131" title="Anthrax (American band)" label="Anthrax"/>
<link wikidata="Q309312" start="3133" end="3142" title="Testament (band)" label="Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q320499" start="3154" end="3167" title="Faith No More" label="Faith No More"/>
<link wikidata="Q175514" start="3169" end="3182" title="King&amp;#x27;s X" label="King&amp;#x27;s X"/>
<link wikidata="Q81509" start="3197" end="3209" title="Minor Threat" label="Minor Threat"/>
<link wikidata="Q647370" start="3211" end="3224" title="Mercyful Fate" label="Mercyful Fate"/>
<link wikidata="Q830598" start="3226" end="3234" title="Savatage" label="Savatage"/>
<link wikidata="Q845926" start="3236" end="3242" title="Voivod (band)" label="Voivod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383759" start="3266" end="3274" title="Exhorder" label="Exhorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478754" start="4089" end="4103" title="Cemetery Gates (Pantera song)" label="Cemetery Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077388" start="4126" end="4138" title="power ballad" label="power ballad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422401" start="4685" end="4699" title="Western saloon" label="Western saloon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641728" start="4774" end="4793" title="Telluride, Colorado" label="Telluride, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q311050" start="4832" end="4847" title="Dimebag Darrell" label="Diamond Darrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q19754079" start="5581" end="5590" title="Billboard charts" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q241365" start="5661" end="5683" title="platinum certification" label="platinum certification"/>
<link wikidata="Q241365" start="5826" end="5830" title="Gold certification" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q19754079" start="5954" end="5975" title="Billboard charts" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303631" start="5976" end="5991" title="Top Heatseekers" label="Top Heatseekers"/>
<link wikidata="Q216537" start="6038" end="6052" title="Sverigetopplistan" label="Swedish Charts"/>
<link wikidata="Q241662" start="6351" end="6363" title="groove metal" label="groove metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q207708" start="6580" end="6583" title="IGN" label="IGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="6703" end="6711" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971087" start="6814" end="6822" title="remaster" label="remaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q17085328" start="6825" end="6828" title="audio mixing (recorded music)" label="mix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090890" start="7168" end="7177" title="This Love (Pantera song)" label="This Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q259657" start="7195" end="7218" title="Vulgar Display of Power" label="Vulgar Display of Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="7556" end="7581" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q5051302" start="7595" end="7609" title="Catalog (album)" label="Catalog Albums"/>
<link wikidata="Q930471" start="7702" end="7714" title="Guitar World" label="Guitar World"/>
<link wikidata="Q6822692" start="7850" end="7865" title="Metal-Rules.com" label="Metal-Rules.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q207708" start="7867" end="7870" title="IGN" label="IGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q241662" start="8008" end="8020" title="groove metal" label="groove metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q133151" start="8057" end="8070" title="Ozzy Osbourne" label="Ozzy Osbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q728170" start="8306" end="8312" title="Exodus (band)" label="Exodus"/>
<link wikidata="Q899341" start="8317" end="8336" title="Suicidal Tendencies" label="Suicidal Tendencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q271576" start="8347" end="8358" title="Rob Halford" label="Rob Halford"/>
<link wikidata="Q567086" start="8422" end="8433" title="Annihilator (band)" label="Annihilator"/>
<link wikidata="Q83468" start="8447" end="8459" title="Judas Priest" label="Judas Priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q461269" start="8521" end="8529" title="Skid Row (American band)" label="Skid Row"/>
<link wikidata="Q239074" start="8531" end="8540" title="Sepultura" label="Sepultura"/>
<link wikidata="Q754323" start="8542" end="8555" title="Fates Warning" label="Fates Warning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638101" start="8557" end="8562" title="Prong (band)" label="Prong"/>
<link wikidata="Q6863564" start="8564" end="8578" title="Mind Over Four" label="Mind Over Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q309001" start="8580" end="8592" title="Morbid Angel" label="Morbid Angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q740623" start="8594" end="8606" title="White Zombie (band)" label="White Zombie"/>
<link wikidata="Q166315" start="8611" end="8620" title="Sanctuary (band)" label="Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2516603" start="8666" end="8684" title="Wrathchild America" label="Wrathchild America"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8731" end="8756" title="Monsters of Rock#1991 European Tour" label="Monsters of Rock festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q27593" start="8762" end="8767" title="AC/DC" label="AC/DC"/>
<link wikidata="Q486688" start="8769" end="8780" title="Mötley Crüe" label="Mötley Crüe"/>
<link wikidata="Q15920" start="8782" end="8791" title="Metallica" label="Metallica"/>
<link wikidata="Q378958" start="8796" end="8812" title="The Black Crowes" label="The Black Crowes"/>
<link wikidata="Q86483" start="9314" end="9326" title="Black Friday (shopping)" label="Black Friday"/>
<link wikidata="Q314535" start="9754" end="9766" title="Phil Anselmo" label="Phil Anselmo"/>
<link wikidata="Q311050" start="9777" end="9792" title="Dimebag Darrell" label="Diamond Darrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q465196" start="9804" end="9807" title="Rex Brown" label="Rex"/>
<link wikidata="Q380531" start="9872" end="9883" title="Vinnie Paul" label="Vinnie Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q30567" start="9904" end="9914" title="Terry Date" label="Terry Date"/>
<link wikidata="Q5922144" start="10045" end="10059" title="Howie Weinberg" label="Howie Weinberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587057" start="10211" end="10230" title="Ultimate Guitar Archive" label="Ultimate-Guitar.com"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="142969" wikidata="Q250206" url="?curid=142969" title="Barth">
<text>Barth may refer to:

==Places==
* Barth, Germany, a town in Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, Germany
**Barth (Amt), administrative subdivision
* Barth Island, Nunavut, Canada

==Other uses==
* Barth (name), a surname (and list of people with that name)
* Barth Bagge, a character from the television show &quot;You Can&#x27;t Do That on Television&quot;
* Barth Classic, a golf tournament on the LPGA Tour from 1974 to 1980

==See also==
*Barth syndrome, a metabolic disorder
* Barthes (disambiguation)
* Barthe (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q250206" start="0" end="5" title="Barth" label="Barth"/>
<link wikidata="Q161943" start="34" end="48" title="Barth, Germany" label="Barth, Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q460429" start="101" end="112" title="Barth (Amt)" label="Barth (Amt)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4865181" start="143" end="155" title="Barth Island" label="Barth Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q809264" start="191" end="203" title="Barth (name)" label="Barth (name)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235376" start="309" end="345" title="You Can&amp;#x27;t Do That on Television" label="You Can&amp;#x27;t Do That on Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q4865180" start="354" end="367" title="Barth Classic" label="Barth Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q928424" start="437" end="451" title="Barth syndrome" label="Barth syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q240531" start="476" end="500" title="Barthes (disambiguation)" label="Barthes (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q439200" start="503" end="526" title="Barthe (disambiguation)" label="Barthe (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="142973" wikidata="Q311773" url="?curid=142973" title="Sonderkommando">
<text>Sonderkommandos (, ) were work units made up of German Nazi death camp prisoners. They were composed of prisoners, usually Jews, who were forced, on threat of their own deaths, to aid with the disposal of gas chamber victims during the Holocaust. The death-camp &quot;Sonderkommandos&quot;, who were always inmates, were unrelated to the &quot;SS-Sonderkommandos&quot;, which were &quot;ad hoc&quot; units formed from members of various SS offices between 1938 and 1945.

The German term was part of the vague and euphemistic language which the Nazis used to refer to aspects of the Final Solution (e.g., &quot;Einsatzkommando&quot;, &quot;deployment units&quot;).

==Death factory workers==
&quot;Sonderkommando&quot; members did not participate directly in killing; that responsibility was reserved for the SS, while the &quot;Sonderkommandos&quot;″ primary duty was disposing of the corpses. In most cases, they were inducted immediately upon arrival at the camp and forced into the position under threat of death. They were not given any advance notice of the tasks they would have to perform. To their horror, sometimes the &quot;Sonderkommando&quot; inductees would discover members of their own family amid the bodies. They had no way to refuse or resign other than by committing suicide. In some places and environments, the &quot;Sonderkommandos&quot; might be euphemistically called &quot;Arbeitsjuden&quot; (Jews for work). At other times, &quot;Sonderkommandos&quot; were called &quot;Hilflinge&quot; (helpers). At Birkenau the &quot;Sonderkommandos&quot; numbered up to 400 people by 1943 and, when Hungarian Jews were deported there in 1944, their numbers swelled to more than 900 persons, in order to keep up with the increased rounds of murder and extermination.

Because the Germans needed the &quot;Sonderkommandos&quot; to remain physically able, they were granted much less squalid living conditions than other inmates: they slept in their own barracks and were allowed to keep and use various goods such as food, medicines and cigarettes brought into camp by those who were sent to the gas chambers. Unlike ordinary inmates, they were not normally subject to arbitrary killing by guards. Their livelihood and utility were determined by how efficiently they could keep the Nazi death factory running. As a result, &quot;Sonderkommando&quot; members survived longer in the death camps than other prisonersbut few survived the war.

As they had detailed knowledge of the Nazis&#x27; practice of mass murder, the &quot;Sonderkommando&quot; were considered &quot;Geheimnisträger&quot;bearers of secrets. As such, they were held in isolation away from prisoners being used as slave labor (see SS Main Economic and Administrative Office). There was a belief that every three months, according to SS policy, almost all the &quot;Sonderkommandos&quot; working in the death camps&#x27; killing areas would be gassed themselves and replaced with new arrivals to ensure secrecy, and that some inmates survived for up to a year or more because they possessed specialist skills. Usually, the task of a new &quot;Sonderkommando&quot; unit would be to dispose of the bodies of their predecessors. Research has calculated that from the creation of a death camp&#x27;s first &quot;Sonderkommando&quot; to the liquidation of the camp, there were approximately 14 generations of &quot;Sonderkommando&quot;. However, according to historian Igor Bartosik, author of &quot;Witnesses from the Pit of Hell: History of the Auschwitz Sonderkommando&quot; (2022) published by the Auschwitz Museum, the renewed exterminations of the Auschwitz-Birkenau Sonderkommandos are a myth, since such an extermination only took place there once. &quot;Nor was it true that prisoners were selected for their technical expertise. After a cursory inspection, they were selected merely in view of their apparent ability to work,&quot; wrote Bartosik.

===Eyewitness testimony===
Fewer than 20 of several thousand members of the &quot;Sonderkommandos&quot; are documented to have survived until liberation and to have testified about the events (although some sources claim more). Among them were Henryk (Tauber) Fuchsbrunner, Filip Müller, Daniel Behnnamias, Dario Gabbai, Morris Venezia, Shlomo Venezia, Antonio Boldrin, Alter Fajnzylberg, Samuel Willenberg, Abram Dragon, David Olère, Henryk Mandelbaum and Martin Gray. Another six or seven are confirmed to have survived, but did not give witness (or at least, such testimony is not documented). Buried and hidden accounts by members of the &quot;Sonderkommando&quot; were later found at some camps.

Between 1943 and 1944, some members of the Birkenau &quot;Sonderkommando&quot; were able to obtain writing materials and record some of their experiences and what they had witnessed. These documents were buried in the grounds of the crematoria and recovered after the war. Five men have been identified as the authors of these manuscripts: Zalman Gradowski, Zalman Lewental, and Leib Langfus, who wrote in Yiddish; Chaim Herman, who wrote in French; and Marcel Nadjary, who wrote in Greek. Of the five, only Nadjary survived until liberation; Gradowski was killed in the revolt at Crematorium IV on 7 October 1944 (see below), or in retaliation for it; Lewental, Langfus, and Herman are believed to have been killed in November 1944. Gradowski wrote the following note, found buried at an Auschwitz crematorium site:

The manuscripts are kept primarily in the archive of the Auschwitz-Birkenau State Memorial Museum. Exceptions are Herman&#x27;s letter (kept in the archives of the &quot;Amicale des déportés d&#x27;Auschwitz-Birkenau&quot;) and Gradowski&#x27;s texts, one of which is held in the Russian Museum of Military Medicine in St. Petersburg, and another in Yad Vashem, Israel.
Some of the manuscripts were published as &quot;The Scrolls of Auschwitz&quot;, edited by Ber Mark. The Auschwitz Museum published some others as &quot;Amidst a Nightmare of Crime&quot;.

The Scrolls of Auschwitz have been recognised as some of the most important testimony to be written about the Holocaust, as they include contemporaneous eyewitness accounts of the workings of the gas chambers in Birkenau.

==Revolts==
&quot;Sonderkommando&quot; prisoners participated in uprisings on two occasions.

===Treblinka===
The first revolt occurred at Treblinka on 2 August 1943. Prisoners used a duplicate key to open the camp arsenal and steal 20 to 25 rifles, 20 hand grenades, and several pistols. At 3:45 p.m., 700 Jews launched an attack on the camp&#x27;s &quot;SS&quot; guards and trawnikis that lasted for 30 minutes. They set buildings and a fuel tanker ablaze. Armed Jews attacked the main gate, while others attempted to climb the fence. About 200 Jews escaped from the camp, but the well-armed guards slaughtered hundreds of others. They phoned for &quot;SS&quot; reinforcements from four towns, and these set up roadblocks and pursued escapees in cars and on horses. 

Partisans of the &quot;Armia Krajowa&quot; (Polish: Home Army) transported some of the surviving escaped prisoners across the Bug River, while others were helped and fed by Polish villagers. Of the 700 Sonderkommando who took part in the revolt, 100 managed to survive and escape from the camp, and around 70 of these are known to have survived the war. These include Richard Glazar, Chil Rajchman, Jankiel Wiernik, and Samuel Willenberg, who co-wrote the &quot;Treblinka Memoirs&quot;.

===Auschwitz===
In October 1944, the &quot;Sonderkommando&quot; rebelled at Crematorium IV in Auschwitz II. For months, young Jewish women workers had been smuggling small packets of gunpowder out of the Weichsel-Union-Metallwerke, a munitions factory in an industrial area between the main camp of Auschwitz I and Auschwitz II. The gunpowder was passed along a smuggling chain to &quot;Sonderkommando&quot; in Crematorium IV. The plan was to destroy the gas chambers and crematoria and launch an uprising.

However, on the morning of 7 October 1944, the camp resistance warned the &quot;Sonderkommando&quot; in Crematorium IV that they were to be killed, and the &quot;Sonderkommando&quot; attacked the &quot;SS&quot; and &quot;Kapos&quot; with two machine guns, axes, knives, and grenades, killing three and injuring about a dozen more. Some of the &quot;Sonderkommando&quot; escaped from the camp, but most were recaptured later the same day. Of those who did not die during the uprising itself, 200 were later forced to strip and lie face down before being shot in the back of the head. A total of 451 &quot;Sonderkommandos&quot; were killed that day.

== Media portrayals ==
The earliest portrayals of the &quot;Sonderkommando&quot; were generally unflattering. Miklos Nyiszli, in &quot;Auschwitz: A Doctor&#x27;s Eyewitness Account&quot;, described the &quot;Sonderkommando&quot; as enjoying a virtual feast, complete with chandeliers and candlelight, as other prisoners died of starvation. Nyiszli, an admitted collaborator who assisted Josef Mengele in his medical experiments on Auschwitz prisoners, would appear to have been in a good position to observe the &quot;Sonderkommando&quot; in action, as he had an office in Krematorium II. But some of his inaccurate physical descriptions of the crematoria diminishes his credibility in this regard. Historian Gideon Greif characterized Nyiszli&#x27;s writings as among the &quot;myths and other wrong and defamatory accounts&quot; of the &quot;Sonderkommando&quot;, which flourished in the absence of first-hand testimony by surviving &quot;Sonderkommando&quot; members.

Primo Levi, in &quot;The Drowned and the Saved&quot;, characterizes the &quot;Sonderkommando&quot; as being &quot;akin to collaborators.&quot; He said that their testimonies should not be given much credence, since they had much to atone for and would naturally attempt to rehabilitate themselves at the expense of the truth. But, he asked his readers to refrain from condemnation: &quot;Therefore I ask that we meditate upon the story of &#x27;the crematorium ravens&#x27; with pity and rigor, but that judgment of them be suspended.&quot;

Filip Müller was one of the few &quot;Sonderkommando&quot; members who survived the war and was also unusual in that he served on the &quot;Sonderkommando&quot; far longer than most. He wrote of his experiences in his book &quot;Eyewitness Auschwitz: Three Years in the Gas Chambers&quot; (1979). Among other incidents he related, Müller recounted how he tried to enter the gas chamber to die with a group of his countrymen but was dissuaded from suicide by a girl who asked him to remain alive and bear witness.

Since the late 20th century, several other more sympathetic accounts of the &quot;Sonderkommando&quot; have been published, beginning with Gideon Greif&#x27;s own book &quot;We Wept Without Tears&quot; (1999 in Hebrew, 2005 in English), which consists of interviews with former &quot;Sonderkommando&quot; members. Greif includes as his prologue Gunther Anders&#x27; poem &quot;And What Would You Have Done?&quot;, which says that one who has not been in that situation has little right to judge the &quot;Sonderkommando&quot;: &quot;Not you, not me! We were not put to that ordeal!&quot;

The first depiction of the &quot;Sonderkommando&quot; revolt was titled &quot;Ikh leb&quot; (I live), a play written by Jewish author Moshe Pinchevski. It was also the first post-World War 2, Yiddish-language performance at the Idisher Kultur Farband Teater in Bucharest, Romania, in 1945.

A theatre play that explores the moral dilemmas of the &quot;Sonderkommando&quot; was &quot;The Grey Zone&quot;, directed by Doug Hughes and produced in New York at MCC Theater in 1996. The play was later adapted as a film of the same title by producer Tim Blake Nelson. The film took its mood, as well as much of its plot, from Nyiszli, portraying members of the &quot;Sonderkommando&quot; as crossing the line from victim to perpetrator. &quot;Sonderkommando&quot; Hoffman (played by David Arquette) beats a man to death in the undressing room under the eyes of a smiling SS member. Nelson emphasizes that the subject of the film is that very moral ambiguity. &quot;We can see each one of ourselves in that situation, perhaps acting in that way, because we are human. But we&#x27;re not sanctified victims.&quot;

A &quot;novelized&quot; memoir, &quot;A Damaged Mirror&quot; (2014), by Yael Shahar and Ovadya ben Malka, explores the lengths to which a former &quot;Sonderkommando&quot; will go to obtain forgiveness and closure: &quot;The fact that good people can be forced to do wrong doesn&#x27;t make them less good,&quot; the survivor says of himself, &quot;but it also doesn&#x27;t make the wrong less wrong.&quot;

&quot;Son of Saul&quot;, a 2015 Hungarian film directed by László Nemes, and winner of the 2015 Cannes Film Festival Grand Prix, details the story of one &quot;Sonderkommando&quot; attempting to bury a dead child he takes for his son. Géza Röhrig, who starred in the film, reacted with anger to the suggestion, made by a journalist, that members of the &quot;Sonderkommando&quot; were &quot;half-victim, half-hangman&quot;.&quot;There has to be a clarification,&quot; he said. &quot;They are 100% victims. They have not spilled blood or been involved in any sort of killing. They were inducted on arrival under the threat of death. They had no control of their destinies. They were as victimised as any other prisoners in Auschwitz.&quot;

==Gallery==


==See also==

* Ala Gertner
* David Olère
* Filip Müller
* &quot;The Grey Zone&quot;
* Henryk Mandelbaum
* Henryk Tauber
* Kommando
* Leib Langfus
* Morris Venezia
* Rose Meth
* Roza Robota
* Shlomo Venezia
* &quot;Shoah&quot; (film)
* &quot;Son of Saul&quot;
* &quot;Sonderaktion&quot; 1005
* &quot;Ypatingasis būrys&quot;
==Notes==
==References==
===Footnotes===
===Bibliography===
* 
* .
* .
* 
* Eyewitness accounts from members of the &quot;Sonderkommando&quot;. Publications include:
# 
# 
# . A play and subsequent film about the &quot;Sonderkommandos&quot;, &quot;The Grey Zone&quot; (2001) directed by Tim Blake Nelson, was based on this book.
# &quot;Dario Gabbai (Interview Code 142, conducted in English)&quot; video testimony, interview conducted in November 1996, Survivors of the Shoah Visual History Foundation, USC Shoah Foundation Institute, University of Southern California.
# 

==External links==

* History of the Jüdische Sonderkommando Sonderkommando-studien.de (further content: Zum Begriff Sonderkommando und verwandten Bezeichnungen • „Handlungsräume“ im Sonderkommando Auschwitz. • Der „Sonderkommando-Aufstand“ in Auschwitz-Birkenau – Photos )
* Information about Auschwitz &quot;Sonderkommandos&quot; members, French website &quot;Sonderkommando.info&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q321194" start="26" end="36" title="Extermination through labor" label="work units"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="48" end="59" title="Nazi Germany" label="German Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q153813" start="60" end="70" title="death camp" label="death camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="232" end="245" title="the Holocaust" label="the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="344" end="362" title="SS-Sonderkommandos" label="SS-Sonderkommandos"/>
<link wikidata="Q192683" start="387" end="393" title="ad hoc" label="ad hoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="437" end="439" title="SS" label="SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q83464" start="514" end="525" title="euphemism" label="euphemistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q127013" start="583" end="597" title="Final Solution" label="Final Solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q13479365" start="611" end="626" title="Einsatzkommando" label="Einsatzkommando"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341" start="1527" end="1535" title="Birkenau" label="Birkenau"/>
<link wikidata="Q218737" start="2708" end="2750" title="SS Main Economic and Administrative Office" label="SS Main Economic and Administrative Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q819729" start="3573" end="3589" title="Auschwitz Museum" label="Auschwitz Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q16015000" start="4174" end="4202" title="Henryk (Tauber) Fuchsbrunner" label="Henryk (Tauber) Fuchsbrunner"/>
<link wikidata="Q323900" start="4204" end="4216" title="Filip Müller" label="Filip Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q5222849" start="4237" end="4249" title="Dario Gabbai" label="Dario Gabbai"/>
<link wikidata="Q17480823" start="4251" end="4265" title="Morris Venezia" label="Morris Venezia"/>
<link wikidata="Q571476" start="4267" end="4281" title="Shlomo Venezia" label="Shlomo Venezia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2218967" start="4319" end="4336" title="Samuel Willenberg" label="Samuel Willenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q319707" start="4352" end="4363" title="David Olère" label="David Olère"/>
<link wikidata="Q528622" start="4365" end="4382" title="Henryk Mandelbaum" label="Henryk Mandelbaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q708648" start="4387" end="4398" title="Martin Gray (Holocaust survivor)" label="Martin Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q12407238" start="4972" end="4988" title="Zalman Gradowski" label="Zalman Gradowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q15995927" start="5011" end="5023" title="Leib Langfus" label="Leib Langfus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641" start="5038" end="5045" title="Yiddish" label="Yiddish"/>
<link wikidata="Q42101261" start="5086" end="5100" title="Marcel Nadjari" label="Marcel Nadjary"/>
<link wikidata="Q819729" start="5507" end="5547" title="Auschwitz-Birkenau State Museum" label="Auschwitz-Birkenau State Memorial Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4114427" start="5730" end="5765" title="Russian Museum of Military Medicine" label="Russian Museum of Military Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="5769" end="5783" title="St. Petersburg" label="St. Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q156591" start="5800" end="5810" title="Yad Vashem" label="Yad Vashem"/>
<link wikidata="Q152010" start="6370" end="6379" title="Treblinka extermination camp" label="Treblinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q12162151" start="6607" end="6615" title="Trawniki men" label="trawniki"/>
<link wikidata="Q152529" start="7024" end="7037" title="Armia Krajowa" label="Armia Krajowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q156237" start="7127" end="7136" title="Bug River" label="Bug River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3474378" start="7156" end="7190" title="Rescue of Jews by Poles during the Holocaust" label="helped and fed by Polish villagers"/>
<link wikidata="Q453189" start="7369" end="7383" title="Richard Glazar" label="Richard Glazar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11723735" start="7385" end="7398" title="Chil Rajchman" label="Chil Rajchman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6154832" start="7400" end="7415" title="Jankiel Wiernik" label="Jankiel Wiernik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2218967" start="7421" end="7438" title="Samuel Willenberg" label="Samuel Willenberg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7565" end="7579" title="Cremation#World War II" label="Crematorium IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341" start="7583" end="7595" title="Auschwitz concentration camp" label="Auschwitz II"/>
<link wikidata="Q12861" start="7672" end="7681" title="gunpowder" label="gunpowder"/>
<link wikidata="Q702997" start="8212" end="8229" title="Kapo (concentration camp)" label="&amp;quot;Kapos&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q550391" start="8756" end="8770" title="Miklos Nyiszli" label="Miklos Nyiszli"/>
<link wikidata="Q57109" start="9033" end="9046" title="Josef Mengele" label="Josef Mengele"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523122" start="9355" end="9367" title="Gideon Greif" label="Gideon Greif"/>
<link wikidata="Q153670" start="9618" end="9628" title="Primo Levi" label="Primo Levi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3791315" start="9639" end="9664" title="The Drowned and the Saved" label="The Drowned and the Saved"/>
<link wikidata="Q323900" start="10160" end="10172" title="Filip Müller" label="Filip Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7977833" start="10848" end="10869" title="We Wept Without Tears" label="We Wept Without Tears"/>
<link wikidata="Q60884" start="11019" end="11033" title="Gunther Anders" label="Gunther Anders"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="11524" end="11533" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="11535" end="11542" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q566834" start="11646" end="11659" title="The Grey Zone" label="The Grey Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300588" start="11679" end="11690" title="Doug Hughes" label="Doug Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6714842" start="11719" end="11730" title="MCC Theater" label="MCC Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q566834" start="11772" end="11794" title="The Grey Zone" label="film of the same title"/>
<link wikidata="Q515095" start="11807" end="11823" title="Tim Blake Nelson" label="Tim Blake Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q294185" start="12040" end="12054" title="David Arquette" label="David Arquette"/>
<link wikidata="Q20036755" start="12408" end="12424" title="A Damaged Mirror" label="A Damaged Mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979672" start="12576" end="12583" title="Closure (psychology)" label="closure"/>
<link wikidata="Q19816400" start="12784" end="12795" title="Son of Saul" label="Son of Saul"/>
<link wikidata="Q6495014" start="12837" end="12849" title="László Nemes" label="László Nemes"/>
<link wikidata="Q18348657" start="12869" end="12894" title="2015 Cannes Film Festival" label="2015 Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q19816843" start="13013" end="13024" title="Géza Röhrig" label="Géza Röhrig"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636270" start="13548" end="13559" title="Ala Gertner" label="Ala Gertner"/>
<link wikidata="Q319707" start="13562" end="13573" title="David Olère" label="David Olère"/>
<link wikidata="Q323900" start="13576" end="13588" title="Filip Müller" label="Filip Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q566834" start="13597" end="13610" title="The Grey Zone" label="The Grey Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q528622" start="13619" end="13636" title="Henryk Mandelbaum" label="Henryk Mandelbaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q16015000" start="13639" end="13652" title="Henryk Tauber" label="Henryk Tauber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746009" start="13655" end="13663" title="Kommando" label="Kommando"/>
<link wikidata="Q15995927" start="13666" end="13678" title="Leib Langfus" label="Leib Langfus"/>
<link wikidata="Q17480823" start="13681" end="13695" title="Morris Venezia" label="Morris Venezia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7367863" start="13698" end="13707" title="Rose Meth" label="Rose Meth"/>
<link wikidata="Q545582" start="13710" end="13721" title="Roza Robota" label="Roza Robota"/>
<link wikidata="Q571476" start="13724" end="13738" title="Shlomo Venezia" label="Shlomo Venezia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720765" start="13741" end="13765" title="Shoah (film)" label="&amp;quot;Shoah&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19816400" start="13774" end="13785" title="Son of Saul" label="Son of Saul"/>
<link wikidata="Q645971" start="13794" end="13823" title="Sonderaktion 1005" label="&amp;quot;Sonderaktion&amp;quot; 1005"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619096" start="13832" end="13849" title="Ypatingasis būrys" label="Ypatingasis būrys"/>
<link wikidata="Q566834" start="14104" end="14117" title="The Grey Zone" label="The Grey Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q515095" start="14143" end="14159" title="Tim Blake Nelson" label="Tim Blake Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q571721" start="14310" end="14358" title="USC Shoah Foundation Institute for Visual History and Education" label="Survivors of the Shoah Visual History Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614" start="14392" end="14425" title="University of Southern California" label="University of Southern California"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="142978" wikidata="Q228017" url="?curid=142978" title="Naples (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Naples]] is a major city and province in Italy.

Naples may also refer to:
== Places ==
===Italy===
* Naples International Airport, IATA code NAP
* Port of Naples
* Duchy of Naples, a former duchy
* Gulf of Naples, the bay off the coast of Naples
* Kingdom of Naples, a former kingdom
* Metropolitan City of Naples
* Kingdom of Naples (Napoleonic), a former French client state

===United States===
* Naples, Long Beach, California
* Naples, Florida
** Naples Airport (Florida)
** Naples Historic District
** Naples High School
* Naples, Idaho
* Naples, Illinois
* Naples, Maine
** Naples (CDP), Maine
* Naples, New York
** Naples (village), New York
* Naples, South Dakota
* Naples, Texas
* Naples, Utah
* Naples, Wisconsin
* Naples Creek, a stream in San Mateo County, California
* Naples Reef, a reef located off the coast of Santa Barbara, California

===Other places===
* Naples, Alberta, Canada
* Naples, the Roman name for the biblical city of Shechem, pronounced Nablus in Arabic 

== People ==
* Al Naples (1926-2021), an American Major League Baseball shortstop
* Donna Naples, American physicist
* Nancy Naples (politician), member of the AMTRAK Board of Directors
* Nancy Naples (sociologist), American sociologist

== Other uses==
* Epyc Naples, the first generation of AMD&#x27;s Epyc line of server processors, codenamed Naples

== See also ==
* Napoli (disambiguation)
* Neapoli (disambiguation)
* Neapolitan (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q228017" start="0" end="10" title="Naples (disambiguation)" label="[[Naples]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q228017" start="51" end="57" title="Naples (disambiguation)" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q849383" start="104" end="132" title="Naples International Airport" label="Naples International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398528" start="150" end="164" title="Port of Naples" label="Port of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051600" start="167" end="182" title="Duchy of Naples" label="Duchy of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q201385" start="201" end="215" title="Gulf of Naples" label="Gulf of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q173065" start="251" end="268" title="Kingdom of Naples" label="Kingdom of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q18241891" start="289" end="316" title="Metropolitan City of Naples" label="Metropolitan City of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q48779892" start="319" end="349" title="Kingdom of Naples (Napoleonic)" label="Kingdom of Naples (Napoleonic)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6964958" start="403" end="421" title="Naples, Long Beach" label="Naples, Long Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q257830" start="436" end="451" title="Naples, Florida" label="Naples, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565912" start="455" end="479" title="Naples Airport (Florida)" label="Naples Airport (Florida)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6964975" start="483" end="507" title="Naples Historic District" label="Naples Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="Q6964974" start="511" end="529" title="Naples High School" label="Naples High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3870228" start="532" end="545" title="Naples, Idaho" label="Naples, Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q579986" start="548" end="564" title="Naples, Illinois" label="Naples, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361169" start="567" end="580" title="Naples, Maine" label="Naples, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6964961" start="584" end="603" title="Naples (CDP), Maine" label="Naples (CDP), Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6964959" start="606" end="622" title="Naples, New York" label="Naples, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460629" start="626" end="652" title="Naples (village), New York" label="Naples (village), New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2683926" start="655" end="675" title="Naples, South Dakota" label="Naples, South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q976503" start="678" end="691" title="Naples, Texas" label="Naples, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q482396" start="694" end="706" title="Naples, Utah" label="Naples, Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q598334" start="709" end="726" title="Naples, Wisconsin" label="Naples, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6964969" start="729" end="741" title="Naples Creek" label="Naples Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q17046044" start="786" end="797" title="Naples Reef" label="Naples Reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863466" start="879" end="894" title="Naples, Alberta" label="Naples, Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7951237" start="953" end="960" title="Shechem" label="Shechem"/>
<link wikidata="Q4704530" start="1007" end="1016" title="Al Naples" label="Al Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q124962875" start="1076" end="1088" title="Donna Naples" label="Donna Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q6962873" start="1111" end="1136" title="Nancy Naples (politician)" label="Nancy Naples (politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q22367193" start="1180" end="1206" title="Nancy Naples (sociologist)" label="Nancy Naples (sociologist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q33083031" start="1248" end="1259" title="Epyc Naples" label="Epyc Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q420173" start="1363" end="1386" title="Napoli (disambiguation)" label="Napoli (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973095" start="1389" end="1413" title="Neapoli (disambiguation)" label="Neapoli (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q344835" start="1416" end="1443" title="Neapolitan (disambiguation)" label="Neapolitan (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="142980" wikidata="Q328993" url="?curid=142980" title="Definitely Maybe">
<text>Definitely Maybe is the debut studio album by the English rock band Oasis, released on 29 August 1994 by Creation Records. The album features Noel Gallagher on lead guitar, backing vocals and as chief songwriter, Liam Gallagher on lead vocals, Paul &quot;Bonehead&quot; Arthurs on rhythm guitar, Paul &quot;Guigsy&quot; McGuigan on bass guitar and Tony McCarroll on drums.

The band booked Monnow Valley Studio near Rockfield in late 1993 to record the album; they worked with producer Dave Batchelor, whom Noel Gallagher knew from his time working as a roadie for the Inspiral Carpets. However, sessions were unsatisfactory, and Batchelor was subsequently fired. In January 1994, the group began re-recording the album at Sawmills Studio in Cornwall, where Noel produced sessions alongside Mark Coyle. The results were still deemed unsatisfactory; in desperation, Creation&#x27;s Marcus Russell contacted engineer and producer Owen Morris, who eventually worked on mixing the album at Johnny Marr&#x27;s studio in Manchester.

&quot;Definitely Maybe&quot; was an immediate commercial success in the United Kingdom, having followed on the heels of the singles &quot;Supersonic&quot;, &quot;Shakermaker&quot;, and the UK top-ten hit &quot;Live Forever&quot;, which was also a success on US Rock Airplay. It went straight to number one in the UK Albums Chart and became the fastest-selling debut album in British music history at the time; it went on to be certified 9× platinum by the BPI for sales of over 2.7 million units. It was also successful in the United States, being certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). The album went on to sell over 15 million copies worldwide. It is the only Oasis album to feature all five original members completely; drummer Tony McCarroll was ejected from the band in early 1995, but he would still partially appear on their second album on the track &quot;Some Might Say&quot;.

Upon release, &quot;Definitely Maybe&quot; received widespread critical acclaim and helped to spur a revitalisation in British pop/rock music in the 1990s. It was embraced by critics for its optimistic themes and rejection of the negative outlook of much of the grunge music of the time and is regarded as a cornerstone of the Britpop genre, having since appeared in many publications&#x27; lists of the greatest albums of all time. In 2006, the &quot;NME&quot; conducted a readers&#x27; poll in which &quot;Definitely Maybe&quot; was voted the greatest album ever. In 2015, &quot;Spin&quot; included the album in their list of &quot;The 300 Best Albums of 1985–2014&quot;. &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; ranked the album at number 217 on its 2020 list of the 500 Greatest Albums of All Time.

== Background and recording==
Formerly called the Rain, Oasis was formed in 1991 by Liam Gallagher, Paul &quot;Bonehead&quot; Arthurs, Paul &quot;Guigsy&quot; McGuigan, and Tony McCarroll. The group was soon joined by Liam&#x27;s older brother, Noel Gallagher, who insisted that the group give him complete control and would work towards global fame if he joined.

Oasis booked Monnow Valley Studio near Rockfield in late 1993 to record the album. Their producer was Dave Batchelor, whom Noel knew from working as a roadie for the Inspiral Carpets. The sessions were unsatisfactory, and Bonehead recalled, &quot;It wasn&#x27;t happening. [Batchelor] was the wrong person for the job... we&#x27;d play in this great big room, buzzing to be in this studio, playing like we always played. He&#x27;d say, &#x27;Come in and have a listen.&#x27; And we&#x27;d be like, &#x27;That doesn&#x27;t sound like it sounded in that room. What&#x27;s &quot;that&quot;?&#x27; It was thin. Weak. Too clean.&quot;

Additionally, engineer Dave Scott commented, &quot;I couldn&#x27;t connect with him [Batchelor] artistically or technically, neither could I get any idea from him what his vision for the album was. This made life very difficult for me. I had rarely worked under other producers and when I had, there had always been a collaboration. I think that the lack of direction and different expectations led to an uncoordinated session with too many compromises.&quot; Scott described various technical issues that befell the sessions, including defective equipment, poor quality headphones, and excessive sound variation between mixing channels. He was fired by Batchelor after two clashes while recording &quot;Slide Away&quot;, and was later informed &quot;Slide Away&quot; was the only track kept from the sessions.

The sessions at Monnow Valley were costing £800 a day. As the sessions proved increasingly fruitless, the group began to panic. Bonehead said, &quot;Noel was frantically on the phone to the management, going, &#x27;This ain&#x27;t working.&#x27; For it not to be happening was a bit frightening.&quot; Batchelor was fired, and Noel tried to make use of the music already recorded by taking the tapes to a number of London studios. Tim Abbot of Creation Records said while visiting the band in Chiswick, &quot;McGee, Noel, me, and various people had a great sesh [session], and we listened to it over and over again. And all I could think was, &#x27;It ain&#x27;t got the attack.&#x27; There was no immediacy.&quot;
Liam Gallagher would say years later that the recordings at Monnow Valley were also characterised by the presence of a &quot;ghost&quot;.
In January 1994, the group returned from an ill-fated trip to Amsterdam and set about re-recording the album at Sawmills Studio in Cornwall. This time the sessions were produced by Noel alongside Mark Coyle. The group decided the only way to replicate their live sound in the studio was to record together without soundproofing between individual instruments, with Noel overdubbing numerous guitars afterwards. Bonehead said, &quot;That was Noel&#x27;s favourite trick: get the drums, bass, and rhythm guitar down, and then he&#x27;d &quot;cane&quot; it. &#x27;Less is more&#x27; didn&#x27;t really work then.&quot; The results were still deemed unsatisfactory, and there was little chance of another attempt at recording the album, so the recordings already made had to be used.

In desperation, Creation&#x27;s Marcus Russell contacted engineer and producer Owen Morris, who had previously mixed the album&#x27;s songs. Morris recalled after hearing the Sawmills recordings, &quot;I just thought, &#x27;They&#x27;ve messed up here.&#x27; I guessed at that stage Noel was completely fucked off. Marcus was like, &#x27;You can do what you like – literally, whatever you want. Among Morris&#x27;s first tasks was to strip away the layers of guitar overdubs Noel had added, although he noted that the overdubs allowed him to construct the musical dynamics of songs such as &quot;Columbia&quot; and &quot;Rock &#x27;n&#x27; Roll Star&quot;.

Morris worked on mixing the album at Johnny Marr&#x27;s studio in Manchester. He recalled that Marr was &quot;appalled by how &#x27;in your face&#x27; the whole thing was&quot; and would question Morris&#x27;s mixing choices, such as leaving the background noise at the beginning of &quot;Cigarettes &amp; Alcohol&quot;. Inspired by Phil Spector&#x27;s use of tape delay on the drums of John Lennon&#x27;s song &quot;Instant Karma!&quot; and Tony Visconti&#x27;s use of the Eventide Harmonizer on the drums of David Bowie&#x27;s album &quot;Low&quot;, Morris added eighth-note tape delays on the drums, which lent additional groove to McCarroll&#x27;s basic beats. Tape delay was employed to double the drums of &quot;Columbia&quot;, giving the song a faster rhythm, and tambourines were programmed on several songs to follow McCarroll&#x27;s snare hits.

Morris also used a technique he had learned from Bernard Sumner while recording the self-titled album by Sumner&#x27;s group Electronic, routing the bass guitar through a Minimoog and using the filters to remove the high end, which he used to hide imprecise playing, and heavily compressed the final mix to an extent he admitted was &quot;more than would normally be considered &#x27;professional.

Morris completed his final mix of the record on the vintage Neve console during the bank holiday weekend in May in Studio 5 at Matrix Recording Studios in London&#x27;s Fulham district. Music journalist John Harris noted, &quot;The miracle was that music that had passed through so many hands sounded so dynamic: the guitar-heavy stew that Morris had inherited had been remoulded into something positively pile-driving.&quot;

On the other hand, engineer Anjali Dutt criticised the abrasive mix: &quot;Though I don&#x27;t think that the original mixes were amazing, I did prefer them to the final album, as the relentlessness of the compressed chainsaw guitars just wears you out even if the initial feeling of excitement is invigorating. ... I think his mixes did the job and gave it that much needed excitement and attitude. But it wasn&#x27;t my kind of sound and found it far too abrasive so I can only recall ever playing a few tracks at a time.&quot;

== Cover art ==
The photograph on the front cover of the album was taken by rock photographer Michael Spencer Jones in guitarist Bonehead&#x27;s house in Didsbury, Manchester.&lt;ref name=&quot;NME/Oasis&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; The image was inspired by the back cover of the Beatles&#x27; 1966 compilation LP &quot;A Collection of Beatles Oldies&quot;, and, in the positioning of Liam on the floor, by a visit Spencer Jones had made to the Egyptology section at Manchester Science Museum. In a 2019 interview, Spencer Jones said that the idea to photograph the band at Bonehead&#x27;s house came from Noel, who originally wanted the band to be seated around Bonehead&#x27;s dining table; Spencer Jones instead suggested shooting in the lounge, facing a bay window. He also said that he asked Liam to lie on the floor to draw attention away from the room&#x27;s wood flooring, which he felt would make the picture look like an advert for varnish. The wine glass to Liam&#x27;s right was filled with diluted Ribena; although an urban legend suggests that this was used because the band could not afford wine, Spencer Jones explained that it was actually because red wine often turns out black instead of red on pictures.

Spencer Jones asked the band to bring objects of personal value to them to the shoot. Cannon drew inspiration from Jan Van Eyck&#x27;s Flemish Renaissance painting &quot;The Arnolfini Portrait&quot; (1434) for the way it is &quot;littered with visual metaphors&quot;, and applied the same significance for the objects on the &quot;Definitely Maybe&quot; sleeve. The television is showing a scene with actors Eli Wallach and Antonio Casale from Sergio Leone&#x27;s film &quot;The Good, the Bad and the Ugly&quot;. A still of actor Gian Maria Volonté from another Leone film, &quot;A Fistful of Dollars&quot;, is visible on the television on the back cover. According to Spencer Jones, this was Noel&#x27;s favourite film. A picture of footballer Rodney Marsh playing for Manchester City (the football team of the Gallaghers and McGuigan) is propped against the fireplace. A photograph of footballer George Best can be seen in the window at the behest of Bonehead, a Manchester United fan. A poster (actually the inside of a gatefold sleeve) of Burt Bacharach, one of Noel&#x27;s idols, is also shown leaning against the side of the sofa on the lower left-hand side of the cover. Bonehead&#x27;s Epiphone Riviera, which he used on every Oasis recording and gig during his tenure in the band, is propped against the wall. Some writers believe that Oasis were trying to pay homage to the album cover of Pink Floyd&#x27;s &quot;Ummagumma&quot; (1969) by placing Bacharach&#x27;s picture in the same prominent position used for the soundtrack of Vincente Minnelli&#x27;s film &quot;Gigi&quot; on &quot;Ummagumma&quot;.

== Release and promotion ==
Oasis signed to independent record label Creation Records in 1993. The limited-edition 12&quot; single &quot;Columbia&quot; was released later that year as a teaser for journalists and radio shows, and was unexpectedly picked up by BBC Radio 1, who played it 19 times in the two weeks after its release. The band&#x27;s first commercial single &quot;Supersonic&quot; was released on 11 April 1994. The following week, it debuted at No. 31 on the British singles chart. The song was followed by &quot;Shakermaker&quot; in June 1994, which debuted at No. 11 and earned the group an appearance on &quot;Top of the Pops&quot;.

The release of &quot;Definitely Maybe&quot; was preceded by a third single, &quot;Live Forever&quot;, which was released on 8 August 1994 and became the group&#x27;s first top ten single. The continuing success of Oasis partially allowed Creation to ride out a period of tough financial straits; the label was still £2 million in debt, so Tim Abbot was given only £60,000 to promote the upcoming album. Abbot tried to determine how to best use his small budget: &quot;I&#x27;d go back to the Midlands every couple of weeks and people I knew would say, &#x27;Oasis are great. This is what we listen to.&#x27; And I&#x27;d be thinking, &#x27;Well, you lot don&#x27;t buy singles. You don&#x27;t read the &quot;NME&quot;. You don&#x27;t read &quot;Q&quot;. How do we get the people to like you? Abbot decided to place ads in publications that had never been approached by Creation before, such as football magazines, match programmes, and UK dance music periodicals. His suspicions that Oasis would appeal to these non-traditional audiences were confirmed when the dance music magazine &quot;Mixmag&quot;, which usually ignored guitar-based music, gave &quot;Definitely Maybe&quot; a five-star review.

&quot;Definitely Maybe&quot; was released on 29 August 1994. The album sold 100,000 copies in its first four days. On 4 September, the album debuted at No. 1 on the British charts. It outsold the second-highest album (&quot;The Three Tenors in Concert 1994&quot;, which had been favoured to be the chart-topper that week), by a factor of 50%. The first-week sales earned &quot;Definitely Maybe&quot; the record of the fastest-selling debut album in British history. &quot;Cigarettes &amp; Alcohol&quot; was released as the fourth single from the album in October, peaking at No. 7 in the UK, which was then a career high for the band. Noel said &quot;Slide Away&quot; was considered as a fifth single but he ultimately refused, arguing, &quot;You can&#x27;t have five [singles] off a debut album.&quot;

== Critical reception ==
&quot;Definitely Maybe&quot; received widespread critical acclaim and was a commercial success, with many critics and listeners welcoming the album&#x27;s fearless optimism, particularly in an era of rock which was dominated by American grunge which seemed at odds with the album. Noel&#x27;s songwriting and melodic skills, along with Liam&#x27;s vocals, received particular praise. Keith Cameron of &quot;NME&quot; called Noel &quot;a pop craftsman in the classic tradition and a master of his trade&quot; and believed that &quot;the only equivocal thing about &quot;Definitely Maybe&quot; is its title ... everything else screams certainty ... the fact is that too much heartfelt emotion, ingenious belief and patent songwriting savvy rushes through the debut Oasis album for it to be the work of a bunch of wind-up merchants ... it&#x27;s like opening your bedroom curtains one morning and discovering that some f—er&#x27;s built the Taj Mahal in your back garden and then filled it with your favourite flavour of Angel Delight&quot;. &quot;Melody Maker&quot; gave the album its star rating signifying a &quot;bloody essential&quot; purchase, and its critic Paul Lester said, &quot;Of all the great new British pop groups, Oasis are the least playful, the least concerned with post-modern sleights of influence ... &quot;Definitely Maybe&quot; is &#x27;What the World&#x27;s Been Waiting For&#x27;, a record full of songs to live to, made by a gang of reckless northern reprobates who you can easily dream of joining ... If you don&#x27;t agree it offers a dozen opportunities to believe that 1994 is the best year ever for pop/rock music, then you&#x27;re wrong&quot;.

Stuart Maconie of &quot;Q&quot; described &quot;Definitely Maybe&quot; as &quot;an outrageously exciting rock/pop album ... a rutting mess of glam, punk, and psychedelia, you&#x27;ve heard it all before of course, but not since the Stone Roses debut have a young Lancastrian group carried themselves with such vigour and insouciance&quot;. &quot;Vox&quot;″s Mike Pattenden stated that &quot;occasionally – and in this voracious, selfish, faddish industry it is only occasionally – something materialises that justifies the endless bullshit that represents its daily diet... the 11 songs that make up &quot;Definitely Maybe&quot; ... lie shining like so much crystal-cut glass among the debris of the nation&#x27;s hotel rooms&quot;. Writing in &quot;Mojo&quot; in 1994, Jim Irvin felt the record was &quot;bloody close&quot; to the &quot;punch-yer-lights-out debut they&#x27;d intended. Certainly when put next to the flimsy, uncommitted music of most new British bands, &quot;Definitely Maybe&quot; spits feathers ... Spunky, adolescent rock, vivifying and addictive&quot;.

In the US, &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; included the album in its end-of-year round-up of 1994&#x27;s most important records, with Paul Evans saying, &quot;Liam Gallagher has God-given cool. And with his brother Noel supplying him with sumptuous rockers, it&#x27;s easy to see why this quintet is next year&#x27;s model. Heavier on guitar than Blur or Suede, they&#x27;re the simpler, catchier outfit.&quot; Neil Strauss of &quot;The New York Times&quot; wrote of the songs; &quot;On its own, each one sounds like a classic, rippling with hard guitar hooks, strong dance beats and memorable choruses.&quot;

== Legacy ==
In 1997, &quot;Definitely Maybe&quot; was named the 14th greatest album of all time in a &quot;Music of the Millennium&quot; poll conducted by HMV, Channel 4, &quot;The Guardian&quot;, and Classic FM. On Channel 4&#x27;s &quot;100 Greatest Albums&quot; countdown in 2005, the album was placed at No. 6. In 2006, &quot;NME&quot; placed the album at No. 3 on its list of the greatest British albums ever, behind the Stone Roses&#x27; self-titled debut album and the Smiths&#x27; &quot;The Queen Is Dead&quot;. In a 2006 British poll run by &quot;NME&quot; and the &quot;Guinness Book of British Hit Singles&quot;, the album was voted the best album of all time, with the Beatles&#x27; &quot;Sgt. Pepper&#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band&quot; finishing second. &quot;Q&quot; placed it at No. 5 on its greatest albums of all-time list in 2006, and &quot;NME&quot; hailed it as the greatest album of all time that same year.

In a 2008 poll conducted by &quot;Q&quot; and HMV of the greatest British albums of all time, &quot;Definitely Maybe&quot; placed at No. 1. &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; ranked the album at No. 217 on its 2020 list of the &quot;500 Greatest Albums of All Time&quot;, No. 78 on its 2011 list of the &quot;100 Best Albums of the Nineties&quot;, as well as No. 42 on its 2013 list of the &quot;100 Best Debut Albums of All Time&quot;. The German edition of &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; ranked the album at No. 156 on its list of &quot;The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time&quot;.

In 2000, the album was voted No. 44 in Colin Larkin&#x27;s &quot;All Time Top 1000 Albums&quot;. In July 2014, &quot;Guitar World&quot; ranked &quot;Definitely Maybe&quot; at No. 19 on its list of &quot;50 Iconic Albums That Defined 1994&quot;. The album was ranked at No. 160 on &quot;Spin&quot;″s &quot;300 Best Albums of the Past 30 Years (1985–2014)&quot; list. In 2017, &quot;Pitchfork&quot; listed the album at No. 9 on its list of the &quot;50 Best Britpop Albums&quot;. On the other hand, it was ranked at No. 4 on the list of most overrated albums ever in a 2005 BBC public poll. The album was also included in the book &quot;1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die&quot;.

Reviewing the 2014 reissue of &quot;Definitely Maybe&quot; in &quot;Mojo&quot;, Danny Eccleston stated, &quot;There&#x27;s nothing more exhilarating than the feeling that something great is about to happen. It&#x27;s a force that courses, unmanageably, through Oasis&#x27; debut album even today... This is transcendental rock&#x27;n&#x27;roll music that celebrates the moment, not &quot;a&quot; moment.&quot; In his review of the reissue, &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; critic Rob Sheffield said, &quot;Twenty years on, Oasis&#x27; debut album remains one of the most gloriously loutish odes to cigarettes, alcohol, and dumb guitar solos that the British Isles have ever coughed up.&quot; The same year, a study of the album by writer Alex Niven was published in Bloomsbury&#x27;s 33⅓ series. Niven reviewed the album from a sociopolitical context of Oasis as a working-class answer to four decades of political strife.

In October 2023, Liam Gallagher announced plans to tour and perform &quot;Definitely Maybe&quot; in full, marking the album&#x27;s 30th anniversary.

In September 2024, Manchester City issued a football kit for their 2024–25 season, based on the cover art of &quot;Definitely Maybe&quot;, in collaboration with Noel Gallagher. The player&#x27;s numbers are printed using Noel&#x27;s handwriting. A coordinated range of apparel was also released, under the title &quot;Definitely City&quot;.

== Track listing ==
Bonus tracks


=== Vinyl version ===

=== Singles box set ===
The Definitely Maybe box set was released on 4 November 1996, featuring four discs of singles, including B-sides, and one disc of interviews. The set charted at number 23 on the UK Albums Chart.

All songs written by Noel Gallagher, except &quot;I Am the Walrus&quot; by Lennon–McCartney.



=== 2014: 20th anniversary reissue ===
To mark the 20th anniversary of the original release and as part of a promotional campaign entitled Chasing the Sun, the album was released on 19 May 2014, a deluxe edition featured the remastered original album packaged with two additional discs of material. Additionally, a limited edition reproduction of the band&#x27;s original 1993 demo cassette was also made available to purchase.


=== 2024: 30th anniversary reissue ===
To mark the 30th anniversary of the original release, the album was reissued on 30th August 2024. The reissue includes the remastered original album packaged with one additional disc containing the previously discarded original recording session from Monnow Valley along with outtakes from Sawmills Studios and a demo of Sad Song (with Liam Gallagher on vocals).
== DVD ==
&quot;Definitely Maybe&quot; was released on DVD in September 2004 to mark the tenth anniversary of its original release. It went triple platinum in the UK. The DVD featured an hour-long documentary about the recording of the album featuring interviews with the band and its associates. Also included was the album in its entirety, at 48 kHz, including a remix of &quot;Sad Song&quot; with double tracked vocals during the chorus. &quot;Sad Song&quot; originally only appeared on the UK vinyl and Japanese CD versions of the album, as well as on a French bonus CD included with copies of the album sold at FNAC stores. Other content included live and TV performances of the album&#x27;s twelve tracks, and the promo videos to &quot;Supersonic&quot; (UK &amp; US versions), &quot;Shakermaker&quot;, &quot;Live Forever&quot; (UK &amp; US versions), &quot;Cigarettes &amp; Alcohol&quot; and &quot;Rock &#x27;n&#x27; Roll Star&quot;. A limited-edition release in the UK and Ireland included a bonus DVD containing more live footage and anecdotes.

There was also an accompanying made-for-TV documentary, entitled &quot;There We Were, Now Here We Are ... : The Making Of Oasis&quot;. This was broadcast on Channel 4 in the UK at 11:30 pm on Friday, 3 September, three days before the release of the &quot;Definitely Maybe&quot; DVD. The programme combined existing and unused interview footage from the DVD documentary and focused on the origins of the band, and the four singles from &quot;Definitely Maybe&quot;. It also included a clip of &quot;All Around the World&quot; performed live at a rehearsal session in the Boardwalk in 1992, five years before it was eventually recorded and released on &quot;Be Here Now&quot;. The DVD received the &quot;NME&quot; award for Best Music DVD. The DVD earned Gold status in Australia.

== Personnel ==
Oasis
* Liam Gallagher – vocals, tambourine
* Noel Gallagher – lead guitar, backing vocals, bass guitar (&quot;Up in the Sky&quot; and &quot;Slide Away&quot;)
* Paul &quot;Bonehead&quot; Arthurs – rhythm guitar, piano (&quot;Live Forever&quot; and &quot;Digsy&#x27;s Dinner&quot;)
* Paul &quot;Guigsy&quot; McGuigan – bass guitar
* Tony McCarroll – drums

Additional personnel
* Anthony Griffiths – backing vocals (&quot;Supersonic&quot;)
* Mark Coyle – production (all except &quot;Slide Away&quot;), mixing on (&quot;Supersonic&quot; and &quot;Married with Children&quot;), engineering
*Oasis – production (all except &quot;Slide Away&quot;)
* Owen Morris – additional production, mixing
* Barry Grint – mastering at Abbey Road Studios, London
* David Batchelor – production (&quot;Slide Away&quot;)
* Anjali Dutt – engineering
* Dave Scott – engineering, mixing
* Roy Spong – engineering
* Brian Cannon for Microdot – sleeve concept, design, art direction
* Michael Spencer Jones – photography
== Charts ==

=== Weekly charts ===


=== Year-end charts ===







== Certifications ==
===&quot;Definitely Maybe&quot;===





===&quot;Definitely Maybe&quot; DVD===

== References ==

== Notes ==
==Further reading==

== External links ==

* &quot;Definitely Maybe&quot; at YouTube (streamed copy where licensed)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="58" end="62" title="Rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q382890" start="68" end="73" title="Oasis (band)" label="Oasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139341" start="105" end="121" title="Creation Records" label="Creation Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q193459" start="142" end="156" title="Noel Gallagher" label="Noel Gallagher"/>
<link wikidata="Q216708" start="213" end="227" title="Liam Gallagher" label="Liam Gallagher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195785" start="244" end="277" title="Paul Arthurs" label="Paul &amp;quot;Bonehead&amp;quot; Arthurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5547925" start="296" end="328" title="Paul McGuigan (musician)" label="Paul &amp;quot;Guigsy&amp;quot; McGuigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455570" start="348" end="362" title="Tony McCarroll" label="Tony McCarroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q15255232" start="390" end="410" title="Monnow Valley Studio" label="Monnow Valley Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6470937" start="416" end="425" title="Rockfield, Monmouthshire" label="Rockfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q500492" start="569" end="585" title="Inspiral Carpets" label="Inspiral Carpets"/>
<link wikidata="Q7428667" start="723" end="738" title="Sawmills Studio" label="Sawmills Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649429" start="928" end="939" title="Owen Morris" label="Owen Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q317742" start="986" end="997" title="Johnny Marr" label="Johnny Marr"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="1015" end="1025" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351488" start="1166" end="1176" title="Supersonic (Oasis song)" label="Supersonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566005" start="1190" end="1201" title="Shakermaker" label="Shakermaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q769355" start="1238" end="1250" title="Live Forever (Oasis song)" label="Live Forever"/>
<link wikidata="Q19754079" start="1289" end="1301" title="Rock Airplay" label="Rock Airplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q719415" start="1341" end="1356" title="UK Albums Chart" label="UK Albums Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q751895" start="1465" end="1476" title="BPI certification" label="9× platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q751895" start="1484" end="1487" title="British Phonographic Industry" label="BPI"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503026" start="1586" end="1594" title="RIAA certification" label="platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="1602" end="1643" title="Recording Industry Association of America" label="Recording Industry Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455570" start="1796" end="1810" title="Tony McCarroll" label="Tony McCarroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q151755" start="1929" end="1943" title="Some Might Say" label="Some Might Say"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971422" start="2079" end="2082" title="British pop music" label="pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566660" start="2083" end="2093" title="British rock music" label="rock music"/>
<link wikidata="Q11365" start="2214" end="2220" title="grunge" label="grunge"/>
<link wikidata="Q189045" start="2279" end="2286" title="Britpop" label="Britpop"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="2404" end="2407" title="NME" label="NME"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025912" start="2533" end="2537" title="Spin (magazine)" label="Spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="2632" end="2645" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q240550" start="2707" end="2738" title="Rolling Stone&amp;#x27;s 500 Greatest Albums of All Time" label="500 Greatest Albums of All Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q15255232" start="3119" end="3139" title="Monnow Valley Studio" label="Monnow Valley Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6470937" start="3145" end="3154" title="Rockfield, Monmouthshire" label="Rockfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q500492" start="3272" end="3288" title="Inspiral Carpets" label="Inspiral Carpets"/>
<link wikidata="Q3031620" start="4441" end="4451" title="Slide Away (Oasis song)" label="Slide Away"/>
<link wikidata="Q845015" start="5042" end="5050" title="Chiswick" label="Chiswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q216708" start="5264" end="5278" title="Liam Gallagher" label="Liam Gallagher"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="5464" end="5473" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7428667" start="5514" end="5529" title="Sawmills Studio" label="Sawmills Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649429" start="6262" end="6273" title="Owen Morris" label="Owen Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602582" start="6804" end="6832" title="Rock &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Roll Star" label="Rock &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Roll Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q317742" start="6878" end="6889" title="Johnny Marr" label="Johnny Marr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208786" start="7130" end="7154" title="Cigarettes &amp;amp; Alcohol" label="Cigarettes &amp;amp; Alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q213793" start="7174" end="7186" title="Phil Spector" label="Phil Spector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="7228" end="7239" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q545718" start="7258" end="7272" title="Instant Karma!" label="Instant Karma!"/>
<link wikidata="Q505994" start="7283" end="7296" title="Tony Visconti" label="Tony Visconti"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7315" end="7334" title="Eventide, Inc#H910 Harmonizer" label="Eventide Harmonizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383" start="7351" end="7362" title="David Bowie" label="David Bowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q837214" start="7382" end="7385" title="Low (David Bowie album)" label="Low"/>
<link wikidata="Q438885" start="7746" end="7760" title="Bernard Sumner" label="Bernard Sumner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1941788" start="7777" end="7798" title="Electronic (album)" label="the self-titled album"/>
<link wikidata="Q624661" start="7822" end="7832" title="Electronic (band)" label="Electronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q734687" start="7868" end="7876" title="Minimoog" label="Minimoog"/>
<link wikidata="Q277436" start="8180" end="8192" title="bank holiday" label="bank holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q3367868" start="8265" end="8271" title="Fulham" label="Fulham"/>
<link wikidata="Q61774438" start="9148" end="9169" title="Michael Spencer Jones" label="Michael Spencer Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210672" start="9208" end="9216" title="Didsbury" label="Didsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="9324" end="9335" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q300373" start="9368" end="9398" title="A Collection of Beatles Oldies" label="A Collection of Beatles Oldies"/>
<link wikidata="Q145903" start="9493" end="9503" title="Egyptology" label="Egyptology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638616" start="9515" end="9540" title="Manchester Science Museum" label="Manchester Science Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q91416" start="9806" end="9816" title="bay window" label="bay window"/>
<link wikidata="Q21141633" start="9914" end="9927" title="wood flooring" label="wood flooring"/>
<link wikidata="Q81683" start="9990" end="9997" title="varnish" label="varnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092323" start="10059" end="10065" title="Ribena" label="Ribena"/>
<link wikidata="Q189349" start="10079" end="10091" title="urban legend" label="urban legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q102272" start="10388" end="10400" title="Jan Van Eyck" label="Jan Van Eyck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742589" start="10408" end="10427" title="Flemish Renaissance" label="Flemish Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q220859" start="10443" end="10465" title="The Arnolfini Portrait" label="The Arnolfini Portrait"/>
<link wikidata="Q104067" start="10681" end="10692" title="Eli Wallach" label="Eli Wallach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155104" start="10697" end="10711" title="Antonio Casale" label="Antonio Casale"/>
<link wikidata="Q164562" start="10717" end="10729" title="Sergio Leone" label="Sergio Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q41483" start="10748" end="10778" title="The Good, the Bad and the Ugly" label="The Good, the Bad and the Ugly"/>
<link wikidata="Q317110" start="10803" end="10821" title="Gian Maria Volonté" label="Gian Maria Volonté"/>
<link wikidata="Q76479" start="10853" end="10873" title="A Fistful of Dollars" label="A Fistful of Dollars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179220" start="11018" end="11030" title="Rodney Marsh (footballer)" label="Rodney Marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q50602" start="11043" end="11058" title="Manchester City F.C." label="Manchester City"/>
<link wikidata="Q164521" start="11171" end="11182" title="George Best" label="George Best"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="11238" end="11255" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527049" start="11296" end="11311" title="gatefold" label="gatefold sleeve"/>
<link wikidata="Q212762" start="11316" end="11330" title="Burt Bacharach" label="Burt Bacharach"/>
<link wikidata="Q753863" start="11467" end="11475" title="Epiphone" label="Epiphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306" start="11672" end="11682" title="Pink Floyd" label="Pink Floyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q206271" start="11696" end="11705" title="Ummagumma" label="Ummagumma"/>
<link wikidata="Q51535" start="11813" end="11830" title="Vincente Minnelli" label="Vincente Minnelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q577757" start="11849" end="11853" title="Gigi (1958 film)" label="Gigi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542343" start="11931" end="11955" title="independent record label" label="independent record label"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139341" start="11956" end="11972" title="Creation Records" label="Creation Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q795585" start="12147" end="12158" title="BBC Radio 1" label="BBC Radio 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351488" start="12265" end="12275" title="Supersonic (Oasis song)" label="Supersonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566005" start="12415" end="12426" title="Shakermaker" label="Shakermaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q930414" start="12515" end="12530" title="Top of the Pops" label="Top of the Pops"/>
<link wikidata="Q769355" start="12621" end="12633" title="Live Forever (Oasis song)" label="Live Forever"/>
<link wikidata="Q850235" start="13027" end="13039" title="English Midlands" label="the Midlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="13247" end="13250" title="NME" label="NME"/>
<link wikidata="Q217629" start="13284" end="13285" title="Q (magazine)" label="Q"/>
<link wikidata="Q316930" start="13478" end="13489" title="dance music" label="dance music"/>
<link wikidata="Q494400" start="13628" end="13634" title="Mixmag" label="Mixmag"/>
<link wikidata="Q7769104" start="13963" end="13995" title="The Three Tenors in Concert 1994" label="The Three Tenors in Concert 1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q3031620" start="14390" end="14400" title="Slide Away (Oasis song)" label="Slide Away"/>
<link wikidata="Q11365" start="14805" end="14811" title="grunge" label="grunge"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="14975" end="14978" title="NME" label="NME"/>
<link wikidata="Q9141" start="15506" end="15515" title="Taj Mahal" label="Taj Mahal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4762122" start="15586" end="15599" title="Angel Delight" label="Angel Delight"/>
<link wikidata="Q580896" start="15613" end="15625" title="Melody Maker" label="Melody Maker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3371690" start="15730" end="15741" title="Paul Lester" label="Paul Lester"/>
<link wikidata="Q15505924" start="16243" end="16257" title="Stuart Maconie" label="Stuart Maconie"/>
<link wikidata="Q217629" start="16267" end="16268" title="Q (magazine)" label="Q"/>
<link wikidata="Q29606" start="16471" end="16486" title="the Stone Roses" label="the Stone Roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q23077" start="16506" end="16517" title="Lancashire" label="Lancastrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7942329" start="16589" end="16592" title="Vox (magazine)" label="Vox"/>
<link wikidata="Q261633" start="16993" end="16997" title="Mojo (magazine)" label="Mojo"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="17336" end="17349" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q485820" start="17660" end="17664" title="Blur (band)" label="Blur"/>
<link wikidata="Q826255" start="17668" end="17673" title="Suede (band)" label="Suede"/>
<link wikidata="Q519984" start="17724" end="17736" title="Neil Strauss" label="Neil Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="17746" end="17764" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q10854572" start="18080" end="18083" title="HMV" label="HMV"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="18085" end="18094" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="18102" end="18114" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128150" start="18126" end="18136" title="Classic FM (UK)" label="Classic FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q29606" start="18347" end="18362" title="the Stone Roses" label="the Stone Roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q300932" start="18369" end="18392" title="The Stone Roses (album)" label="self-titled debut album"/>
<link wikidata="Q180598" start="18397" end="18407" title="the Smiths" label="the Smiths"/>
<link wikidata="Q853308" start="18420" end="18437" title="The Queen Is Dead" label="The Queen Is Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281823" start="18505" end="18541" title="Guinness Book of British Hit Singles" label="Guinness Book of British Hit Singles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="18602" end="18613" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q169226" start="18626" end="18668" title="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band" label="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q240550" start="19080" end="19111" title="Rolling Stone&amp;#x27;s 500 Greatest Albums of All Time" label="500 Greatest Albums of All Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145275" start="19464" end="19476" title="Colin Larkin" label="Colin Larkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4729825" start="19490" end="19514" title="All Time Top 1000 Albums" label="All Time Top 1000 Albums"/>
<link wikidata="Q930471" start="19542" end="19554" title="Guitar World" label="Guitar World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025912" start="19711" end="19715" title="Spin (magazine)" label="Spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q721140" start="19806" end="19815" title="Pitchfork (website)" label="Pitchfork"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="19997" end="20000" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q164932" start="20060" end="20100" title="1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die" label="1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die"/>
<link wikidata="Q3486861" start="20582" end="20595" title="Rob Sheffield" label="Rob Sheffield"/>
<link wikidata="Q4717558" start="20840" end="20850" title="Alex Niven (writer)" label="Alex Niven"/>
<link wikidata="Q568642" start="20868" end="20878" title="Bloomsbury Publishing" label="Bloomsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q226210" start="20886" end="20889" title="33⅓" label="33⅓"/>
<link wikidata="Q50602" start="21195" end="21210" title="Manchester City F.C." label="Manchester City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381731" start="21229" end="21232" title="Kit (association football)" label="kit"/>
<link wikidata="Q394970" start="21621" end="21628" title="box set" label="box set"/>
<link wikidata="Q719415" start="21778" end="21793" title="UK Albums Chart" label="UK Albums Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q193459" start="21817" end="21831" title="Noel Gallagher" label="Noel Gallagher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138639" start="21846" end="21861" title="I Am the Walrus" label="I Am the Walrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q239177" start="21871" end="21887" title="Lennon–McCartney" label="Lennon–McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="23935" end="23944" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q151760" start="24277" end="24297" title="All Around the World (Oasis song)" label="All Around the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q3641253" start="24349" end="24358" title="Boardwalk (music club)" label="Boardwalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q812828" start="24435" end="24446" title="Be Here Now (album)" label="Be Here Now"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24481" end="24484" title="NME Awards#Shockwaves NME Awards 2005" label="NME"/>
<link wikidata="Q241365" start="24532" end="24543" title="Music recording sales certification" label="Gold status"/>
<link wikidata="Q216708" start="24583" end="24597" title="Liam Gallagher" label="Liam Gallagher"/>
<link wikidata="Q193666" start="24608" end="24618" title="tambourine" label="tambourine"/>
<link wikidata="Q193459" start="24621" end="24635" title="Noel Gallagher" label="Noel Gallagher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195785" start="24736" end="24769" title="Paul Arthurs" label="Paul &amp;quot;Bonehead&amp;quot; Arthurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5547925" start="24858" end="24890" title="Paul McGuigan (musician)" label="Paul &amp;quot;Guigsy&amp;quot; McGuigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455570" start="24907" end="24921" title="Tony McCarroll" label="Tony McCarroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q17085328" start="25077" end="25083" title="Audio mixing (recorded music)" label="mixing"/>
<link wikidata="Q128124" start="25151" end="25162" title="Audio engineer" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649429" start="25221" end="25232" title="Owen Morris" label="Owen Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q19958352" start="25267" end="25278" title="Barry Grint" label="Barry Grint"/>
<link wikidata="Q421031" start="25281" end="25290" title="Audio mastering" label="mastering"/>
<link wikidata="Q209651" start="25294" end="25312" title="Abbey Road Studios" label="Abbey Road Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q4963273" start="25468" end="25480" title="Brian Cannon" label="Brian Cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302863" start="25496" end="25502" title="Record sleeve" label="sleeve"/>
<link wikidata="Q706364" start="25520" end="25533" title="Art director" label="art direction"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="142981" wikidata="Q1044055" url="?curid=142981" title="UNIVAC I">
<text>The UNIVAC I (Universal Automatic Computer I) was the first general-purpose electronic digital computer design for business application produced in the United States. It was designed principally by J. Presper Eckert and John Mauchly, the inventors of the ENIAC. Design work was started by their company, Eckert–Mauchly Computer Corporation (EMCC), and was completed after the company had been acquired by Remington Rand (which later became part of Sperry, now Unisys). In the years before successor models of the UNIVAC I appeared, the machine was simply known as &quot;the UNIVAC&quot;.

The first UNIVAC was accepted by the United States Census Bureau on March 31, 1951, and was dedicated on June 14 that year. The fifth machine (built for the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission) was used by CBS to predict the result of the 1952 presidential election. With a sample of a mere 5.5% of the voter turnout, it famously predicted an Eisenhower landslide.

== History ==
===Development and design===
In early 1946, months after the completion of ENIAC, the University of Pennsylvania adopted a new patent policy, which would&#x27;ve required Eckert and Mauchly to assign all their patents to the university if they stayed beyond spring of that year. Unable to reach an agreement with the university, the duo left the Moore School of Electrical Engineering in March 1946, along with much of the senior engineering staff. Simultaneously, the duo founded the Electronic Control Company (later renamed the Eckert-Mauchly Computer Corporation) in Philadelphia. When the duo was given a $300,000 deposit for research by the United States Census Bureau, the conception of the UNIVAC I began in April 1946, a month after they founded their company. Later in August of that year, during the last of the Moore School Lectures, the Moore School team members were proposing new technological designs for the EDVAC computer (which was also in development at the time) and its stored program concept. They were also simultaneously conceiving ideas for a potential successor model to the EDVAC, which were under the working titles of &quot;Parallel-Type EDVAC,&quot; &quot;Statistical EDVAC,&quot; and simply, &quot;EDVAC II.&quot;
In April 1947, Eckert and Mauchly created the tentative instruction code, C-1, for their potential successor model to the EDVAC, which was the earliest document on the programming of an electronic digital computer intended for commercial use. A month later, they renamed their next project to &quot;the UNIVAC.&quot; Later in October of that year, the duo drafted , which was a mercury acoustic delay-line electronic memory system. The patent was eventually accepted in February 1953 as the &quot;first device to gain widespread acceptance as a reliable computer memory system.&quot; Meanwhile, in November 1947, the Electronic Control Company began advertising the UNIVAC I (which wasn&#x27;t shown as it wasn&#x27;t fully conceptualized at that point). In 1948, the company, renamed the Eckert-Mauchly Computer Corporation, secured a contract with the United States Census Bureau to begin construction on the UNIVAC I. At the same time, Harry Straus, impressed with the development of the duo&#x27;s next invention, convinced the directors of American Totalisator to invest $500,000 to shore up the financially troubled Eckert-Mauchly Computer Corporation.

In early 1949, Betty Holberton, one of the developers of the project, made the UNIVAC Instructions Code C-10, the first software to allow a computer to be operated by keyboarded commands rather than dials and switches. At the same time, Grace Hopper left the Harvard Computation Laboratory to join the EMCC as a senior mathematician and programmer to help develop the UNIVAC I. Later in June of that year, Mauchly conceived Short Code—the first high-level programming language for an electronic computer—to be used with the BINAC. The Short Code was later tested on the UNIVAC I in early 1950. Meanwhile, in September 1949, by the time the BINAC was delivered to Northrop Aircraft, Eckert and Mauchly received six new orders for the UNIVAC I, so they decided to focus on finishing the UNIVAC I. Unfortunately for them, a month later, Harry Straus was killed when his twin-engine airplane crashed, causing American Totalisator to withdraw their promise of financial support. This was quickly undone when Remington Rand bought the duo&#x27;s company in February 1950 to help finish construction on the UNIVAC I. The company then became Remington Rand&#x27;s &quot;Eckert-Mauchly Division.&quot; Construction of the UNIVAC I was completed by December 1950, and it was later delivered to the United States Census Bureau in March 1951 so data could be processed more quickly and accurately.

===Market positioning===
The UNIVAC I was the first American computer designed at the outset for business and administrative use with fast execution of relatively simple arithmetic and data transport operations, as opposed to the complex numerical calculations required of scientific computers. As such, the UNIVAC competed directly against punch-card machines, though the UNIVAC originally could neither read nor punch cards. That shortcoming hindered sales to companies concerned about the high cost of manually converting large quantities of existing data stored on cards. This was corrected by adding offline card processing equipment, the UNIVAC Tape to Card converter, to transfer data between cards and UNIVAC magnetic tapes. However, the early market share of the UNIVAC I was lower than the Remington Rand Company wished.

To promote sales, the company partnered with CBS to have UNIVAC I predict the result of the 1952 United States presidential election live on television. The machine predicted that Dwight D. Eisenhower would win in a landslide over Adlai Stevenson at a chance of 100 to 1, receive 32,915,949 votes and win the Electoral College 438–93. It was opposed to the final Gallup Poll, which had predicted that Eisenhower would win in a close contest. The CBS crew was so certain that UNIVAC was wrong that they believed it was not working, so they changed a certain &quot;national trend factor&quot; from 40% to 4% to obtain what appeared more correct 268–263, and released that for the television. It was soon noticed that the prediction assuming 40% was closer to truth, so they changed it back.

On election night, Eisenhower received 34,075,029 votes in a 442–89 Electoral College victory. UNIVAC had a margin of error of 3.5% of Eisenhower&#x27;s popular vote tally and was within four votes of his electoral vote total. The prediction and its use in CBS&#x27;s election coverage gave rise to a greater public awareness of computing technology, while computerized predictions became a widely used part of election night broadcasts.

===Installations===

The first contracts were with government agencies such as the Census Bureau, the U.S. Air Force, and the U.S. Army Map Service. Contracts were also signed by the ACNielsen Company, and the Prudential Insurance Company. Following the sale of Eckert–Mauchly Computer Corporation to Remington Rand in 1950, due to the cost overruns on the project, Remington Rand convinced Nielsen and Prudential to cancel their contracts.

The first sale, to the Census Bureau, was marked with a formal ceremony on March 31, 1951, at the Eckert–Mauchly Division&#x27;s factory at 3747 Ridge Avenue, Philadelphia. The machine was not actually shipped until the following December, because, as the sole fully set-up model, it was needed for demonstration purposes, and the company was apprehensive about the difficulties of dismantling, transporting, and reassembling the delicate machine. As a result, the first installation was with the second computer, delivered to the Pentagon in June 1952.

====UNIVAC installations, 1951–1954====
Originally priced at US$159,000, the UNIVAC I rose in price until they were between $1,250,000 and $1,500,000. A total of 46 systems were eventually built and delivered.

The UNIVAC I was too expensive for most universities, and Sperry Rand, unlike companies such as IBM, was not strong enough financially to afford to give many away. However, Sperry Rand donated UNIVAC I systems to Harvard University (1956), the University of Pennsylvania (1957), and Case Institute of Technology in Cleveland, Ohio (1957). The UNIVAC I at Case was still operable in 1965 but had been supplanted by a UNIVAC 1107.

A few UNIVAC I systems stayed in service long after they were made obsolete by advancing technology. The Census Bureau used its two systems until 1963, amounting to 12 and 9 years of service, respectively. Sperry Rand itself used two systems in Buffalo, New York until 1968. The insurance company Life and Casualty of Tennessee used its system until 1970, totalling over 13 years of service.

==Technical description==
===Major physical features===

UNIVAC I used 6,103 vacuum tubes, weighed , consumed 125 kW, and could perform about 1,905 operations per second running on a 2.25 MHz clock. The Central Complex alone (i.e. the processor and memory unit) was 4.3 m by 2.4 m by 2.6 m high. The complete system occupied more than 35.5 m2 (382 ft2) of floor space.

===Main memory details===

The main memory consisted of 1000 words of 12 characters each. When representing numbers, they were written as 11 decimal digits plus sign. The 1000 words of memory consisted of 100 channels of 10-word mercury delay-line registers. The input/output buffers were 60 words each, consisting of 12 channels of 10-word mercury delay-line registers. There are six channels of 10-word mercury delay-line registers as spares. With modified circuitry, seven more channels control the temperature of the seven mercury tanks, and one more channel is used for the 10-word &quot;Y&quot; register. The total of 126 mercury channels is contained in the seven mercury tanks mounted on the backs of sections MT, MV, MX, NT, NV, NX, and GV. Each mercury tank is divided into 18 mercury channels.

Each 10-word mercury delay-line channel is made up of three sections:
# A channel in a column of mercury, with receiving and transmitting quartz piezo-electric crystals mounted at opposite ends.
# An intermediate frequency chassis, connected to the receiving crystal, containing amplifiers, detector, and compensating delay, mounted on the shell of the mercury tank.
# A recirculation chassis, containing cathode follower, pulse former and retimer, modulator, which drives the transmitting crystal, and input, clear, and memory-switch gates, mounted in the sections adjacent to the mercury tanks.

===Instructions and data===
Instructions were six alphanumeric characters, packed two instructions per word. The addition time was 525 microseconds and the multiplication time was 2150 microseconds. A non-standard modification called &quot;Overdrive&quot; did exist, that allowed for three four-character instructions per word under some circumstances. (Ingerman&#x27;s simulator for the UNIVAC, referenced below, also makes this modification available.)
Digits were represented internally using excess-3 (&quot;XS3&quot;) binary-coded decimal (BCD) arithmetic with six bits per digit using the same value as the digits of the alphanumeric character set (and one parity bit per digit for error checking), allowing 11-digit signed magnitude numbers. But with the exception of one or two machine instructions, UNIVAC was considered by programmers to be a decimal machine, not a binary machine, and the binary representation of the characters was irrelevant. If a non-digit character was encountered in a position during an arithmetic operation the machine passed it unchanged to the output, and any carry into the non-digit was lost. (Note, however, that a peculiarity of UNIVAC I&#x27;s addition/subtraction circuitry was that the &quot;ignore&quot;, space, and minus characters were occasionally treated as numeric, with values of –3, –2, and –1, respectively, and the apostrophe, ampersand, and left parenthesis were occasionally treated as numeric, with values 10, 11, and 12.)

===Input/output===
Besides the operator&#x27;s console, the only I/O devices connected to the UNIVAC I were up to 10 UNISERVO tape drives, a Remington Standard electric typewriter and a Tektronix oscilloscope. The UNISERVO was the first commercial computer tape drive commercially sold. It used data density 128 bits per inch (with real transfer rate 7,200 characters per second) on magnetically plated phosphor bronze tapes. The UNISERVO could also read and write UNITYPER created tapes at 20 bits per inch. The UNITYPER was an offline typewriter to tape device, used by programmers and for minor data editing. Backward and forward tape read and write operations were possible on the UNIVAC and were fully overlapped with instruction execution, permitting high system throughput in typical sort/merge data processing applications. Large volumes of data could be submitted as input via magnetic tapes created on offline card to tape system and made as output via a separate offline tape to printer system. The operators console had three columns of decimal coded switches that allowed any of the 1000 memory locations to be displayed on the oscilloscope. Since the mercury delay-line memory stored bits in a serial format, a programmer or operator could monitor any memory location continuously and with sufficient patience, decode its contents as displayed on the scope. The on-line typewriter was typically used for announcing program breakpoints, checkpoints, and for memory dumps.

===Operations===
A typical UNIVAC I installation had several ancillary devices. There were:
* The UNIPRINTER read metal UNIVAC magnetic tape using a tape reader and typed the data at 10 characters per second using a modified Remington typewriter.
* The UNIVAC Card to Tape converter read punched cards at 240 cards per minute and wrote their data on metal UNIVAC magnetic tape using a UNISERVO tape drive.
* A tape-to-card converter, that read a magnetic tape and produced punched cards.
UNIVAC did not provide an operating system. Operators loaded on a UNISERVO a program tape which could be loaded automatically by processor logic. The appropriate source and output data tapes would be mounted and the program started. Results tapes then went to the offline printer or typically for data processing into short-term storage to be updated with the next set of data produced on the offline card to tape unit. The mercury delay-line memory tank temperature was very closely controlled as the speed of sound in mercury varies with temperature. In the event of a power failure, many hours could elapse before the temperature stabilized.

===Reliability===
Eckert and Mauchly were uncertain about the reliability of digital logic circuits—little was known about them at the time. The UNIVAC had been designed with parallel computation circuits and a statistical comparison of the results. In practice, however, only failing &quot;components,&quot; i.e., the vacuum tubes, yielded comparison faults, as the circuit designs as such proved very reliable. A regimen was established to ensure the reliability of the fragile vacuum tubes, the choke point of the entire operation. Prior to use large lots of the predominant tube type 25L6 were burned in and thoroughly tested. (Often half of any given production lot would be thrown away.) Technicians would then install a tested and burned-in tube in an easily diagnosed location such as the memory recirculate amplifiers. Then, when further proven aged and proven reliable, this &quot;golden&quot; tube was sent to stock to be pulled out for difficult-to-diagnose logic positions.

Furthermore, it took approximately 30 minutes to turn on the computer—all cathode heater power was stepped up gradually in order to reduce the in-rush current the concominant thermal stress on the tubes. As a result of these measures, uptimes (MTBF) of many days to weeks were eventually obtained on the processor. (The UNISERVO did not have vacuum columns but rather springs and strings to buffer the tape from the reels to the capstan. These mechanical components then became the most frequent source of failures.)

==See also==
* BINAC
* Ferranti Mark 1
* Grace Hopper
* History of computing hardware
* LEO (computer)
* List of UNIVAC products
* List of vacuum-tube computers

==References==
==External links==

* UNIVAC Conference Oral history on 17–18 May 1990. Charles Babbage Institute, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis. 171-page transcript of oral history with computer pioneers, including Jean Bartik, involved with the Univac computer, held on 17–18 May 1990. The meeting involved 25 engineers, programmers, marketing representatives, and salesmen who were involved with the UNIVAC, as well as representatives from users such as General Electric, Arthur Andersen, and the U.S. Census.
* Margaret R. Fox Papers, 1935–1976, Charles Babbage Institute, University of Minnesota. collection contains reports, including the original report on the ENIAC, UNIVAC, and many early in-house National Bureau of Standards (NBS) activity reports; memoranda on and histories of SEAC, SWAC, and DYSEAC; programming instructions for the UNIVAC, LARC, and MIDAC; patent evaluations and disclosures relevant to computers; system descriptions; speeches and articles written by Margaret Fox&#x27;s colleagues; and correspondence of Samuel Alexander, Margaret Fox, and Samuel Williams.
* UNIVAC I documentation – From computer documentation repository www.bitsavers.org
* The UNIVAC and the Legacy of the ENIAC – From the University of Pennsylvania Library (PENN UNIVERSITY/exhibitions)
* UNIVAC 1 Computer System – By Allan G. Reiter, formerly of the ERA division of Remington Rand
* UNIVAC I &amp; II Simulator – By Peter Zilahy Ingerman; Shareware simulator of the UNIVAC I and II. Archived download
* Core memory slide show – This slide show contains a photo of a 1951 core memory module for a UNIVAC I
* Remington-Rand Presents UNIVAC – Promotional film from the collection of the Computer History Museum, Mountain View, California
* Pictures and video in flash of UNIVAC main console; sales and marketing documents
* &quot;Want To Buy A Brain&quot;, May 1949, &quot;Popular Science&quot; early illustrated article on the UNIVAC for the general public
* YouTube Video: 1951 UNIVAC 1 Computer Basic System Components – Computer History Archives Project</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1044055" start="4" end="12" title="UNIVAC I" label="UNIVAC I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044055" start="14" end="44" title="UNIVAC I" label="Universal Automatic Computer I"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="152" end="165" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q457906" start="198" end="215" title="J. Presper Eckert" label="J. Presper Eckert"/>
<link wikidata="Q522162" start="220" end="232" title="John Mauchly" label="John Mauchly"/>
<link wikidata="Q169399" start="255" end="260" title="ENIAC" label="ENIAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281617" start="304" end="339" title="Eckert–Mauchly Computer Corporation" label="Eckert–Mauchly Computer Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372129" start="405" end="419" title="Remington Rand" label="Remington Rand"/>
<link wikidata="Q784567" start="448" end="454" title="Sperry Corporation" label="Sperry"/>
<link wikidata="Q518016" start="460" end="466" title="Unisys" label="Unisys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044055" start="574" end="580" title="UNIVAC I" label="UNIVAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="626" end="653" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q939090" start="746" end="775" title="United States Atomic Energy Commission" label="U.S. Atomic Energy Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="789" end="792" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q699548" start="822" end="848" title="U.S. presidential election, 1952" label="1952 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="926" end="936" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q169399" start="1038" end="1043" title="ENIAC" label="ENIAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q49117" start="1049" end="1075" title="University of Pennsylvania" label="University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6908229" start="1309" end="1347" title="Moore School of Electrical Engineering" label="Moore School of Electrical Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="1534" end="1546" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1610" end="1637" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q6908227" start="1786" end="1807" title="Moore School Lectures" label="Moore School Lectures"/>
<link wikidata="Q834849" start="1888" end="1893" title="EDVAC" label="EDVAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134867" start="1955" end="1969" title="stored program" label="stored program"/>
<link wikidata="Q5670410" start="3148" end="3160" title="Harry L. Straus" label="Harry Straus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745261" start="3254" end="3274" title="American Totalisator" label="American Totalisator"/>
<link wikidata="Q11636" start="3384" end="3399" title="Betty Holberton" label="Betty Holberton"/>
<link wikidata="Q11641" start="3606" end="3618" title="Grace Hopper" label="Grace Hopper"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="3628" end="3658" title="Harvard Computation Laboratory" label="Harvard Computation Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566011" start="3793" end="3803" title="Short Code (computer language)" label="Short Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q795989" start="3893" end="3898" title="BINAC" label="BINAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q912979" start="4032" end="4049" title="Northrop Aircraft" label="Northrop Aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q233132" start="4236" end="4247" title="twin-engine" label="twin-engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372129" start="4372" end="4386" title="Remington Rand" label="Remington Rand"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="4657" end="4684" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q183414" start="5097" end="5107" title="punched card" label="punch-card"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="5633" end="5636" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q699548" start="5680" end="5720" title="1952 United States presidential election" label="1952 United States presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="5768" end="5788" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q642590" start="5804" end="5813" title="landslide victory" label="landslide"/>
<link wikidata="Q311719" start="5819" end="5834" title="Adlai Stevenson II" label="Adlai Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q47586" start="5897" end="5914" title="United States Electoral College" label="Electoral College"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5951" end="5962" title="Gallup, Inc.#Gallup Poll" label="Gallup Poll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352827" start="6486" end="6501" title="margin of error" label="margin of error"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="6900" end="6913" title="United States Census Bureau" label="Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="6919" end="6933" title="United States Air Force" label="U.S. Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794172" start="6948" end="6964" title="Army Map Service" label="Army Map Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q288603" start="7000" end="7017" title="ACNielsen" label="ACNielsen Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2114414" start="7027" end="7055" title="Prudential Financial" label="Prudential Insurance Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="7875" end="7878" title="United States dollar" label="US$"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="8121" end="8124" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="8238" end="8256" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49117" start="8269" end="8295" title="University of Pennsylvania" label="University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047060" start="8308" end="8336" title="Case Institute of Technology" label="Case Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="8340" end="8355" title="Cleveland, Ohio" label="Cleveland, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467589" start="8441" end="8452" title="UNIVAC 1107" label="UNIVAC 1107"/>
<link wikidata="Q40435" start="8700" end="8717" title="Buffalo, New York" label="Buffalo, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q6545036" start="8752" end="8782" title="Life and Casualty Insurance Company of Tennessee" label="Life and Casualty of Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574371" start="8925" end="8936" title="vacuum tube" label="vacuum tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="8962" end="8964" title="kilowatt" label="kW"/>
<link wikidata="Q39369" start="9036" end="9039" title="megahertz" label="MHz"/>
<link wikidata="Q625642" start="9279" end="9284" title="Word (data type)" label="words"/>
<link wikidata="Q81365" start="9359" end="9366" title="decimal" label="decimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5359789" start="9379" end="9383" title="signed number representations" label="sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778158" start="9447" end="9465" title="delay-line memory" label="mercury delay-line"/>
<link wikidata="Q187466" start="9466" end="9475" title="register (computing)" label="registers"/>
<link wikidata="Q219320" start="9481" end="9493" title="input/output" label="input/output"/>
<link wikidata="Q43010" start="10162" end="10168" title="quartz" label="quartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q43533" start="10184" end="10191" title="crystal" label="crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q272683" start="10650" end="10662" title="Instruction set" label="Instructions"/>
<link wikidata="Q737372" start="10672" end="10684" title="alphanumeric" label="alphanumeric"/>
<link wikidata="Q842015" start="10757" end="10769" title="microseconds" label="microseconds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076814" start="11118" end="11126" title="excess-3" label="excess-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q276582" start="11145" end="11165" title="binary-coded decimal" label="binary-coded decimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q625502" start="11285" end="11295" title="parity bit" label="parity bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062839" start="11310" end="11324" title="redundancy check" label="error checking"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11345" end="11361" title="signed number representations#Sign–magnitude" label="signed magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q219320" start="12168" end="12171" title="input/output" label="I/O"/>
<link wikidata="Q7865304" start="12220" end="12228" title="UNISERVO" label="UNISERVO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372129" start="12244" end="12262" title="Remington Standard" label="Remington Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q46335" start="12263" end="12282" title="electric typewriter" label="electric typewriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347679" start="12289" end="12298" title="Tektronix" label="Tektronix"/>
<link wikidata="Q174320" start="12299" end="12311" title="oscilloscope" label="oscilloscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q7865318" start="12616" end="12624" title="UNITYPER" label="UNITYPER"/>
<link wikidata="Q12483" start="14934" end="14945" title="statistics" label="statistical"/>
<link wikidata="Q400005" start="15221" end="15232" title="choke point" label="choke point"/>
<link wikidata="Q4632133" start="15311" end="15315" title="25L6" label="25L6"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365473" start="15785" end="15799" title="cathode heater" label="cathode heater"/>
<link wikidata="Q754940" start="15955" end="15959" title="Mean time between failures" label="MTBF"/>
<link wikidata="Q176994" start="16140" end="16147" title="Capstan (tape recorder)" label="capstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q795989" start="16244" end="16249" title="BINAC" label="BINAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q675128" start="16252" end="16267" title="Ferranti Mark 1" label="Ferranti Mark 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q11641" start="16270" end="16282" title="Grace Hopper" label="Grace Hopper"/>
<link wikidata="Q186148" start="16285" end="16314" title="History of computing hardware" label="History of computing hardware"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991842" start="16317" end="16331" title="LEO (computer)" label="LEO (computer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4436308" start="16334" end="16357" title="List of UNIVAC products" label="List of UNIVAC products"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137429" start="16360" end="16389" title="List of vacuum-tube computers" label="List of vacuum-tube computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975167" start="16478" end="16503" title="Charles Babbage Institute" label="Charles Babbage Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975167" start="16947" end="16972" title="Charles Babbage Institute" label="Charles Babbage Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q16081635" start="17381" end="17393" title="Margaret R. Fox" label="Margaret Fox"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="142982" wikidata="Q5272257" url="?curid=142982" title="Mora">
<text>Mora may refer to:

==People==
* José Maria Mora (1847–1926), Cuban-American photographer, often credited as &quot;Mora&quot;
* Mora (singer) (born 1996), a Puerto Rican singer
* Mora (surname), a Spanish name (includes a list of people with the name)

==Places==
===Sweden===
* Mora, Säter, Sweden
* Mora, Sweden, the seat of Mora Municipality
* Mora Municipality, Sweden

===United States===
* Mora, Louisiana, an unincorporated community
* Mora, Minnesota, a city
* Mora, Missouri, an unincorporated community
* Mora County, New Mexico
** Mora, New Mexico, a census-designated place and the county seat
** Mora River, partially in Mora County

===Elsewhere===
* Mora, Cordillera, Bolivia
* Mora, Cameroon, a town
* Mora (canton), San José, Costa Rica
* Mora, Cyprus, a village
* Mõra, Estonia, a village
* Mora, Maharashtra, India, a port serving the town of Uran
* Mora, Portugal, a municipality
* Mora, Spain, a town and municipality in the province of Toledo
* Mora de Rubielos, a town in Aragón, Spain
* Morea Eyalet (Ottoman Turkish: Eyālet-i Mōrâ), a former Ottoman Empire province in what is now Greece
* Mora (historical region), East Africa
* 1257 Móra, an asteroid

==Sports==
* Mora CF, a Spanish football team
* Mora IK, an ice hockey club in Mora, Sweden
* IFK Mora, a sports club in Mora, Sweden
* IFK Mora Fotboll, a football club in Mora, Sweden

==Warfare==
* Mora (military unit), an ancient Spartan unit of about 600 soldiers
* First Battle of Mora, an 1847 battle of the Mexican–American War
* Second Battle of Mora, an 1847 battle of the Mexican–American War

==Other uses==
* &quot;Mora&quot; (album), a 2011 album by Hungarian industrial nu metal band FreshFabrik
* MORA (aviation), minimum off-route altitude
* Mora (drink), a drink consisting of blackberry juice, water and sugar
* &quot;Mora&quot; (fish), a genus of fish in the family Moridae
* &quot;Mora&quot; (plant), a genus of plants in the pea family &quot;Fabaceae&quot;
* Mora (linguistics), a unit of sound
** &quot;mōra&quot;, the modern Japanese equivalent
* Mora (music store), a music download store by Sony
* Mora Banc Grup, joint name of two Andorran banks
* Mora (mythology), in Slavic mythology
* &quot;Mora&quot; (ship), the flagship of William the Conqueror
* Mora station, Busan, South Korea, a railway station
* Mora clock, a type of 19th-century Swedish longcase clock
* Mora knife, a type of knife made by various makers in Mora, Sweden
* Cyclone Mora, a tropical cyclone that affected Bangladesh in 2017

==See also==
* Siege of Mora, in World War I
* &quot;Mora v. McNamara&quot;, a 1967 US Supreme Court case
* Stones of Mora, the place where Swedish kings were elected
* De la Mora (disambiguation)
* Morea (disambiguation)
* Moria (disambiguation)
* Morra (disambiguation)
* Mayura (disambiguation)
* Moras, a commune in France</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5272257" start="0" end="4" title="Mora" label="Mora"/>
<link wikidata="Q4302284" start="33" end="48" title="José Maria Mora" label="José Maria Mora"/>
<link wikidata="Q111546121" start="128" end="141" title="Mora (singer)" label="Mora (singer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q10083765" start="179" end="193" title="Mora (surname)" label="Mora (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3352421" start="279" end="290" title="Mora, Säter" label="Mora, Säter"/>
<link wikidata="Q849874" start="301" end="313" title="Mora, Sweden" label="Mora, Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q504239" start="347" end="372" title="Mora Municipality, Sweden" label="Mora Municipality, Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q18157710" start="396" end="411" title="Mora, Louisiana" label="Mora, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1924796" start="443" end="458" title="Mora, Minnesota" label="Mora, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q3471172" start="469" end="483" title="Mora, Missouri" label="Mora, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q487236" start="515" end="538" title="Mora County, New Mexico" label="Mora County, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183004" start="542" end="558" title="Mora, New Mexico" label="Mora, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q55623733" start="609" end="619" title="Mora River" label="Mora River"/>
<link wikidata="Q652371" start="665" end="681" title="Mora, Cordillera" label="Mora, Cordillera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708675" start="693" end="707" title="Mora, Cameroon" label="Mora, Cameroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935206" start="718" end="731" title="Mora (canton)" label="Mora (canton)"/>
<link wikidata="Q785372" start="756" end="768" title="Mora, Cyprus" label="Mora, Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3456501" start="782" end="786" title="Mõra" label="Mõra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6908888" start="809" end="826" title="Mora, Maharashtra" label="Mora, Maharashtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q174800" start="869" end="883" title="Mora, Portugal" label="Mora, Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641529" start="902" end="913" title="Mora, Spain" label="Mora, Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q955799" start="967" end="983" title="Mora de Rubielos" label="Mora de Rubielos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568317" start="1011" end="1023" title="Morea Eyalet" label="Morea Eyalet"/>
<link wikidata="Q118897532" start="1115" end="1139" title="Mora (historical region)" label="Mora (historical region)"/>
<link wikidata="Q137366" start="1155" end="1164" title="1257 Móra" label="1257 Móra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6908895" start="1192" end="1199" title="Mora CF" label="Mora CF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422758" start="1227" end="1234" title="Mora IK" label="Mora IK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653513" start="1273" end="1281" title="IFK Mora" label="IFK Mora"/>
<link wikidata="Q16845231" start="1315" end="1331" title="IFK Mora Fotboll" label="IFK Mora Fotboll"/>
<link wikidata="Q898140" start="1380" end="1400" title="Mora (military unit)" label="Mora (military unit)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452525" start="1450" end="1470" title="First Battle of Mora" label="First Battle of Mora"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443100" start="1517" end="1538" title="Second Battle of Mora" label="Second Battle of Mora"/>
<link wikidata="Q6717097" start="1601" end="1625" title="Mora (album)" label="&amp;quot;Mora&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6717098" start="1692" end="1707" title="MORA (aviation)" label="MORA (aviation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6908894" start="1738" end="1750" title="Mora (drink)" label="Mora (drink)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3457816" start="1810" end="1833" title="Mora (fish)" label="&amp;quot;Mora&amp;quot; (fish)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461699" start="1875" end="1899" title="Mora (plant)" label="&amp;quot;Mora&amp;quot; (plant)"/>
<link wikidata="Q521164" start="1960" end="1978" title="Mora (linguistics)" label="Mora (linguistics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7090878" start="2005" end="2009" title="mōra" label="mōra"/>
<link wikidata="Q368256" start="2050" end="2068" title="Mora (music store)" label="Mora (music store)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6908896" start="2103" end="2117" title="Mora Banc Grup" label="Mora Banc Grup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262457" start="2154" end="2170" title="Mora (mythology)" label="Mora (mythology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5273519" start="2194" end="2217" title="Mora (ship)" label="&amp;quot;Mora&amp;quot; (ship)"/>
<link wikidata="Q705959" start="2259" end="2271" title="Mora station" label="Mora station"/>
<link wikidata="Q6908903" start="2313" end="2323" title="Mora clock" label="Mora clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268004" start="2373" end="2383" title="Mora knife" label="Mora knife"/>
<link wikidata="Q30101315" start="2442" end="2454" title="Cyclone Mora" label="Cyclone Mora"/>
<link wikidata="Q7510251" start="2524" end="2537" title="Siege of Mora" label="Siege of Mora"/>
<link wikidata="Q15147984" start="2562" end="2578" title="Mora v. McNamara" label="Mora v. McNamara"/>
<link wikidata="Q304555" start="2617" end="2631" title="Stones of Mora" label="Stones of Mora"/>
<link wikidata="Q56292752" start="2678" end="2705" title="De la Mora (disambiguation)" label="De la Mora (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q619154" start="2708" end="2730" title="Morea (disambiguation)" label="Morea (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q258157" start="2733" end="2755" title="Moria (disambiguation)" label="Moria (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q358462" start="2758" end="2780" title="Morra (disambiguation)" label="Morra (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q13574999" start="2783" end="2806" title="Mayura (disambiguation)" label="Mayura (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068929" start="2809" end="2814" title="Moras" label="Moras"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="142983" wikidata="Q431195" url="?curid=142983" title="IBM Db2">
<text>Db2 is a family of data management products, including database servers, developed by IBM. It initially supported the relational model, but was extended to support object–relational features and non-relational structures like JSON and XML. The brand name was originally styled as DB2 until 2017, when it changed to its present form. In the early days, it was sometimes wrongly styled as DB/2 in a false derivation from the operating system OS/2.

==History==
DB2 traces its roots back to the beginning of the 1970s, when Edgar F. Codd, a researcher working for IBM, described the theory of relational databases, and in June 1970, published the model for data manipulation.

In 1974, the IBM San Jose Research Center developed a related Database Management System (DBMS) called System R, to implement Codd&#x27;s concepts. A key development of the System R project was the Structured Query Language (SQL). To apply the relational model, Codd needed a relational-database language he named DSL/Alpha. At the time, IBM did not believe in the potential of Codd&#x27;s ideas, leaving the implementation to a group of programmers not under Codd&#x27;s supervision. This led to an inexact interpretation of Codd&#x27;s relational model that matched only part of the prescriptions of the theory; the result was Structured English QUEry Language or SEQUEL.

IBM bought Metaphor Computer Systems to utilize their GUI interface and encapsulating SQL platform that had already been in use since the mid-80s.

In parallel with the development of SQL, IBM also developed Query by Example (QBE), the first graphical query language.

IBM&#x27;s first commercial relational-database product, SQL/DS, was released for the DOS/VSE and VM/CMS operating systems in 1981. In 1976, IBM released Query by Example for the VM platform where the table-oriented front-end produced a linear-syntax language that drove transactions to its relational database. Later, the QMF feature of DB2 produced real SQL, and brought the same &quot;QBE&quot; look and feel to DB2. The inspiration for the mainframe version of DB2&#x27;s architecture came in part from IBM IMS, a hierarchical database, and its dedicated database-manipulation language, IBM DL/I.

The name DB2 (IBM Database 2), was first given to the Database Management System or DBMS in 1983 when IBM released DB2 on its MVS mainframe platform.

For some years DB2, as a full-function DBMS, was exclusively available on IBM mainframes. Later, IBM brought DB2 to other platforms, including OS/2, UNIX, and MS Windows servers, and then Linux (including Linux on IBM Z) and PDAs. This process occurred through the 1990s. An implementation of DB2 is also available for z/VSE and z/VM. An earlier version of the code that would become DB2 LUW (Linux, Unix, Windows) was part of an Extended Edition component of OS/2 called Database Manager.

IBM extended the functionality of Database Manager a number of times, including the addition of distributed database functionality by means of Distributed Relational Database Architecture (DRDA) that allowed shared access to a database in a remote location on a LAN. (Note that DRDA is based on objects and protocols defined by Distributed Data Management Architecture (DDM).)

Eventually, IBM decided to rewrite the software completely. The new version of Database Manager were called DB2/2 and DB2/6000 respectively. Other versions of DB2, with different code bases, followed the same &#x27;/&#x27; naming convention and became DB2/400 (for the AS/400), DB2/VSE (for the DOS/VSE environment), and DB2/VM (for the VM operating system). IBM lawyers stopped this handy naming convention from being used and decided that all products needed to be called &quot;product FOR platform&quot; (for example, DB2 for OS/390). The next iteration of the mainframe and the server-based products was named DB2 Universal Database (or DB2 UDB).

=== Db2 for LUW ===
In the mid-1990s, IBM released a clustered DB2 implementation called DB2 Parallel Edition, which initially ran on AIX. This edition allowed scalability by providing a shared-nothing architecture, in which a single large database is partitioned across multiple DB2 servers that communicate over a high-speed interconnect. This DB2 edition was eventually ported to all Linux, UNIX, and Windows (LUW) platforms, and was renamed to DB2 Extended Enterprise Edition (EEE). IBM now refers to this product as the Database Partitioning Feature (DPF) and bundles it with their flagship DB2 Enterprise product.

When Informix Corporation acquired Illustra and made their database engine an object-SQL DBMS by introducing their Universal Server, both Oracle Corporation and IBM followed suit by changing their database engines to be capable of object–relational extensions. In 2001, IBM bought Informix Software, and in the following years incorporated Informix technology into the DB2 product suite. DB2 can technically be considered to be an object–SQL DBMS.

In mid-2006, IBM announced &quot;Viper&quot;, the codename for DB2 9 on both distributed platforms and z/OS. DB2 9 for z/OS was announced in early 2007. IBM claimed that the new DB2 was the first relational database to store XML &quot;natively&quot;. Other enhancements include OLTP-related improvements for distributed platforms, business intelligence/data warehousing-related improvements for z/OS, more self-tuning and self-managing features, additional 64-bit exploitation (especially for virtual storage on z/OS), stored procedure performance enhancements for z/OS, and continued convergence of the SQL vocabularies between z/OS and distributed platforms.

In October 2007, IBM announced &quot;Viper 2&quot;, the codename for DB2 9.5 on the distributed platforms. There were three key themes for the release, Simplified Management, Business Critical Reliability, and Agile XML development.

In June 2009, IBM announced &quot;Cobra&quot;, the codename for DB2 9.7 for LUW. DB2 9.7 added data compression for database indexes, temporary tables, and large objects. DB2 9.7 also supported native XML data in hash partitioning (database partitioning), range partitioning (table partitioning), and multi-dimensional clustering. These native XML features allow users to directly work with XML in data warehouse environments. DB2 9.7 also added several features that make it easier for Oracle Database users to work with DB2. These include support for the most commonly used SQL syntax, PL/SQL syntax, scripting syntax, and data types from Oracle Database. DB2 9.7 also enhanced its concurrency model to exhibit behavior that is familiar to users of Oracle Database and Microsoft SQL Server.

In October 2009, IBM introduced its second major release of the year when it announced DB2 pureScale. DB2 pureScale is a cluster database for non-mainframe platforms, suitable for online transaction processing (OLTP) workloads. IBM based the design of DB2 pureScale on the Parallel Sysplex implementation of DB2 data sharing on the mainframe. DB2 pureScale provides a fault-tolerant architecture and shared-disk storage. A DB2 pureScale system can grow to 128 database servers, and provides continuous availability and automatic load balancing.

In 2009, it was announced that DB2 can be an engine in MySQL. This allows users on the IBM i platform and users on other platforms to access these files through the MySQL interface. On IBM i and its predecessor OS/400, DB2 is tightly integrated into the operating system, and comes as part of the operating system. It provides journaling, triggers and other features.

In early 2012, IBM announced the next version of DB2, DB2 10.1 (code name Galileo) for Linux, UNIX, and Windows. DB2 10.1 contained a number of new data management capabilities including row and column access control which enables &#x27;fine-grained&#x27; control of the database and multi-temperature data management that moves data to cost effective storage based on how &quot;hot&quot; or &quot;cold&quot; (how frequently the data is accessed) the data is. IBM also introduced &quot;adaptive compression&quot; capability in DB2 10.1, a new approach to compressing data tables.

In June 2013, IBM released DB2 10.5 (code name &quot;Kepler&quot;).

On 12 April 2016, IBM announced DB2 LUW 11.1, and in June 2016, it was released.

In mid-2017, IBM re-branded its DB2 and dashDB product offerings and amended their names to &quot;Db2&quot;.

On June 27, 2019, IBM released Db2 11.5, the AI Database. It added AI functionality to improve query performance as well as capabilities to facilitate AI application development.

=== Db2 for z/OS - evolution ===
In 1995, GA (general availability) of V4. It introduced &quot;data sharing&quot;: several DB2 engines access the same data. Advantages: performance and availability (if one DB2 engine fails or is migrated to the next version).

In 1997, GA of V5. It added, e.g., online reorganization of tablespaces.

In 1999, GA of V6. It added object-relational support. &quot;Objects&quot; here mean data items longer than 32K (up to then the maximal length of a table row, more precisely a table record), such as images, videos, or text. DB2 could now store and handle such objects. Furthermore, it added trigger support.

In 2001, GA of V7. It added, e.g., dynamic allocation of data sets (~files on z/OS), and the ability to let utilities run on lists of tablespaces. Furthermore, real-time statistics, scrollable cursors, and initial Unicode support.

In 2004, GA of V8. It added, e.g., 64-bit support. New index types (notably DPSI), recursive SQL. Internal catalog is converted to Unicode.

In 2007, GA of V9. It added, e.g., Trusted Context (a security feature), and &quot;native XML&quot; support.

In 2010, GA of V10. It added, e.g., Temporal Tables (e.g., row history), security features like separation of system and security administrators, and RCAC (row column access control).

In 2013, GA of V11. It added, e.g., JSON support.

In 2016, GA of V12. It added, e.g., RESTful services; and usage of AI to optimize the selection of the access path to the data, thus enhancing performance.

On May 31, 2022, IBM released Db2 13 for z/OS.

===Db2 Warehouse===
&quot;Data warehousing&quot; was first mentioned in a 1988 IBM Systems Journal article entitled, &quot;An Architecture for Business Information Systems.&quot; This article illustrated the first use-case for data warehousing in a business setting as well as the results of its application.

Traditional transaction processing databases were not able to provide the insight business leaders needed to make data-informed decisions. A new approach was needed to aggregate and analyze data from multiple transactional sources to deliver new insights, uncover patterns, and find hidden relationships among the data. Db2 Warehouse, with its capabilities to normalize data from multiple sources, performs sophisticated analytic and statistical modeling, provides businesses these features at speed and scale.

Increases in computational power resulted in an explosion of data inside businesses generally and data warehouses specifically. Warehouses grew from being measured in GBs to TBs and PBs. As both the volume and variety of data grew, Db2 Warehouse adapted as well. Initially purposed for star and snowflake schemas, Db2 Warehouse now includes support for the following data types and analytical models, among others:

* Relational data
* Non-Relational data
* XML data
* Geospatial data
* RStudio
* Apache Spark
* Embedded Spark Analytics engine
* Multi-Parallel Processing
* In-memory analytical processing
* Predictive Modeling algorithms

Db2 Warehouse uses Docker containers to run in multiple environments: on-premise, private cloud and a variety of public clouds, both managed and unmanaged. Db2 Warehouse can be deployed as software only, as an appliance and in Intel x86, Linux and mainframe platforms. Built upon IBM&#x27;s Common SQL engine, Db2 Warehouse queries data from multiple sources—Oracle, Microsoft SQL Server, Teradata, open source, Netezza and others. Users write a query once and data returns from multiple sources quickly and efficiently.

===Db2 on Cloud/Db2 Hosted===
Db2 on Cloud: Formerly named &quot;dashDB for Transactions&quot;, Db2 on Cloud is a fully managed, cloud SQL database with a high-availability option featuring a 99.99 percent uptime SLA. Db2 on Cloud offers independent scaling of storage and compute, and rolling security updates.

Db2 on Cloud is deployable on both IBM Cloud and Amazon Web Services (AWS).

Key features include:

* Elasticity: Db2 on Cloud offers independent scaling of storage and compute through the user interface and API, so businesses can burst on compute during peak demand and scale down when demand falls. Storage is also scalable, so organizations can scale up as their storage needs grow.
* Backups and Recovery: Db2 on Cloud provides several disaster recovery options: (1) Fourteen days&#x27; worth of back-ups, (2) point in time restore options, (3) 1-click failover to the DR node at an offsite data center of user&#x27;s choice.
* Encryption: Db2 on Cloud complies with data protection laws and includes at-rest database encryption and SSL connections. The Db2 on Cloud high availability plans offer rolling security updates and all database instances include daily backups. Security patching and maintenance is managed by the database administrator. 
* High availability options: Db2 on Cloud provides a 99.99% uptime service level agreement on the high availability option. Highly available option allows for updates and scaling operations without downtime to applications running on Db2 on Cloud, using Db2&#x27;s HADR technology.
* Data federation: A single query displays a view of all data by accessing data distributed across Db2 on-premises or Db2 Warehouse on-premises or in the cloud. 
* Private networking: Db2 on Cloud can be deployed on an isolated network that is accessible through a secure Virtual Private Network (VPN).

Db2 Hosted: Formally named &quot;DB2 on Cloud&quot;, Db2 Hosted is an unmanaged, hosted version of Db2 on Cloud&#x27;s transactional, SQL cloud database.

Key features:

* Server control: Db2 Hosted provides custom software for direct server installation. This reduces application latency and integrates with a business&#x27;s current data management setup. Db2 Hosted offers exact server configuration based on the needs of the business.
* Encryption: Db2 Hosted supports SSL connections. 
* Elasticity: Db2 Hosted allows for independent scaling of compute and storage to meet changing business needs.

===Db2 Warehouse on Cloud===
Formerly named &quot;dashDB for Analytics&quot;, Db2 Warehouse on Cloud is a fully managed, elastic, cloud data warehouse built for high-performance analytics and machine learning workloads.

Key features include:

* Autonomous cloud service: Db2 Warehouse on Cloud runs on an autonomous platform-as-a-service, and is powered by Db2&#x27;s autonomous self-tuning engine. Day-to-day operations, including database monitoring, uptime checks and failovers, are fully automated. Operations are supplemented by a DevOps team that are on-call to handle unexpected system failures.
* Optimized for analytics: Db2 Warehouse on Cloud delivers high performance on complex analytics workloads by utilizing IBM BLU Acceleration, a collection of technologies pioneered by IBM Research that features four key optimizations: (1) a columnar organized storage model, (2) in-memory processing, (3) querying of compressed data sets, and (4) data skipping.
* Manage highly concurrent workloads: Db2 Warehouse on Cloud includes an Adaptive Workload Management technology that automatically manages resources between concurrent workloads, given user-defined resource targets. This technology ensures stable and reliable performance when tackling highly concurrent workloads.
* Built-in machine learning and geospatial capabilities: Db2 Warehouse on Cloud comes with in-database machine learning capabilities that allow users to train and run machine learning models on Db2 Warehouse data without the need for data movement. Examples of algorithms include Association Rules, ANOVA, k-means, Regression, and Naïve Bayes. Db2 Warehouse on Cloud also supports spatial analytics with Esri compatibility, supporting Esri data types such as GML, and supports native Python drivers and native Db2 Python integration into Jupyter Notebooks. 
* Elasticity: Db2 Warehouse on Cloud offers independent scaling of storage and compute, so organizations can customize their data warehouses to meet the needs of their businesses. For example, customers can burst on compute during peak demand, and scale down when demand falls. Users can also expand storage capacity as their data volumes grow. Customers can scale their data warehouse through the Db2 Warehouse on Cloud web console or API. 
* Data security: Data is encrypted at-rest and in-motion by default. Administrators can also restrict access to sensitive data through data masking, row permissions, and role-based security, and can utilize database audit utilities to maintain audit trails for their data warehouse.
* Polyglot persistence: Db2 Warehouse on Cloud is optimized for polyglot persistence of data, and supports relational (columnar and row-oriented tables), geospatial, and NoSQL document (XML, JSON, BSON) models. All data is subject to advanced data compression.
* Deployable on multiple cloud providers: Db2 Warehouse on Cloud is currently deployable on IBM Cloud and Amazon Web Services (AWS).

===Db2 BigSQL===
In 2018, the IBM SQL product was renamed and is now known as IBM Db2 Big SQL (Big SQL). Big SQL is an enterprise-grade, hybrid ANSI-compliant SQL on the Hadoop engine delivering massively parallel processing (MPP) and advanced data query. Additional benefits include low latency, high performance, security, SQL compatibility and federation capabilities.

Big SQL offers a single database connection or query for disparate sources such as HDFS, RDMS, NoSQL databases, object stores and WebHDFS. Exploit Hive, Or to exploit Hbase and Spark and whether on the cloud, on premises or both, access data across Hadoop and relational data bases.

Users (data scientists and analysts) can run smarter ad hoc and complex queries supporting more concurrent users with less hardware compared to other SQL options for Hadoop. Big SQL provides an ANSI-compliant SQL parser to run queries from unstructured streaming data using new APIs.

Through the integration with the IBM Common SQL Engine, Big SQL was designed to work with all the Db2 family of offerings, as well as with the IBM Integrated Analytics System. Big SQL is a part of the IBM Hybrid Data Management Platform, a comprehensive IBM strategy for flexibility and portability, strong data integration and flexible licensing.

===Db2 Event Store===
Db2 Event Store targets the needs of the Internet of things (IOT), industrial, telecommunications, financial services, online retail and other industries needing to perform real-time analytics on streamed high volume, high velocity data. It became publicly available in June 2017. It can store and analyze 250 billion events in a day with just 3 server nodes with its high speed data capture and analytics capabilities. The need to support AI and machine learning was envisioned from the start by including IBM Watson Studio into the product, and integrating Jupyter notebooks for collaborative app and model development. Typically combined with streaming tools, it provides persistent data by writing the data out to object storage in an open data format (Apache Parquet). Built on Spark, Db2 Event Store is compatible with Spark Machine Learning, Spark SQL, other open technologies, as well as the Db2 family Common SQL Engine and all languages supported – including Python, GO, JDBC, ODBC, and more.

==Db2 for IBM i==
In 1994, IBM renamed the integrated relational database of the OS/400 to &quot;DB2/400&quot; to indicate comparable functionality to DB2 on other platforms. Despite this name, it is not based on Db2 code, but instead it evolved from the IBM System/38 integrated database. The product is currently named &quot;IBM Db2 for i&quot;.

==Other Platforms==
* Db2 for Linux, UNIX and Windows (informally known as Db2 LUW)
* Db2 for z/OS (mainframe)
* Db2 for VSE &amp; VM
* Db2 on IBM Cloud
*Db2 on Amazon Web Services (AWS)

Db2 for z/OS is available in its traditional product packaging, or in the Value Unit Edition.

Db2 also powers IBM InfoSphere Warehouse, which offers data warehouse capabilities. InfoSphere Warehouse is available for z/OS. It includes several BI features such as ETL, data mining, OLAP acceleration, and in-line analytics.

Db2 11.5 for Linux, UNIX and Windows, contains all of the functionality and tools offered in the prior generation of DB2 and InfoSphere Warehouse on Linux, UNIX and Windows.

==Editions==
IBM offers four editions of Db2: Community Edition, Starter Edition, Standard Edition, and Advanced Server Edition.

===IBM Db2 Community Edition===
IBM Db2 Community Edition is a free-to-download, free-to-use edition of the IBM Db2 database, which has both XML database and relational database management system features. Version 11.5 provides all core capabilities of Db2 but is limited to 4 virtual processor cores, 16 GB of instance memory, has no enterprise-level support, and no fix packs. Version 12.1, however, sets a limit of 4 cores and 8 GB of memory per server, and imposes further restrictions, including a prohibition on the use in production environments, lack of federation capability, lack of database partitioning, etc.

While there is no limit on the database size since version 11.5.1, some previous releases imposed a limit of 100 GB. The database engine does not limit the number of concurrent user connections. A prior free Db2 version, the IBM DB2 Express-C, supported up to 16 GB RAM and two CPU cores.

===Db2 Starter Edition===
The Starter edition was introduced with Db2 version 12.1. It is a paid product, and has several limitations, including a limitation to 4 cores and 16 GB of memory, and restrictions on advanced functionality such as native encryption, audit logging, federation, Db2 pureScale, etc.

===IBM Db2 Standard Edition===
The Db2 Standard Edition is available as a perpetual software license for production and non-production use for up to 16 processor cores and 128 GB RAM with IBM support. For production use, Db2 Standard Edition can be licensed based on a Virtual Processor Core metric, wherein it is licensed by the total count of processor cores in a non-partitioned physical server, or virtual cores assigned to a virtual server. For non-production use, Db2 Standard Edition can be licensed based on the total count of authorized users.

===IBM Db2 Advanced Edition===
The Db2 Advanced Edition is available only as a component of the IBM Hybrid Data Management Platform (HDMP). Within HDMP, Db2 is available both as a perpetual software license AND a monthly subscription for unrestricted production and non-production use with premium IBM support. For both HDMP perpetual license and subscription offerings, FlexPoints need to be bought. FlexPoints are generic licensing credits that can be used to deploy any Db2-family software product or cloud service offering.

==Code names==
IBM has developed many Db2 versions under a code name, and documentation can be related to that name

Db2

* Xperanto
* Stinger - 8.1, 8.2
* Viper - 9.1.
* Viper 2 - 9.5
* Cobra - 9.7
* Galileo - 10.1
* Kepler - 10.5
* Cancun - 10.5.4
* Nebula - 11.5.4
* Andromeda - 12?

Db2 for z/OS

* Eagle
* Sequoia - 11.1
* Cypress - 12
* Apollo - 13

==Technical information==
Db2 can be administered from either the command-line or a GUI. Db2 supports both SQL and XQuery. DB2 has a native implementation of XML data storage, where XML data is stored as XML (not as relational data or CLOB data) for faster access using XQuery.

Db2 has APIs for Rexx, PL/I, COBOL, RPG, Fortran, C++, C, Delphi, .NET CLI, Java, Python, Perl, PHP, Ruby, and many other programming languages. Db2 also supports integration into the Eclipse and Visual Studio integrated development environments.

pureQuery is IBM&#x27;s data access platform focused on applications that access data. pureQuery supports both Java and .NET. pureQuery provides access to data in databases and in-memory Java objects via its tools, APIs, and runtime environment as delivered in IBM Data Studio Developer and IBM Data Studio pureQuery Runtime.

==See also==
* Comparison of relational database management systems
* Comparison of database administration tools
* List of relational database management systems
* List of column-oriented DBMSes
* Data Language Interface

==References==
==External links==
* Db2 - IBM Data for developers</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q431195" start="0" end="3" title="IBM Db2" label="Db2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149776" start="19" end="34" title="data management" label="data management"/>
<link wikidata="Q76320" start="55" end="70" title="database server" label="database server"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="86" end="89" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q755662" start="118" end="134" title="relational model" label="relational model"/>
<link wikidata="Q58756" start="164" end="181" title="object–relational" label="object–relational"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063" start="226" end="230" title="JSON" label="JSON"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115" start="235" end="238" title="XML" label="XML"/>
<link wikidata="Q92596" start="521" end="534" title="Edgar F. Codd" label="Edgar F. Codd"/>
<link wikidata="Q8513" start="736" end="769" title="Database" label="Database Management System (DBMS)"/>
<link wikidata="Q973966" start="777" end="785" title="IBM System R" label="System R"/>
<link wikidata="Q47607" start="899" end="902" title="SQL" label="SQL"/>
<link wikidata="Q4734969" start="988" end="997" title="Alpha (programming language)" label="DSL/Alpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q47607" start="1340" end="1346" title="SQL" label="SEQUEL"/>
<link wikidata="Q10329154" start="1360" end="1385" title="Metaphor Computer Systems" label="Metaphor Computer Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q114486" start="1557" end="1573" title="Query by Example" label="Query by Example"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969010" start="1675" end="1681" title="IBM SQL/DS" label="SQL/DS"/>
<link wikidata="Q289345" start="1704" end="1711" title="DOS/VSE" label="DOS/VSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q5013572" start="1716" end="1722" title="VM (operating system)" label="VM/CMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571984" start="2129" end="2132" title="Information Management System" label="IMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q871236" start="2136" end="2157" title="hierarchical database" label="hierarchical database"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299300" start="2213" end="2217" title="Data Language Interface" label="DL/I"/>
<link wikidata="Q8513" start="2304" end="2308" title="DBMS" label="DBMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q781443" start="2346" end="2349" title="MVS" label="MVS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114593" start="2445" end="2458" title="IBM mainframe" label="IBM mainframe"/>
<link wikidata="Q189794" start="2514" end="2518" title="OS/2" label="OS/2"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="2520" end="2524" title="Unix" label="UNIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="2530" end="2540" title="Microsoft Windows" label="MS Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="2559" end="2564" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q136277" start="2576" end="2590" title="Linux on IBM Z" label="Linux on IBM Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q162768" start="2596" end="2600" title="Personal digital assistant" label="PDAs"/>
<link wikidata="Q289345" start="2690" end="2695" title="z/VSE" label="z/VSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399696" start="2700" end="2704" title="z/VM" label="z/VM"/>
<link wikidata="Q189794" start="2831" end="2835" title="OS/2" label="OS/2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229597" start="3005" end="3049" title="DRDA" label="Distributed Relational Database Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q11381" start="3124" end="3127" title="local area network" label="LAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q18206604" start="3190" end="3230" title="Distributed Data Management Architecture" label="Distributed Data Management Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734086" start="4079" end="4106" title="shared-nothing architecture" label="shared-nothing architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6031342" start="4518" end="4538" title="Informix Corporation" label="Informix Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6000571" start="4548" end="4556" title="Illustra" label="Illustra"/>
<link wikidata="Q58756" start="4591" end="4606" title="object–relational database" label="object-SQL DBMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q19900" start="4651" end="4669" title="Oracle Corporation" label="Oracle Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6031342" start="4794" end="4811" title="Informix Software" label="Informix Software"/>
<link wikidata="Q58756" start="4944" end="4959" title="object–relational database" label="object–SQL DBMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q180634" start="5039" end="5060" title="distributed computing" label="distributed platforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q283705" start="5081" end="5085" title="z/OS" label="z/OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115" start="5187" end="5190" title="XML" label="XML"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501395" start="5240" end="5244" title="OLTP" label="OLTP"/>
<link wikidata="Q3353185" start="5293" end="5314" title="business intelligence" label="business intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q193351" start="5315" end="5331" title="data warehousing" label="data warehousing"/>
<link wikidata="Q846619" start="5481" end="5497" title="stored procedure" label="stored procedure"/>
<link wikidata="Q180634" start="5708" end="5729" title="distributed computing" label="distributed platforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q41574" start="6446" end="6452" title="PL/SQL" label="PL/SQL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501395" start="6832" end="6861" title="online transaction processing" label="online transaction processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q358927" start="6925" end="6941" title="IBM Parallel Sysplex" label="Parallel Sysplex"/>
<link wikidata="Q850" start="7253" end="7258" title="MySQL" label="MySQL"/>
<link wikidata="Q709277" start="12347" end="12357" title="Uptime" label="uptime SLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q96381605" start="12489" end="12498" title="IBM cloud computing" label="IBM Cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q170963" start="13961" end="13990" title="Virtual private network" label="Virtual Private Network (VPN)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2539" start="14789" end="14805" title="machine learning" label="machine learning"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15321" end="15341" title="IBM BLU Acceleration" label="IBM BLU Acceleration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3146518" start="15385" end="15397" title="IBM Research" label="IBM Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q386780" start="16159" end="16176" title="Association rule learning" label="Association Rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q42297" start="16178" end="16183" title="Analysis of variance" label="ANOVA"/>
<link wikidata="Q310401" start="16185" end="16192" title="K-means clustering" label="k-means"/>
<link wikidata="Q208042" start="16194" end="16204" title="Regression analysis" label="Regression"/>
<link wikidata="Q812530" start="16210" end="16221" title="Naive Bayes classifier" label="Naïve Bayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q25110688" start="17164" end="17184" title="Polyglot persistence" label="Polyglot persistence"/>
<link wikidata="Q82231" start="17332" end="17337" title="NoSQL" label="NoSQL"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115" start="17348" end="17351" title="XML" label="XML"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063" start="17353" end="17357" title="JSON" label="JSON"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661480" start="17359" end="17363" title="BSON" label="BSON"/>
<link wikidata="Q96381605" start="17515" end="17524" title="IBM cloud computing" label="IBM Cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q29120" start="17727" end="17733" title="Hadoop" label="Hadoop"/>
<link wikidata="Q251212" start="18911" end="18929" title="Internet of things" label="Internet of things"/>
<link wikidata="Q15637561" start="19955" end="19961" title="OS/400" label="OS/400"/>
<link wikidata="Q466308" start="20129" end="20142" title="IBM System/38" label="IBM System/38"/>
<link wikidata="Q283705" start="20317" end="20321" title="z/OS" label="z/OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q289345" start="20344" end="20347" title="VSE (operating system)" label="VSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399696" start="20354" end="20356" title="z/VM" label="VM"/>
<link wikidata="Q96381605" start="20366" end="20375" title="IBM Cloud" label="IBM Cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q456157" start="20384" end="20403" title="Amazon Web Services" label="Amazon Web Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q5968866" start="20522" end="20536" title="IBM InfoSphere DataStage" label="IBM InfoSphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q126552" start="20654" end="20656" title="Business informatics" label="BI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276130" start="20674" end="20677" title="Extract, transform, load" label="ETL"/>
<link wikidata="Q172491" start="20679" end="20690" title="data mining" label="data mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q642514" start="20692" end="20696" title="Online analytical processing" label="OLAP"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20715" end="20732" title="in-line analytics" label="in-line analytics"/>
<link wikidata="Q357393" start="21181" end="21193" title="XML database" label="XML database"/>
<link wikidata="Q192588" start="21198" end="21235" title="relational database management system" label="relational database management system"/>
<link wikidata="Q850661" start="23814" end="23820" title="XQuery" label="XQuery"/>
<link wikidata="Q685820" start="23995" end="23999" title="Rexx" label="Rexx"/>
<link wikidata="Q223433" start="24001" end="24005" title="PL/I" label="PL/I"/>
<link wikidata="Q131140" start="24007" end="24012" title="COBOL" label="COBOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q840543" start="24014" end="24017" title="IBM RPG" label="RPG"/>
<link wikidata="Q83303" start="24019" end="24026" title="Fortran" label="Fortran"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407" start="24028" end="24031" title="C++" label="C++"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="24033" end="24034" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q487378" start="24036" end="24042" title="Delphi (programming language)" label="Delphi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5289" start="24044" end="24048" title=".NET Framework" label=".NET"/>
<link wikidata="Q835904" start="24049" end="24052" title="Common Language Infrastructure" label="CLI"/>
<link wikidata="Q251" start="24054" end="24058" title="Java (programming language)" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q28865" start="24060" end="24066" title="Python (programming language)" label="Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q42478" start="24068" end="24072" title="Perl" label="Perl"/>
<link wikidata="Q59" start="24074" end="24077" title="PHP" label="PHP"/>
<link wikidata="Q161053" start="24079" end="24083" title="Ruby (programming language)" label="Ruby"/>
<link wikidata="Q82268" start="24162" end="24169" title="Eclipse (computing)" label="Eclipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q134067" start="24174" end="24187" title="Microsoft Visual Studio" label="Visual Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q13741" start="24188" end="24222" title="integrated development environment" label="integrated development environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="24239" end="24242" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q241317" start="24262" end="24270" title="platform (computing)" label="platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1713118" start="24337" end="24341" title="Java platform" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q5289" start="24346" end="24350" title=".NET Framework" label=".NET"/>
<link wikidata="Q8513" start="24389" end="24397" title="database" label="database"/>
<link wikidata="Q216601" start="24418" end="24425" title="Object (computer science)" label="objects"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077784" start="24434" end="24438" title="programming tool" label="tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q165194" start="24441" end="24444" title="API" label="API"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004415" start="24451" end="24458" title="Run-time system" label="runtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q60485" start="24568" end="24620" title="Comparison of relational database management systems" label="Comparison of relational database management systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155853" start="24623" end="24666" title="Comparison of database administration tools" label="Comparison of database administration tools"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900200" start="24669" end="24715" title="List of relational database management systems" label="List of relational database management systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q16900302" start="24718" end="24748" title="List of column-oriented DBMSes" label="List of column-oriented DBMSes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299300" start="24751" end="24774" title="Data Language Interface" label="Data Language Interface"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="142985" wikidata="Q298415" url="?curid=142985" title="Multiplex">
<text>Multiplex may refer to:

==Science and technology==
* Multiplex communication, combining many signals into one transmission circuit or channel
** Multiplex (television), a group of digital television or radio channels that are combined for broadcast
* Multiplex (assay), a biological assay which measures several components at the same time
* Multiplex, another name for plywood, a composite material manufactured from thin layers of wood veneer

==Other uses==
* Multiplex (automobile), a former American car make
* Multiplex (comics), a DC comic book supervillain
* Multiplex (company), a global contracting and development company
* Multiplex (highway) or concurrency, a single road designated by multiple highway numbers
* Multiplex (juggling), a juggling action with multiple balls thrown or caught at one time by the same hand
* Multiplex (movie theater), a theater with many screens
* &quot;Multiplex&quot; (webcomic), an online comic about the staff of a movie theater

==See also==
* Multiplex Modellsport, a manufacturer of radio control equipment and radio-controlled airplanes
* Multiplexer, an electronic device that performs multiplexing
* MUX (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q298415" start="0" end="9" title="Multiplex" label="Multiplex"/>
<link wikidata="Q222903" start="54" end="77" title="Multiplex communication" label="Multiplex communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q745404" start="146" end="168" title="Multiplex (television)" label="Multiplex (television)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934982" start="252" end="269" title="Multiplex (assay)" label="Multiplex (assay)"/>
<link wikidata="Q219803" start="371" end="378" title="plywood" label="plywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q25209241" start="464" end="486" title="Multiplex (automobile)" label="Multiplex (automobile)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6568339" start="517" end="535" title="Multiplex (comics)" label="Multiplex (comics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4974585" start="568" end="587" title="Multiplex (company)" label="Multiplex (company)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159092" start="636" end="655" title="Multiplex (highway)" label="Multiplex (highway)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934979" start="727" end="747" title="Multiplex (juggling)" label="Multiplex (juggling)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153108" start="835" end="860" title="Multiplex (movie theater)" label="Multiplex (movie theater)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934980" start="892" end="924" title="Multiplex (webcomic)" label="&amp;quot;Multiplex&amp;quot; (webcomic)"/>
<link wikidata="Q932174" start="993" end="1014" title="Multiplex Modellsport" label="Multiplex Modellsport"/>
<link wikidata="Q189434" start="1091" end="1102" title="Multiplexer" label="Multiplexer"/>
<link wikidata="Q344722" start="1154" end="1174" title="MUX (disambiguation)" label="MUX (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="142989" wikidata="Q3499205" url="?curid=142989" title="William Jacob Baer">
<text>William Jacob Baer (January 29, 1860 – September 21, 1941) was an American artist, considered the foremost American miniature painter.

==Biography==
William Jacob Baer was born in Cincinnati, Ohio on January 29, 1860. He was a lithographer&#x27;s apprentice at Donaldson and Company in Cincinnati from 1876 to 1879. During the same period he attended an evening modeling class at the McMicken School of Design, taught by Louis Rebisso. He continued his training in Munich at the Royal Academy from 1880 to 1884, studying oil painting with Ludwig Löfftz. He received medals in all his courses, and the Academy purchased one of his watercolors. In 1913, Baer was elected into the National Academy of Design as an Associate member.

Upon his return to the United States, Baer settled into the Montclair, New Jersey art colony to continue his career as a genre painter, portrait painter, and teacher. He was attracted there by his friend, Alexander Drake (the art editor &quot;Scribner’s Monthly&quot;). Drake encouraged him to teach a class in engraving and black-and-white draftsmanship for illustrators; class members were dubbed the &quot;Carbonari&quot;. In 1888 Baer became the instructor at Round Lake, New York, for summer classes at a Chautauqua-like cultural enterprise to which he remained attached until 1891; in 1893 he took over the classes at Chautauqua itself for several years. In 1892 and &#x27;93, he turned from figure painting to miniatures (both portraits and other subjects), initially under the patronage of Alfred Corning Clark, and soon Baer not only became the most renowned miniaturist in the country but also spearheaded the miniature-painting revival that began at that time. He was the first president of the American Society of Miniature Painters, New York.

Baer exhibited at the Chicago Worlds Fair of 1893. In New York and at the Paris Exposition of 1900, Baer was awarded a 1st class medals. He also was a regular exhibitor at the National Academy of Design, N.Y., the Chicago Art Institute and the Pennsylvania Academy of Fine Art. Among his miniatures are &quot;The Golden Hour&quot;, &quot;Daphne&quot;, &quot;In Arcadia&quot;, and &quot;Madonna with the Auburn Hair&quot;. In 1913, Baer was elected into the National Academy of Design as an Associate member.

Baer died in East Orange, New Jersey on September 21, 1941.

==Gallery==
==Notes==
==References==
*American Federation of Arts, &quot;American Art Directory, Volume 3&quot;, Editor Florence Nightingale Levy, R.R. Bowker., 1900.
*Carr, Carolyn Kinder, &quot;Revisiting the White City: American Art at the 1893 World&#x27;s Fair, National Portrait Gallery, 1993.
* Dearinger, David Bernard, National Academy of Design (U.S.), &quot;Paintings and Sculpture in the Collection of the National Academy of Design: 1826-1925&quot;, Hudson Hills, 2004. 
* Michigan State Library, &quot;Biographical Sketches of American Artists&quot;, &quot;Baer, William J.&quot;, p. 21–22. Michigan State library, 1912.

==External links==
*William Jacob Baer writing about painting ivory from the Smithsonian Archives of American Art</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3499205" start="0" end="18" title="William Jacob Baer" label="William Jacob Baer"/>
<link wikidata="Q43196" start="181" end="197" title="Cincinnati, Ohio" label="Cincinnati, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4796670" start="385" end="410" title="Art Academy of Cincinnati" label="McMicken School of Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q6688039" start="422" end="435" title="Louis Rebisso" label="Louis Rebisso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="466" end="472" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q414052" start="480" end="493" title="Academy of Fine Arts Munich" label="Royal Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q876190" start="540" end="553" title="Ludwig Löfftz" label="Ludwig Löfftz"/>
<link wikidata="Q502218" start="679" end="705" title="National Academy of Design" label="National Academy of Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q678437" start="791" end="812" title="Montclair, New Jersey" label="Montclair, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7439159" start="974" end="992" title="Scribner’s Monthly" label="Scribner’s Monthly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3452931" start="1195" end="1215" title="Round Lake, New York" label="Round Lake, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q119038" start="1241" end="1251" title="Chautauqua" label="Chautauqua"/>
<link wikidata="Q4722485" start="1529" end="1549" title="Alfred Corning Clark" label="Alfred Corning Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q16002869" start="1737" end="1775" title="American Society of Miniature Painters" label="American Society of Miniature Painters"/>
<link wikidata="Q285406" start="1810" end="1829" title="World&amp;#x27;s Columbian Exposition" label="Chicago Worlds Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q753646" start="1862" end="1878" title="Exposition Universelle (1900)" label="Paris Exposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q502218" start="1964" end="1990" title="National Academy of Design" label="National Academy of Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q239303" start="2002" end="2023" title="Chicago Art Institute" label="Chicago Art Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952033" start="2032" end="2064" title="Pennsylvania Academy of Fine Art" label="Pennsylvania Academy of Fine Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q502218" start="2245" end="2271" title="National Academy of Design" label="National Academy of Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q988515" start="2310" end="2333" title="East Orange, New Jersey" label="East Orange, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q502218" start="2686" end="2712" title="National Academy of Design" label="National Academy of Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860568" start="3083" end="3107" title="Archives of American Art" label="Archives of American Art"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="142990" wikidata="Q160814" url="?curid=142990" title="Braniewo">
<text>Braniewo () (, , Old Prussian: &quot;Brus&quot;), is a town in northern Poland, in Warmia, in the Warmian-Masurian Voivodeship, with a population of 16,907 as of June 2021. It is the capital of Braniewo County.

Braniewo is the second biggest city of Warmia after Olsztyn and one of the historical centers of the region.

== Location ==
Braniewo lies on the Pasłęka River about 5 km from the Vistula Lagoon, about 35 km northeast of Elbląg and southwest of Kaliningrad (). The Polish border with Russia&#x27;s Kaliningrad Oblast lies 6 km north, and may be reached from Braniewo via National road 54.

==History==
===Middle Ages===

According to the German geographer Johann Friedrich Goldbeck (1748–1812), the town originally was named Brunsberg after Bruno von Schauenburg (1205–1281), bishop of Olomouc in Moravia, who accompanied King Ottokar II of Bohemia in 1254 and 1267 when the latter participated in the crusade of the Teutonic Knights against the Old Prussians. It has also been suggested that the name &quot;Braunsberg&quot; might stem from &quot;Brusebergue&quot; (&quot;camp of the Prussians&quot;), but this notion is not documented.

In 1243, the settlement and the surrounding region of Warmia was given by the Teutonic Order to the newly created Bishopric of Warmia, whose bishop built his cathedral in the town and made it his chief residence. The city was granted town privileges based on those of Lübeck in 1254, but in 1261 was destroyed and depopulated during the second of the Prussian Uprisings. It was rebuilt in a new location in 1273 and settled by colonists from Lübeck. In 1284, it was given a new town charter, again based on that of Lübeck. However, the next bishop, Heinrich Fleming (1278–1300), transferred the chapter from Braunsberg to Frauenburg (now Frombork).

In 1296, a Franciscan abbey was built, and in 1342, a &quot;new town&quot; was added. As the most important trading and harbor city in Warmia, the town prospered as member of the Hanseatic League, which it remained until 1608. 
In 1440, the town was one of the founding members of the Prussian Confederation, which opposed Teutonic rule, and upon the request of which King Casimir IV Jagiellon incorporated the territory to the Kingdom of Poland in 1454. The town pledged allegiance to the Polish King and recognized his rule in March 1454 in Kraków. After the subsequent Thirteen Years&#x27; War, the Teutonic Knights renounced any claims to the town in the Second Peace of Thorn in 1466. Administratively, it was part of the Prince-Bishopric of Warmia in the new autonomous province of Royal Prussia, later on also in the Greater Poland Province.

===Modern era===
After the secularization of the Teutonic Order in 1525, a large part of its residents converted to Lutheran Protestantism. Duke Albert, who had been grand master of the Order, sought to unite Warmia with Ducal Prussia (a nearby vassal state of Poland), causing the Catholics of the town to swear allegiance to the king of Poland in return for aid against Protestant Prussia. In 1526 a Polish royal commission released Braunsberg burghers from the oath to the Polish king and handed the town back to Prince-Bishop Mauritius Ferber. However, just like the entire area of Warmia, Braunsberg swore allegiance to the Prince-Bishops of Warmia, who were subjects of the popes. Additionally, it had to denounce all Lutheran teachings and hand over Lutheran writings. Thereafter Warmia remained predominantly Roman Catholic (even after the Partitions of Poland, when it became part of Prussia in 1772).
Braniewo was occupied by Sweden for about three years during the Livonian War in the 16th century. In Warmia, Lutheran teachings again were suppressed when Prince-Bishop Stanislaus Hosius (1504–1579) brought in the Jesuits and founded the Collegium Hosianum school. Among the students of the school were Polish Catholic Saint Andrew Bobola, Polish statesmen and high dignitaries Mikołaj Zebrzydowski and Piotr Gembicki, Europe&#x27;s most prominent 17th-century Latin poet Maciej Kazimierz Sarbiewski, missionary, explorer, mathematician, astronomer and sinologist Jan Mikołaj Smogulecki, and Primate of Poland Gabriel Podoski. Prominent Hungarian Renaissance poet Bálint Balassi stayed in the town in 1590–1591. A priestly seminary was added in 1564. Pope Gregory XIII later added a papal mission seminary for northern and eastern European countries. Regina Protmann (1552–1613), a native of Braunsberg (Braniewo), founded the Saint Catherine Order of Sisters in the town, recognized by the church in 1583. The Jesuit theologian Antonius Possevinus was instrumental in enlarging the Collegium Hosianum in the 1580s to counter the growing Protestant movement.

The Polish, and mainly Catholic town was annexed by the mostly Protestant Kingdom of Prussia in 1772 during the First Partition of Poland and made part of the newly formed province of East Prussia the following year.

===19th and 20th centuries===

Braunsberg obtained its first railway connection with the rest of the kingdom via the Prussian Eastern Railway in 1852. In the early 20th century, the town was the leading academic center of East Prussia next to Königsberg. In 1912 the Jesuit college became the State Academy of Braunsberg (German: &quot;Staatliche Akademie Braunsberg&quot;). Prior to World War II, the population of Braunsberg had grown to more than 21,000, of whom 59 percent were listed as Catholic and 29 percent Protestant.

The Second World War turned much of the town into ruins. After three and a half years of savage warfare, Soviet forces began their assault on German land by attacking East Prussia on Jan. 13, 1945. Red Army formations reached the Vistula Lagoon north of Braunsberg on Jan. 26. In early February, German civilians began fleeing from Braunsberg across the ice of the frozen lagoon to the Vistula Spit, from which many journeyed to either Danzig (Gdańsk) or Pillau (Baltiysk), and managed to board German ships that made the perilous voyage westward. Braunsberg was captured by Soviet troops on March 20, 1945. 
Heavy fighting and wanton destruction afterwards had left the town about 80 percent destroyed, including much of its historic town center, largely consumed by fire. After German surrender, sovereignty over the town was ceremoniously transferred to Polish authorities on July 7.

The previous unilateral Soviet transfer of power to Poland was accepted according to the Potsdam Agreement, however, under preliminary terms. The town was partially repopulated by Polish settlers, many of whom came from areas of eastern Poland annexed by the Soviet Union.

In 2001 the St. Catherine Church, built in 1346, destroyed in 1945, and rebuilt after 1979, was declared a Basilica Minor. This Gothic Hall church was built on a site which had held a previous wooden Church of St. Catherine since 1280. Prince-Bishop Lucas Watzenrode of Warmia (1447–1512) had added extensively to the original building.

===Number of inhabitants by year===
===Political timeline===
*1240 first mentioned as part of the monastic state of the Teutonic Knights
*1254 Lübeck law rights granted
*1454 incorporation to the Kingdom of Poland, upon the request of the Prussian Confederation
*1466 Second Peace of Thorn (1466): recognized as part of Poland, administratively part of the Prince-Bishopric of Warmia in the province of Royal Prussia, after 1569 in the province of Greater Poland
*1772 First Partition of Poland: became part of the Kingdom of Prussia
*1871 German Empire founded: the town automatically part of it
*1945 Occupation by Soviet Red Army, then became again part of Poland.

==Economy==
The &quot;Browar Braniewo&quot; (&quot;Braniewo Brewery&quot;) is located in the town.

==Sports==
The local football team is , which competes in the lower leagues.

==Notable residents==

* Stanislaus Hosius (1504–1579), Polish Catholic cardinal, prince-bishop, founder of the Collegium Hosianum
* Regina Protmann (1522–1613), Polish Catholic nun, charity pioneer.
* Andrew Bobola (1591–1657), Polish missionary, martyr and Catholic saint.
* August Willich (1810–1878), German politician and general.
* Karl Weierstrass (1815–1897), German mathematician.
* Gustavus von Tempsky (1828–1868), German newspaper correspondent and soldier.
* Elimar Klebs (1852–1918), German historian
* Samuel Oppenheim (1857–1928), Austrian astronomer.
* Konrad Zuse (1910–1995), German civil engineer, inventor and computer pioneer.
* Rainer Barzel (1924–2006), German politician (Christian Democratic Union).
* Hartmut Bagger (born 1938), postwar German general (Bundeswehr).
* Bartosz Białkowski (born 1987), Polish footballer (soccer player) on several British teams.
* Tomasz Ptak (born 1992), Polish footballer for Zatoka Braniewo

==International relations==
===Twin towns — sister cities===
Braniewo is twinned with:
* Münster, Germany
* Nošovice, Czech Rep.

Former twin towns:
* Zelenogradsk, Russia

In March 2022, Braniewo terminated its partnership with the Russian city of Zelenogradsk as a reaction to the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine.

==References==
==External links==

*Municipal website 
*City business page 
*History of Braniewo 
*Local community website 
*Map of Braniewo 
*Street plan </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q160814" start="0" end="8" title="Braniewo" label="Braniewo"/>
<link wikidata="Q35501" start="17" end="29" title="Old Prussian language" label="Old Prussian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3957" start="55" end="59" title="town" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="72" end="78" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q322620" start="83" end="89" title="Warmia" label="Warmia"/>
<link wikidata="Q54184" start="98" end="126" title="Warmian-Masurian Voivodeship" label="Warmian-Masurian Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164883" start="194" end="209" title="Braniewo County" label="Braniewo County"/>
<link wikidata="Q322620" start="251" end="257" title="Warmia" label="Warmia"/>
<link wikidata="Q82765" start="264" end="271" title="Olsztyn" label="Olsztyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055907" start="358" end="365" title="Pasłęka" label="Pasłęka"/>
<link wikidata="Q5605" start="392" end="406" title="Vistula Lagoon" label="Vistula Lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q104712" start="433" end="439" title="Elbląg" label="Elbląg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1829" start="457" end="468" title="Kaliningrad" label="Kaliningrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749" start="510" end="528" title="Kaliningrad Oblast" label="Kaliningrad Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123059" start="583" end="599" title="National road 54 (Poland)" label="National road 54"/>
<link wikidata="Q15301811" start="668" end="693" title="Johann Friedrich Goldbeck" label="Johann Friedrich Goldbeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q77972" start="753" end="774" title="Bruno von Schauenburg" label="Bruno von Schauenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q81137" start="798" end="805" title="Olomouc" label="Olomouc"/>
<link wikidata="Q43266" start="809" end="816" title="Moravia" label="Moravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q150320" start="839" end="860" title="Ottokar II of Bohemia" label="Ottokar II of Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q48189" start="929" end="945" title="Teutonic Knights" label="Teutonic Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q109073" start="958" end="971" title="Old Prussians" label="Old Prussians"/>
<link wikidata="Q322620" start="1204" end="1210" title="Warmia" label="Warmia"/>
<link wikidata="Q506218" start="1264" end="1283" title="Prince-Bishopric of Warmia" label="Bishopric of Warmia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382083" start="1291" end="1297" title="Bishops of Warmia" label="bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q28942" start="1384" end="1399" title="town privileges" label="town privileges"/>
<link wikidata="Q686235" start="1418" end="1424" title="Lübeck law" label="Lübeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q723800" start="1501" end="1519" title="Prussian Uprisings" label="Prussian Uprisings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843" start="1592" end="1598" title="Lübeck" label="Lübeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q497115" start="1788" end="1796" title="Frombork" label="Frombork"/>
<link wikidata="Q165005" start="1811" end="1821" title="Franciscan" label="Franciscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q42908" start="1979" end="1995" title="Hanseatic League" label="Hanseatic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q281484" start="2085" end="2107" title="Prussian Confederation" label="Prussian Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q53459" start="2173" end="2193" title="Casimir IV Jagiellon" label="Casimir IV Jagiellon"/>
<link wikidata="Q171348" start="2228" end="2245" title="Crown of the Kingdom of Poland" label="Kingdom of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q31487" start="2343" end="2349" title="Kraków" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q315921" start="2372" end="2396" title="Thirteen Years&amp;#x27; War (1454–1466)" label="Thirteen Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q233532" start="2459" end="2480" title="Second Peace of Thorn (1466)" label="Second Peace of Thorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q506218" start="2527" end="2553" title="Prince-Bishopric of Warmia" label="Prince-Bishopric of Warmia"/>
<link wikidata="Q589662" start="2588" end="2601" title="Royal Prussia" label="Royal Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500794" start="2624" end="2647" title="Greater Poland Province, Crown of the Kingdom of Poland" label="Greater Poland Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="2766" end="2774" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="2775" end="2788" title="Protestantism" label="Protestantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q40433" start="2795" end="2801" title="Albert, Duke of Prussia" label="Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q22881" start="3166" end="3179" title="Prince-Bishop" label="Prince-Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q433635" start="3180" end="3196" title="Mauritius Ferber" label="Mauritius Ferber"/>
<link wikidata="Q22881" start="3279" end="3292" title="Prince-Bishop" label="Prince-Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q152006" start="3498" end="3518" title="Partitions of Poland" label="Partitions of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="3543" end="3550" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q215443" start="3586" end="3592" title="Swedish Empire" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q246863" start="3626" end="3638" title="Livonian War" label="Livonian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q61962" start="3731" end="3748" title="Stanislaus Hosius" label="Stanislaus Hosius"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="3776" end="3783" title="Society of Jesus" label="Jesuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q323209" start="3800" end="3818" title="Collegium Hosianum" label="Collegium Hosianum"/>
<link wikidata="Q55043" start="3819" end="3825" title="gymnasium (school)" label="school"/>
<link wikidata="Q129674" start="3887" end="3900" title="Andrew Bobola" label="Andrew Bobola"/>
<link wikidata="Q241436" start="3940" end="3960" title="Mikołaj Zebrzydowski" label="Mikołaj Zebrzydowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q4110603" start="3965" end="3979" title="Piotr Gembicki" label="Piotr Gembicki"/>
<link wikidata="Q471723" start="4034" end="4061" title="Maciej Kazimierz Sarbiewski" label="Maciej Kazimierz Sarbiewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q6149510" start="4126" end="4148" title="Jan Mikołaj Smogulecki" label="Jan Mikołaj Smogulecki"/>
<link wikidata="Q4110329" start="4172" end="4187" title="Gabriel Podoski" label="Gabriel Podoski"/>
<link wikidata="Q133032" start="4199" end="4208" title="Hungarians" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q379599" start="4226" end="4240" title="Bálint Balassi" label="Bálint Balassi"/>
<link wikidata="Q83029" start="4313" end="4330" title="Pope Gregory XIII" label="Pope Gregory XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q84547" start="4413" end="4428" title="Regina Protmann" label="Regina Protmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q179718" start="4489" end="4504" title="Catherine of Alexandria" label="Saint Catherine"/>
<link wikidata="Q548115" start="4591" end="4610" title="Antonius Possevinus" label="Antonius Possevinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="4796" end="4814" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Kingdom of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q597506" start="4834" end="4859" title="First Partition of Poland" label="First Partition of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q103801" start="4906" end="4918" title="East Prussia" label="East Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q445563" start="5057" end="5081" title="Prussian Eastern Railway" label="Prussian Eastern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120832" start="5183" end="5193" title="Königsberg" label="Königsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="5207" end="5213" title="Society of Jesus" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5601" start="5855" end="5867" title="Vistula Spit" label="Vistula Spit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="5905" end="5911" title="Gdańsk" label="Danzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q5660" start="5924" end="5930" title="Baltiysk" label="Pillau"/>
<link wikidata="Q695666" start="5991" end="6015" title="Operation Hannibal" label="perilous voyage westward"/>
<link wikidata="Q277476" start="6446" end="6463" title="Potsdam Agreement" label="Potsdam Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3293310" start="6601" end="6628" title="Territorial changes of Poland immediately after World War II" label="annexed by the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347063" start="6881" end="6897" title="Lucas Watzenrode the Younger" label="Lucas Watzenrode"/>
<link wikidata="Q156020" start="7067" end="7105" title="monastic state of the Teutonic Knights" label="monastic state of the Teutonic Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q686235" start="7112" end="7122" title="Lübeck law" label="Lübeck law"/>
<link wikidata="Q171348" start="7165" end="7182" title="Crown of the Kingdom of Poland" label="Kingdom of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q281484" start="7208" end="7230" title="Prussian Confederation" label="Prussian Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q233532" start="7237" end="7265" title="Second Peace of Thorn (1466)" label="Second Peace of Thorn (1466)"/>
<link wikidata="Q506218" start="7326" end="7352" title="Prince-Bishopric of Warmia" label="Prince-Bishopric of Warmia"/>
<link wikidata="Q589662" start="7372" end="7385" title="Royal Prussia" label="Royal Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141653" start="7405" end="7413" title="prowincja" label="province"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500794" start="7417" end="7431" title="Greater Poland Province, Crown of the Kingdom of Poland" label="Greater Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q597506" start="7438" end="7463" title="First Partition of Poland" label="First Partition of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="7484" end="7502" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Kingdom of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="7509" end="7522" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="7586" end="7592" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="7593" end="7601" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q9348145" start="7603" end="7635" title="Polish–Soviet border agreement of August 1945" label="then became again part of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7660" end="7675" title=":pl:Browar Braniewo" label="Browar Braniewo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="7759" end="7767" title="Association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q61962" start="7841" end="7858" title="Stanislaus Hosius" label="Stanislaus Hosius"/>
<link wikidata="Q323209" start="7928" end="7946" title="Collegium Hosianum" label="Collegium Hosianum"/>
<link wikidata="Q84547" start="7949" end="7964" title="Regina Protmann" label="Regina Protmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q129674" start="8018" end="8031" title="Andrew Bobola" label="Andrew Bobola"/>
<link wikidata="Q97092" start="8093" end="8107" title="August Willich" label="August Willich"/>
<link wikidata="Q57103" start="8154" end="8170" title="Karl Weierstrass" label="Karl Weierstrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q108592" start="8208" end="8228" title="Gustavus von Tempsky" label="Gustavus von Tempsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q98762" start="8288" end="8300" title="Elimar Klebs" label="Elimar Klebs"/>
<link wikidata="Q86629" start="8333" end="8349" title="Samuel Oppenheim" label="Samuel Oppenheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q60093" start="8386" end="8397" title="Konrad Zuse" label="Konrad Zuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q470285" start="8467" end="8480" title="Rainer Barzel" label="Rainer Barzel"/>
<link wikidata="Q73632" start="8544" end="8558" title="Hartmut Bagger" label="Hartmut Bagger"/>
<link wikidata="Q56010" start="8596" end="8606" title="Bundeswehr" label="Bundeswehr"/>
<link wikidata="Q4244779" start="8611" end="8629" title="Bartosz Białkowski" label="Bartosz Białkowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q7818455" start="8705" end="8716" title="Tomasz Ptak" label="Tomasz Ptak"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="8842" end="8849" title="Twin towns and sister cities" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742" start="8858" end="8865" title="Münster" label="Münster"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="8867" end="8874" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q583162" start="8877" end="8885" title="Nošovice" label="Nošovice"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="8887" end="8897" title="Czech Rep." label="Czech Rep."/>
<link wikidata="Q5584" start="8920" end="8932" title="Zelenogradsk" label="Zelenogradsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="8934" end="8940" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="9052" end="9084" title="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="142992" wikidata="Q55807" url="?curid=142992" title="William Baffin">
<text>William Baffin ( – 23 January 1622) was an English navigator, explorer and cartographer. He is best known for his attempt to find the Northwest Passage from the Atlantic to Pacific oceans, during which Baffin became the first European to discover a bay which was subsequently named in his honour. Baffin carried out numerous surveys of the Red Sea and Persian Gulf for the English East India Company.

==Life==
Nothing is known about Baffin&#x27;s early life (an estimated year of birth, 1584, originated in the &quot; Encyclopædia Britannica&quot; in the 19th century, but without known documentary support). It has been conjectured that he was born to a humble station in London and gradually raised himself through his diligence and perseverance. In printing his journals, Samuel Purchas wrote of him as a &quot;learned-unlearned Mariner and Mathematician... wanting art of words&quot; who &quot;really employed himself to those industries, whereof here you see so evident fruits.&quot;

His earliest mention occurs in 1612, when he was chief pilot on Captain James Hall&#x27;s 4th expedition to Greenland. Hall&#x27;s three earlier explorations had been underwritten by the king of Denmark-Norway anxious to reestablish contact with the Norse settlements there. It was still unknown that they had been overrun by the Inuit centuries before, but after the third failed expedition, Christian abandoned the project. Hall then successfully interested four English merchants—Thomas Smythe, James Lancaster, William Cockayne, and Richard Ball—in permitting him to continue his work. Baffin and Hall sailed from the Humber aboard &quot;Patience&quot; on 22 April, accompanied by &quot;Heart&#x27;s Ease&quot;. During this voyage, Captain Hall was killed by the Inuit on the west coast of Greenland but Baffin successfully returned to Hull on 11 September under the new captain Andrew Barker.

Over the next two years, Baffin served in the Muscovy Company-controlled whale-fishery off Spitzbergen. During the 1613 season, he served under Captain Benjamin Joseph as pilot of &quot;Tiger&quot;, the flagship of the 7-vessel whaling fleet; in 1614, he and Joseph served on &quot;Thomasine&quot;, amid a fleet of 11 ships and 2 pinnaces. Icy conditions precluded exploration to the north, but Baffin examined a &quot;considerable portion&quot; of Spitzbergen&#x27;s coast, returning to London on 4 October.

In 1615, he entered the service of the &quot;Company of Merchants of London, Discoverers of the North-West Passage&quot;, which had been established in 1612. Its first governor was Thomas Smythe, one of the underwriters of Hall&#x27;s fourth voyage. Baffin served as pilot of &quot;Discovery&quot;, which left England under Captain Robert Bylot on 15 March. It carefully explored Hudson Strait in search of a Northwest Passage from the North Atlantic to the Far East. The accuracy of Baffin&#x27;s tidal and astronomical observations on this voyage was confirmed when William Edward Parry passed over the same ground in 1821. 

Baffin again sailed as pilot of &quot;Discovery&quot; the next year. Leaving Gravesend on 26 March, he passed west of Greenland up the Davis Strait, discovering the large bay to its north which now bears his name, together with a series of sounds which radiate from its head and were named by him after members of the North-West Passage Company: Lancaster, Smith, and Jones. On this voyage, he sailed over farther north than his predecessor John Davis: since his voyages seemed to preclude hope of an ice-free nautical path to the Orient, the area was not explored again for two centuries and his furthest north (about remained unsurpassed in North America until the Royal Navy officer Edward Augustus Inglefield reached in the same area in 1852.

With the abandonment of projects for the Northwest Passage, Baffin took service with the East India Company, possibly with the intent of eventually discovering the passage from the western end. He left as master&#x27;s mate to Andrew Shilling, captain of &quot;Anne Royal&quot;, on 4 February 1617. The fleet – under the command of Captain Martin Pring – reached Saldanha Bay in South Africa on 21 June and Surat in British India in September. Baffin&#x27;s ship then performed separate service on runs to Mocha in Yemen and other ports of the Red Sea and Persian Gulf. Upon his return to London in September, 1619, the company granted him special recognition for the valuable charts he had made during the course of his voyage.

In 1620, he sailed east again as master of &quot;London&quot; on the special recommendation of Capt. Shilling, the commander of the expedition. Baffin left the Downs on 25 March and reached Suvali Beach near Surat in India on 9 November. Hearing of a joint Portuguese and Dutch fleet searching for them, Shilling went in search of them: he was wounded in battle in the Gulf of Oman on 28 December and died on 6 January. A year later, the East India Company agreed to join the Persian assaults on the Portuguese fortresses on the islands of Qeshm and Hormuz in exchange for certain trade concessions. At Qeshm off Bandar Abbas, he was sent ashore on 23 January 1622 to take measurements of the height and distance of the walls of Fort Queixome to assist the fleet&#x27;s gunners. One of his contemporaries described his death:
Master Baffin went on shoare with his Geometricall Instruments, for the taking of the height and distance of the Castle wall, for the better levelling of his peece to make his shot; but, as he was about the same, he received a small shot from the Castle into his belly, wherewith he gave three leapes, and died immediately. He was one of few English casualties. The garrison swiftly surrendered, and Anglo-Persian control of Qeshm permitted the swift conquest of Ormuz, opening Persia to direct trade.

His wife – reckoned a &quot;troublesome, impatient woman&quot; – forced the East India Company into court over her husband&#x27;s wages and other claims. Three years later, a settlement of £500 was agreed upon.

==Legacy==

Baffin Bay and Baffin Island were named in William Baffin&#x27;s honour, and he is responsible for the names of several of their features. His journals were the only account of several of his voyages. Excerpts were printed by Samuel Purchas in 1625, but Baffin&#x27;s charts and hydrographic observations were omitted owing to the expense involved. All but one were subsequently lost, and in time Baffin&#x27;s discoveries came to be doubted. He was, however, a hero to the explorer John Ross, who led an expedition in 1818 that confirmed Baffin&#x27;s account in almost all particulars.

Besides his geographical discoveries, Baffin is celebrated for the scrupulous accuracy of his many scientific and magnetic observations. His reckoning of longitude at sea by lunar distances on 26 April 1615 is the first of its kind on record.

He is also the namesake of the William Baffin rose.

==See also==
* Samuel Purchas
* Blackburn Baffin

==Notes==

==References==
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q55807" start="0" end="14" title="William Baffin" label="William Baffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q81136" start="134" end="151" title="Northwest Passage" label="Northwest Passage"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="161" end="169" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="173" end="187" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific oceans"/>
<link wikidata="Q37040" start="247" end="252" title="Baffin Bay" label="a bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="340" end="347" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="352" end="364" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="381" end="399" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="518" end="542" title=" Encyclopædia Britannica" label=" Encyclopædia Britannica"/>
<link wikidata="Q921942" start="776" end="790" title="Samuel Purchas" label="Samuel Purchas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772526" start="1063" end="1073" title="James Hall (explorer)" label="James Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5109757" start="1110" end="1148" title="Christian IV&amp;#x27;s Expeditions to Greenland" label="Hall&amp;#x27;s three earlier explorations"/>
<link wikidata="Q48198" start="1178" end="1182" title="list of Danish kings" label="king"/>
<link wikidata="Q62651" start="1186" end="1200" title="Denmark-Norway" label="Denmark-Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q16488964" start="1241" end="1264" title="Viking Greenland" label="Norse settlements there"/>
<link wikidata="Q189975" start="1321" end="1326" title="Inuit" label="Inuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="1456" end="1463" title="Kingdom of England" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q7794061" start="1474" end="1487" title="Thomas Smythe" label="Thomas Smythe"/>
<link wikidata="Q368237" start="1489" end="1504" title="James Lancaster" label="James Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289573" start="1506" end="1522" title="William Cockayne" label="William Cockayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q550995" start="1613" end="1619" title="Humber" label="Humber"/>
<link wikidata="Q128147" start="1831" end="1835" title="Kingston upon Hull" label="Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765656" start="1936" end="1951" title="Muscovy Company" label="Muscovy Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q42767" start="1963" end="1976" title="whaling" label="whale-fishery"/>
<link wikidata="Q25231" start="1981" end="1992" title="Spitzbergen" label="Spitzbergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q212357" start="2093" end="2101" title="flagship" label="flagship"/>
<link wikidata="Q837139" start="2220" end="2227" title="Full-rigged pinnace" label="pinnace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7794061" start="2581" end="2594" title="Thomas Smythe" label="Thomas Smythe"/>
<link wikidata="Q389965" start="2682" end="2691" title="Discovery (1602 ship)" label="Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q654591" start="2732" end="2744" title="Robert Bylot" label="Robert Bylot"/>
<link wikidata="Q207702" start="2780" end="2793" title="Hudson Strait" label="Hudson Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q81136" start="2809" end="2826" title="Northwest Passage" label="Northwest Passage"/>
<link wikidata="Q42225" start="2858" end="2866" title="Far East" label="Far East"/>
<link wikidata="Q437310" start="2968" end="2988" title="William Edward Parry" label="William Edward Parry"/>
<link wikidata="Q389965" start="3066" end="3075" title="Discovery (1602 ship)" label="Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q676689" start="3105" end="3114" title="Gravesend" label="Gravesend"/>
<link wikidata="Q189262" start="3163" end="3175" title="Davis Strait" label="Davis Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q37040" start="3222" end="3240" title="Baffin Bay" label="now bears his name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285117" start="3374" end="3383" title="Lancaster Sound" label="Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164842" start="3385" end="3390" title="Smith Sound" label="Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703405" start="3396" end="3401" title="Jones Sound" label="Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q311652" start="3469" end="3479" title="John Davis (English explorer)" label="John Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706394" start="3625" end="3639" title="Furthest North" label="furthest north"/>
<link wikidata="Q544724" start="3714" end="3740" title="Edward Augustus Inglefield" label="Edward Augustus Inglefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="3865" end="3883" title="English East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q18783558" start="4003" end="4018" title="Andrew Shilling" label="Andrew Shilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q430202" start="4116" end="4128" title="Martin Pring" label="Martin Pring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563436" start="4139" end="4151" title="Saldanha Bay" label="Saldanha Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4629" start="4183" end="4188" title="Surat" label="Surat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385925" start="4192" end="4205" title="British India" label="British India"/>
<link wikidata="Q339258" start="4282" end="4287" title="Mocha, Yemen" label="Mocha"/>
<link wikidata="Q805" start="4291" end="4296" title="Yemen" label="Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="4320" end="4327" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="4332" end="4344" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238161" start="4662" end="4671" title="The Downs (ship anchorage)" label="the Downs"/>
<link wikidata="Q28153930" start="4696" end="4708" title="Suvali Beach" label="Suvali Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q4629" start="4714" end="4719" title="Surat" label="Surat"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="4763" end="4773" title="Portuguese Empire" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="4778" end="4783" title="Dutch Republic" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q189326" start="4982" end="4988" title="Qajar dynasty" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q240719" start="5046" end="5051" title="Qeshm Island" label="Qeshm"/>
<link wikidata="Q695265" start="5056" end="5062" title="Hormuz Island" label="Hormuz"/>
<link wikidata="Q154814" start="5119" end="5131" title="Bandar Abbas" label="Bandar Abbas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031465" start="5783" end="5800" title="Capture of Ormuz (1622)" label="conquest of Ormuz"/>
<link wikidata="Q189326" start="5810" end="5816" title="Qajar dynasty" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6024" end="6025" title="Pound sterling#Tudor, 1551" label="£"/>
<link wikidata="Q37040" start="6059" end="6069" title="Baffin Bay" label="Baffin Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q81178" start="6074" end="6087" title="Baffin Island" label="Baffin Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q921942" start="6285" end="6299" title="Samuel Purchas" label="Samuel Purchas"/>
<link wikidata="Q456083" start="6542" end="6551" title="John Ross (Arctic explorer)" label="John Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q8507766" start="6789" end="6811" title="history of longitude" label="reckoning of longitude"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6822" end="6837" title="History of longitude#Lunar distances" label="lunar distances"/>
<link wikidata="Q921942" start="6960" end="6974" title="Samuel Purchas" label="Samuel Purchas"/>
<link wikidata="Q880735" start="6977" end="6993" title="Blackburn Baffin" label="Blackburn Baffin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="142993" wikidata="Q215945" url="?curid=142993" title="Jens Baggesen">
<text>Jens Immanuel Baggesen (15 February 1764 – 3 October 1826) was a major Danish poet, librettist, critic, and comic writer.

==Life==
Baggesen was born at Korsør on the Danish island of Zealand on February 15, 1764. His parents were very poor, and he was sent to copy documents at the office of the clerk of Hornsherred District before he was twelve. He was a melancholy, feeble child, and he attempted suicide more than once. By dint of indomitable perseverance, he managed to gain an education; in 1782, he entered the University of Copenhagen.

His first work—a verse &quot;Comical Tales&quot; broadly similar to the later &quot;Broad Grins&quot; of Colman the Younger—took the capital by storm and the struggling poet found himself a popular favorite at age 21. He then tried more serious lyric poetry and his , elegant manners, and versatility gained him a place in the best society. In March 1789, his success collapsed when his opera &quot;Holger Danske&quot; was received with mockery of its many faults and a heated nationalist controversy over Baggesen&#x27;s association with Germans. He left Denmark in a rage and spent the next years in Germany, France, and Switzerland.

In 1790, he married at Bern and began to write in German. He published his next poem &#x27; (&quot;Alpine Song&quot;) in that language, but brought the Danish &#x27; (&quot;Labyrinth&quot;) as a peace offering upon his return to Denmark in the winter. It was received with unbounded homage. Over the next twenty years, he published volumes alternately in Danish and German and wandered across northern Europe before settling principally in Paris. His most important German work during this period was the 1803 idyllic hexameter epic called &quot;Parthenais&quot;.

Upon his 1806 visit to Copenhagen, he found the young Oehlenschläger hailed as the great poet of the day and his own popularity on the wane. He then stayed, engaging in one abusive literary feud after another, most with the underlying issue that Baggesen was determined not to allow Oehlenschläger to be considered a greater poet than himself. He finally left for Paris in 1820, where he lost his second wife and youngest child in 1822. Suffering a period of imprisonment for his debts, he fell at last into a hopeless melancholy madness. Having slightly recovered, he determined to see Denmark once more, but died en route at the Freemasons&#x27; hospital in Hamburg on October 3, 1826. He was buried at Kiel.

==Legacy==
Baggesen&#x27;s many-sided talents achieved success in all forms of writing, but his political, philosophical, and critical works fell out of favor by the mid-19th century. His satire is marred by his egotism and passions, but his comic poems are deathless. His finished and elegant style was very influential on later Danish literature, in which he is regarded as the major figure between Holberg and Oehlenschläger. His greatest success, however, has proven to be the simple song &quot;&quot; (&quot;There Was a Time when I Was Very Little&quot;) which was known by heart among Danes a century after his death. It outlived all of his epics.

There is a statue of Baggesen on Havnepladsen in Korsør, unveiled on 6 May 1906 by Professor Vilhelm Andersen. The local Best Western hotel is also named after him.

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q215945" start="0" end="22" title="Jens Baggesen" label="Jens Immanuel Baggesen"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="71" end="77" title="Denmark" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q49757" start="78" end="82" title="poet" label="poet"/>
<link wikidata="Q131084" start="84" end="94" title="librettist" label="librettist"/>
<link wikidata="Q58854" start="96" end="102" title="literary criticism" label="critic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784816" start="153" end="159" title="Korsør" label="Korsør"/>
<link wikidata="Q756617" start="167" end="173" title="Kingdom of Denmark" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q927909" start="174" end="180" title="list of Danish islands" label="island"/>
<link wikidata="Q25535" start="184" end="191" title="Zealand" label="Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q3997704" start="261" end="275" title="copyist" label="copy documents"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547094" start="306" end="317" title="Hornsherred" label="Hornsherred"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832330" start="318" end="326" title="Traditional districts of Denmark" label="District"/>
<link wikidata="Q10737" start="401" end="408" title="suicide" label="suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q186285" start="519" end="543" title="University of Copenhagen" label="University of Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q513170" start="651" end="669" title="George Colman the Younger" label="Colman the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q182357" start="791" end="803" title="lyric poetry" label="lyric poetry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="933" end="938" title="Danish opera" label="opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762793" start="945" end="958" title="Holger Danske (opera)" label="Holger Danske"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1023" end="1034" title="Danish nationalism" label="nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="1085" end="1092" title="German people" label="Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="1148" end="1155" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q58296" start="1157" end="1163" title="First French Republic" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="1169" end="1180" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q70" start="1206" end="1210" title="Bern" label="Bern"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="1233" end="1239" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q9035" start="1335" end="1341" title="Danish language" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q48963" start="1356" end="1365" title="Labyrinth" label="Labyrinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="1412" end="1419" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="1623" end="1628" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q109548" start="1701" end="1710" title="hexameter" label="hexameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q37484" start="1711" end="1715" title="epic poetry" label="epic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="1771" end="1781" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q168356" start="1802" end="1816" title="Adam Gottlob Oehlenschläger" label="Oehlenschläger"/>
<link wikidata="Q85781589" start="1929" end="1942" title="literary feud" label="literary feud"/>
<link wikidata="Q427276" start="2207" end="2233" title="debtors&amp;#x27; prison" label="imprisonment for his debts"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="2379" end="2389" title="Freemasonry" label="Freemasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="2408" end="2415" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707" start="2453" end="2457" title="Kiel" label="Kiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048091" start="2556" end="2565" title="Danish politics" label="political"/>
<link wikidata="Q5219853" start="2567" end="2580" title="Danish philosophy" label="philosophical"/>
<link wikidata="Q58854" start="2586" end="2594" title="literary criticism" label="critical"/>
<link wikidata="Q128758" start="2648" end="2654" title="satire" label="satire"/>
<link wikidata="Q849175" start="2790" end="2807" title="Danish literature" label="Danish literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q216692" start="2861" end="2868" title="Ludvig Holberg" label="Holberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q168356" start="2873" end="2887" title="Adam Gottlob Oehlenschläger" label="Oehlenschläger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784816" start="3164" end="3170" title="Korsør" label="Korsør"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072778" start="3208" end="3224" title="Vilhelm Andersen" label="Vilhelm Andersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q830334" start="3236" end="3248" title="Best Western" label="Best Western"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="142995" wikidata="Q1212945" url="?curid=142995" title="The Story of the Kelly Gang">
<text>The Story of the Kelly Gang is a 1906 Australian bushranger film directed by Charles Tait. It traces the exploits of the 19th-century Kelly gang of bushrangers and outlaws, led by Ned Kelly. The silent film was shot in and around Melbourne and originally ran for more than an hour with a reel length of about , making it the longest narrative film yet seen in the world.

The film premiered at Melbourne&#x27;s Athenaeum Hall on 26 December 1906 and was first shown in the United Kingdom in January 1908. A commercial and critical success, it is regarded as the origin point of the bushranging drama, a genre that dominated the early years of Australian film production. Since its release, many other films have been made about the Kelly gang.

As of 2020, approximately 17 minutes of the film are known to have survived, which, together with stills and other fragments, have undergone restoration for theatrical and home video releases. In 2007, &quot;The Story of the Kelly Gang&quot; was inscribed on the UNESCO Memory of the World Register for being the world&#x27;s first full-length narrative feature film.

==Plot==

Film historian Ina Bertrand suggests that the tone of &quot;The Story of the Kelly Gang&quot; is &quot;one of sorrow, depicting Ned Kelly and his gang as the last of the bushrangers.&quot; Bertrand identifies several scenes that suggest considerable film-making sophistication on the part of the Taits. One is the composition of a scene of police shooting parrots in the bush. The second is the capture of Ned, shot from the viewpoint of the police, as he advances. A copy of the programme booklet has survived, containing a synopsis of the film, in six &#x27;scenes&#x27;. The latter provided audiences with the sort of information later provided by intertitles, and can help historians imagine what the entire film may have been like.

According to the synopsis given in the surviving programme, the film originally comprised six sequences. These provided a loose narrative based on the Kelly gang story.
* Scene 1: Police discuss a warrant for Dan Kelly&#x27;s arrest. Later, Kate Kelly rebuffs the attentions of a Trooper.
* Scene 2: The killings of Kennedy, Scanlon and Lonigan at Stringybark Creek by the gang.
* Scene 3: The hold-up at Younghusband&#x27;s station and a bank hold–up.
* Scene 4: Various gang members and supporters evade the police and the gang killing of Aaron Sherritt.
* Scene 5: The attempt to derail a train and scenes at the Glenrowan Inn. The police surround the hotel, Dan Kelly and Steve Hart &quot;die by each other&#x27;s hands&quot; after Joe Byrne is shot dead.
* Scene 6: The closing scenes. Ned Kelly fights hard but is shot in the legs. &quot;He begs the Troopers to spare his life, thus falls the last of the Kelly Gang…&quot;

===Alternative film===
Some confusion regarding the plot has emerged as a result of a variant poster dating from the time the film was re-released in 1910. The similar (but different) photos suggest that either the film was being added to for its re-release, or an entirely new version was made by Johnson and Gibson, as the poster proclaims. In addition, a film fragment (&quot; the Perth fragment &quot;) exists, showing Aaron Sherritt being shot in front of an obviously painted canvas flat. This is now thought to be from a different film altogether, perhaps a cheap imitation of &quot;The Story of the Kelly Gang&quot; made by a theatrical company, keen to cash in on the success of the original, or an earlier bushranger short.

==Origins==
Australian bushranger Ned Kelly had been executed only twenty-six years before &quot;The Story of the Kelly Gang&quot; was made, and Ned&#x27;s mother Ellen and younger brother Jim were still alive at the time of its release. The film was made during an era when plays about bushrangers were extremely popular, and there were, by one estimate, six contemporaneous theatre companies giving performances of the Kelly gang story. Historian Ian Jones suggests bushranger stories still had an &quot;indefinable appeal&quot; for Australians in the early 20th century. Stephen Vagg wrote that &quot;bushranger films are their own, uniquely Australian genre, deriving from local history and literary tradition rather than simply copying American tropes... &quot;Kelly Gang&quot;... , was adapted from an Australian stage play, based on an Australian historical event, and featured many traditions and tropes that are grounded more in Australian than American literary traditions – miscarriage of justice, Protestant-Catholic sectarianism, class warfare, feisty &quot;squatter’s daughters&quot;, etc.&quot;

==Cast==
There is considerable uncertainty over who appeared in the film and a number of unsubstantiated claims have been made regarding participation. According to the Australian National Film and Sound Archive, the only actors positively identified are:
* John Forde as Dan Kelly
* Elizabeth Tait as the stunt double for the actress playing Kate Kelly
Others thought to be in the film include:
* Frank Mills, as the title character Ned Kelly
* John and Frank Tait, Harriet Tait, members of Charles Tait&#x27;s family.
* J. (Jack) Ennis, as Steve Hart
* Will Coyne, as Joe Byrne
*C.S. Marsdesh as &quot;the man who let off the smoke bombs at the right moment&quot;
In her memoirs, Viola Tait claimed the part of Ned was played by a Canadian stunt actor, who deserted the project partway through.

A 1944 article said the actors came from Cole&#x27;s Dramatic Company. This article claims the Taits were not in the film. However, another article the following year from the same publication confirms the Taits&#x27; involvement.

==Production==
Shooting of the film reportedly involved a budget variously estimated between £400 (Gibson) and £1,000 (Tait) and took six months. While it is now commonly accepted that the Taits&#x27; experienced older brother Charles directed the film, only ten years after it was made, pioneer Australian director W. J. Lincoln claimed it was actually &quot;directed by Mr Sam Crews [sic], who... worked without a scenario, and pieced the story together as he went along.&quot; Lincoln also claimed that &quot;the principal characters were played by the promoters and their relatives, who certainly made no pretensions to any great histrionic talent.&quot;

Viola Tait&#x27;s memoirs, published in the early 1970s, identifies Charles as being chosen as director because of his theatrical experience. Her account confirmed that many of the extended Tait family and their friends appeared in scenes.

Much of the film was shot at Charterisville, a property leased by Lizzie Tait&#x27;s family as a dairy farm and artists&#x27; colony near Heidelberg, now a suburb of Melbourne. Other scenes in the film may have been shot in the suburbs of St Kilda (indoor scenes), and possibly Eltham, Greensborough, Mitcham, and Rosanna. The Victoria Railways Department assisted by providing a train.

Costumes were possibly borrowed from E. I. Cole&#x27;s Bohemian Company, and members of the troupe may have also performed in the film. According to Viola Tait, Sir Rupert Clarke loaned the suit of Kelly armour his family then owned for use in the film.

&quot;The Story of the Kelly Gang&quot; was made by a consortium of two partnerships involved in theatre—entrepreneurs John Tait and Nevin Tait, and pioneering film exhibitors Millard Johnson and William Gibson. The Tait family owned the Melbourne Athenaeum Hall and part of their concert program often included short films. Melbourne film exhibitors Johnson and Gibson also had technical experience, including developing film stock. Credit for writing the film scenario is generally given to brothers Frank, John and sometimes Charles Tait. At a time when films were usually shorts of five to ten minutes duration, their inspiration for making a film of at least sixty minutes in length, and intended as a stand-alone feature, was undoubtedly based on the proven success of stage versions of the Kelly story.

Film historians Andrew Pike and Ross Cooper have noted that at the time, the filmmakers were unaware of the historical importance of the film they were making, and only much later &quot;poured forth their memories.&quot; Unfortunately, &quot;with the passage of time and the desire to make a good story of it&quot; they &quot;created a maze of contradictory information.&quot;

For example, in later years, William Gibson claimed that while touring through New Zealand showing the bio-pic &quot;Living London&quot;, he noticed the large audiences attracted to Charles McMahon&#x27;s stage play &quot;The Kelly Gang&quot;. Film historian Eric Reade claimed the Taits themselves owned the stage rights to a Kelly play, while actors Sam Crewes and John Forde later also claimed to have thought of the idea of a making a film of the Kelly Gang&#x27;s exploits, inspired by the success of stage plays.

&quot;The Story of the Kelly Gang&quot; was not the first bushranger film. Two shorts were produced in 1904: &quot;The Bushranger&quot; and Joseph Perry&#x27;s &quot;Bushranging in North Queensland&quot;, made by the Salvation Army&#x27;s Limelight Department in Melbourne, one of the world&#x27;s first film studios.

==Release and reception==

The film was given a week of trial screenings in &quot;Kelly Country&quot; (north-eastern Victoria) in late 1906. This proved enormously successful and the movie recouped its budget for these screenings alone.

Its Melbourne debut was made at the Athenaeum Hall on 26 December 1906. It ran for five weeks to full houses, local papers noting the extraordinary popularity of the film. Although the country screenings had been silent, when the film was screened in Melbourne it was accompanied by live sound effects, including blank cartridges as gunshots and coconut shells beaten together to simulate hoofbeats. At later screenings a lecturer would also narrate the action. These additions were well received by the theatre critic for &quot;Melbourne Punch&quot;, who stated that they greatly enhance the film&#x27;s realism. He went on to say:
Comparing the film to other artistic depictions of the Kelly saga, one Adelaide critic wrote that it conveys &quot;a far more vivid impression of the actual life and deeds of the Kellys than letterpress and stagecraft combined.&quot;

Many groups at the time, including some politicians and the police, interpreted the film as a glorification of criminality. Scenes depicting the gang&#x27;s chivalrous conduct towards women received criticism, with &quot;The Bulletin&quot; stating that such a portrayal &quot;justifies all Ned Kelly’s viciousness and villainies&quot;. The film was banned in &quot;Kelly Country&quot;—regional centres such as Benalla and Wangaratta—in April 1907, and in 1912 bushranger films were banned across New South Wales and Victoria.

Despite the bans, the film toured Australia for over 20 years and was also shown in New Zealand, Ireland and Britain. When Queen&#x27;s Royal Theatre was rebuilt in Dublin in 1909, it opened with a program headed by &quot;The Story of the Kelly Gang&quot;. The backers and exhibitors made &quot;a fortune&quot; from the film, perhaps in excess of £25,000.

==Restoration==

The film was considered completely lost until 1976, when five short segments totalling a few seconds of running time were found. In 1978, another of the film was discovered in a collection belonging to a former film exhibitor. In 1980, further footage was found at a rubbish dump. The longest surviving single sequence, the scene at Younghusband&#x27;s station, was found in the UK in 2006. In November 2006, the National Film and Sound Archive released a new digital restoration which incorporated the new material and recreated some scenes based on existing still photographs.

The restoration is now 17 minutes long and includes the key scene of Kelly&#x27;s last stand and capture.

==In popular culture==
In director Warwick Thornton&#x27;s 2017 film &quot;Sweet Country&quot;, a &quot;travelling picture show&quot; in 1920s Northern Territory shows &quot;The Story of the Kelly Gang&quot; to residents of an outback town, who cheer for the bushranger. The film&#x27;s protagonist, an Aboriginal outlaw, is also named Kelly, but vilified and hunted by the same townspeople. According to &quot;The Australian&quot;, Thornton, an Aboriginal, &quot;has little time&quot; for depictions of Ned Kelly as a larrikin folk hero and Irish victim of British colonisation. &quot;When there was a raiding party,&quot; said Thornton, &quot;and a massacre happened, the Scottish, the Irish and the British were all shooting us. It doesn’t equate for me&quot;.

==Other Ned Kelly films==
* &quot;The Kelly Gang&quot; (1920)
* &quot;When the Kellys Were Out&quot; (1923)
* &quot;When the Kellys Rode&quot; (1934)
* &quot;A Message to Kelly&quot; (1947)
* &quot;The Glenrowan Affair&quot; (1951)
* &quot;Ned Kelly&quot; (1959)
* &quot;Stringybark Massacre&quot; (1967)
* &quot;Ned Kelly&quot; (1970)
* &quot;Reckless Kelly&quot; (1993) (satire)
* &quot;Ned Kelly&quot; (2003)
* &quot;Ned&quot; (2003) (satire)
* &quot;True History of the Kelly Gang&quot; (2019)

==See also==
* Ned Kelly in popular culture
* List of Australian films before 1910
* List of incomplete or partially lost films

==References==
==External links==
* 
*&quot;The Story of the Kelly Gang preserved and released on DVD in Australia&quot;
* &quot;The Story of the Kelly Gang&quot; at Australian Screen Online
* Sally Jackson and Graham Shirley describe the restoration of &quot;The Story of the Kelly Gang&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6804274" start="49" end="64" title="bushranger film" label="bushranger film"/>
<link wikidata="Q2960286" start="77" end="89" title="Charles Tait (film director)" label="Charles Tait"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627286" start="148" end="158" title="bushranger" label="bushranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q301816" start="180" end="189" title="Ned Kelly" label="Ned Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="230" end="239" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q12912091" start="333" end="347" title="fictional film" label="narrative film"/>
<link wikidata="Q12122406" start="411" end="425" title="Melbourne Athenaeum" label="Athenaeum Hall"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="690" end="706" title="cultural depictions of Ned Kelly#Film" label="many other films"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="1008" end="1014" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q473858" start="1015" end="1043" title="Memory of the World Register" label="Memory of the World Register"/>
<link wikidata="Q24869" start="1099" end="1111" title="feature film" label="feature film"/>
<link wikidata="Q245069" start="1775" end="1785" title="intertitle" label="intertitle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627286" start="3550" end="3560" title="bushranger" label="bushranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q301816" start="3561" end="3570" title="Ned Kelly" label="Ned Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5981930" start="3976" end="3985" title="Ian Jones (author)" label="Ian Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q7610740" start="4101" end="4113" title="Stephen Vagg" label="Stephen Vagg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565882" start="4818" end="4849" title="National Film and Sound Archive" label="National Film and Sound Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306628" start="4910" end="4919" title="Dan Kelly (bushranger)" label="Dan Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6375575" start="4981" end="4991" title="Kate Kelly (Australian outlaw)" label="Kate Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q301816" start="5072" end="5081" title="Ned Kelly" label="Ned Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7612787" start="5180" end="5190" title="Steve Hart" label="Steve Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3545985" start="5208" end="5217" title="Joe Byrne" label="Joe Byrne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5321938" start="5477" end="5505" title="E.I. Cole" label="Cole&amp;#x27;s Dramatic Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2960286" start="5895" end="5902" title="Charles Tait (film director)" label="Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564549" start="5984" end="5997" title="W. J. Lincoln" label="W. J. Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q14935077" start="6598" end="6612" title="Charterisville" label="Charterisville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558054" start="6681" end="6701" title="artists&amp;#x27; colony" label="artists&amp;#x27; colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1594002" start="6707" end="6717" title="Heidelberg, Victoria" label="Heidelberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q823531" start="6808" end="6816" title="St Kilda, Victoria" label="St Kilda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2437209" start="6847" end="6853" title="Eltham, Victoria" label="Eltham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604476" start="6855" end="6868" title="Greensborough, Victoria" label="Greensborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q6881034" start="6870" end="6877" title="Mitcham, Victoria" label="Mitcham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7367325" start="6883" end="6890" title="Rosanna, Victoria" label="Rosanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q5321938" start="6994" end="7004" title="E. I. Cole" label="E. I. Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q7528922" start="7118" end="7135" title="Sir Rupert Clarke, 2nd Baronet" label="Sir Rupert Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q6260174" start="7331" end="7340" title="John Tait (entrepreneur)" label="John Tait"/>
<link wikidata="Q7004918" start="7345" end="7355" title="Nevin Tait" label="Nevin Tait"/>
<link wikidata="Q6858512" start="7388" end="7403" title="Millard Johnson (producer)" label="Millard Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8009864" start="7408" end="7422" title="William Gibson (producer)" label="William Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q12122406" start="7450" end="7474" title="Melbourne Athenaeum" label="Melbourne Athenaeum Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6260174" start="7721" end="7725" title="John Tait (entrepreneur)" label="John"/>
<link wikidata="Q2960286" start="7740" end="7752" title="Charles Tait (film director)" label="Charles Tait"/>
<link wikidata="Q5080538" start="8583" end="8598" title="Charles MacMahon (theatre)" label="Charles McMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q20739634" start="9061" end="9073" title="Joseph Perry (cinematographer)" label="Joseph Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q20649428" start="9087" end="9118" title="Bushranging in North Queensland" label="Bushranging in North Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q188307" start="9138" end="9152" title="Salvation Army" label="Salvation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q6549206" start="9160" end="9180" title="Limelight Department" label="Limelight Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q12122406" start="9514" end="9528" title="Athenaeum, Melbourne" label="Athenaeum Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6811855" start="10007" end="10022" title="Melbourne Punch" label="Melbourne Punch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112" start="10182" end="10190" title="Adelaide" label="Adelaide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025604" start="10567" end="10579" title="The Bulletin (Australian periodical)" label="The Bulletin"/>
<link wikidata="Q816673" start="10756" end="10763" title="Benalla" label="Benalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024728" start="10768" end="10778" title="Wangaratta" label="Wangaratta"/>
<link wikidata="Q16199721" start="10806" end="10870" title="bushranger ban" label="bushranger films were banned across New South Wales and Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270119" start="10996" end="11022" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Theatre, Dublin" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Royal Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="11038" end="11044" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268687" start="11282" end="11286" title="Lost film" label="lost"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565882" start="11660" end="11691" title="National Film and Sound Archive" label="National Film and Sound Archive"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11896" end="11931" title="Ned Kelly#Last stand and capture" label="Kelly&amp;#x27;s last stand and capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4461183" start="11969" end="11985" title="Warwick Thornton" label="Warwick Thornton"/>
<link wikidata="Q35144519" start="12009" end="12022" title="Sweet Country (2017 film)" label="Sweet Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235" start="12077" end="12095" title="Northern Territory" label="Northern Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478700" start="12345" end="12359" title="The Australian" label="The Australian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9020347" start="12453" end="12461" title="larrikin" label="larrikin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15039594" start="12733" end="12747" title="The Kelly Gang (film)" label="The Kelly Gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7992991" start="12769" end="12793" title="When the Kellys Were Out" label="When the Kellys Were Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q7992989" start="12815" end="12835" title="When the Kellys Rode" label="When the Kellys Rode"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12857" end="12875" title="A Message to Kelly" label="A Message to Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7736766" start="12897" end="12917" title="The Glenrowan Affair" label="The Glenrowan Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q122349463" start="12939" end="12948" title="Ned Kelly (television play)" label="Ned Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q21899923" start="12970" end="12990" title="Stringybark Creek" label="Stringybark Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112204" start="13012" end="13021" title="Ned Kelly (1970 movie)" label="Ned Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3421998" start="13043" end="13057" title="Reckless Kelly" label="Reckless Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q128758" start="13072" end="13078" title="satire" label="satire"/>
<link wikidata="Q391542" start="13088" end="13097" title="Ned Kelly (2003 movie)" label="Ned Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6985914" start="13119" end="13122" title="Ned (film)" label="Ned"/>
<link wikidata="Q128758" start="13137" end="13143" title="satire" label="satire"/>
<link wikidata="Q56274013" start="13153" end="13183" title="True History of the Kelly Gang (film)" label="True History of the Kelly Gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q6986026" start="13213" end="13241" title="Ned Kelly in popular culture" label="Ned Kelly in popular culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6562801" start="13244" end="13280" title="List of Australian films before 1910" label="List of Australian films before 1910"/>
<link wikidata="Q6623940" start="13283" end="13325" title="List of incomplete or partially lost films" label="List of incomplete or partially lost films"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565882" start="13493" end="13517" title="Australian Screen Online" label="Australian Screen Online"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="142996" wikidata="Q239260" url="?curid=142996" title="Pyotr Bagration">
<text>Prince Pyotr Ivanovich Bagration (10 July 1765 – 24 September 1812) was a Russian general and prince of Georgian origin, prominent during the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars.

Bagration, a member of the Bagrationi dynasty, was born in Kizlyar. His father, Ivan (Ivane), served as an officer in the Imperial Russian Army, in which Bagration also enlisted in 1782. Pyotr Ivanovich Bagration began his military career serving in the Russo-Circassian War of 1763–1864 for a couple of years. Afterwards he participated in a war against the Ottomans and the capture of Ochakov in 1788. Later he helped suppress the Kościuszko Uprising of 1794 in Poland and capture Warsaw. During Russia&#x27;s Italian and Swiss campaigns of 1799 against the French, he served with distinction under Field Marshal Alexander Suvorov.

In 1805 Russia joined the coalition against Napoleon. After the collapse of the Austrians at Ulm in October 1805, Bagration won praise for his successful defense in the Battle of Schöngrabern (November 1805) that allowed Russian forces to withdraw and unite with the main Russian army of Mikhail Kutuzov. In December 1805 the combined Russo-Austrian army suffered defeat at the Battle of Austerlitz, where Bagration commanded the allied right wing against the French under Jean Lannes. Later he commanded Russian troops in the Finnish War (1808–1809) against Sweden and in another war against the Turks (1806–1812) on the Danube.

During the French invasion of Russia in 1812, Bagration commanded one of two large Russian armies (Barclay de Tolly commanded the other) fighting a series of rear-guard actions. The Russians failed to stop the French advance at the Battle of Smolensk in August 1812. Barclay had proposed a scorched-earth retreat that the emperor Alexander I of Russia had approved, although Bagration preferred to confront the French in a major battle. Mikhail Kutuzov succeeded Barclay as commander-in-chief but continued his policy until the Battle of Borodino () near Moscow. Bagration commanded the left wing around what became known as the Bagration flèches at Borodino, where he was mortally wounded; he died a couple of weeks later. Originally buried at a local church, in 1839 he was reburied on the battlefield of Borodino.

==Life==
Pyotr was born in 1765 to a prince of the Mukhrani branch of the Bagrationi dynasty, Colonel Prince Ivane Bagrationi, who was the eldest son of Prince Alexander, an illegitimate son of King Jesse of Kartli, which is now central Georgia. He studied Russian and German and was taught Persian, Turkish, Armenian, and Georgian by his father. However, unlike many other Russian aristocrats, he did not know French.

Pyotr joined the Imperial Russian Army in 1782, enlisting as a sergeant in the Kavsansk Rifles of the Astrakhan Infantry Regiment. His younger brother Roman joined the Chuguev Cossack regiment as a &quot;uryadnik&quot; (a Cossack NCO) at the age of thirteen in 1791. Both would go on to become generals of the Imperial Russian Army.

Bagration served for some years in the Russian-Circassian War. He participated in the Siege of Ochakov (1788). In 1792 he was commissioned as a captain and transferred to the Kiev Cavalry Regiment that year as a second Major, transferring as a full first Major to the Sofiiskii Carabineers on 15 May 1794. He served in the military campaign to suppress the Polish Kościuszko Uprising of 1794.

He received successive promotions to lieutenant-colonel (26 October 1794), to colonel (1798) and to major-general (1799). His merits were recognized by Suvorov, whom he accompanied in the Italian and Swiss campaigns of 1799, winning particular distinction by the capture of the towns of Brescia and Bergamo and having fought well along the Adda River and in the Klön Valley. From 1798 to 1799, he commanded the 6th Chasseurs; from 1801 to 1802, he commanded the Chasseurs of the Imperial Guard; then from 1802 to 1805, he served as GOC Jager Brigade.

He was the alleged lover of Emperor Paul&#x27;s daughter Catherine. In 1800 Paul recognized the title of &quot;Prince (&quot;Knyaz&quot;) Bagration&quot; for Pyotr in Russia, and unexpectedly married him off to Countess Catherine Pavlovna Skavronskaya, the favourite niece of Grigory Potemkin and one of the Empress Maria&#x27;s ladies-in-waiting. Bagration and Catherine had been casually involved, but the marriage was a failure. The young and lovely Catherine soon preferred travelling and, in 1805, fled to Vienna, where her salon and running affair with Prince Clemens von Metternich—who called her &quot;the Naked Angel&quot;—permitted her to serve as an important agent of Russian intelligence and diplomacy. Bagration was obliged by the emperor to claim their daughter, Marie-Clementine, as his own and to subsidize thousands of rubles of Catherine&#x27;s debts. He had a reputation as a heavy gambler, as well, and was forced to sell estates to cover losses that rose as high as 80,000 roubles.

In the wars of 1805 Bagration&#x27;s achievements appeared even more brilliant. When Napoleon ordered Murat to break an armistice he had just signed with Bagration, the general was able to successfully resist the repeated attacks of forces five times his own numbers under Murat and Lannes at Schöngrabern (16 November) near Hollabrunn. Though Bagration lost half of the men under his command, their stand protected the retreat of the main army under Kutuzov to Olmütz. When Kutuzov was overruled and forced into battle at Austerlitz (2 December), Bagration commanded the advance guard of the Prince Liechtenstein&#x27;s column and defended the allied right against Lannes while the left attacked Napoleon&#x27;s deliberately undefended right flank. He was promoted to lieutenant-general in 1805, and in 1807 fought bravely and obstinately at the battles of Eylau (7 February), Heilsberg (11 June), and Friedland (14 June).

He was successful as commander of both Russia&#x27;s Finnish Campaign in 1808 and Turkish Campaign in 1809. In the former, he captured the Åland Islands by a daring march across the frozen Gulf of Finland. His rapid transfer to the distant Moldavian front against the Ottoman Empire has been seen as a reprimand for an alleged affair with the tsarevna Catherine, who was married off shortly thereafter. While there, he led the Russian army at Rassowa and Tataritza and was promoted to full general of infantry.

In 1812, Bagration commanded the 2nd Army of the West. A few days before Napoleon&#x27;s invasion on 24 June, he suggested to Alexander I a pre-emptive strike into the Duchy of Warsaw. Defeated at Mogilev (23 July), Bagration led his forces to join the 1st Army at Smolensk under Barclay de Tolly, to whom he ceded overall command of both armies on 2 August. Bagration led the left wing at the Battle of Borodino (7 September) where he constructed many flèches which, due to a shortage of engineer officers, were poorly built. During the battle, he received a mortal wound and later died from gangrene on 24 September, in the village of Simi, where his aunt resided.

It is said that, while wounded, Bagration kept giving orders to the troops without knowing that the Russian army was abandoning Moscow. When he finally heard the truth, Bagration was so shocked that he rapidly stood up, totally forgetting about his grave wound. Such an act was too much for his severely wounded body and it quickly cost Bagration his life.

==Napoleonic Wars==

===Battles of Hollabrunn and Austerlitz===

In the course of the War of the Third Coalition, Napoleon&#x27;s defeat of General Mack&#x27;s Austrian army at Ulm on 19 October 1805 led Kutuzov to consider withdrawing and uniting his forces with reinforcements arriving at Brünn. Kutuzov ordered Bagration to guard Vienna with just a single regiment to stall a possible French assault. The French marshals Murat and Lannes made a false armistice claim to position themselves near the Danube at Vienna. When the guards were distracted they rushed over the bridge to secure the town. Kutuzov was in hurry to unite his army with the Russian troops commanded by Buxhoeveden, so he needed a diversion to delay the French advance. Bagration then took command of the Russian army&#x27;s rearguard to do so. His combined Russo-Austrian force numbered less than 7,500 men facing a foe more than five times the size. Bagration took up a position 6 km north of Hollabrunn, on the hill north above the small town of Schöngrabern, and formed a huge line to trick the French into believing the entire Russian army stood before them. In fact, Marshal Murat hesitated to attack and later even agreed to an offer from Bagration to negotiate an armistice, halting the entire French advance without informing Napoleon. This delay gave Kutuzov enough time to save his army. When word reached Napoleon he was enraged at Murat&#x27;s obstinate behaviour and ordered him to resume the attack immediately, ending the armistice on 16 November. The vanguard of Lannes&#x27;s and Murat&#x27;s 45,000 men attacked Bagration&#x27;s position repeatedly but were repelled each time, unable to take the hill for some six hours. General Bagration personally led some of the counter-attacks, which drove the French back. Even though his force suffered heavy casualties and destruction seemed inevitable, Bagration managed to manoeuver his remaining troops out of the area and unite with the rest of the Coalition army at Brunn on 18 November 1805. His actions prevented the Russian army from being cut off and destroyed.
Just two weeks later, on 2 December 1805, the opposing armies would meet at Austerlitz. This time Bagration assumed command over the Coalition army&#x27;s 13,000 men strong right-wing, opposing Lannes&#x27; equally strong French left-wing. When the coalition army started to rout, Bagration too ordered his men to retreat after not achieving any progress against Marshal Lannes, who had the support of elements of Marshal Murat&#x27;s forces, even though his men fought bravely and fiercely. The battle was lost at that point. While Bagration saw no other option but to commence a strategic withdrawal, Marshal Murat refused Lannes&#x27; suggestion to further pursue him so that his corps wouldn&#x27;t suffer further losses.

===Battle of Eylau===

General Bagration demonstrated his skills as military commander particularly during the brutal Battle of Eylau which took place in East Prussia on 7 and 8 February 1807 during the War of the Fourth Coalition. After destroying the Prussian army at Jena-Auerstedt (October 1806), Napoleon was pursuing Russian forces under Marshal Kamensky. In a series of inconclusive clashes, the French did not reach their ultimate goal of destroying the enemy, while the Russians successfully continued retreating. However, on 7 January 1807 General Levin August, Count von Bennigsen assumed overall command of the Russian forces and carried out a successful surprise attack on the French left-wing against Marshal Ney and further against Marshal Bernadotte. Bernadotte managed to evade destruction by winning the Battle of Mohrungen (25 January 1807) and by retreating. Napoleon saw an opportunity to envelop Bennigsen&#x27;s unprotected left-wing by instructing Bernadotte to keep retreating and allowing his army to cut off the Russians from their own retreat. By a stroke of luck, a group of Cossacks intercepted a French messenger carrying Napoleon&#x27;s orders to Bernadotte and quickly reported to General Bagration. Bagration then informed Bennigsen, who immediately halted his offensive and retreated. The French pursued, and after several engagements finally confronted the entire Russian army at Eylau on 7 February 1807. Bagration occupied high ground a mile in front of the town, facing Marshal Soult&#x27;s IV Corps and Marshal Murat&#x27;s cavalry. The combined French forces assaulted the plateau, but Bagration&#x27;s heavily outnumbered troops repulsed them. The general demanded bitter resistance from his men to gain time for Bennigsen&#x27;s heavy artillery to pass through Eylau and join the main Russian force. During the afternoon the French were reinforced by Marshal Augereau&#x27;s corps and the Imperial Guard, making up about 45,000 soldiers in all. Under pressure from greatly superior numbers, Bagration finally conducted an orderly retreat to join the main Russian army. Russian forces under General Barclay de Tolly covered the retreat. Despite a clear numerical advantage, the French were not able to achieve a greater victory than eventually driving Bagration&#x27;s small force off the plateau. Bagration&#x27;s delaying action and skilful withdrawal enabled the Russian army to escape destruction and consolidate for a decisive battle.

In 1946, Soviet authorities renamed the town of Preußisch Eylau Bagrationovsk in honour of Pyotr Bagration and of his remarkable skills as a tactician.

==Finnish War==

===Initial assault===

During the Finnish War from 1808 to 1809 Bagration commanded the 21st division of the Russian forces under Buxhoeveden. Not wanting to wait until Sweden had concentrated a large army in Finland, The Russian Empire took initiative and decided to take action. On the night of 9 (21) September (February 1808) Russian troops crossed the border to Finland and launched an offensive. Bagration&#x27;s 21st division was forming the Russian centre and moving ahead to quickly seize Hämeenlinna, Tampere and Pori. Under the pressure of the swift advance, the Swedish forces began a hasty retreat to the depths of Finland and were pursued relentlessly. Bagration&#x27;s men had to endure worst weather conditions, severe frost, snowstorms and forest debris. Also, the retreating Swedes were constructing obstacles and destroyed any possible food source as well as roads. Nevertheless, Bagration&#x27;s division overcame those obstacles and took all objectives, Hämeenlinna on 22 February (6 March), Tampere on 1 March (13) and Pori on 6 (18) March 1808. Bagration managed to advance over a distance of 200  km and capture three cities in just eight days and securing the way to the Gulf of Bothnia. His manoeuvre split the Swedish forces in two, a northern and southern group, providing the Russians with the possibility to strike each group one after another. Bagration correctly assessed the situation that the main Swedish force was in the north and intended to turn his division for an attack. But the commander in chief Buxhoveden foiled that plan by miscalculating the situation and assaulting the southern Swedish group, which had itself fortified in numerous fortifications, with his superior force, including the 21st division of Bagration. This allowed the main Swedish force to retreat unharmed to Oulu. Despite that Bagration, himself still achieved success by capturing the strategically important Turku province. In September 1808 Bagration became ill and was forced to leave the theatre of operation. He was keenly interested in the events and hastily returned as soon as he became fit for service again. Upon arrival he was appointed commander of the Russian forces defending the west coast of Finland.

===Swedish assault on Turku===
In September 1808 the Swedish command decided to land troops on Turku to distract attention from the northern Russian Front that threatened the Swedish main army and to secure the southern part of the west coast of Finland. A 2,500 men strong advance guard arrived in Åland and from there departed for the Turku coast. Bagration made a timely response and quickly threw the Swedes back to the sea. The Swedish leadership decided to take Turku at all cost to be able to create a bridgehead for reinforcements. King Gustav IV arrived at the Åland Islands to personally supervise the operation. On 14 (26) September a Swedish vanguard of 5,000 men was landing on Turku. Bagration was carefully monitoring the enemy&#x27;s activities and allowed the Swedish troops to set foot on shore before he commenced a full assault which destroyed the entire enemy force, leaving only a few who could escape with boats. By the end of 1808, suffering heavy casualties, the Swedish troops were in full retreat and the area of Finland completely cleared of them. Despite those setbacks, the Kingdom of Sweden was not ready to give up the fight.

===Battle for the Åland Islands===
In 1809, the Russian command had decided to take the war to the territory of Sweden to finally crush her army. The Russian army was divided into three operational groups commanded by Bagration, Barclay de Tolly and . Bagration&#x27;s 17,000-strong corps consisted of 30 infantry battalions, four cavalry squadrons, 600 Cossacks and 20 guns.

The main assault was to be carried out by a daring march across the frozen Gulf of Bothnia from Turku, reaching and capturing the heavily fortified Åland, which were garrisoned by about 10,000 Swedish troops, before continuing on the frozen Sea towards Stockholm. Bagration carefully planned his campaign and managed to supply his troops with fresh food, warm clothes, ammunition and weapons.

The expedition was ready on 26 February (10 March) 1809 and began the next day. The offensive against the Åland was carried out in five attack columns: four engaged in a frontal assault while the fifth bypassed Åland from the south. The Swedish troops did not put up much resistance, preferring to retreat to the major Åland island, from where they intended to stop Bagration&#x27;s advance. To do so, the Swedish commander-general Carl von Döbeln proposed negotiations for an armistice. Bagration refused, convinced that the sole purpose of von Döbeln&#x27;s offer was to delay his movements. After completing negotiations, he ordered his troops to advance at an even faster pace. Fearing an encirclement, General von Döbeln abandoned Åland. Pursued by Bagration&#x27;s troops, the retreat quickly turned into a devastating rout, leaving ammunition, weapons and equipment behind.

To intimidate the Swedes, Bagration ordered a 400-man cavalry detachment under Major General Yakov Kulnev to pursue the Swedes to their own shores. Kulnev managed to take the Swedish town of Grisslehamn, which was just 70  km away from Stockholm. This unexpected turn of events brought shock and confusion to the Swedish leadership and population, who were surprised to hear of Russian troops on Swedish soil. Stockholm was fortified and an army quickly put together and sent to intercept an enemy that was not actually there. The plan worked beyond Bagration&#x27;s expectations as the psychological impact of Kulnev&#x27;s incursion into Sweden was decisive for the course of the entire war. Simultaneously the other Russian corps also reached their goals so that the Swedish side found itself forced into peace talks after losing all its claims in Finland. Bagration was highly praised for his conduct of the campaign and was promoted to full general of infantry.

==French invasion of Russia==

During the early stage of Napoleon&#x27;s incursion into Russia, Bagration commanded the 2nd Russian Army deployed close to Vileyka, Belarus. The French march on Vilnius intended to split Bagration&#x27;s forces from Barclay de Tolly&#x27;s, who assumed overall command. Napoleon would then destroy Bagration&#x27;s 2nd army with a combined hammer and anvil operation conducted by the Marshals Jerome, Davout and Eugene after he falsely assumed they ran into Bagration&#x27;s army when it were only elements of General Dokturov&#x27;s cavalry. Confusion, false assumptions and lack of information prevented the French from having a clear picture of the situation. On the other side it was not much better. Conflicting orders and lack of information had almost placed Bagration in a blind march straight into Davout&#x27;s forces. Mud tracks, supply problems, weather and command dispute among the French gave Bagration enough time to join with Docturov and assume command over a 45.000 men strong force. Having already lost a large portion of his troops to skirmishes, bad weather condition and diseases, Marshal Davout was reluctant to fight Bagration without Jerome first reinforcing him. The French cavalry was defeated twice by General Platov so that they were kept in the dark. Bagration wasn&#x27;t better informed with both sides overestimating the other&#x27;s strength. Davout thought Bagration had some 60,000 men and Bagration thought Davout had 70,000. Bagration was getting orders from both Alexander&#x27;s staff and Barclay (which Barclay didn&#x27;t know) and left Bagration without a clear picture of what was expected of him and the general situation. This stream of confused orders to Bagration had him upset with Barclay which would have repercussions later. Even though Barclay de Tolly was given overall command as minister of war, Bagration was not subordinate under him since he was the older general. This is a reason why he constantly received orders from Tsar Alexander and Barclay at the same time.

Despite massive losses among the French, their rapid advance by force march towards Moscow repeatedly prevented de Tolly from establishing a defensive position and was forced to retreat every time he intended to. The commander in chief refused to put up a fight despite Bagration&#x27;s numerous urging. De Tolly&#x27;s continuing resistance to give battle would later lead to his removal from his position.

===Battle of Mogilev===
The battle of Mogilev, better known as Battle of Saltanovka, was the result of Bagration&#x27;s unsuccessful attempt to unite with the Russian main army after he had suggested a pre-emptive strike on the French to tsar Alexander. His 2nd army got intercepted when trying to reach Barclay de Tolly&#x27;s 1st army and clashed with Marshal Davout&#x27;s forces at the Dnieper river. In order to break through the French lines at Mogilev, Bagration deployed the 20,000 men strong 7th corps led by General Nikolay Raevsky. On the opposing side marshal Davout&#x27;s corps consisting of five divisions with a total strength of 28,000 men had formed defensive lines around Saltanovka. Davout waited for the approaching Russians and set them under massive musket volleys and artillery fire. Raevsky continued the advance personally leading his men in the assault. Despite great determination of the Russian troops, the French managed to repel the attack along the entire line. Davout then mounted a counter assault which threw the 7th corps back, although Raevsky was able to fend them off repeatedly until Bagration decided to order a general retreat when his army got also struck by other French forces at the flanks and rear. In order to avoid complete envelopement he quickly withdrew to Smolensk. Both sides suffered heavy losses, but Bagration misjudged the situation, believing he fought Napoleon&#x27;s main army when it was only Davout&#x27;s forces and some reinforcement. This highlighted the poor communication between the Russian armies. However at the same time Bagration&#x27;s decision to withdraw thwarted Napoleon&#x27;s plan to destroy the Second Western Army and he was eventually forced to fight a unified Russian force at Smolensk, which is what happened because Bagration fearing another attack, retreated to Smolensk and waited for Barclay to reinforce him.

===Battle of Smolensk===
On 14 August 1812, the three Marshals Murat, Davout and Ney crossed the Dnieper River on quickly constructed pontoon bridges. The plan was to race toward the city of Smolensk, taking it without a fight. Napoleon saw Smolensk as a vital supply and replenishment base from where he would march to the north to attack the rear of the Russian main forces under Barclay de Tolly. The town had also symbolic, religious importance for the Russian side. Unfortunately for the French, conflicting orders and a breakdown in communication had already led Bagration to disobey orders and instead of marching west, he occupied Smolensk to the south. By 16 August, French forces found the city heavily garrisoned by Bagration&#x27;s troops. He got further reinforced with the arrival of de Tolly&#x27;s army. Napoleon, however, assumed the Russians would fight outside the city to avoid the destruction of historical monuments, which did not happen. The fight for Smolensk started on 16 August 1812 with Napoleon&#x27;s forces of three corps capturing parts of the town&#x27;s suburbs but being repelled soon after. Continuous artillery shelling set the town, which consisted of mostly wooden buildings, ablaze, but the French didn&#x27;t manage to get past the suburbs and to the walls as they lacked ladders and other equipment. Inflicting heavy losses on the attackers, the Russian garrison was able to hold its positions. However, the widespread fire forced Bagration and de Tolly to abandon burning Smolensk on 18 August 1812. The battle ended inconclusively, with the Russian armies retreating and Napoleon conquering but as quickly leaving what was left of the city as it was of no use anymore.

===Guerrilla warfare===

From the very beginning of the invasion, Bagration had understood that the invasion was not an ordinary one, but rather a nationwide war. Local citizenry displayed great bravery where they could against small French units, particularly around Smolensk but also in other parts of Russia. Sporadic attacks from small diversionary groups of lightly-armed peasants had already caught Bagration&#x27;s attention earlier and he was fascinated by their determination and effectiveness. From then on he was convinced that a smart cooperation between irregular forces and the regular Russian armies would be the only method to stop Napoleon&#x27;s advance. His aide-de-camp, vice Colonel D.V. Davydov, commander of a Hussar regiment, shared Bagration&#x27;s views on a guerrilla movement and proposed a possible course of action. Bagration approved the proposal but, when he presented the plans to Kutuzov, the commander in chief only allowed a very limited number of troops to be provided for such operations. Davydov gave his word that he would take full care and responsibility for the supplies and action of his troops, only dissatisfied about the resources he considered very insufficient, asking Bagration to give him at least 1,000 Cossacks. Bagration, much as he wanted to meet his officer&#x27;s request and carry out that operation himself, did not want to disobey Kutuzov, and replied: &quot;I would give you 3000 of them to start with, for I do not like to act superficially, but I can not even speak about it; Knyaz (ie the Prince) has defined the composition of the group himself; it is necessary to obey.&quot; Afterwards Bagration wrote the following instruction to Davydov:

Bagration then also wrote letters to General Vassilichikov and General Karpov regarding the allocations and general information about the best Cossack and Hussar units available. On the request of Davydov he provided the vice colonel a copy of his map of the Smolensk province and when parting wished the young officer the best of luck, and also hoped for his success. His confidence would soon be emphasized when the guerrilla movement developed wide scope. Soon, besides Davydov&#x27;s movement, other groups emerged: those of General Dorokhov, Captain Fisher, Captain Seslavin, Colonel Kudashev and many others. These groups successfully strove against the French, combining their activities with those of peasant guerrilla groups. Bagration became the author of the first real tactical instructions for such activities and one of the founders of the Russian guerrilla movement against Napoleon.

===Battle of Borodino===


Fearing that Napoleon might take the Smolensk Road to Moscow, Kutuzov ordered Bagration and his 2nd Army to the left while Barclay de Tolly was guarding the right with the 1st Army. Other than the 1st Army, which was deployed on positions which were strong and virtually unassailable by the French, Bagration&#x27;s army had no terrain advantage at all and his request to change to a more advantageous position was denied by Kutuzov. So he decided to create one himself by ordering his sappers to construct four big Redans, also known as the Bagration flèches, four arrow-head shaped, open-backed earthworks which arced out to the left en echelon in front of the Kolocha stream. When the battle started on 7 September 1812 with a massive cannonade against the Russian center, Davout sent two divisions against the flèches at about 6 am. His force of 25,000 men supported by 102 guns faced 8,000 Russian defenders with 50 guns.

While advancing, Davout&#x27;s divisions were hit hard by massed Russian artillery, which was deployed on the other side of the Kolcha to support Bagration&#x27;s lines and also by Russian jaeger units that were deployed in front of the fortifications. The French troops suffered heavy casualties before they could reach their objective and the undertaking was about to fall apart when Davout saw his troops retreating and rushed forward to personally lead the charge. With the second attempt he managed to take the southernmost flèche at 7 am. But in response Bagration ordered Raevsky and his 7th Corps once more to confront Davout, only this time the French were struck on their flank and thrown back for the second time. Napoleon already held Bagration in high esteem, calling him the best the Russians could possibly throw against him, but was surprised by the stiff resistance he offered. While Napoleon reinforced Davout with Marshal Ney and officer Junot for a third attack, Bagration repositioned his troops and deployed his reserves, the 2nd Grenadier and 2nd Cuirassier divisions.

The 3rd Infantry Division was still held in reserve at Semyenovskoe for the possibility that the French might try to outflank him. Kutuzov, who observed the heavy fighting at the flèches, was sending the 2nd and parts of the 5th Infantry Corps with 100 guns from his artillery reserve, but their arrival would take one to two hours, which meant that Bagration was on his own. Napoleon demanded that the flèches be taken at all costs, and opened the third offensive with a massive artillery bombardment, followed by a simultaneous infantry and cavalry assault. At first the French managed to occupy the right and far left flèche but were again driven out by Bagration&#x27;s troops. Marshal Poniatowski, who had the task of enveloping the Russians and striking Bagration&#x27;s rear with his cavalry corps, was also defeated by Tuchkov&#x27;s 3rd Infantry Corps. The defenders restored their positions at 9 am. Failing for a third time, Napoleon became furious and now also added Marshal Murat to the operation, launching a fourth assault at 9 am. This time Napoleon&#x27;s forces were not only able to drive Bagration&#x27;s forces out of the flèches but also captured Semyenovskoe.

By this time however, the 2nd and 5th corps sent earlier by Kutuzov for Bagration&#x27;s aid finally arrived and Bagration threw all available forces against the French, repulsing them completely from all occupied positions and inflicting heavy losses. After that, three more French attacks were repelled in a row, General Tuchkov being killed in the fifth assault. Despite the mounting casualties, Napoleon continued to assault Bagration&#x27;s position. His troops were hit not only by musket fire but also canister shot from artillery at close range. Heaps of corpses and wounded prevented the cavalry and infantry from manoeuvring properly on the battlefield. Napoleon considered sending his elite Imperial Guard to bolster the morale of his troops but hesitated, not willing to risk it being torn apart as well. At noon, the French launched their eighth assault, with around 45,000 men supported by 400 guns against the defending 18,000 Russians and their 300 guns. Bagration decided to meet the attackers boldly in what led to a long and brutal melee, probably the bloodiest scene during the entire battle, described by the historian Buturlin as follows:

Bagration ordered his entire force to counterattack, but was seriously outnumbered and slowly driven back. The French 57th Line Infantry Regiment kept attacking the flèches, even though it was almost completely torn to pieces by musket fire from all directions. Their courageous behaviour earned two &quot;Bravo&quot; shouts from Bagration, and it was then that the 2nd commander-in chief was struck by shell splinters in his leg. His subordinates quickly carried him to a safe place away from the fight while trying to conceal what had happened, but Bagration&#x27;s absence was soon noticed. Rumours of him being killed spread and the morale of his troops began to increasingly waver. Bagration, now unable to control the situation, insisted on not being moved from the field until the battle was decided, hoping for the success of the 2nd Cuirassier Division of General Duka. The Cuirassiers managed to defeat the forces of Marshal Ney but the news of Bagration being hit quickly spread and brought confusion and morale collapse within the 2nd Army. Its management broke down so that the Russian forces were starting to abandon their positions in the chaos and to retreat from the overwhelming French assault. The Bagration flèches were abandoned and left to the French, but it had cost them a huge price. From the 60,000 French soldiers who participated in the operation, about 30,000 were killed or wounded. Russian casualties were also high, but fewer. The battle, however, ended inconclusively, with both sides returning to their initial deployment zones. The battle drained from Napoleon his last fighting capabilities and resources and finally forced him to abandon his plan of forcing Russia into a second Tilsit when he entered an empty Moscow.

Bagration was evacuated to Simy, a village in the Vladimir province and died there of his wound on 24 September 1812 at the age of 47.

==Tactics and doctrine==

Bagration, heavily influenced by Alexander Suvorov, was an innovative tactician who favoured mobile offensive warfare, even though many of the battles in which he was engaged with the French were of a defensive nature. He refused what he perceived as obsolete positioning tactics and instead would give the Russian army strategic objects and tactical manoeuvers, always going for the quick confrontation, where speed and accuracy were most important, in order to deny the enemy any chance to react, respond or even organize. This led to much tension and rivalry between him and general Barclay de Tolly, who was given overall command and relied mostly on the search for adequate positions to entrench and wait for the enemy. Bagration&#x27;s applied doctrines were ahead of their time solid concepts for both offensive and defensive warfare, as even his retreats were conducted in equally good and impressive fashion, given the sometimes impossible odds he was facing.

Bagration&#x27;s strategic views defined also his insights about the character of tactical military action. It is possible to discern these insights by considering the famous order to the forces of the 2nd Western Army, dated 25 June 1812. In the order, written by Bagration with his own hand, instructions were given concerning actions to be taken against the French armies if they invaded Russian territory. He wrote:

Attacks were to be conducted with troops formed in columns:

Bagration recommended deployment of the forces in a battle array that was not too closely packed, but sufficiently so as to permit soldiers to feel each other&#x27;s presence with their elbows. In case of counter-attacks by enemy cavalry, Bagration advised the use of battalion masses and squares, or &quot;carrés&quot;. &quot;When the enemy cavalry attacks infantry, it takes only a minute to form either a column closed on all sides, or a battalion in a &quot;carré&quot;.&quot;

With the purpose of increasing the enthusiasm of armies, all attacks were to be made with a shout, and during the approach the drums were to be beaten and music to be played.

Similar insights are reflected in a number of Bagration&#x27;s other orders, instructions, and letters. In particular, as characteristic of his tactical perspective, the &quot;Manual for Infantry Officers on the Day of Battle&quot; may serve as an example. This document was prepared on the basis of the &quot;Manual to Officers of the Narva infantry Regiment,&quot; authored by M.S. Vorontsov in 1812. According to military historian P. Simansky, Vorontsov&#x27;s manual &quot;was strongly influenced by Suvorov&#x27;s precepts, and was appraised by the most favorite disciple of Suvorov, Prince Bagration; it was slightly corrected by him, as in some places it concerned only Narva infantry Regiment, and then in July 1812 it was dispatched to all units of the 2nd Army.&quot; The &quot;Manual to Infantry Officers on the Day of Battle&quot; recognized the offensive as the fundamental form of combat. The principal manifestation of offensive combat was the bayonet attack, concluded with a vigorous pursuit of the defeated enemy. This manual considered in detail the question of action in separate lines and in columns and about conducting aimed fire. The necessity of maintaining close communication of skirmishers with their columns was specified; movement forward was to be determined only by an order of the chief of division or battalion. If it was necessary to operate on separate lines in forests, it was suggested to hold a reserve behind one of the flanks in order to have an opportunity to suddenly envelope the flank of a counter-attacking enemy.

Attacks by enemy cavalry acting in separate lines were to be met by fire, after allowing the enemy to advance to within approximately 150 paces; after that it would be necessary to divide into small groups of ten and repulse the enemy by fire and bayonets until the approach of reinforcements. Upon approaching, reinforcements were to be redeployed from a column into square, firing on enemy cavalry from a distance of 150 paces. The &quot;Manual&quot; demanded that officers demonstrate constant care for their soldiers, to remind them of their duties and their oath, to explain what was required of them during military action. Special attention was given to the maintenance of trust in the virtue of &quot;Russian bayonets&quot;, a spirit of boldness, courage and persistence in the fight. &quot;Persistence and courage,&quot; declared the &quot;Manual&quot;, &quot;have won more battles than all other military talents taken altogether.&quot;

Dissemination of all rumors of disaster and panic, such as &quot;We are cut off!&quot;, were categorically forbidden, under the threat of severe punishment. It was specified in the &quot;Manual&quot; that: &quot;Brave people are never cut off; wherever the enemy goes, turn your breast to follow and defeat him.&quot; Thus, in the field of tactics, as well as in the field of strategy, Bagration acted as an innovator, a convinced supporter of decisive offensive action. He doggedly introduced advanced tactics; he dispensed with obsolete positional tactics and applied tactics of columns in a combination with separate lines. Paying great attention to the value of offensive combat, Bagration at the same time did not reject the opportunity to conduct defensive operations. He creatively approached planning for his assigned tasks, applying such forms of combat as provided exactly the right answers to particular circumstances. His practical legacy offers experience rich in the conduct of offensive battles as well as the development and practice of waging both advance and rear guard fights.

Bagration was the unsurpassed master of organization of these extremely complex kinds of action. It was not by chance that, at the most crucial moments of the wars of 1799–1807, it was Bagration who was appointed to command the rear guards and advance guards of the Russian Army. The engagements conducted by Russian armies under Bagration&#x27;s leadership during the Italian campaign of 1799, and also the advance and rear guard combats during the Swiss Campaign of 1799 and war between of Russia and France in 1805–1807, belong among the finest accomplishments in Russian military art. Bagration built a process of education and training of soldiers on the basis of the system developed by A.V. Suvorov. He paid great attention to the training and education of troops to develop soldiers with courage and initiative, capable of carrying out orders quickly and skillfully.

Bagration constantly worried about his soldiers&#x27; health, taking measures so that they&#x27;d be well clothed and timely fed. S.G. Volkonsky, who during the Franco-Russian conflict of 1806–1807 was frequently in Bagration&#x27;s group, wrote:

While showing concern for the soldiers, Bagration at the same time demanded the maintenance of the strictest military discipline, considering it to be the foundation of military ability. &quot;In military service,&quot; he wrote, &quot;the first objective is order, subordination, discipline, unanimity and friendship&quot;. Above all, Bagration was extremely demanding of himself. &quot;...To execute the will of the sovereign, of the emperor and my commanders is the most sacred obligation which I follow and obey at every step of my service... I love soldiers, I respect their bravery, and equally I demand order and discipline.&quot; Armies under Bagration&#x27;s command were always distinguished for their high discipline, and, in some sense, this was one of the main reasons for their brilliant victories over their enemies.

==Honours and legacy==
On 15 October 1800, Bagration was granted the hereditary title of a Prince of the Russian Empire (&quot;Kniaz Bagration&quot;) by the Emperor Paul I. He was also awarded the Orders of St Andrew (1810), of St. Alexander Nevsky (1807), of the St Vladimir, 1st class (1809), of the St Anna, 1st class (1800), the St George 2nd class (1805) and made a commander of the Order of St John of Jerusalem (1800). He was further honoured with a gold sword of honour for bravery (1808). Bagration&#x27;s foreign awards also included the Prussian Orders of the Red Eagle (1807) and the Black Eagle (1807), the Austrian Military Order of Maria Theresa, 2nd class (1799) and the Sardinian Order of Saints Maurice and Lazarus, 1st Class (1799).

He is a secondary character in Leo Tolstoy&#x27;s epic 1869 novel &quot;War and Peace&quot;. In the 1960s Russian movie &quot;War and Peace&quot;, he is played by Giuli Chokhonelidze, who repeated the role in the 1985 Russian biopic &quot;Bagrationi&quot;. In the 2016 BBC TV adaptation of &quot;War and Peace&quot;, he is played by Pip Torrens.

Tsar Nicholas I had a monument erected in his honour on the battlefield of Borodino. The general&#x27;s remains were transferred to the place where he had fallen and remain there to this day. The grave was blown up during World War II (reputedly, the local museum authorities were able to save only shreds of bone and cloth from the grave) but has since then been restored.

Joseph Stalin chose Bagration as the name of the Soviet offensive launched on 22 June 1944 that defeated the German Army Group Centre and drove the forces of Nazi Germany out of what is now Belarus. After the war, the Soviet Union annexed northern East Prussia, and the until-then German town of Preußisch Eylau—the scene of the 1807 battle—was renamed Bagrationovsk in his memory.

An asteroid 3127 Bagration is named after Prince Bagration.

In Moscow, the Bagrationovskaya metro station, Bagration pass in Filyovsky Park District and the Bagration Bridge, which commemorates the 850th year of the city, were named in his honour. Many streets across the different cities in Russia also hold his name.

In August 2023, a new highway near Kutuzovsky Prospekt, was named Bagration Avenue.

In the 20th and 21st centuries, at least 15 ships associated with the name of P.I. Bagration.

==Quotes about Bagration==
*&quot;Russia has no good generals. The only exception is Bagration.&quot; (Napoleon)
*&quot;Prince Bagration—the most excellent general, worthy of highest degrees.&quot; (Alexander Suvorov)
*&quot;Bagration – Lion of the Russian army.&quot; (Alexander Chernyshyov)

==See also==
* Bagration Bridge
* Bagration flèches
* Operation Bagration

==Notes==
==References==
==Sources==
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
* Napoleon, His Army and Enemies</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q239260" start="0" end="32" title="Pyotr Bagration" label="Prince Pyotr Ivanovich Bagration"/>
<link wikidata="Q18973" start="104" end="112" title="Georgians" label="Georgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q15053704" start="142" end="182" title="French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars" label="French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q187525" start="212" end="230" title="Bagrationi dynasty" label="Bagrationi dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q145810" start="244" end="251" title="Kizlyar" label="Kizlyar"/>
<link wikidata="Q16849101" start="265" end="277" title="Ivan Aleksandrovich Bagration" label="Ivan (Ivane)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078222" start="307" end="328" title="Imperial Russian Army" label="Imperial Russian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737628" start="439" end="459" title="Russo-Circassian War" label="Russo-Circassian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724886" start="572" end="579" title="Siege of Ochakov (1788)" label="Ochakov"/>
<link wikidata="Q849176" start="618" end="637" title="Kościuszko Uprising" label="Kościuszko Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q122890272" start="697" end="724" title="Italian and Swiss expedition" label="Italian and Swiss campaigns"/>
<link wikidata="Q154232" start="800" end="817" title="Alexander Suvorov" label="Alexander Suvorov"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="864" end="872" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q159072" start="913" end="916" title="Battle of Ulm" label="Ulm"/>
<link wikidata="Q948810" start="989" end="1011" title="Battle of Schöngrabern" label="Battle of Schöngrabern"/>
<link wikidata="Q185801" start="1108" end="1123" title="Mikhail Kutuzov" label="Mikhail Kutuzov"/>
<link wikidata="Q134114" start="1198" end="1218" title="Battle of Austerlitz" label="Battle of Austerlitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q273032" start="1293" end="1304" title="Jean Lannes" label="Jean Lannes"/>
<link wikidata="Q736268" start="1347" end="1358" title="Finnish War" label="Finnish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q209312" start="1401" end="1422" title="Russo-Turkish War (1806–1812)" label="war against the Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q179250" start="1462" end="1487" title="French invasion of Russia" label="French invasion of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q157632" start="1550" end="1566" title="Michael Andreas Barclay de Tolly" label="Barclay de Tolly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071578" start="1683" end="1701" title="Battle of Smolensk (1812)" label="Battle of Smolensk"/>
<link wikidata="Q208485" start="1741" end="1755" title="scorched-earth" label="scorched-earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q15193" start="1781" end="1802" title="Alexander I of Russia" label="Alexander I of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q185801" start="1888" end="1903" title="Mikhail Kutuzov" label="Mikhail Kutuzov"/>
<link wikidata="Q184320" start="1979" end="1997" title="Battle of Borodino" label="Battle of Borodino"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="2006" end="2012" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4842106" start="2080" end="2097" title="Bagration flèches" label="Bagration flèches"/>
<link wikidata="Q810873" start="2306" end="2312" title="batonishvili" label="prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368426" start="2320" end="2335" title="House of Mukhrani" label="Mukhrani branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q187525" start="2343" end="2361" title="Bagrationi dynasty" label="Bagrationi dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q16849101" start="2378" end="2394" title="Ivan Aleksandrovich Bagration" label="Ivane Bagrationi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4718121" start="2422" end="2438" title="Prince Alexander of Kartli (died 1773)" label="Prince Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q63548" start="2463" end="2473" title="Jesse of Kartli" label="King Jesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q195972" start="2477" end="2483" title="Kingdom of Kartli" label="Kartli"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="2506" end="2513" title="Georgia (country)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078222" start="2706" end="2727" title="Imperial Russian Army" label="Imperial Russian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q745671" start="2840" end="2845" title="Roman Bagration" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q47805" start="2911" end="2918" title="Cossack" label="Cossack"/>
<link wikidata="Q158950" start="2919" end="2922" title="Non-commissioned officer" label="NCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078222" start="2999" end="3020" title="Imperial Russian Army" label="Imperial Russian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737628" start="3062" end="3084" title="Russian-Circassian War" label="Russian-Circassian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724886" start="3109" end="3132" title="Siege of Ochakov (1788)" label="Siege of Ochakov (1788)"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="3380" end="3386" title="Poland–Lithuania" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q849176" start="3387" end="3406" title="Kościuszko Uprising" label="Kościuszko Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q154232" start="3569" end="3576" title="Alexander Suvorov" label="Suvorov"/>
<link wikidata="Q122890272" start="3605" end="3632" title="Italian and Swiss expedition of 1799" label="Italian and Swiss campaigns"/>
<link wikidata="Q4110441" start="3704" end="3711" title="Capture of Brescia" label="Brescia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131126869" start="3716" end="3723" title="Capture of Bergamo" label="Bergamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q858913" start="3747" end="3767" title="Battle of Cassano (1799)" label="along the Adda River"/>
<link wikidata="Q124392588" start="3772" end="3790" title="Battle of Klöntal" label="in the Klön Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q15189" start="3997" end="4009" title="Paul I of Russia" label="Emperor Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q234257" start="4026" end="4035" title="Catherine Pavlovna of Russia" label="Catherine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4094" end="4099" title="Knyaz#Russia" label="Knyaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q276487" start="4180" end="4220" title="Catherine Bagration" label="Countess Catherine Pavlovna Skavronskaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q243201" start="4245" end="4261" title="Grigory Potemkin" label="Grigory Potemkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q57632" start="4285" end="4290" title="Maria Feodorovna (Sophie Dorothea of Württemberg)" label="Maria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="4480" end="4486" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q45662" start="4528" end="4557" title="Klemens von Metternich" label="Prince Clemens von Metternich"/>
<link wikidata="Q16200269" start="4747" end="4763" title="Marie-Clementine Bagration" label="Marie-Clementine"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="5059" end="5067" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q151173" start="5076" end="5081" title="Joachim Murat" label="Murat"/>
<link wikidata="Q273032" start="5257" end="5263" title="Jean Lannes" label="Lannes"/>
<link wikidata="Q948810" start="5267" end="5279" title="Battle of Schöngrabern" label="Schöngrabern"/>
<link wikidata="Q624352" start="5299" end="5309" title="Hollabrunn" label="Hollabrunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q185801" start="5425" end="5432" title="Mikhail Illarionovich Kutuzov" label="Kutuzov"/>
<link wikidata="Q81137" start="5436" end="5442" title="Olomouc" label="Olmütz"/>
<link wikidata="Q134114" start="5497" end="5507" title="Battle of Austerlitz" label="Austerlitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q310528" start="5567" end="5587" title="Johann I Josef, Prince of Liechtenstein" label="Prince Liechtenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q331347" start="5832" end="5837" title="Battle of Eylau" label="Eylau"/>
<link wikidata="Q926489" start="5852" end="5861" title="Battle of Heilsberg" label="Heilsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q241108" start="5877" end="5886" title="Battle of Friedland" label="Friedland"/>
<link wikidata="Q736268" start="5952" end="5968" title="Finnish War" label="Finnish Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q209312" start="5981" end="5997" title="Russo-Turkish War, 1806-1812" label="Turkish Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689" start="6038" end="6051" title="Åland" label="Åland Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q14686" start="6088" end="6103" title="Gulf of Finland" label="Gulf of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q10957559" start="6139" end="6147" title="Moldavia" label="Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="6167" end="6181" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q234257" start="6242" end="6260" title="Catherine Pavlovna of Russia" label="tsarevna Catherine"/>
<link wikidata="Q209312" start="6342" end="6363" title="Russo-Turkish War, 1806-1812" label="Rassowa and Tataritza"/>
<link wikidata="Q15193" start="6537" end="6548" title="Alexander I of Russia" label="Alexander I"/>
<link wikidata="Q154835" start="6608" end="6615" title="Mogilev" label="Mogilev"/>
<link wikidata="Q157632" start="6691" end="6707" title="Michael Andreas Barclay de Tolly" label="Barclay de Tolly"/>
<link wikidata="Q184320" start="6805" end="6823" title="Battle of Borodino" label="Battle of Borodino"/>
<link wikidata="Q4842106" start="6864" end="6871" title="Bagration flèches" label="flèches"/>
<link wikidata="Q168805" start="7004" end="7012" title="gangrene" label="gangrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="7207" end="7213" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q249232" start="7523" end="7549" title="War of the Third Coalition" label="War of the Third Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q93489" start="7585" end="7589" title="Karl Mack von Leiberich" label="Mack"/>
<link wikidata="Q159072" start="7614" end="7617" title="Battle of Ulm" label="Ulm"/>
<link wikidata="Q185801" start="7641" end="7648" title="Mikhail Kutuzov" label="Kutuzov"/>
<link wikidata="Q14960" start="7728" end="7733" title="Brünn" label="Brünn"/>
<link wikidata="Q151173" start="7861" end="7866" title="Joachim Murat" label="Murat"/>
<link wikidata="Q273032" start="7871" end="7877" title="Jean Lannes" label="Lannes"/>
<link wikidata="Q700437" start="8113" end="8124" title="Friedrich Wilhelm von Buxhoeveden" label="Buxhoeveden"/>
<link wikidata="Q624352" start="8405" end="8415" title="Hollabrunn" label="Hollabrunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q134114" start="9618" end="9628" title="Battle of Austerlitz" label="Austerlitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q331347" start="10387" end="10402" title="Battle of Eylau" label="Battle of Eylau"/>
<link wikidata="Q605977" start="10472" end="10499" title="War of the Fourth Coalition" label="War of the Fourth Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q154426" start="10539" end="10553" title="Battle of Jena–Auerstedt" label="Jena-Auerstedt"/>
<link wikidata="Q932448" start="10621" end="10629" title="Mikhail Kamensky" label="Kamensky"/>
<link wikidata="Q57777" start="10827" end="10860" title="Levin August, Count von Bennigsen" label="Levin August, Count von Bennigsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q40756" start="10992" end="10995" title="Michel Ney" label="Ney"/>
<link wikidata="Q52927" start="11024" end="11034" title="Jean-Baptiste Bernadotte" label="Bernadotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871761" start="11091" end="11110" title="Battle of Mohrungen" label="Battle of Mohrungen"/>
<link wikidata="Q314135" start="12171" end="12179" title="Pierre Augereau" label="Augereau"/>
<link wikidata="Q65012" start="12410" end="12426" title="Barclay de Tolly" label="Barclay de Tolly"/>
<link wikidata="Q104354" start="12816" end="12829" title="Bagrationovsk" label="Bagrationovsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q736268" start="12956" end="12967" title="Finnish War" label="Finnish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q202158" start="13420" end="13431" title="Hämeenlinna" label="Hämeenlinna"/>
<link wikidata="Q40840" start="13433" end="13440" title="Tampere" label="Tampere"/>
<link wikidata="Q180233" start="13445" end="13449" title="Pori" label="Pori"/>
<link wikidata="Q47048" start="14745" end="14749" title="Oulu" label="Oulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q38511" start="14847" end="14852" title="Turku" label="Turku"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689" start="15455" end="15460" title="Åland" label="Åland"/>
<link wikidata="Q52929" start="15701" end="15710" title="Gustav IV Adolf of Sweden" label="Gustav IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q65012" start="16544" end="16560" title="Barclay de Tolly" label="Barclay de Tolly"/>
<link wikidata="Q38511" start="16788" end="16793" title="Turku" label="Turku"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689" start="16840" end="16845" title="Åland" label="Åland"/>
<link wikidata="Q727574" start="17518" end="17533" title="Georg Carl von Döbeln" label="Carl von Döbeln"/>
<link wikidata="Q130613" start="18061" end="18073" title="Yakov Kulnev" label="Yakov Kulnev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547090" start="18159" end="18170" title="Grisslehamn" label="Grisslehamn"/>
<link wikidata="Q181632" start="19091" end="19098" title="Vileyka" label="Vileyka"/>
<link wikidata="Q158778" start="19369" end="19375" title="Louis-Nicolas Davout" label="Davout"/>
<link wikidata="Q840790" start="21467" end="21487" title="Battle of Saltanovka" label="Battle of Saltanovka"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443645" start="21662" end="21670" title="Second Western Army" label="2nd army"/>
<link wikidata="Q444438" start="21930" end="21945" title="Nikolay Raevsky" label="Nikolay Raevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q158778" start="21976" end="21982" title="Davout" label="Davout"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337" start="23165" end="23173" title="Smolensk" label="Smolensk"/>
<link wikidata="Q40855" start="23401" end="23414" title="Dnieper River" label="Dnieper River"/>
<link wikidata="Q544983" start="25722" end="25734" title="Denis Davydov" label="D.V. Davydov"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="25803" end="25821" title="Guerrilla warfare" label="guerrilla movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q90727" start="28169" end="28174" title="Redan" label="Redan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4842106" start="28195" end="28212" title="Bagration flèches" label="Bagration flèches"/>
<link wikidata="Q40756" start="29522" end="29525" title="Michel Ney" label="Ney"/>
<link wikidata="Q353907" start="29538" end="29543" title="Jean-Andoche Junot" label="Junot"/>
<link wikidata="Q154382" start="30364" end="30375" title="Józef Poniatowski" label="Poniatowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090710" start="31560" end="31574" title="Imperial Guard (Napoleon I)" label="Imperial Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2817722" start="32138" end="32165" title="57th Line Infantry Regiment" label="57th Line Infantry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q154596" start="33736" end="33742" title="Treaties of Tilsit" label="Tilsit"/>
<link wikidata="Q154232" start="33972" end="33989" title="Alexander Suvorov" label="Alexander Suvorov"/>
<link wikidata="Q15189" start="41770" end="41784" title="Emperor Paul I" label="Emperor Paul I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126563" start="41820" end="41829" title="Order of St Andrew" label="St Andrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q10514065" start="41841" end="41861" title="Order of St. Alexander Nevsky" label="St. Alexander Nevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501067" start="41877" end="41888" title="Order of St Vladimir" label="St Vladimir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147717" start="41915" end="41922" title="Order of St Anna" label="St Anna"/>
<link wikidata="Q831282" start="41946" end="41955" title="Order of St George" label="St George"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966867" start="42001" end="42030" title="Russian tradition of the Knights Hospitaller" label="Order of St John of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633112" start="42070" end="42102" title="Gold Sword for Bravery" label="gold sword of honour for bravery"/>
<link wikidata="Q93732" start="42180" end="42193" title="Order of the Red Eagle" label="the Red Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q94145" start="42205" end="42220" title="Order of the Black Eagle" label="the Black Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q694769" start="42251" end="42273" title="Order of Maria Theresa" label="Order of Maria Theresa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422957" start="42310" end="42345" title="Order of Saints Maurice and Lazarus" label="Order of Saints Maurice and Lazarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243" start="42397" end="42408" title="Leo Tolstoy" label="Leo Tolstoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q161531" start="42438" end="42451" title="War and Peace" label="War and Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q845176" start="42492" end="42505" title="War and Peace (film series)" label="War and Peace"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42529" end="42548" title="Giuli Chokhonelidze" label="Giuli Chokhonelidze"/>
<link wikidata="Q645928" start="42592" end="42598" title="biopic" label="biopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16170490" start="42630" end="42652" title="War &amp;amp; Peace (2016 TV series)" label="2016 BBC TV adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387430" start="42699" end="42710" title="Pip Torrens" label="Pip Torrens"/>
<link wikidata="Q130734" start="42713" end="42728" title="Nicholas I of Russia" label="Tsar Nicholas I"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="42935" end="42947" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="43088" end="43101" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q151052" start="43137" end="43153" title="Operation Bagration" label="Soviet offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q158260" start="43204" end="43221" title="Army Group Centre" label="Army Group Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="43246" end="43258" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q184" start="43278" end="43285" title="Belarus" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q103801" start="43336" end="43348" title="East Prussia" label="East Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q104354" start="43441" end="43454" title="Bagrationovsk" label="Bagrationovsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q685045" start="43483" end="43497" title="3127 Bagration" label="3127 Bagration"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="43535" end="43541" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2547853" start="43547" end="43563" title="Bagrationovskaya" label="Bagrationovskaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q5499" start="43564" end="43569" title="Moscow Metro" label="metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q998027" start="43597" end="43620" title="Filyovsky Park District" label="Filyovsky Park District"/>
<link wikidata="Q800135" start="43629" end="43645" title="Bagration Bridge" label="Bagration Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q281935" start="43827" end="43846" title="Kutuzovsky Prospekt" label="Kutuzovsky Prospekt"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="44075" end="44083" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q154232" start="44171" end="44188" title="Alexander Suvorov" label="Alexander Suvorov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373441" start="44242" end="44263" title="Alexander Chernyshyov" label="Alexander Chernyshyov"/>
<link wikidata="Q800135" start="44281" end="44297" title="Bagration Bridge" label="Bagration Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4842106" start="44300" end="44317" title="Bagration flèches" label="Bagration flèches"/>
<link wikidata="Q151052" start="44320" end="44339" title="Operation Bagration" label="Operation Bagration"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="142999" wikidata="Q146591" url="?curid=142999" title="Circle of latitude">
<text>A circle of latitude or line of latitude on Earth is an abstract east–west small circle connecting all locations around Earth (ignoring elevation) at a given latitude coordinate line.

Circles of latitude are often called parallels because they are parallel to each other; that is, planes that contain any of these circles never intersect each other. A location&#x27;s position along a circle of latitude is given by its longitude. Circles of latitude are unlike circles of longitude, which are all great circles with the centre of Earth in the middle, as the circles of latitude get smaller as the distance from the Equator increases. Their length can be calculated by a common sine or cosine function. For example, the 60th parallel north or south is half as long as the Equator (disregarding Earth&#x27;s minor flattening by 0.335%), stemming from formula_1. On the Mercator projection or on the Gall-Peters projection, a circle of latitude is perpendicular to all meridians. On the ellipsoid or on spherical projection, all circles of latitude are rhumb lines, except the Equator. 

The latitude of the circle is approximately the angle between the Equator and the circle, with the angle&#x27;s vertex at Earth&#x27;s centre. The Equator is at 0°, and the North Pole and South Pole are at 90° north and 90° south, respectively. The Equator is the longest circle of latitude and is the only circle of latitude which also is a great circle. As such, it is perpendicular to all meridians.

There are 89 integral (whole degree) circles of latitude between the Equator and the poles in each hemisphere, but these can be divided into more precise measurements of latitude, and are often represented as a decimal degree (e.g. 34.637° N) or with minutes and seconds (e.g. 22°14&#x27;26&quot; S).

On a map, the circles of latitude may or may not be parallel, and their spacing may vary, depending on which projection is used to map the surface of the Earth onto a plane. On an equirectangular projection, centered on the equator, the circles of latitude are horizontal, parallel, and equally spaced. On other cylindrical and pseudocylindrical projections, the circles of latitude are horizontal and parallel, but may be spaced unevenly to give the map useful characteristics. For instance, on a Mercator projection the circles of latitude are more widely spaced near the poles to preserve local scales and shapes, while on a Gall–Peters projection the circles of latitude are spaced more closely near the poles so that comparisons of area will be accurate. On most non-cylindrical and non-pseudocylindrical projections, the circles of latitude are neither straight nor parallel.

Arcs of circles of latitude are sometimes used as boundaries between countries or regions where distinctive natural borders are lacking (such as in deserts), or when an artificial border is drawn as a &quot;line on a map&quot;, which was made in massive scale during the 1884 Berlin Conference, regarding huge parts of the African continent. North American nations and states have also mostly been created by straight lines, which are often parts of circles of latitudes. For instance, the northern border of Colorado is at 41° N while the southern border is at 37° N. Roughly half the length of the border between the United States and Canada follows 49° N.

==Major circles of latitude==


There are five major circles of latitude, listed below from north to south. The position of the Equator is fixed (90 degrees from Earth&#x27;s axis of rotation) but the latitudes of the other circles depend on the tilt of this axis relative to the plane of Earth&#x27;s orbit, and so are not perfectly fixed. The values below are for :

* Arctic Circle ( N)
* Tropic of Cancer ( N)
* Equator (0° latitude)
* Tropic of Capricorn ( S)
* Antarctic Circle ( S)

These circles of latitude, excluding the Equator, mark the divisions between the five principal geographical zones.

===Equator===

The equator is the circle that is equidistant from the North Pole and South Pole. It divides the Earth into the Northern Hemisphere and the Southern Hemisphere. Of the parallels or circles of latitude, it is the longest, and the only &#x27;great circle&#x27; (a circle on the surface of the Earth, centered on Earth&#x27;s center). All the other parallels are smaller and centered only on Earth&#x27;s axis.

===Polar circles===

The Arctic Circle is the southernmost latitude in the Northern Hemisphere at which the Sun can remain continuously above or below the horizon for 24 hours (at the June and December solstices respectively). Similarly, the Antarctic Circle marks the northernmost latitude in the Southern Hemisphere at which the Sun can remain continuously above or below the horizon for 24 hours (at the December and June Solstices respectively).

The latitude of the polar circles is equal to 90° minus the Earth&#x27;s axial tilt.

===Tropical circles===

The Tropic of Cancer and Tropic of Capricorn mark the northernmost and southernmost latitudes at which the Sun may be seen directly overhead at the June solstice and December solstice respectively.

The latitude of the tropical circles is equal to the Earth&#x27;s axial tilt.

===Movement of the Tropical and Polar Circles===
By definition, the positions of the Tropic of Cancer, Tropic of Capricorn, Arctic Circle and Antarctic Circle all depend on the tilt of the Earth&#x27;s axis relative to the plane of its orbit around the Sun (the &quot;obliquity of the ecliptic&quot;). If the Earth were &quot;upright&quot; (its axis at right angles to the orbital plane) there would be no Arctic, Antarctic, or Tropical circles: at the poles the Sun would always circle along the horizon, and at the equator the Sun would always rise due east, pass directly overhead, and set due west.

The positions of the Tropical and Polar Circles are not fixed because the axial tilt changes slowly – a complex motion determined by the superimposition of many different cycles (some of which are described below) with short to very long periods. At noon of January 1st 2000 AD, the mean value of the tilt was 23° 26′ 21.406″ (according to IAU 2006, theory P03), the corresponding value being 23° 26′ 10.633&quot; at noon of January 1st 2023 AD. 

The main long-term cycle causes the axial tilt to fluctuate between about 22.1° and 24.5° with a period of 41,000 years. Currently, the &quot;average&quot; value of the tilt is decreasing by about 0.468″ per year. As a result (approximately, and on average), the Tropical Circles are drifting towards the equator (and the Polar Circles towards the poles) by 15 m per year, and the area of the Tropics, defined astronomically, is decreasing by per year. (However, the tropical belt as defined based on atmospheric conditions is expanding due to global warming.)

The Earth&#x27;s axial tilt has additional shorter-term variations due to nutation, of which the main term, with a period of 18.6 years, has an amplitude of 9.2″ (corresponding to almost 300 m north and south). There are many smaller terms, resulting in varying daily shifts of some metres in any direction.

Finally, the Earth&#x27;s rotational axis is not exactly fixed in the Earth, but undergoes small fluctuations (on the order of 15 m) called polar motion, which have a small effect on the Tropics and Polar Circles and also on the Equator.

Short-term fluctuations over a matter of days do not directly affect the location of the extreme latitudes at which the Sun may appear directly overhead, or at which 24-hour day or night is possible, except when they actually occur at the time of the solstices. Rather, they cause a theoretical shifting of the parallels, that would occur if the given axis tilt were maintained throughout the year.

==== Other planets ====

These circles of latitude can be defined on other planets with axial inclinations relative to their orbital planes. Objects such as Pluto with tilt angles greater than 45 degrees will have the tropic circles closer to the poles and the polar circles closer to the equator.

==Other notable parallels==
A number of sub-national and international borders were intended to be defined by, or are approximated by, parallels. Parallels make convenient borders in the northern hemisphere because astronomic latitude can be roughly measured (to within a few tens of metres) by sighting the North Star.

==Elevation==

Normally the circles of latitude are defined at zero elevation. Elevation has an effect on a location with respect to the plane formed by a circle of latitude. Since (in the geodetic system) altitude and depth are determined by the normal to the Earth&#x27;s surface, locations sharing the same latitude—but having different elevations (i.e., lying along this normal)—no longer lie within this plane. Rather, all points sharing the same latitude—but of varying elevation and longitude—occupy the surface of a truncated cone formed by the rotation of this normal around the Earth&#x27;s axis of rotation.

==See also==
* Circles of a sphere
* List of circles of latitude

==References==
==External links==
*U.S. Naval Observatory – mean obliquity of the ecliptic. .</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q146591" start="2" end="20" title="Circle of latitude" label="circle of latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q146591" start="24" end="40" title="Circle of latitude" label="line of latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="44" end="49" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q684" start="65" end="69" title="east" label="east"/>
<link wikidata="Q679" start="70" end="74" title="west" label="west"/>
<link wikidata="Q91345714" start="75" end="87" title="small circle" label="small circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633778" start="136" end="145" title="elevation" label="elevation"/>
<link wikidata="Q34027" start="158" end="166" title="latitude" label="latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q11210" start="167" end="182" title="coordinate line" label="coordinate line"/>
<link wikidata="Q146591" start="222" end="231" title="Circle of latitude" label="parallels"/>
<link wikidata="Q53875" start="249" end="257" title="Parallel (geometry)" label="parallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q17141489" start="329" end="338" title="Intersection" label="intersect"/>
<link wikidata="Q36477" start="421" end="430" title="longitude" label="longitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q146657" start="499" end="511" title="great circle" label="great circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q23538" start="617" end="624" title="Equator" label="Equator"/>
<link wikidata="Q13647261" start="679" end="683" title="sine" label="sine"/>
<link wikidata="Q13647261" start="687" end="693" title="cosine" label="cosine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255171" start="721" end="740" title="60th parallel north" label="60th parallel north"/>
<link wikidata="Q783987" start="744" end="749" title="60th parallel south" label="south"/>
<link wikidata="Q212750" start="814" end="824" title="flattening" label="flattening"/>
<link wikidata="Q309372" start="869" end="888" title="Mercator projection" label="Mercator projection"/>
<link wikidata="Q27123" start="899" end="921" title="Gall-Peters projection" label="Gall-Peters projection"/>
<link wikidata="Q32099" start="968" end="976" title="meridian (geography)" label="meridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q215169" start="1052" end="1062" title="rhumb line" label="rhumb line"/>
<link wikidata="Q11352" start="1135" end="1140" title="angle" label="angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q26401" start="1199" end="1205" title="vertex (geometry)" label="vertex"/>
<link wikidata="Q934" start="1260" end="1270" title="North Pole" label="North Pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q933" start="1275" end="1285" title="South Pole" label="South Pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q12503" start="1504" end="1512" title="integer" label="integral"/>
<link wikidata="Q28390" start="1520" end="1526" title="Degree (angle)" label="degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q183273" start="1576" end="1581" title="Geographical pole" label="poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q399984" start="1590" end="1600" title="Hemispheres of Earth" label="hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q12097402" start="1742" end="1761" title="Minute of arc" label="minutes and seconds"/>
<link wikidata="Q186386" start="1902" end="1912" title="Map projection" label="projection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326965" start="1973" end="1999" title="equirectangular projection" label="equirectangular projection"/>
<link wikidata="Q309372" start="2291" end="2310" title="Mercator projection" label="Mercator projection"/>
<link wikidata="Q27123" start="2421" end="2443" title="Gall–Peters projection" label="Gall–Peters projection"/>
<link wikidata="Q13582" start="2952" end="2969" title="Berlin Conference" label="Berlin Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="3185" end="3193" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316072" start="3200" end="3205" title="41° N" label="41° N"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186318" start="3238" end="3243" title="37° N" label="37° N"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="3295" end="3308" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="3313" end="3319" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256141" start="3328" end="3333" title="49° N" label="49° N"/>
<link wikidata="Q176609" start="3707" end="3720" title="Arctic Circle" label="Arctic Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q176635" start="3728" end="3744" title="Tropic of Cancer" label="Tropic of Cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q23538" start="3752" end="3759" title="Equator" label="Equator"/>
<link wikidata="Q177440" start="3776" end="3795" title="Tropic of Capricorn" label="Tropic of Capricorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q182657" start="3803" end="3819" title="Antarctic Circle" label="Antarctic Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299642" start="3922" end="3939" title="geographical zone" label="geographical zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q934" start="4013" end="4023" title="North Pole" label="North Pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q933" start="4028" end="4038" title="South Pole" label="South Pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q39061" start="4070" end="4089" title="Northern Hemisphere" label="Northern Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q41228" start="4098" end="4117" title="Southern Hemisphere" label="Southern Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q146657" start="4198" end="4210" title="great circle" label="great circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6312465" start="4551" end="4555" title="June solstice" label="June"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249063" start="4560" end="4577" title="December solstice" label="December solstice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249063" start="4774" end="4782" title="December solstice" label="December"/>
<link wikidata="Q6312465" start="4787" end="4800" title="June Solstice" label="June Solstice"/>
<link wikidata="Q179745" start="4891" end="4901" title="axial tilt" label="axial tilt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6312465" start="5076" end="5089" title="June solstice" label="June solstice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249063" start="5094" end="5111" title="December solstice" label="December solstice"/>
<link wikidata="Q176635" start="5291" end="5307" title="Tropic of Cancer" label="Tropic of Cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q177440" start="5309" end="5328" title="Tropic of Capricorn" label="Tropic of Capricorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q176609" start="5330" end="5343" title="Arctic Circle" label="Arctic Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q182657" start="5348" end="5364" title="Antarctic Circle" label="Antarctic Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q179745" start="5383" end="5412" title="Axial tilt" label="tilt of the Earth&amp;#x27;s axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530" start="6651" end="6658" title="Tropics" label="Tropics"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="6802" end="6816" title="global warming" label="global warming"/>
<link wikidata="Q190009" start="6894" end="6902" title="astronomical nutation" label="nutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q159190" start="6964" end="6973" title="amplitude" label="amplitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167025" start="7269" end="7281" title="polar motion" label="polar motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q339" start="7925" end="7930" title="Pluto" label="Pluto"/>
<link wikidata="Q133346" start="8138" end="8144" title="border" label="border"/>
<link wikidata="Q12980" start="8375" end="8385" title="Polaris" label="North Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633778" start="8456" end="8465" title="elevation" label="elevation"/>
<link wikidata="Q222032" start="8525" end="8530" title="Plane (mathematics)" label="plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502887" start="8577" end="8592" title="Geodetic datum" label="geodetic system"/>
<link wikidata="Q273176" start="8635" end="8641" title="surface normal" label="normal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2518149" start="8922" end="8926" title="Conical surface" label="cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q91345714" start="9023" end="9042" title="Circles of a sphere" label="Circles of a sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q18348508" start="9045" end="9072" title="List of circles of latitude" label="List of circles of latitude"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143000" wikidata="Q188342" url="?curid=143000" title="Nicéphore Niépce">
<text>Joseph Nicéphore Niépce (; 7 March 1765 – 5 July 1833) was a French inventor and one of the earliest pioneers of photography. Niépce developed heliography, a technique he used to create the world&#x27;s oldest surviving products of a photographic process. In the mid-1820s, he used a primitive camera to produce the oldest surviving photograph of a real-world scene. Among Niépce&#x27;s other inventions was the Pyréolophore, one of the world&#x27;s first internal combustion engines, which he conceived, created, and developed with his older brother Claude Niépce.

== Biography ==

=== Early life ===
Niépce was born in Chalon-sur-Saône, Saône-et-Loire, where his father was a wealthy lawyer. His older brother Claude (1763–1828) was also his collaborator in research and invention, but died half-mad and destitute in England, having squandered the family wealth in pursuit of non-opportunities for the &quot;Pyréolophore&quot;. Niépce also had a sister and a younger brother, Bernard.

Nicéphore was baptized Joseph but adopted the name Nicéphore, in honour of Saint Nicephorus the ninth-century Patriarch of Constantinople, while studying at the Oratorian college in Angers. At the college he learned science and the experimental method, rapidly achieving success and graduating to work as a professor of the college.

=== Military career ===
Niépce served as a staff officer in the French army under Napoleon, spending years in Italy and on the island of Sardinia, but ill health forced him to resign, whereupon he married Agnes Romero and became the Administrator of the district of Nice in post-revolutionary France. In 1795, he resigned as administrator of Nice to pursue scientific research with his brother Claude. One source reports his resignation to have been forced due to his unpopularity.

=== Scientific research ===
In 1801 the brothers returned to the family&#x27;s estates in Chalon to continue their scientific research, and where they were united with their mother, their sister and their younger brother Bernard. Here they managed the family estate as independently wealthy gentlemen-farmers, raising beets and producing sugar.

=== Claude Niépce ===
In 1827 Niépce journeyed to England to visit his seriously ill elder brother Claude Niépce, who was now living in Kew, near London. Claude had descended into delirium and squandered much of the family fortune chasing inappropriate business opportunities for the &quot;Pyréolophore&quot;.

=== Death ===
Nicéphore Niépce died of a stroke on 5 July 1833, financially ruined such that his grave in the cemetery of Saint-Loup de Varennes was financed by the municipality. The cemetery is near the family house where he had experimented and had made the world&#x27;s oldest surviving photographic image.

=== Descendants ===
His son Isidore (1805–1868) formed a partnership with Daguerre after his father&#x27;s death and was granted a government pension in 1839 in return for disclosing the technical details of Nicéphore&#x27;s heliogravure process.

A cousin, Claude Félix Abel Niépce de Saint-Victor (1805–1870), was a chemist and was the first to use albumen in photography. He also produced photographic engravings on steel. During 1857–1861, he discovered that uranium salts emit a form of radiation that is invisible to the human eye.

Photojournalist Janine Niépce (1921–2007) is a distant relative.

== Achievements ==

=== Photography ===

The date of Niépce&#x27;s first photographic experiments is uncertain. He was led to them by his interest in the new art of lithography, for which he realized he lacked the necessary skill and artistic ability, and by his acquaintance with the camera obscura, a drawing aid which was popular among affluent dilettantes in the late 18th and early 19th centuries. The camera obscura&#x27;s beautiful but fleeting little &quot;light paintings&quot; inspired a number of people, including Thomas Wedgwood and Henry Fox Talbot, to seek some way of capturing them more easily and effectively than could be done by tracing over them with a pencil.

Letters to his sister-in-law around 1816 indicate that Niépce had managed to capture small camera images on paper coated with silver chloride, making him apparently the first to have any success at all in such an attempt, but the results were negatives, dark where they should be light and vice versa, and he could find no way to stop them from darkening all over when brought into the light for viewing.

Niépce turned his attention to other substances that were affected by light, eventually concentrating on Bitumen of Judea, a naturally occurring asphalt that had been used for various purposes since ancient times. In Niépce&#x27;s time, it was used by artists as an acid-resistant coating on copper plates for making etchings. The artist scratched a drawing through the coating, then bathed the plate in acid to etch the exposed areas, then removed the coating with a solvent and used the plate to print ink copies of the drawing onto paper. What interested Niépce was the fact that the bitumen coating became less soluble after it had been left exposed to light.

Niépce dissolved bitumen in lavender oil, a solvent often used in varnishes, and thinly coated it onto a lithographic stone or a sheet of metal or glass. After the coating had dried, a test subject, typically an engraving printed on paper, was laid over the surface in close contact and the two were put out in direct sunlight. After sufficient exposure, the solvent could be used to rinse away only the unhardened bitumen that had been shielded from light by lines or dark areas in the test subject. The parts of the surface thus laid bare could then be etched with acid, or the remaining bitumen could serve as the water-repellent material in lithographic printing.

Niépce called his process heliography, which literally means &quot;sun drawing&quot;. In 1822, he used it to create what is believed to have been the world&#x27;s first permanent photographic image, a contact-exposed copy of an engraving of Pope Pius VII, but it was later destroyed when Niépce attempted to make prints from it. The earliest surviving photographic artifacts by Niépce, made in 1825, are copies of a 17th-century engraving of a man with a horse and of what may be an etching or engraving of a woman with a spinning wheel. They are simply sheets of plain paper printed with ink in a printing press, like ordinary etchings, engravings, or lithographs, but the plates used to print them were created photographically by Niépce&#x27;s process rather than by laborious and inexact hand-engraving or drawing on lithographic stones. They thus are photo-etchings. One example of the print of the man with a horse and two examples of the print of the woman with the spinning wheel are known to have survived. The former is in the collection of the Bibliothèque nationale de France in Paris and the latter two are in a private collection in Westport, Connecticut.

Niépce&#x27;s correspondence with his brother Claude has preserved the fact that his first real success in using bitumen to create a permanent photograph of the image in a camera obscura came sometime between 1822 and 1827. The result is now the oldest known camera photograph still in existence. The historic image had seemingly been lost early in the 20th century, but photography historians Helmut and Alison Gernsheim succeeded in tracking it down in 1952. The exposure time required to make it is usually said to have been eight or nine hours, but that is a mid-20th century assumption based largely on the fact that the sun lights the buildings on opposite sides, as if from an arc across the sky, indicating an essentially day-long exposure. A later researcher who used Niépce&#x27;s notes and historically correct materials to recreate his processes found that in fact &quot;several days&quot; of exposure in the camera were needed to adequately capture such an image on a bitumen-coated plate.

In 1829, Niépce entered into a partnership with Louis Daguerre, who was also seeking a means of creating permanent photographic images with a camera. Together, they developed the physautotype, an improved process that used lavender oil distillate as the photosensitive substance. The partnership lasted until Niépce&#x27;s death in 1833, after which Daguerre continued to experiment, eventually working out a process that only superficially resembled Niépce&#x27;s. He named it the &quot;daguerréotype&quot;, after himself. In 1839 he managed to get the government of France to purchase his invention on behalf of the people of France. The French government agreed to award Daguerre a yearly stipend of 6,000 francs for the rest of his life, and to give the estate of Niépce 4,000 francs yearly. This arrangement rankled Niépce&#x27;s son, who claimed Daguerre was reaping all the benefits of his father&#x27;s work. In some ways, he was right—for many years, Niépce received little credit for his contribution. Later historians have reclaimed Niépce from relative obscurity, and it is now generally recognized that his &quot;heliography&quot; was the first successful example of what we now call &quot;photography&quot;: the creation of a reasonably light-fast and permanent image by the action of light on a light-sensitive surface and subsequent processing.

Although initially ignored amid the excitement caused by the introduction of the daguerreotype, and far too insensitive to be practical for making photographs with a camera, the utility of Niépce&#x27;s original process for its primary purpose was eventually realized. From the 1850s until well into the 20th century, a thin coating of bitumen was widely used as a slow but very effective and economical photoresist for making printing plates.

=== Pyréolophore ===

The Pyréolophore, one of the world&#x27;s first internal combustion engines that was actually built, was invented and patented by the Niépce brothers in 1807. This engine ran on controlled dust explosions of lycopodium powder and was installed on a boat that ran on the river Saône. Ten years later, the brothers were the first in the world to make an engine work with a fuel injection system.

=== Marly machine ===
In 1807 the imperial government opened a competition for a hydraulic machine to replace the original Marly machine (located in Marly-le-Roi) that delivered water to the Palace of Versailles from the Seine river. The machine was built in Bougival in 1684, from where it pumped water a distance of one kilometer and raised it 150 meters. The Niépce brothers conceived a new hydrostatic principle for the machine and improved it once more in 1809. The machine had undergone changes in many of its parts, including more precise pistons, creating far less resistance. They tested it many times, and the result was that with a stream drop of 4 feet 4 inches, it lifted water 11 feet. But in December 1809 they got a message that they had waited too long and the Emperor had taken on himself the decision to ask the engineer Périer (1742–1818) to build a steam engine to operate the pumps at Marly.

=== Vélocipède ===
In 1818 Niépce became interested in the ancestor of the bicycle, a Laufmaschine invented by Karl von Drais in 1817. He built himself a model and called it the vélocipède (&quot;fast foot&quot;) and caused quite a sensation on the local country roads. Niépce improved his machine with an adjustable saddle and it is now exhibited at the Niépce Museum. In a letter to his brother Nicéphore contemplated motorizing his machine.

== Legacy and commemoration ==
The lunar crater Niépce is named after him.

The Niépce Heliograph is on permanent display at the Harry Ransom Center at the University of Texas at Austin. The object was located by historians Alison and Helmut Gernsheim in 1952 and sold to the Humanities Research Center (later renamed the Harry Ransom Center) in 1963.

The Niépce Prize has been awarded annually since 1955 to a professional photographer who has lived and worked in France for over three years. It was introduced in honour of Niépce by Albert Plécy of the l&#x27;Association Gens d&#x27;Images.

== See also ==
* Timeline of photography technology
* Timeline of transportation technology
* History of the internal combustion engine
* François Isaac de Rivaz
* List of works by Eugène Guillaume

== References ==
== Sources ==
* Marignier, J. L., &quot;Niépce: l&#x27;invention de la photographie&quot; (1999)
* Bajac, Q., &quot;The Invention of Photography&quot;, trans. R. Taylor (2002)

== External links ==

* Website about Niépce 
* Website about Niépce
* Harry Ransom Center permanent exhibition of &quot;The Niépce Heliograph&quot;
* The history men: Helmut Gernsheim and Nicéphore Niépce on Photo Histories
* Home page of the &#x27;Niépce prize&#x27; at the association &quot;Gens d&#x27;Images&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q188342" start="0" end="23" title="Nicéphore Niépce" label="Joseph Nicéphore Niépce"/>
<link wikidata="Q355472" start="101" end="124" title="History of photography" label="pioneers of photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414342" start="143" end="154" title="heliography" label="heliography"/>
<link wikidata="Q183998" start="284" end="300" title="Camera obscura" label="primitive camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q616159" start="316" end="365" title="View from the Window at Le Gras" label="oldest surviving photograph of a real-world scene"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395446" start="412" end="424" title="Pyréolophore" label="Pyréolophore"/>
<link wikidata="Q12757" start="456" end="482" title="internal combustion engine" label="internal combustion engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128980" start="551" end="564" title="Claude Niépce" label="Claude Niépce"/>
<link wikidata="Q203645" start="622" end="638" title="Chalon-sur-Saône" label="Chalon-sur-Saône"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395446" start="911" end="923" title="Pyréolophore" label="Pyréolophore"/>
<link wikidata="Q116639" start="1064" end="1080" title="Nikephoros I of Constantinople" label="Saint Nicephorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q60719" start="1099" end="1126" title="Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople" label="Patriarch of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278654" start="1150" end="1167" title="Oratory of Jesus" label="Oratorian college"/>
<link wikidata="Q38380" start="1171" end="1177" title="Angers" label="Angers"/>
<link wikidata="Q101965" start="1221" end="1240" title="experimental method" label="experimental method"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="1405" end="1413" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q33959" start="1589" end="1593" title="Nice" label="Nice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740301" start="2288" end="2291" title="Kew" label="Kew"/>
<link wikidata="Q138003" start="3032" end="3072" title="Abel Niepce de Saint-Victor" label="Claude Félix Abel Niépce de Saint-Victor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3162008" start="3329" end="3342" title="Janine Niépce" label="Janine Niépce"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3544" end="3555" title="Printmaking#Lithography" label="lithography"/>
<link wikidata="Q933545" start="3905" end="3920" title="Thomas Wedgwood (photographer)" label="Thomas Wedgwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q299565" start="3925" end="3941" title="Henry Fox Talbot" label="Henry Fox Talbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q216918" start="4188" end="4203" title="silver chloride" label="silver chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q595597" start="4305" end="4314" title="negative (photography)" label="negatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919163" start="4573" end="4589" title="Bitumen of Judea" label="Bitumen of Judea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4785" end="4793" title="Printmaking#Etching" label="etchings"/>
<link wikidata="Q900534" start="5161" end="5173" title="lavender oil" label="lavender oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q146505" start="5177" end="5184" title="solvent" label="solvent"/>
<link wikidata="Q81683" start="5199" end="5206" title="varnish" label="varnish"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5345" end="5354" title="Printmaking#Engraving" label="engraving"/>
<link wikidata="Q124754" start="6043" end="6056" title="Pope Pius VII" label="Pope Pius VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q58966" start="6324" end="6338" title="spinning wheel" label="spinning wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q193563" start="6857" end="6889" title="Bibliothèque nationale de France" label="Bibliothèque nationale de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q131405" start="8025" end="8039" title="Louis Daguerre" label="Louis Daguerre"/>
<link wikidata="Q268527" start="8156" end="8168" title="physautotype" label="physautotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q179744" start="8465" end="8478" title="daguerréotype" label="daguerréotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439684" start="9743" end="9754" title="photoresist" label="photoresist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019218" start="10014" end="10031" title="lycopodium powder" label="lycopodium powder"/>
<link wikidata="Q187834" start="10082" end="10087" title="Saône" label="Saône"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466299" start="10324" end="10337" title="Marly machine" label="Marly machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q656505" start="10350" end="10362" title="Marly-le-Roi" label="Marly-le-Roi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946" start="10392" end="10412" title="Palace of Versailles" label="Palace of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471" start="10422" end="10427" title="Seine" label="Seine"/>
<link wikidata="Q399342" start="10460" end="10468" title="Bougival" label="Bougival"/>
<link wikidata="Q3157902" start="11041" end="11047" title="Jacques-Constantin Périer" label="Périer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255515" start="11202" end="11214" title="Laufmaschine" label="Laufmaschine"/>
<link wikidata="Q77122" start="11227" end="11241" title="Karl Drais" label="Karl von Drais"/>
<link wikidata="Q595658" start="11294" end="11304" title="vélocipède" label="vélocipède"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="11596" end="11601" title="Moon" label="lunar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7031785" start="11609" end="11615" title="Niepce (crater)" label="Niépce"/>
<link wikidata="Q49213" start="11717" end="11746" title="University of Texas at Austin" label="University of Texas at Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q761387" start="11918" end="11930" title="Niépce Prize" label="Niépce Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088185" start="12174" end="12208" title="Timeline of photography technology" label="Timeline of photography technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2516265" start="12211" end="12248" title="Timeline of transportation technology" label="Timeline of transportation technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031196" start="12251" end="12292" title="History of the internal combustion engine" label="History of the internal combustion engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q124068" start="12295" end="12318" title="François Isaac de Rivaz" label="François Isaac de Rivaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q16840477" start="12321" end="12354" title="List of works by Eugène Guillaume" label="List of works by Eugène Guillaume"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143001" wikidata="Q213778" url="?curid=143001" title="Karl Friedrich Bahrdt">
<text>Karl Friedrich Bahrdt (; 25 August 1741 – 23 April 1792), also spelled Carl Friedrich Bahrdt, was an unorthodox German Protestant biblical scholar, theologian, and polemicist. Controversial during his day, he is sometimes considered an &quot;enfant terrible&quot; and one of the most immoral characters in German learning.

==Life==
Bahrdt was born on 25 August 1741 in Bischofswerda, Upper Lusatia, where his father was pastor of the local church. The elder Bahrdt was later a professor, canon, and general superintendent at Leipzig. He received his early education at the celebrated school of Pforta, but some commenters have found his training to have been grossly neglected.

At sixteen, he enrolled in the University of Leipzig, where he studied under Christian August Crusius, who was then head of the theological faculty. The boy varied the monotony of his studies by pranks which revealed his unbalanced character, including an attempt to raise spirits with the aid of &quot;Dr Faust&#x27;s &quot;.

After graduation, he lectured on biblical exegesis for a time as an adjunct to his father before becoming a catechist (&#x27;) at the church of . He proved an eloquent and popular preacher and returned to the university as a visiting professor (&#x27;) of biblical philology. He published a popular book of devotions, &quot;The Christian in Solitude&quot;, but was required to resign his positions and leave the Leipzig in 1768 on account of his irregular conduct.

Christian Adolph Klotz was then able to secure him the chair in biblical antiquities at the University of Erfurt. As the post was unpaid and Bahrdt was now married, he made his actual living as an inn-keeper and from private tutoring. Once he completed his doctorate of theology at Erlangen, he was able to persuade the faculty at Erfurt to appoint him professor designate of theology and began reading lectures. His orthodoxy had by this time completely vanished: Bahrdt was now an extreme rationalist and determined to popularize the position. He was not dismissed on this account, however, but left Erfurt in 1771 on account of his debts and the personal and professional quarrels he had become embroiled in with his colleagues.

He left for a post as professor of theology and preacher at the University of Giessen. His personal behavior was no less or more objectionable than elsewhere, but his publication of &quot;God&#x27;s Recent Revelations in Letters and Stories&quot; (&quot;&quot;) between 1773 and 1775 made plain his departure from official doctrine. The work—a &quot;model version&quot; of the New Testament in modern German—occasioned a memorably scornful attack on its poor taste by Goethe and prompted Bahrdt to again resign his position and relocate.

He then served as the director of the educational institution (&quot;&quot;) established by Carl Ulisses von Salis-Marschlins at his Château de Marschlins. It had languished since &#x27;s death in 1772, but Bahrdt disliked the strict discipline maintained by von Salis, resigned in 1777, and prompted the closing of the school.

Bahrdt next served as general superintendent at Dürkheim-on-the-Hardt at the invitation of the count of Leiningen-Dagsburg. He also attempted to establish a new school at Heidesheim. His luckless translation of the Bible followed him, however, and a 1778 decision of the Court Council of the Empire prohibited him from holding any professorial office, lecturing in any capacity, or publishing any work on theology. He again fled from his creditors and was imprisoned for a short period in Dienheim.

In 1779, he took refuge in Halle, now in dire poverty. There, he kept a tavern with a billiard table near the town gate. In spite of senate and theological opposition, he obtained permission from the Prussian minister Karl Abraham von Zedlitz to lecture on subjects other than theology. He would lecture in the morning on moral philosophy and then retire for the afternoon to his public house, which was largely patronized by students. He repudiated his wife and lived with his mistress and their daughters.

Compelled to write to earn additional income, he developed an astounding literary activity, although most of his works are now considered comparatively worthless or even a caricature of Enlightenment rationalism. He directed all his efforts at the development of a &quot;moral system&quot; intended to replace supernatural Christianity. Having become a Freemason at some point, Bahrdt founded a secret society to that purpose in 1787 called the German Union of the Two and Twenty, from its original number of members. To make time for more writing, he gave up his lectures, although he opened a new inn at Weinberg near Halle.

In 1789, he was arrested partly on account of a pasquinade he had written concerning a religious edict passed by Prussia the year before, owing to the religious reaction that set in upon the death of Frederick the Great. The king reduced the term to one year, which Bahrdt devoted to writing his autobiography, &quot;a mixture of lies, hypocrisy, and self-prostitution&quot;, along with indecent stories and coarse polemics. The German Union was dissolved upon his arrest and publicly exposed by Johann Joachim Christoph Bode&#x27;s &quot;More Notes than Text&quot; (&quot;&quot;). Most of its members went on to join the Illuminati.

Bahrdt died of a severe illness in Nietleben near Halle on 23 April 1792.

==Works==
* Books by Karl Friedrich Bahrdt at Open Library
* 

==See also==
* Heinrich Paulus – another rationalist theologian (1761–1851)
* Hermann Samuel Reimarus – another rationalist theologian (1694–1768)

==Notes==

==References==
* 
* 
* 

Attribution:</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q213778" start="0" end="21" title="Karl Friedrich Bahrdt" label="Karl Friedrich Bahrdt"/>
<link wikidata="Q213778" start="71" end="92" title="Karl Friedrich Bahrdt" label="Carl Friedrich Bahrdt"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="112" end="118" title="German people" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="119" end="129" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q81717" start="370" end="383" title="Bischofswerda" label="Bischofswerda"/>
<link wikidata="Q7943" start="385" end="398" title="Upper Lusatia" label="Upper Lusatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079" start="526" end="533" title="Leipzig" label="Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q162494" start="595" end="601" title="Pforta" label="Pforta"/>
<link wikidata="Q154804" start="711" end="732" title="University of Leipzig" label="University of Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q63340" start="757" end="781" title="Christian August Crusius" label="Christian August Crusius"/>
<link wikidata="Q332885" start="983" end="991" title="Faust" label="Dr Faust"/>
<link wikidata="Q244783" start="1041" end="1058" title="biblical exegesis" label="biblical exegesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735729" start="1116" end="1125" title="catechist" label="catechist"/>
<link wikidata="Q40634" start="1273" end="1282" title="philology" label="philology"/>
<link wikidata="Q70821" start="1474" end="1496" title="Christian Adolph Klotz" label="Christian Adolph Klotz"/>
<link wikidata="Q609819" start="1538" end="1558" title="Biblical archaeology" label="biblical antiquities"/>
<link wikidata="Q702524" start="1566" end="1586" title="University of Erfurt" label="University of Erfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q256020" start="1671" end="1681" title="inn-keeper" label="inn-keeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q40025" start="1756" end="1764" title="University of Erlangen" label="Erlangen"/>
<link wikidata="Q317053" start="2271" end="2292" title="University of Giessen" label="University of Giessen"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="2584" end="2597" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5879" start="2675" end="2681" title="Johann Wolfgang von Goethe" label="Goethe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5040893" start="2838" end="2871" title="Carl Ulisses von Salis-Marschlins" label="Carl Ulisses von Salis-Marschlins"/>
<link wikidata="Q670256" start="2879" end="2900" title="Marschlins Castle" label="Château de Marschlins"/>
<link wikidata="Q22901" start="3123" end="3144" title="Bad Dürkheim" label="Dürkheim-on-the-Hardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q668414" start="3179" end="3197" title="House of Leiningen" label="Leiningen-Dagsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q175746" start="3246" end="3256" title="Heidesheim" label="Heidesheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q536989" start="3346" end="3373" title="Court Council of the Empire" label="Court Council of the Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q650305" start="3564" end="3572" title="Dienheim" label="Dienheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2814" start="3602" end="3607" title="Halle, Saxony-Anhalt" label="Halle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500725" start="3661" end="3675" title="billiard table" label="billiard table"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="3775" end="3783" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Prussian"/>
<link wikidata="Q96859" start="3793" end="3817" title="Karl Abraham Zedlitz" label="Karl Abraham von Zedlitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="4270" end="4283" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q170774" start="4394" end="4406" title="miracle" label="supernatural"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="4437" end="4446" title="Freemason" label="Freemason"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4690" end="4698" title="Weinberg bei Halle" label="Weinberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055725" start="4760" end="4770" title="pasquinade" label="pasquinade"/>
<link wikidata="Q33550" start="4912" end="4931" title="Frederick the Great" label="Frederick the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q213880" start="5208" end="5237" title="Johann Joachim Christoph Bode" label="Johann Joachim Christoph Bode"/>
<link wikidata="Q133957" start="5334" end="5344" title="Illuminati" label="Illuminati"/>
<link wikidata="Q2814" start="5382" end="5391" title="Nietleben" label="Nietleben"/>
<link wikidata="Q2814" start="5397" end="5402" title="Halle (Saale)" label="Halle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201876" start="5468" end="5480" title="Open Library" label="Open Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q68710" start="5500" end="5515" title="Heinrich Paulus" label="Heinrich Paulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q706888" start="5563" end="5586" title="Hermann Samuel Reimarus" label="Hermann Samuel Reimarus"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143002" wikidata="Q1358292" url="?curid=143002" title="Johannes Dantiscus">
<text>Johannes Dantiscus, (; ; 1 November 1485 – 27 October 1548) was prince-bishop of Warmia and Bishop of Chełmno (Culm). In recognition of his diplomatic services for Polish kings, the bishop and poet is also known as the &quot;Father of Polish Diplomacy.&quot;

Johannes Dantiscus&#x27; personal seal, a depiction located at Stanford University Libraries, identifies him as &quot;Ioannes De Curiis, Pruss. Varmien&quot; with St. Katherine, St. Jacob and St. Peter crests.

==Biography==
Dantiscus was born in Danzig (Gdańsk), in the Kingdom of Poland. His family&#x27;s name was &quot;von Höfen&quot;, while &quot;Flachsbinder&quot; was an occupational name derived from his grandfather&#x27;s ropemaking trade (literally &quot;flax binder&quot;). Johannes took on the nickname Dantiscus in order to show that he was a burgher of Danzig () where his father was a brewer and merchant.

He finished his elementary studies at a parish school in Grudziądz (Graudenz), and studied first in Greifswald, then in Kraków where he was awarded a bachelor&#x27;s degree.

During his studies, the teenage Dantiscus became associated with the royal court of King John I Albert of Poland, and took part in military expeditions against the Turks and the Moldavians. For over 30 years he was a royal diplomat and the royal secretary.

Dantiscus, at King Sigismund I&#x27;s side, took part in the Holy Roman Empire&#x27;s convention of Vienna in 1515. In Vienna he was knighted by the emperor for his services and was made a nobleman.

Johannes became a church canon, then Bishop of Chełmno and later of Bishop of Warmia. He also wrote many poems, mainly in Latin, for which he is regarded as one of the most outstanding poets. Among his many works is his autobiography &quot;Vita Joannis de Curiis Dantisci&quot; (&quot;The Life of Johannes of the Danzig Church&quot;).

In addition, he maintained an active correspondence with prominent persons and institutions throughout Europe as well as with relatives. Thousands of his letters dating from 1500–1548 are still in existence. Dantiscus wrote mainly in Latin and German, and sporadically received letters in Polish, or in other languages.

He died, aged 63, in Lidzbark (Heilsberg).

== References ==
==External links==
* Archive of Dantiscus&#x27; works and correspondence, in English and Polish
* Works in Latin 
* List of correspondents (in Polish only)
* Works by Johannes Dantiscus in digital library Polona</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1358292" start="0" end="18" title="Johannes Dantiscus" label="Johannes Dantiscus"/>
<link wikidata="Q22881" start="64" end="77" title="prince-bishop" label="prince-bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382083" start="81" end="87" title="bishop of Warmia" label="Warmia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3738192" start="92" end="109" title="Bishop of Chełmno" label="Bishop of Chełmno"/>
<link wikidata="Q193360" start="164" end="176" title="Polish kings" label="Polish kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358292" start="225" end="251" title="Johannes Dantiscus" label="Father of Polish Diplomacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="515" end="521" title="Gdańsk" label="Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q171348" start="531" end="548" title="Kingdom of Poland (1385–1569)" label="Kingdom of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q31029" start="692" end="696" title="rope" label="rope"/>
<link wikidata="Q52090" start="817" end="824" title="Bourgeoisie" label="burgher"/>
<link wikidata="Q869095" start="861" end="867" title="brewing" label="brewer"/>
<link wikidata="Q215536" start="872" end="880" title="merchant" label="merchant"/>
<link wikidata="Q102496" start="923" end="929" title="parish" label="parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3914" start="930" end="936" title="school" label="school"/>
<link wikidata="Q123511" start="940" end="949" title="Grudziądz" label="Grudziądz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4098" start="983" end="993" title="Greifswald" label="Greifswald"/>
<link wikidata="Q31487" start="1003" end="1009" title="Kraków" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q53451" start="1147" end="1160" title="John I Albert" label="John I Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q171348" start="1164" end="1170" title="Kingdom of Poland (1385–1569)" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="1222" end="1227" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q10957559" start="1236" end="1244" title="Moldavia" label="Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q54056" start="1335" end="1346" title="Sigismund I the Old" label="Sigismund I"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="1377" end="1394" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="1416" end="1422" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104153" start="1541" end="1546" title="Canon (priest)" label="canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3738192" start="1553" end="1570" title="Bishop of Chełmno" label="Bishop of Chełmno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382083" start="1584" end="1600" title="Bishop of Warmia" label="Bishop of Warmia"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="1638" end="1643" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4184" start="1736" end="1749" title="autobiography" label="autobiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q133492" start="1889" end="1903" title="letter (message)" label="correspondence"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="1955" end="1961" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q133492" start="2006" end="2013" title="Letter (message)" label="letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q751123" start="2194" end="2202" title="Lidzbark Warmiński" label="Lidzbark"/>
<link wikidata="Q11691781" start="2439" end="2445" title="Polona" label="Polona"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143012" wikidata="Q1057250" url="?curid=143012" title="Land value tax">
<text>A land value tax (LVT) is a levy on the value of land without regard to buildings, personal property and other improvements upon it. Some economists favor LVT, arguing it does not cause economic inefficiency, and helps reduce economic inequality. A land value tax is a progressive tax, in that the tax burden falls on land owners, because land ownership is correlated with wealth and income. The land value tax has been referred to as &quot;the perfect tax&quot; and the economic efficiency of a land value tax has been accepted since the eighteenth century. Economists since Adam Smith and David Ricardo have advocated this tax because it does not hurt economic activity, and encourages development without subsidies.

LVT is associated with Henry George, whose ideology became known as Georgism. George argued that taxing the land value is the most logical source of public revenue because the supply of land is fixed and because public infrastructure improvements would be reflected in (and thus paid for by) increased land values.

A low-rate land value tax is currently implemented throughout Denmark, Estonia, Lithuania, Russia, Singapore, and Taiwan; it has also been applied to lesser extents in parts of Australia, Germany, Mexico (Mexicali), and the United States (e.g., Pennsylvania).

==Terminology==
It is also known as a location value tax, a point valuation tax, a site valuation tax, split rate tax, or a site-value rating.

==Economic properties==

===Efficiency===

Most taxes distort economic decisions and discourage beneficial economic activity. For example, property taxes discourage construction, maintenance, and repair because taxes increase with improvements. LVT is not based on how land is used. Because the supply of land is essentially fixed, land rents depend on what tenants are prepared to pay, rather than on landlord expenses. Thus, if landlords passed LVT on to tenants, they might move or rent smaller spaces before absorbing increased rent.

The land&#x27;s occupants benefit from improvements surrounding a site. Such improvements shift tenants&#x27; aggregate demand curve to the right (they will pay more). Landlords benefit from price competition among tenants; the only direct effect of LVT in this case is to reduce the amount of social benefit that is privately captured as land price by titleholders.

LVT is said to be justified for economic reasons because it does not deter production, distort markets, or otherwise create deadweight loss. Land value tax can even have negative deadweight loss (social benefits), particularly when land use improves. Economist William Vickrey believed that: 

LVT&#x27;s efficiency has been observed in practice. Fred Foldvary stated that LVT discourages speculative land holding because the tax reflects changes in land value (up and down), encouraging landowners to develop or sell vacant/underused plots in high demand. Foldvary claimed that LVT increases investment in dilapidated inner city areas because improvements don&#x27;t cause tax increases. This in turn reduces the incentive to build on remote sites and so reduces urban sprawl. For example, Harrisburg, Pennsylvania&#x27;s LVT has operated since 1975. This policy was credited by mayor Stephen R. Reed with reducing the number of vacant downtown structures from around 4,200 in 1982 to fewer than 500.

LVT is arguably an ecotax because it discourages the waste of prime locations, which are a finite resource. Many urban planners claim that LVT is an effective method to promote transit-oriented development.

===Real estate values===
The value of land reflects the value it can provide over time. This value can be measured by the ground rent that a piece of land receives on the market. The present value of ground-rent is the basis for land prices. A land value tax (LVT) will reduce the ground rent received by the landlord, and thus will decrease the price of land, holding all else constant. The rent charged for land may also decrease as a result of efficiency gains if speculators stop hoarding unused land.

Real estate bubbles direct savings towards rent-seeking activities rather than other investments and can contribute to recessions. Advocates claim that LVT reduces the speculative element in land pricing, thereby leaving more money for productive capital investment.

At sufficiently high levels, LVT would cause real estate prices to fall by taxing away land rents that would otherwise become &#x27;capitalized&#x27; into the price of real estate. It also encourages landowners to sell or develop locations that they are not using. This might cause some landowners, especially pure landowners, to resist high land value tax rates. Landowners often possess significant political influence, which may help explain the limited spread of land value taxes so far.

===Tax incidence===
A land value tax has progressive tax effects, in that it is paid by the owners of valuable land who tend to be the rich, and since the amount of land is fixed, the tax burden cannot be passed on as higher rents or lower wages to tenants, consumers, or workers.

==Practical issues==
Several practical issues complicate LVT implementation. Most notably, it must be:
* calculated accurately and fairly (and fairness is always subjective)
* high enough to raise sufficient revenue without causing land abandonment, but if land is abandoned, it could be claimed by the State (as occurs under Israel&#x27;s Absentees&#x27; Property Laws)
* billed to the correct person or business entity
* Political Resistance: Landowners, particularly those with substantial holdings, may oppose LVT due to its potential to significantly increase their tax burden. This resistance can lead to political challenges in implementing and sustaining an LVT.
* Effect on Rural Landowners: In rural areas, where land values are lower but the land size per owner might be large, the tax might seem unfair or burdensome compared to urban areas where land values are higher.
* Effect on Planning 1: Whereas in a conceptual world LVT drives efficient use of land, extant planning restrictions mitigate against that efficiency. Moreover when external developments increase the notional land value (by increasing amenity, for instance) existing landowners may object if such a development increased LVT while they are not allowed to realise the benefit.
* Effect on Planning 2: LVT in real estate should encourage high-rise building to maximise land-use efficiency. However amenity improvements required for those high-occupant developments are shared unequally across low-occupancy neighbours.
* Market Fluctuations: The real estate market is subject to fluctuations, which can lead to significant changes in land values and, consequently, the taxes owed. This volatility can make it difficult for landowners to plan financially.
* Economic Impact on Property Development: While LVT encourages the efficient use of land, it could also discourage development in areas where the anticipated increase in land value may not justify the initial investment costs, potentially leading to underdevelopment.

===Assessment/appraisal===

Levying an LVT requires an assessment and a title register. In a 1796 United States Supreme Court opinion, Justice William Paterson said that leaving the valuation process up to assessors would cause bureaucratic complexities, as well as non-uniform procedures. Murray Rothbard later raised similar concerns, claiming that no government can fairly assess value, which can be determined only by a free market.

Compared to modern property tax assessments, land valuations involve fewer variables and have smoother gradients than valuations that include improvements. This is due to variation of building design and quality. Modern statistical techniques have improved the process; in the 1960s and 1970s, multivariate analysis was introduced as an assessment tool. Usually, such a valuation process begins with a measurement of the most and least valuable land within the taxation area. A few sites of intermediate value are then identified and used as &quot;landmark&quot; values. Other values are interpolated between the landmark values. The data is then collated in a database, &quot;smoothed&quot; and mapped using a geographic information system (GIS). Thus, even if the initial valuation is difficult, once the system is in use, successive valuations become easier.

===Revenue===
 In the context of LVT as a single tax (replacing all other taxes), some have argued that LVT alone cannot raise enough tax revenue. However, the presence of other taxes can reduce land values and hence the revenue that can be raised from them. The Physiocrats argued that all other taxes ultimately come at the expense of land rental values. Most modern LVT systems function alongside other taxes and thus only reduce their impact without removing them. Land taxes that are higher than the rental surplus (the full land rent for that time period) would result in land abandonment.

===LVT Impracticalities===
In some countries, LVT is impractical because of uncertainty regarding land titles and tenure. For instance, a parcel of grazing land may be communally owned by village inhabitants and administered by village elders. The land in question would need to be held in a trust or similar body for taxation purposes. If the government cannot accurately define ownership boundaries and ascertain the proper owners, it cannot know from whom to collect the tax. Clear titles are absent in many developing countries. In African countries with imperfect land registration, boundaries may be poorly surveyed, and the owner can be unknown.

==Incentives==

=== Speculation ===
The owner of a vacant lot in a thriving city must still pay a tax and would rationally perceive the property as a financial liability, encouraging them to put the land to use in order to cover the tax. LVT removes financial incentives to hold unused land solely for price appreciation, making more land available for productive uses. Land value tax creates an incentive to convert these sites to more intensive private uses or into public purposes.

=== Incidence ===
The selling price of a good that is fixed in supply, such as land, does not change if it is taxed. By contrast, the price of manufactured goods can rise in response to increased taxes, because the higher cost reduces the number of units that suppliers are willing to sell at the original price. The price increase is how the maker passes along some part of the tax to consumers. However, if the revenue from LVT is used to reduce other taxes or to provide valuable public investment, it can cause land prices to rise as a result of higher productivity, by more than the amount that LVT removed.

Land tax incidence rests completely upon landlords, although business sectors that provide services to landlords are indirectly impacted. In some economies, 80 percent of bank lending finances real estate, with a large portion of that for land. Reduced demand for land speculation might reduce the amount of circulating bank credit.

While landowners are unlikely to be able to charge higher rents to compensate for LVT, removing other taxes may increase rents, as this may affect the demand for land.

=== Land use ===

Assuming constant demand, an increase in constructed space decreases the cost of improvements to land such as houses. Shifting property taxes from improvements to land encourages development. Infill of underutilized urban space is one common practice to reduce urban sprawl.

=== Collection ===
LVT is less vulnerable to tax evasion, since land cannot be concealed or moved overseas and titles are easily identified, as they are registered with the public. Land value assessments are usually considered public information, which is available upon request. Transparency reduces tax evasion.

==Ethics==
Land acquires a scarcity value owing to the competing needs for space. The value of land generally owes nothing to the landowner and everything to the surroundings.
LVT considers the effect on land value of location, and of improvements made to neighbouring land, such as proximity to roads and public works. LVT is the purest implementation of the public finance principle known as value capture.

A public works project can increase land values and thus increase LVT revenues. Arguably, public improvements should be paid for by the landowners who benefit from them. Thus, LVT captures the land value of socially created wealth, allowing a reduction in tax on privately created (non-land) wealth.

LVT generally is a progressive tax, with those of greater means paying more, in that land ownership correlates to income and landlords cannot shift the tax burden onto tenants. LVT generally reduces economic inequality, removes incentives to misuse real estate, and reduces the vulnerability of economies to property booms and crashes.

==History==

===Pre-modern===
The philosophies and concepts underpinning land value taxation were discussed in ancient times, stemming from taxes on crop yield. For example, Rishis of ancient India claimed that land should be held in common, and that unfarmed land should produce the same tax as productive land. &quot;The earth ...is common to all beings enjoying the fruit of their own labour; it belongs...to all alike&quot;; therefore, &quot;there should be left some for everyone&quot;. Apastamba said &quot;If any person holding land does not exert himself and hence bears no produce, he shall, if rich, be made to pay what ought to have been produced&quot;.

Mencius was a Chinese philosopher (around 300 BCE) who advocated for the elimination of taxes and tariffs, to be replaced by the public collection of urban land rent: &quot;In the market-places, charge land-rent, but don&#x27;t tax the goods.&quot;

During the Middle Ages, in the West, the first regular and permanent land tax system was based on a unit of land known as the hide. The hide was originally the amount of land sufficient to support a household. It later became subject to a land tax known as &quot;geld&quot;.

===Physiocrats===

The physiocrats were a group of economists who believed that the wealth of nations was derived solely from the value of land agriculture or land development. Before the Industrial Revolution, this was approximately correct. Physiocracy is one of the &quot;early modern&quot; schools of economics. Physiocrats called for the abolition of all existing taxes, completely free trade and a single tax on land. They did not distinguish between the intrinsic value of land and ground rent. Their theories originated in France and were most popular during the second half of the 18th century. The movement was particularly dominated by Anne Robert Jacques Turgot (1727–1781) and François Quesnay (1694–1774). It influenced contemporary statesmen, such as Charles Alexandre de Calonne. The physiocrats were highly influential in the early history of land value taxation in the United States.

===Radical Movement===
A participant in the Radical Movement, Thomas Paine contended in his &quot;Agrarian Justice&quot; pamphlet that all citizens should be paid 15 pounds at age 21 &quot;as a compensation in part for the loss of his or her natural inheritance by the introduction of the system of landed property.&quot; &quot;Men did not make the earth. It is the value of the improvements only, and not the earth itself, that is individual property. Every proprietor owes to the community a ground rent for the land which he holds.&quot; This proposal was the origin of the citizen&#x27;s dividend advocated by Geolibertarianism. Thomas Spence advocated a similar proposal except that the land rent would be distributed equally each year regardless of age.

===Classical economists===

Adam Smith, in his 1776 book &quot;The Wealth of Nations&quot;, first rigorously analyzed the effects of a land value tax, pointing out how it would not hurt economic activity, and how it would not raise contract rents.

=== Henry George ===

Henry George (2 September 1839 – 29 October 1897) was perhaps the most famous advocate of recovering land rents for public purposes. A journalist, politician, and political economist, he advocated a &quot;single tax&quot; on land that would eliminate the need for all other taxes. George first articulated the proposal in &quot;Our Land and Land Policy&quot; (1871). Later, in his best-selling work &quot;Progress and Poverty&quot; (1879), George argued that because the value of land depends on natural qualities combined with the economic activity of communities, including public investments, the economic rent of land was the best source of tax revenue. This book significantly influenced land taxation in the United States and other countries, including Denmark, which continues &quot;grundskyld&quot; (&#x27;ground duty&#x27;) as a key component of its tax system. The philosophy that natural resource rents should be captured by society is now often known as Georgism. Its relevance to public finance is underpinned by the Henry George theorem.

===Meiji Restoration===
After the 1868 Meiji Restoration in Japan, land tax reform was undertaken. An LVT was implemented beginning in 1873. By 1880 initial problems with valuation and rural opposition had been overcome and rapid industrialisation began.

===Liberal and Labour Parties in the United Kingdom===
In the United Kingdom, LVT was an important part of the platform of the Liberal Party during the early part of the twentieth century. David Lloyd George and H. H. Asquith proposed &quot;to free the land that from this very hour is shackled with the chains of feudalism.&quot; It was also advocated by Winston Churchill early in his career. The modern Liberal Party (not to be confused with the Liberal Democrats, who are the heir to the earlier Liberal Party and who offer some support for the idea) remains committed to a local form of LVT, as do the Green Party of England and Wales and the Scottish Greens.

The 1931 Labour budget included an LVT, but before it came into force it was repealed by the Conservative-dominated national government that followed.

An attempt at introducing LVT in the administrative County of London was made by the local authority under the leadership of Herbert Morrison in the 1938–1939 Parliament, called the London Rating (Site Values) Bill. Although it failed, it detailed legislation for the implementation of a system of LVT using annual value assessment.

After 1945, the Labour Party adopted the policy, against substantial opposition, of collecting &quot;development value&quot;: the increase in land price arising from planning consent. This was one of the provisions of the Town and Country Planning Act 1947, but it was repealed when the Labour government lost power in 1951.

Senior Labour figures in recent times have advocated an LVT, notably Andy Burnham in his 2010 leadership campaign, former Leader of the Opposition Jeremy Corbyn, and Shadow Chancellor John McDonnell.

===Republic of China===
The Republic of China was one of the first jurisdictions to implement an LVT, specified in its constitution. Sun Yat-Sen would learn about LVT from the Kiautschou Bay concession, which had successful implementation of LVT, bringing increased wealth and financial stability to the colony. The Republic of China would go on to implement LVT in farms at first, later implementing it in the urban areas due to its success.

===Economists&#x27; perspectives===

===Early neoclassicists===
Alfred Marshall argued in favour of a &quot;fresh air rate&quot;, a tax to be charged to urban landowners and &quot;levied on that value of urban land that is caused by the concentration of population&quot;. That &quot;general rate&quot; should have &quot;to be spent on breaking out small green spots in the midst of dense industrial districts, and on the preservation of large green areas between different towns and between different suburbs which are tending to coalesce&quot;. This idea influenced Marshall&#x27;s pupil Arthur Pigou&#x27;s ideas on taxing negative externalities.

Pigou wrote an essay in favor of the land value tax, calling it &quot;an exceptionally good object for taxation.&quot; His views were interpreted as support for Lloyd George&#x27;s People&#x27;s Budget.

===Nobel laureates===
Paul Samuelson supported LVT. &quot;Our ideal society finds it essential to put a rent on land as a way of maximizing the total consumption available to the society. ...Pure land rent is in the nature of a &#x27;surplus&#x27; which can be taxed heavily without distorting production incentives or efficiency. A land value tax can be called &#x27;the useful tax on measured land surplus&#x27;.&quot;

Milton Friedman stated: &quot;There&#x27;s a sense in which all taxes are antagonistic to free enterprise – and yet we need taxes. ...So the question is, which are the least bad taxes? In my opinion the least bad tax is the property tax on the unimproved value of land, the Henry George argument of many, many years ago.&quot;

Paul Krugman agreed that LVT is efficient, however he disputed whether it should be considered a single tax, as he believed it would not be enough alone, excluding taxes on natural resource rents and other Georgist taxes, to fund a welfare state. &quot;Believe it or not, urban economics models actually do suggest that Georgist taxation would be the right approach at least to finance city growth. But I would just say: I don&#x27;t think you can raise nearly enough money to run a modern welfare state by taxing land [only].&quot;

Joseph Stiglitz, articulating the Henry George theorem wrote that, &quot;Not only was Henry George correct that a tax on land is nondistortionary, but in an equalitarian society ... tax on land raises just enough revenue to finance the (optimally chosen) level of government expenditure.&quot;

===Other economists===
Michael Hudson is a proponent for taxing rent, especially land rent. &quot;... politically, taxing economic rent has become the bête noire of neoliberal globalism. It is what property owners and rentiers fear most of all, as land, subsoil resources and natural monopolies far exceed industrial capital in magnitude. What appears in the statistics at first glance as &#x27;profit&#x27; turns out upon examination to be Ricardian or &#x27;economic&#x27; rent.&quot;

Rick Falkvinge proposed a &quot;simplified taxless state&quot; where the state owns all the land it can defend from other states and leases this land to people at market rates.

Fred Foldvary, an Austrian economist, has expressed support for the LVT and has integrated Georgist and Austrian models into his theory of the business cycle. &quot;Conventional macroeconomics lacks a warranted explanation of the major business cycle, while the Austrian and geo-economic Georgist schools have incomplete theories. A geo-Austrian synthesis, in contrast, provides a potent theory consistent with historical cycles and with explanations about the root causes.&quot;

==Implementation==
===Australia===

Land taxes in Australia are levied by the states. The exemption thresholds vary, as do tax rates and other rules.

In New South Wales, the state land tax exempts farmland and principal residences and there is a tax threshold. Determination of land value for tax purposes is the responsibility of the Valuer-General. In Victoria, the land tax threshold is on the total value of all Victorian property owned by a person on 31 December of each year and taxed at a progressive rate. The principal residence, primary production land and land used by a charity are exempt from land tax. In Tasmania the threshold is and the audit date is 1 July. Between and the tax rate is 0.55% and over it is 1.5%. In Queensland, the threshold for individuals is and for other entities, and the audit date is 30 June. In South Australia the threshold is and taxed at a progressive rate, the audit date is 30 June.

By revenue, property taxes represent 4.5% of total taxation in Australia. A government report in 1986 for Brisbane, Queensland advocated an LVT.

The Henry Tax Review of 2010 commissioned by the federal government recommended that state governments replace stamp duty with LVT. The review proposed multiple marginal rates and that most agricultural land would be in the lowest band with a rate of zero. The Australian Capital Territory moved to adopt this system and planned to reduce stamp duty by 5% and raise land tax by 5% for each of twenty years.

=== Belgium ===
Bernard Clerfayt called for the overhaul of the property tax in the Brussels region, with a higher tax for land values than for buildings.

===Canada===
LVTs were common in Western Canada at the turn of the twentieth century. In Vancouver LVT became the sole form of municipal taxation in 1910 under the leadership of mayor, Louis D. Taylor. Gary B. Nixon (2000) stated that the rate never exceeded 2% of land value, too low to prevent the speculation that led directly to the 1913 real estate crash. All Canadian provinces later taxed improvements. The 2022 value of land in Canada, as reported by the National Balance Sheet, is $5.824 trillion. LVTs can be somewhat controversial in Canada because of the already high cost of property that many Canadians struggle to afford.

===Estonia===
Estonia levies an LVT to fund municipalities. It is a state-level tax, but 100% of the revenue funds local councils. The rate is set by the local council within the limits of 0.1–2.5%. It is one of the most important sources of funding for municipalities. LVT is levied on the value of the land only. Few exemptions are available and even public institutions are subject to it. Church sites are exempt, but other land held by religious institutions is not. The tax has contributed to a high rate (~90%) of owner-occupied residences within Estonia, compared to a rate of 67.4% in the United States.

=== Germany ===
In 2020 the state parliament of Baden-Württemberg agreed on a modified version of the LVT. Starting in 2025, 1.3‰ of the land value is taxed annually. The modification concerns tax reductions for different land uses such as (social) housing, forestry and cultural sites. Baden-Württemberg is the only state in Germany to replace its previous property tax by a LVT.

The decision has been met with criticism. It&#x27;s argued that the change unequally benefits wealthy real estate owners who previously had to pay property tax.

===Hong Kong===
Government rent in Hong Kong, formerly the crown rent, is levied in addition to rates. Properties located in the New Territories (including New Kowloon) or located in the rest of the territory and whose land grant was recorded after 27 May 1985, pay 3% of the rateable rental value. Hong Kong is unique in a way because the government owns virtually all the land and allows for long term leases which is how they make their income off property. Hong Kong levies a property tax known as &quot;rates,&quot; which is a tax on the occupation of property or payable by the owner of unoccupied property. This is calculated as a percentage of the property&#x27;s estimated rental value, assessed quarterly.

===Hungary===
Municipal governments in Hungary levy an LVT based on the area or the land&#x27;s adjusted market value. The maximum rate is 3% of the adjusted market value.

===Kenya===
Kenya&#x27;s LVT history dates to at least 1972, shortly after it achieved independence. Local governments must tax land value but are required to seek approval from the central government for rates that exceed 4 percent. Buildings were not taxed in Kenya as of 2000. The central government is legally required to pay municipalities for the value of land it occupies. Kelly claimed that possibly as a result of this land reform, Kenya became the only stable country in its region. As of late 2014, the city of Nairobi still taxed only land values, although a tax on improvements had been proposed.

===Mexico===
The capital city of Baja California, Mexicali, has had an LVT since the 1990s, when it became the first locality in Mexico to implement such a tax.

===Namibia===
A land value taxation on rural land was introduced in Namibia, with the primary intention of improving land use.

===Russia===
In 1990, several economists wrote to then President Mikhail Gorbachev suggesting that Russia adopt LVT. Currently, Russia has an LVT of 0.3% on residential, agricultural and utilities lands as well as a 1.5% tax for other types of land.

===Singapore===
Singapore owns the majority of its land, which it leases for 99-year terms. In addition, Singapore taxes development uplift at around 70%. These two sources of revenue fund most of Singapore&#x27;s new infrastructure.

===South Korea===
South Korea has an aggregate land tax that is levied annually based on an individual&#x27;s landholding value across the whole country. Speculative and residential land has a progressive tax rate of 0.2–5%, commercial and building sites 0.3–2%, farm and forest lands 0.1% and luxury properties 5%.

===Spain===
===Taiwan===
As of 2010, land value taxes and land value increment taxes accounted for 8.4% of total government revenue in Taiwan.

===Thailand===
The Thai government introduced the Land and Building Tax Act B.E. 2562 in March 2019, which came into effect on 1 January 2020. It sets a maximum tax rate of 1.2% on commercial and vacant land, 0.3% on residential land and 0.15% on agricultural land.

===United States===

In the late 19th century George&#x27;s followers founded a single tax colony at Fairhope, Alabama. Although the colony, now a nonprofit corporation, still holds land in the area and collects a relatively small ground rent, the land is subject to state and local property taxes.

Common property taxes include land value, which usually has a separate assessment. Thus, land value taxation already exists in many jurisdictions. Some jurisdictions have attempted to rely more heavily on it. In Pennsylvania, certain cities raised the tax on land value while reducing the tax on improvement/building/structure values. For example, the city of Altoona adopted a property tax that solely taxed land value in 2002, but repealed the tax in 2016. Many Pennsylvania cities use a split-rate tax, which taxes the value of land at a higher rate than the value of buildings.

===Zimbabwe===
In Zimbabwe, government coalition partners the Movement for Democratic Change adopted LVT.

===Countries with active discussion===

====China====
China&#x27;s Real Rights Law contains provisions founded on LVT analysis.

====Ireland====

In 2010 the government of Ireland announced that it would introduce an LVT, beginning in 2013. Following a 2011 change in government, a property tax was introduced instead.

====New Zealand====
After decades of a modest LVT, New Zealand abolished it in 1990. Discussions continue as to whether or not to bring it back. Earlier Georgist politicians included Patrick O&#x27;Regan and Tom Paul (who was Vice-President of the New Zealand Land Values League).

====United Kingdom====

In September 1908, Chancellor of the Exchequer David Lloyd George instructed McKenna, the First Lord of the Admiralty, to build more Dreadnoughts. The ships were to be financed by an LVT. Lloyd George believed that relating national defence to land tax would both provoke the opposition of the House of Lords and rally the people round a simple emotive issue. The Lords, composed of wealthy landowners, rejected the Budget in November 1909, leading to a constitutional crisis.

LVT was on the UK statute books briefly in 1931, introduced by Philip Snowden&#x27;s 1931 budget, strongly supported by prominent LVT campaigner Andrew MacLaren MP. MacLaren lost his seat at the next election (1931) and the act was repealed. MacLaren tried again with a private member&#x27;s bill in 1937; it was rejected 141 to 118.

Labour Land Campaign advocates within the Labour Party and the broader labour movement for &quot;a more equitable distribution of the Land Values that are created by the whole community&quot; through LVT. Its membership includes members of the British Labour Party, trade unions and cooperatives and individuals. The Liberal Democrats&#x27; ALTER (Action for Land Taxation and Economic Reform) aims:

The Green Party &quot;favour moving to a system of Land Value Tax, where the level of taxation depends on the rental value of the land concerned.&quot;

A course in &quot;Economics with Justice&quot; with a strong foundation in LVT is offered at the School of Economic Science, which was founded by Andrew MacLaren MP and has historical links with the Henry George Foundation.

=====Scotland=====

In February 1998, the Scottish Office of the British Government launched a public consultation process on land reform. A survey of the public response found that: &quot;excluding the responses of the lairds and their agents, reckoned as likely prejudiced against the measure, 20% of all responses favoured the land tax&quot; (12% in grand total, without the exclusions). The government responded by announcing &quot;a comprehensive economic evaluation of the possible impact of moving to a land value taxation basis&quot;. However, no measure was adopted.

In 2000 the Parliament&#x27;s Local Government Committee&#x27;s inquiry into local government finance explicitly included LVT, but the final report omitted any mention.

In 2003 the Scottish Parliament passed a resolution: &quot;That the Parliament notes recent studies by the Scottish Executive and is interested in building on them by considering and investigating the contribution that land value taxation could make to the cultural, economic, environmental and democratic renaissance of Scotland.&quot;

In 2004 a letter of support was sent from members of the Scottish Parliament to the organisers and delegates of the IU&#x27;s 24th international conference—including members of the Scottish Greens, the Scottish Socialist Party and the Scottish National Party.

The policy was considered in the 2006 Scottish Local Government Finance Review, whose 2007 Report concluded that &quot;although land value taxation meets a number of our criteria, we question whether the public would accept the upheaval involved in radical reform of this nature, unless they could clearly understand the nature of the change and the benefits involved... We considered at length the many positive features of a land value tax which are consistent with our recommended local property tax [LPT], particularly its progressive nature.&quot; However, &quot;[h]aving considered both rateable value and land value as the basis for taxation, we concur with Layfield (UK Committee of Inquiry, 1976) who recommended that any local property tax should be based on capital values.&quot;

In 2009, Glasgow City Council resolved to introduce LVT by saying &quot;the idea could become the blueprint for Scotland&#x27;s future local taxation&quot;. The Council agreed to a &quot;long term move to a local property tax / land value tax hybrid tax&quot;. Its Local Taxation Working Group stated that simple [non-hybrid] land value taxation should itself &quot;not be discounted as an option for local taxation reform: it potentially holds many benefits and addresses many existing concerns&quot;.

==Tax rates==
===EU countries===
==See also==

* Citizen&#x27;s dividend
* Classical economics
* Danegeld
* Ecotax
* Equity in taxation
* Excess profits tax
* Geographic information system
* Geolibertarianism
* Georgism
* Inheritance tax
* International Union for Land Value Taxation (The IU)
* Land (economics)
* Land monopolization and reform
* Land speculation
* Land tenure and registration
* Law of rent
* Lockean proviso
* Natural resource economics
* Open letter to Gorbachev
* Optimal tax
* Physiocracy
* Pigovian tax
* Progressive tax
* Property rights (economics)
* Property Tax
* Prosper Australia
* Rent-seeking
* Scottish League for the Taxation of Land Values
* Single tax
* Tax reform
* Tax shift
* Value capture
* Wealth tax
* Windfall tax

==References==

===Notes===
===Sources===
* 
==Further reading==
* 

==External sources==
*New South Wales Land Tax Management Act 1956 (Australia)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1057250" start="2" end="16" title="Land value tax" label="land value tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057250" start="18" end="21" title="Land value tax" label="LVT"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085066" start="49" end="53" title="land (economics)" label="land"/>
<link wikidata="Q41176" start="72" end="81" title="buildings" label="buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q499094" start="83" end="100" title="personal property" label="personal property"/>
<link wikidata="Q6484056" start="111" end="123" title="land improvement" label="improvements"/>
<link wikidata="Q615445" start="186" end="207" title="economic efficiency" label="economic inefficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055020" start="226" end="245" title="economic inequality" label="economic inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q509331" start="269" end="284" title="progressive tax" label="progressive tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165871" start="298" end="308" title="tax burden" label="tax burden"/>
<link wikidata="Q9381" start="576" end="586" title="Adam Smith" label="Adam Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q160270" start="591" end="604" title="David Ricardo" label="David Ricardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q355245" start="743" end="755" title="Henry George" label="Henry George"/>
<link wikidata="Q679595" start="788" end="796" title="Georgism" label="Georgism"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="1098" end="1105" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689528" start="1107" end="1114" title="Taxation in Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="1116" end="1125" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548019" start="1127" end="1133" title="Taxation in Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="1135" end="1144" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689557" start="1150" end="1156" title="Taxation in Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1213" end="1222" title="Taxation in Australia#Property taxes" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="1224" end="1231" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="1233" end="1239" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q199440" start="1241" end="1249" title="Mexicali" label="Mexicali"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1260" end="1273" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="1281" end="1293" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q607695" start="1580" end="1592" title="property tax" label="property tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q223639" start="1754" end="1771" title="Elasticity (economics)" label="essentially fixed"/>
<link wikidata="Q8981416" start="2100" end="2112" title="demand curve" label="demand curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q358063" start="2472" end="2487" title="deadweight loss" label="deadweight loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q295673" start="2609" end="2624" title="William Vickrey" label="William Vickrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q838964" start="2695" end="2708" title="Fred Foldvary" label="Fred Foldvary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1739536" start="2967" end="2977" title="inner city" label="inner city"/>
<link wikidata="Q192042" start="3112" end="3124" title="urban sprawl" label="urban sprawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q25280" start="3139" end="3163" title="Harrisburg, Pennsylvania" label="Harrisburg, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7610316" start="3234" end="3249" title="Stephen R. Reed" label="Stephen R. Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q295822" start="3370" end="3376" title="ecotax" label="ecotax"/>
<link wikidata="Q131062" start="3464" end="3478" title="urban planners" label="urban planners"/>
<link wikidata="Q374221" start="3528" end="3556" title="transit-oriented development" label="transit-oriented development"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007688" start="3681" end="3692" title="ground rent" label="ground rent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100466" start="3742" end="3755" title="present value" label="present value"/>
<link wikidata="Q186582" start="4066" end="4084" title="Real estate bubble" label="Real estate bubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428800" start="4109" end="4121" title="rent-seeking" label="rent-seeking"/>
<link wikidata="Q176494" start="4185" end="4194" title="recession" label="recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q509331" start="4868" end="4883" title="progressive tax" label="progressive tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165871" start="5011" end="5021" title="tax burden" label="tax burden"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5435" end="5478" title="Israeli land and property laws#Absentees&amp;#x27; Property Laws" label="Israel&amp;#x27;s Absentees&amp;#x27; Property Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571373" start="6087" end="6095" title="Planning permission" label="planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="7213" end="7240" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="United States Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q729054" start="7250" end="7274" title="William Paterson (judge)" label="Justice William Paterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435947" start="7321" end="7330" title="Assessor (property)" label="assessors"/>
<link wikidata="Q297079" start="7405" end="7420" title="Murray Rothbard" label="Murray Rothbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q46607" start="7539" end="7550" title="free market" label="free market"/>
<link wikidata="Q173582" start="7656" end="7664" title="gradient" label="gradient"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952580" start="7847" end="7868" title="multivariate analysis" label="multivariate analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q483130" start="8264" end="8293" title="geographic information system" label="geographic information system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523989" start="8458" end="8468" title="single tax" label="single tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q385503" start="8550" end="8561" title="tax revenue" label="tax revenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q183244" start="8679" end="8690" title="Physiocrats" label="Physiocrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q268617" start="8928" end="8935" title="economic surplus" label="surplus"/>
<link wikidata="Q305418" start="8999" end="9010" title="Abandonment (legal)" label="abandonment"/>
<link wikidata="Q672598" start="9111" end="9122" title="land titles" label="land titles"/>
<link wikidata="Q66493932" start="9127" end="9133" title="land ownership and tenure" label="tenure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165871" start="10772" end="10785" title="tax incidence" label="tax incidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q192042" start="11549" end="11561" title="urban sprawl" label="urban sprawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q6502151" start="11609" end="11620" title="tax evasion" label="tax evasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q672598" start="11717" end="11727" title="land registry" label="registered"/>
<link wikidata="Q815758" start="11906" end="11914" title="scarcity" label="scarcity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7912749" start="12273" end="12286" title="value capture" label="value capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q627364" start="12291" end="12303" title="public works" label="public works"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165871" start="12742" end="12752" title="tax burden" label="tax burden"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055020" start="12789" end="12808" title="economic inequality" label="economic inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q889514" start="13076" end="13086" title="crop yield" label="crop yield"/>
<link wikidata="Q755990" start="13101" end="13106" title="Rishi" label="Rishi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3457276" start="13419" end="13428" title="Apastamba" label="Apastamba"/>
<link wikidata="Q188903" start="13593" end="13600" title="Mencius" label="Mencius"/>
<link wikidata="Q521994" start="13969" end="13973" title="Hide (unit)" label="hide"/>
<link wikidata="Q183244" start="14142" end="14152" title="physiocrat" label="physiocrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q188094" start="14170" end="14179" title="economist" label="economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="14263" end="14274" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6484056" start="14278" end="14294" title="land development" label="land development"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="14307" end="14328" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048444" start="14413" end="14433" title="schools of economics" label="schools of economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q200435" start="14506" end="14516" title="free trade" label="free trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523989" start="14523" end="14533" title="single tax" label="single tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="14650" end="14656" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q221303" start="14766" end="14792" title="Anne Robert Jacques Turgot" label="Anne Robert Jacques Turgot"/>
<link wikidata="Q13575" start="14809" end="14825" title="François Quesnay" label="François Quesnay"/>
<link wikidata="Q437832" start="14885" end="14913" title="Charles Alexandre de Calonne" label="Charles Alexandre de Calonne"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14962" end="15019" title="Land value tax in the United States#History" label="early history of land value taxation in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q913401" start="15066" end="15082" title="Radicalism (historical)" label="Radical Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q126462" start="15084" end="15096" title="Thomas Paine" label="Thomas Paine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4693750" start="15120" end="15136" title="Agrarian Justice" label="Agrarian Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="15188" end="15194" title="Pound sterling" label="pounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q8561238" start="15599" end="15622" title="citizen&amp;#x27;s dividend" label="citizen&amp;#x27;s dividend"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009337" start="15636" end="15653" title="Geolibertarianism" label="Geolibertarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q327729" start="15655" end="15668" title="Thomas Spence" label="Thomas Spence"/>
<link wikidata="Q233562" start="15846" end="15867" title="The Wealth of Nations" label="The Wealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q355245" start="16054" end="16066" title="Henry George" label="Henry George"/>
<link wikidata="Q47555" start="16217" end="16236" title="political economist" label="political economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523989" start="16259" end="16269" title="single tax" label="single tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896920" start="16459" end="16479" title="Progress and Poverty" label="Progress and Poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q264259" start="16654" end="16667" title="economic rent" label="economic rent"/>
<link wikidata="Q679595" start="17020" end="17028" title="Georgism" label="Georgism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5721923" start="17084" end="17104" title="Henry George theorem" label="Henry George theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q8707" start="17146" end="17163" title="Meiji Restoration" label="Meiji Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3049252" start="17174" end="17189" title="Land Tax Reform (Japan 1873)" label="land tax reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="17425" end="17439" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="17490" end="17503" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q134982" start="17552" end="17570" title="David Lloyd George" label="David Lloyd George"/>
<link wikidata="Q166714" start="17575" end="17588" title="H. H. Asquith" label="H. H. Asquith"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="17719" end="17736" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360801" start="17762" end="17782" title="Liberal Party (UK, 1989)" label="modern Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q9624" start="17812" end="17829" title="Liberal Democrats (UK)" label="Liberal Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q9669" start="17970" end="18002" title="Green Party of England and Wales" label="Green Party of England and Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256956" start="18011" end="18026" title="Scottish Greens" label="Scottish Greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137312" start="18233" end="18249" title="County of London" label="County of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q335791" start="18306" end="18322" title="Herbert Morrison" label="Herbert Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="18531" end="18543" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000360" start="18737" end="18771" title="Town and country planning in the United Kingdom" label="Town and Country Planning Act 1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q269909" start="18910" end="18922" title="Andy Burnham" label="Andy Burnham"/>
<link wikidata="Q291169" start="18988" end="19001" title="Jeremy Corbyn" label="Jeremy Corbyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q694695" start="19025" end="19039" title="John McDonnell (politician)" label="John McDonnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="19070" end="19087" title="Taiwan" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q8573" start="19175" end="19186" title="Sun Yat-Sen" label="Sun Yat-Sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q675321" start="19218" end="19243" title="Kiautschou Bay concession" label="Kiautschou Bay concession"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="19358" end="19375" title="Republic of China" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q13529" start="19550" end="19565" title="Alfred Marshall" label="Alfred Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q313034" start="20075" end="20087" title="Arthur Cecil Pigou" label="Arthur Pigou"/>
<link wikidata="Q134982" start="20297" end="20309" title="Lloyd George" label="Lloyd George"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374979" start="20317" end="20337" title="People&amp;#x27;s Budget" label="People&amp;#x27;s Budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q102454" start="20362" end="20376" title="Paul Samuelson" label="Paul Samuelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q47426" start="20762" end="20777" title="Milton Friedman" label="Milton Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q131112" start="21090" end="21102" title="Paul Krugman" label="Paul Krugman"/>
<link wikidata="Q18430" start="21624" end="21639" title="Joseph Stiglitz" label="Joseph Stiglitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q956284" start="21942" end="21956" title="Michael Hudson (economist)" label="Michael Hudson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436211" start="22137" end="22145" title="Rentier capitalism" label="rentiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q681004" start="22173" end="22180" title="subsoil" label="subsoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q648510" start="22195" end="22213" title="natural monopoly" label="natural monopolies"/>
<link wikidata="Q443624" start="22407" end="22421" title="Rick Falkvinge" label="Rick Falkvinge"/>
<link wikidata="Q838964" start="22585" end="22598" title="Fred Foldvary" label="Fred Foldvary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="23220" end="23235" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q36687" start="23421" end="23429" title="Victoria, Australia" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q34366" start="23686" end="23694" title="Tasmania" label="Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="23800" end="23810" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q34932" start="24103" end="24123" title="Brisbane, Queensland" label="Brisbane, Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5729024" start="24147" end="24163" title="Henry Tax Review" label="Henry Tax Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472954" start="24254" end="24264" title="stamp duty" label="stamp duty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258" start="24404" end="24432" title="Australian Capital Territory" label="Australian Capital Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q822355" start="24567" end="24583" title="Bernard Clerfayt" label="Bernard Clerfayt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666897" start="24892" end="24907" title="L. D. Taylor" label="Louis D. Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="25359" end="25366" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="25942" end="25955" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q985" start="26006" end="26023" title="Baden-Württemberg" label="Baden-Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q985" start="26245" end="26262" title="Baden-Württemberg" label="Baden-Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="26284" end="26291" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q607695" start="26487" end="26499" title="property tax" label="property tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589428" start="26518" end="26546" title="Government rent in Hong Kong" label="Government rent in Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26598" end="26603" title="Rates (tax)#Hong Kong" label="rates"/>
<link wikidata="Q596660" start="26631" end="26646" title="New Territories" label="New Territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136014" start="26658" end="26669" title="New Kowloon" label="New Kowloon"/>
<link wikidata="Q199440" start="28053" end="28061" title="Mexicali, Mexico" label="Mexicali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255261" start="28348" end="28357" title="President of the Soviet Union" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="28358" end="28375" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Mikhail Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="28392" end="28398" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q79502" start="29587" end="29604" title="Fairhope Single Tax Corporation" label="single tax colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q79502" start="29608" end="29625" title="Fairhope, Alabama" label="Fairhope, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="30019" end="30031" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q444210" start="30167" end="30174" title="Altoona, Pennsylvania" label="Altoona"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="30408" end="30416" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146616" start="30452" end="30482" title="Movement for Democratic Change - Tsvangirai" label="Movement for Democratic Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="30551" end="30556" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="30669" end="30676" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664232" start="30714" end="30717" title="Local property tax (Ireland)" label="LVT"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30947" end="30960" title="Taxation in New Zealand#Land taxes" label="bring it back"/>
<link wikidata="Q7147412" start="31000" end="31020" title="Patrick O&amp;#x27;Regan (politician)" label="Patrick O&amp;#x27;Regan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817186" start="31025" end="31033" title="Tom Paul (politician)" label="Tom Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q134982" start="31170" end="31188" title="David Lloyd George" label="David Lloyd George"/>
<link wikidata="Q21561383" start="31213" end="31240" title="First Lord of the Admiralty" label="First Lord of the Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q847109" start="31256" end="31267" title="Dreadnought" label="Dreadnought"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="31417" end="31431" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q337483" start="31664" end="31678" title="Philip Snowden" label="Philip Snowden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4757841" start="31746" end="31764" title="Andrew MacLaren" label="Andrew MacLaren MP"/>
<link wikidata="Q30587581" start="31871" end="31897" title="private member&amp;#x27;s bill" label="private member&amp;#x27;s bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432427" start="32587" end="32613" title="School of Economic Science" label="School of Economic Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q4757841" start="32636" end="32651" title="Andrew MacLaren" label="Andrew MacLaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q5721877" start="32689" end="32712" title="Henry George Foundation of Great Britain" label="Henry George Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11311619" start="32757" end="32772" title="Scottish Office" label="Scottish Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q32521" start="33569" end="33587" title="Scottish Executive" label="Scottish Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q16995240" start="33916" end="33918" title="The IU" label="IU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256956" start="33981" end="33996" title="Scottish Greens" label="Scottish Greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q891900" start="34002" end="34026" title="Scottish Socialist Party" label="Scottish Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658" start="34035" end="34058" title="Scottish National Party" label="Scottish National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q130637" start="34862" end="34882" title="Glasgow City Council" label="Glasgow City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q8561238" start="35406" end="35429" title="Citizen&amp;#x27;s dividend" label="Citizen&amp;#x27;s dividend"/>
<link wikidata="Q271857" start="35432" end="35451" title="Classical economics" label="Classical economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q301742" start="35454" end="35462" title="Danegeld" label="Danegeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q295822" start="35465" end="35471" title="Ecotax" label="Ecotax"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35474" end="35492" title="Equity (economics)#Taxation" label="Equity in taxation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419534" start="35495" end="35513" title="Excess profits tax" label="Excess profits tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q483130" start="35516" end="35545" title="Geographic information system" label="Geographic information system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009337" start="35548" end="35565" title="Geolibertarianism" label="Geolibertarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q679595" start="35568" end="35576" title="Georgism" label="Georgism"/>
<link wikidata="Q628413" start="35579" end="35594" title="Inheritance tax" label="Inheritance tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q16995240" start="35597" end="35640" title="The IU" label="International Union for Land Value Taxation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085066" start="35652" end="35668" title="Land (economics)" label="Land (economics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6484102" start="35671" end="35690" title="Land monopoly" label="Land monopolization"/>
<link wikidata="Q208128" start="35695" end="35701" title="Land reform" label="reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q107885" start="35704" end="35720" title="Land speculation" label="Land speculation"/>
<link wikidata="Q66493932" start="35723" end="35734" title="Land tenure" label="Land tenure"/>
<link wikidata="Q672598" start="35739" end="35751" title="Land registration" label="registration"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503464" start="35754" end="35765" title="Law of rent" label="Law of rent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2978617" start="35768" end="35783" title="Lockean proviso" label="Lockean proviso"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299701" start="35786" end="35812" title="Natural resource economics" label="Natural resource economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q19087981" start="35815" end="35839" title="Open letter to Gorbachev" label="Open letter to Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q3516321" start="35842" end="35853" title="Optimal tax" label="Optimal tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q183244" start="35856" end="35867" title="Physiocracy" label="Physiocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q931921" start="35870" end="35882" title="Pigovian tax" label="Pigovian tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q509331" start="35885" end="35900" title="Progressive tax" label="Progressive tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q8799101" start="35903" end="35930" title="Property rights (economics)" label="Property rights (economics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q607695" start="35933" end="35945" title="Property Tax" label="Property Tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q7250866" start="35948" end="35965" title="Prosper Australia" label="Prosper Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428800" start="35968" end="35980" title="Rent-seeking" label="Rent-seeking"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437842" start="35983" end="36030" title="Scottish League for the Taxation of Land Values" label="Scottish League for the Taxation of Land Values"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523989" start="36033" end="36043" title="Single tax" label="Single tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346630" start="36046" end="36056" title="Tax reform" label="Tax reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689480" start="36059" end="36068" title="Tax shift" label="Tax shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q7912749" start="36071" end="36084" title="Value capture" label="Value capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q967719" start="36087" end="36097" title="Wealth tax" label="Wealth tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q228177" start="36100" end="36112" title="Windfall tax" label="Windfall tax"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143013" wikidata="Q355245" url="?curid=143013" title="Henry George">
<text>Henry George (September 2, 1839 – October 29, 1897) was an American political economist and journalist. His writing was immensely popular in 19th-century America and sparked several reform movements of the Progressive Era. He inspired the economic philosophy known as Georgism, the belief that people should own the value they produce themselves, but that the economic value of land (including natural resources) should belong equally to all members of society. George famously argued that a single tax on land values would create a more productive and just society.

His most famous work, &quot;Progress and Poverty&quot; (1879), sold millions of copies worldwide. The treatise investigates the paradox of increasing inequality and poverty amid economic and technological progress, the business cycle with its cyclic nature of industrialized economies, and the use of rent capture such as land value taxation and other anti-monopoly reforms as a remedy for these and other social problems. Other works by George defended free trade, the secret ballot, free (at marginal cost) public utilities/transportation provided by the capture of their resulting land rent uplift, Pigouvian taxation, and public ownership of other natural monopolies.

George was a journalist for many years, and the popularity of his writing and speeches brought him to run for election as Mayor of New York City in 1886. As the United Labor Party nominee in 1886 and in 1897 as the Jefferson Democracy Party nominee, he received 31 percent and 4 percent of the vote respectively and finished ahead of former New York State Assembly minority leader Theodore Roosevelt in the first race. After his death during the second campaign, his ideas were carried forward by organizations and political leaders through the United States and other Anglophone countries. The mid-20th century labor economist and journalist George Soule wrote that George was by far &quot;the most famous American economic writer&quot; and &quot;author of a book which probably had a larger world-wide circulation than any other work on economics ever written.&quot;

==Personal life==

George was born in Philadelphia to a lower-middle-class family, the second of ten children of Richard S. H. George and Catharine Pratt George (née Vallance). His father was a publisher of religious texts and a devout Episcopalian, and he sent George to the Episcopal Academy in Philadelphia. George chafed at his religious upbringing and left the academy without graduating. Instead he convinced his father to hire a tutor and supplemented this with avid reading and attending lectures at the Franklin Institute. His formal education ended at age 14, and he went to sea as a at age 15 in April 1855 on the &quot;Hindoo&quot;, bound for Melbourne and Calcutta. He ended up in the American West in 1858 and briefly considered prospecting for gold but instead started work the same year in San Francisco as a type setter.

In California, George fell in love with Annie Corsina Fox from Sydney, Australia. They met on her seventeenth birthday on October 12, 1860. She had been orphaned and was living with an uncle. The uncle, a prosperous, strong-minded man, was opposed to his niece&#x27;s impoverished suitor. But the couple, defying him, eloped and married on December 3, 1861, with Henry dressed in a borrowed suit and Annie bringing only a packet of books.

The marriage was a happy one, and four children were born to them. On November 3, 1862, Annie gave birth to Henry George Jr. (1862–1916), a future United States Representative from New York. Early on, even with the birth of future sculptor Richard F. George (1865–1912), the family was near starvation. George&#x27;s other two children were both daughters. The first was Jennie George, (c. 1867–1897), later to become Jennie George Atkinson. George&#x27;s other daughter was Anna Angela George (1878-1947), who would become mother of both future dancer and choreographer Agnes de Mille and future actress Peggy George, who was born Margaret George de Mille.

Following the birth of his second child, George had no work and no money and had to beg for food. As he approached the first well-dressed stranger he saw in the street, George, normally a lawful man, decided to rob him if he was unwilling to help. Fortunately, the man took pity on him and gave him five dollars.

George was raised as an Episcopalian, but he believed in &quot;deistic humanitarianism&quot;. His wife Annie was Irish Catholic, but Henry George Jr. wrote that the children were mainly influenced by Henry George&#x27;s deism and humanism.

=== Career in journalism ===
After deciding against gold mining in British Columbia, George was hired as a printer for the newly created San Francisco &quot;Times&quot;. He was able to immediately submit editorials for publication, including the popular &quot;What the Railroads Will Bring Us&quot; (1868), which remained required reading in California schools for decades. George climbed the ranks of the &quot;Times&quot;, eventually becoming managing editor in the summer of 1867.

George&#x27;s first nationally prominent writing was his 1869 essay &quot;The Chinese in California&quot;, in which he wrote that Chinese immigration should be ended before Chinese immigrants overrun the western United States.

George worked for several papers, including four years (1871–1875) as editor of his own newspaper, the &quot;San Francisco Daily Evening Post&quot;, and for a time running the &quot;Reporter&quot;, a Democratic anti-monopoly publication. George experienced four tough years of trying to keep his newspaper afloat and was eventually forced to go to the streets to beg. The George family struggled, but George&#x27;s improving reputation and involvement in the newspaper industry lifted them from poverty.

===Political and economic philosophy===
George began as a Lincoln Republican, then eventually became a Democrat. He was a strong critic of railroad and mining interests, corrupt politicians, land speculators, and labor contractors. He first articulated his views in an 1868 article entitled &quot;What the Railroad Will Bring Us.&quot; George argued that the boom in railroad construction would benefit only the lucky few who owned interests in the railroads and other related enterprises, while throwing the greater part of the population into abject poverty. This had led to him earning the enmity of the Central Pacific Railroad&#x27;s executives, who helped defeat his bid for election to the California State Assembly.

One day in 1871 George went for a horseback ride and stopped to rest while overlooking San Francisco Bay. He later wrote of the revelation that he had:

Furthermore, on a visit to New York City, he was struck by the apparent paradox that the poor in that long-established city were much worse off than the poor in less developed California. These observations supplied the theme and title for his 1879 book &quot;Progress and Poverty&quot;, which was a great success, selling over three million copies. In it George made the argument that a sizeable portion of the wealth created by social and technological advances in a free market economy is possessed by land owners and monopolists via economic rents, and that this concentration of unearned wealth is the main cause of poverty. 
George considered it a great injustice that private profit was being earned from restricting access to natural resources while productive activity was burdened with heavy taxes, and he indicated that such a system was equivalent to slavery. This is also the work in which he made the case for a land value tax in which governments would tax the value of the land itself, thus preventing private interests from profiting upon its mere possession but allowing the value of all improvements made to that land to remain with investors.

George was in a position to discover this pattern, having experienced poverty himself, knowing many different societies from his travels, and living in California at a time of rapid growth. In particular he had noticed that the construction of railroads in California was increasing land values and rents as fast as or faster than wages were rising.

==Political career==

George first ran for public office in 1869, when he sought the Democratic nomination for State Assembly. However, he refused to pay the party’s assessment fee, and was therefore ineligible for consideration. Despite this setback, he remained active in the California Democratic Party. Governor Henry Huntly Haight, impressed by the young journalist, recruited George to manage the party’s newspaper in Sacramento, and in 1871 he served as secretary of the Democratic state convention as it renominated Haight. Later that year, he finally received the party’s nomination for State Assembly, but was defeated alongside the rest of the ticket in a Republican landslide.

In the 1875 election, George campaigned for Democrat William Irwin, who handily won thanks to Republican vote splitting. A few months later, George was forced to give up the &quot;Evening Post&quot; due to a financial dispute with U.S. Senator John P. Jones. Unable to find work or provide for his family, George wrote to Governor Irwin, who rewarded him with the office of State Inspector of Gas Meters. George held that office from 1876 to 1880, during which he was able to write &quot;Progress and Poverty&quot;.

Around the same time, the anti-Chinese Workingmen&#x27;s Party led by Denis Kearney was seeing a meteoric rise in popularity. George supported the party and endorsed their platform, but took issue with Kearney himself. When California&#x27;s Second Constitutional Convention was called in 1878, George was nominated as a delegate on both the Democratic and Workingmen&#x27;s tickets, but lost the latter&#x27;s nomination after he refused to recognize Kearney as leader of the party. While an anti-Kearney faction still nominated him, his refusal to toe the party line cost him the election, though he still polled the highest of any Democrat in the district.

When the California State Legislature convened in 1881 to elect a U.S. Senator, State Senator Warren Chase nominated George. In his nomination speech, Chase eulogized George as follows:

George only received two votes out of 40 cast in the State Senate; one from Chase, and the other from fellow Workingmen&#x27;s Senator Joseph C. Gorman.

In 1880, now a popular writer and speaker, George moved to New York City, becoming closely allied with the Irish nationalist community despite being of English ancestry. From there he made several speaking journeys abroad to places such as Ireland and Scotland where access to land was (and still is) a major political issue.
In 1886, George campaigned for mayor of New York City as the candidate of the United Labor Party, the short-lived political society of the United Labor Party. He polled second, more than the Republican candidate Theodore Roosevelt. The election was won by Tammany Hall candidate Abram Stevens Hewitt by what many of George&#x27;s supporters believed was fraud. In the 1887 New York state elections, George came in a distant third in the election for Secretary of State of New York. The United Labor Party was soon weakened by internal divisions: the management was essentially Georgist, but as a party of organized labor it also included some Marxist members who did not want to distinguish between land and capital, many Catholic members who were discouraged by the excommunication of Father Edward McGlynn, and many who disagreed with George&#x27;s free trade policy. George had particular trouble with Terrence V. Powderly, president of the Knights of Labor, a key member of the United Labor coalition. While initially friendly with Powderly, George vigorously opposed the tariff policies which Powderly and many other labor leaders thought vital to the protection of American workers. George&#x27;s strident criticism of the tariff set him against Powderly and others in the labor movement. In 1897, George again ran for mayor of New York City. However, he had his fatal stroke during the campaign.

During George&#x27;s life, communities in Delaware and Alabama were developed based on his single tax on land and this legacy continued through applications in a number of areas around the world, including Australia, New Zealand and Taiwan.

==Death and funeral==
George&#x27;s first stroke occurred in 1890, after a global speaking tour concerning land rights and the relationship between rent and poverty. This stroke greatly weakened him, and he never truly recovered. Despite this, George tried to remain active in politics. Against the advice of his doctors, George campaigned for New York City mayor again in 1897, this time as an Independent Democrat, saying, &quot;I will make the race if I die for it.&quot; The strain of the campaign precipitated a second stroke, leading to his death four days before the election.

An estimated 100,000 people visited Grand Central Palace during the day to see Henry George&#x27;s face, with an estimated equal number crowding outside, unable to enter, and held back by police. After the Palace doors closed, the Reverend Lyman Abbott, Father Edward McGlynn, Rabbi Gustav Gottheil, R. Heber Newton (Episcopalian), and John Sherwin Crosby delivered addresses.

Separate memorial services were held elsewhere. In Chicago, five thousand people lined up to hear memorial addresses by former Illinois governor John Peter Altgeld and John Lancaster Spalding. Mayor Strong broke down and cried at a meeting, calling George a martyr.
&quot;The New York Times&quot; reported that later in the evening, an organized funeral procession of about 2,000 people left from the Grand Central Palace and made its way through Manhattan to the Brooklyn Bridge. This procession was &quot;all the way ... thronged on either side by crowds of silent watchers.&quot;

The procession then went on to Brooklyn, where the crowd at Brooklyn City Hall &quot;was the densest ever seen there.&quot; There were &quot;thousands on thousands&quot; at City Hall who were so far back that they could not see the funeral procession pass. It was impossible to move on any of the nearby streets. &quot;The Times&quot; wrote, &quot;Rarely has such an enormous crowd turned out in Brooklyn on any occasion,&quot; but that nonetheless, &quot;[t]he slow tolling of the City Hall bell and the regular beating of drums were the only sounds that broke the stillness. ... Anything more impressive ... could not be imagined.&quot; At Court Street, the casket was transferred to a hearse and taken to a private funeral at Fort Hamilton.

Commentators disagreed on whether it was the largest funeral in New York history or the largest since the death of Abraham Lincoln. &quot;The New York Times&quot; reported, &quot;Not even Lincoln had a more glorious death.&quot; Even the more conservative New York &quot;Sun&quot; wrote that, &quot;Since the Civil War, few announcements have been more startling than that of the sudden death of Henry George.&quot; Flags were placed at half-staff, even at Tammany Hall, which cancelled its rally for the day.

== Views and policy proposals ==
===Socialization of land and natural resource rents===

Henry George is best known for his argument that the economic rent of land (location) should be shared by society. The clearest statement of this view is found in &quot;Progress and Poverty&quot;: &quot;We must make land common property.&quot; By taxing land values, society could recapture the value of its common inheritance, raise wages, improve land use, and eliminate the need for taxes on productive activity. George believed it would remove existing incentives toward land speculation and encourage development, as landlords would not suffer tax penalties for any industry or edifice constructed on their land and could not profit by holding valuable sites vacant.

Broadly applying this principle is now commonly known as &quot;Georgism.&quot; In George&#x27;s time, it was known as the &quot;single-tax&quot; movement and sometimes associated with movements for land nationalization, especially in Ireland. However, in &quot;Progress and Poverty&quot;, George did not favor the idea of nationalization.

I do not propose either to purchase or to confiscate private property in land. The first would be unjust; the second, needless. Let the individuals who now hold it still retain, if they want to, possession of what they are pleased to call their land. Let them continue to call it their land. Let them buy and sell, and bequeath and devise it. We may safely leave them the shell, if we take the kernel. It is not necessary to confiscate land; it is only necessary to confiscate rent.

===Municipalization of utilities and free public transit===
George considered businesses relying on exclusive right-of-way land privilege to be &quot;natural&quot; monopolies. Examples of these services included the transportation of utilities (water, electricity, sewage), information (telecommunications), goods, and travelers. George advocated that these systems of transport along &quot;public ways&quot; should usually be managed as public utilities and provided for free or at marginal cost. In some cases, it might be possible to allow competition between private service providers along public &quot;rights of way,&quot; such as parcel shipping companies that operate on public roads, but wherever competition would be impossible, George supported complete municipalization. George said that these services would be provided for free because investments in beneficial public goods always tend to increase land values by more than the total cost of those investments. George used the example of urban buildings that provide free vertical transit, paid out of some of the increased value that residents derive from the addition of elevators.

===Intellectual property reform===
George was opposed to or suspicious of all intellectual property privilege, because his classical definition of &quot;land&quot; included &quot;all natural forces and opportunities.&quot; Therefore, George proposed to abolish or greatly limit intellectual property privilege. In George&#x27;s view, owning a monopoly over specific arrangements and interactions of materials, governed by the forces of nature, allowed title-holders to extract royalty-rents from producers, in a way similar to owners of ordinary land titles. George later supported limited copyright, on the ground that temporary property over a unique arrangement of words or colors did not in any way prevent others from laboring to make other works of art. George apparently ranked patent rents as a less significant form of monopoly than the owners of land title deeds, partly because he viewed the owners of locations as &quot;the robber that takes all that is left.&quot; People could choose not to buy a specific new product, but they cannot choose to lack a place upon which to stand, so benefits gained for labor through lesser reforms would tend to eventually be captured by owners and financers of location monopoly.

===Free trade===
George was opposed to tariffs, which were at the time both the major method of protectionist trade policy and an important source of federal revenue, the federal income tax having not yet been introduced. He argued that tariffs kept prices high for consumers, while failing to produce any increase in overall wages. He also believed that tariffs protected monopolistic companies from competition, thus augmenting their power. Free trade became a major issue in federal politics and his book &quot;Protection or Free Trade&quot; was the first book to be read entirely into the Congressional Record. It was read by five Democratic congressmen.

In 1997, Spencer MacCallum wrote that Henry George was &quot;undeniably the greatest writer and orator on free trade who ever lived.&quot;

In 2009, Tyler Cowen wrote that George&#x27;s 1886 book &quot;Protection or Free Trade&quot; &quot;remains perhaps the best-argued tract on free trade to this day.&quot;

Jim Powell said that &quot;Protection or Free Trade&quot; was probably the best book on trade written by anyone in the Americas, comparing it to Adam Smith&#x27;s &quot;Wealth of Nations&quot;. Milton Friedman said it was the most rhetorically brilliant work ever written on trade. Friedman also paraphrased one of George&#x27;s arguments in favor of free trade: &quot;It&#x27;s a very interesting thing that in times of war, we blockade our enemies in order to prevent them from getting goods from us. In time of peace we do to ourselves by tariffs what we do to our enemy in time of war.&quot;

===Secret ballot===
George was one of the earliest and most prominent advocates of the secret ballot in the United States. Harvard historian Jill Lepore asserts that Henry George&#x27;s advocacy is the reason Americans vote with secret ballots today. George&#x27;s first article in support of the secret ballot was entitled &quot;Bribery in Elections&quot; and was published in the &quot;Overland Review&quot; of December 1871. His second article was &quot;Money in Elections,&quot; published in the &quot;North American Review&quot; of March 1883. The first secret ballot reform approved by a state legislature was brought about by reformers who said they were influenced by George. The first state to adopt the secret ballot, also called The Australian Ballot, was Massachusetts in 1888 under the leadership of Richard Henry Dana III. By 1891, more than half the states had adopted it too.

===Money creation, banking, and national deficit reform===
George supported the use of &quot;debt free&quot; (sovereign money) currency, such as the greenback, which governments would spend into circulation to help finance public spending through the capture of seigniorage rents. He opposed the use of metallic currency, such as gold or silver, and fiat money created by private commercial banks.

===Citizen&#x27;s dividend and universal pension===
George advocated a citizen&#x27;s dividend paid for by a land value tax in an April 1885 speech at a Knights of Labor local in Burlington, Iowa titled &quot;The Crime of Poverty&quot;, and later in an interview with former U.S. House Representative David Dudley Field II from New York&#x27;s 7th congressional district published in the July 1885 edition of the &quot;North American Review&quot;:

George proposed to create a pension and disability system, and an unconditional basic income from surplus land rents. It would be distributed to residents &quot;as a right&quot; instead of as charity. Georgists often refer to this policy as a citizen&#x27;s dividend in reference to a similar proposal by Thomas Paine.

===Bankruptcy protection and an abolition of debtors&#x27; prisons===
George noted that most debt, though bearing the appearance of genuine capital interest, was not issued for the purpose of creating true capital, but instead as an obligation against rental flows from existing economic privilege. George therefore reasoned that the state should not provide aid to creditors in the form of sheriffs, constables, courts, and prisons to enforce collection on these illegitimate obligations. George did not provide any data to support this view, but in today&#x27;s developed economies, much of the supply of credit is created to purchase claims on future land rents, rather than to finance the creation of true capital. Michael Hudson and Adair Turner estimate that about 80 percent of credit finances real estate purchases, mostly land.

George acknowledged that this policy would limit the banking system but believed that would actually be an economic boon, since the financial sector, in its existing form, was mostly augmenting rent extraction, as opposed to productive investment. &quot;The curse of credit,&quot; George wrote, was &quot;... that it expands when there is a tendency to speculation, and sharply contracts just when most needed to assure confidence and prevent industrial waste.&quot; George even said that a debt jubilee could remove the accumulation of burdensome obligations without reducing aggregate wealth.

===Women&#x27;s suffrage===
George was an important and vocal advocate of women&#x27;s political rights. He argued for extending suffrage to women. George wrote, &quot;The cause of woman suffrage is steadily, though slowly and quietly making progress in public opinion. In a large and ever widening circle the women who want to vote are no longer deemed masculine nor the men who would have them vote, effeminate. The goal has not been reached and may yet be far off, but since the first woman’s rights convention was held in the United States forty years ago, great advances have been made..&quot;

===Other proposals===

Henry George also proposed and advocated the following reforms:
* Dramatic reductions in the size of the military.
* Replacement of contract patronage with the direct employment of government workers, with civil-service protections.
* Building and maintenance of free libraries.
* Campaign finance reform and political spending restrictions.
* Careful regulation of all monopolies. George advocated regulations to eliminate monopolies when possible and government ownership of monopolies as a policy of last resort.

==Legacy==
Henry George&#x27;s ideas on politics and economics had enormous influence in his time. His ideas gave rise to the economic philosophy now known as Georgism. However, his influence slowly waned through the 20th century. Nonetheless, it would be difficult to overstate George&#x27;s impact on turn-of-the-century reform movements and intellectual culture. George&#x27;s self-published &quot;Progress and Poverty&quot; was the first popular economics text and one of the most widely printed books ever written. The book&#x27;s explosive worldwide popularity is often marked as the beginning of the Progressive Era and various political parties, clubs, and charitable organizations around the world were founded on George&#x27;s ideas. George&#x27;s message attracts support widely across the political spectrum, including labor union activists, socialists, anarchists, libertarians, reformers, conservatives, and wealthy investors. As a result, Henry George is still claimed as a primary intellectual influence by both classical liberals and socialists. Edwin Markham expressed a common sentiment when he said, &quot;Henry George has always been to me one of the supreme heroes of humanity.&quot;

A large number of famous individuals, particularly Progressive Era figures, claim inspiration from Henry George&#x27;s ideas. John Peter Altgeld wrote that George &quot;made almost as great an impression on the economic thought of the age as Darwin did on the world of science.&quot; José Martí wrote, &quot;Only Darwin in the natural sciences has made a mark comparable to George&#x27;s on social science.&quot; In 1892, Alfred Russel Wallace stated that George&#x27;s &quot;Progress and Poverty&quot; was &quot;undoubtedly the most remarkable and important book of the present century,&quot; implicitly placing it above even &quot;The Origin of Species&quot;, which he had earlier helped develop and publicize.

Franklin D. Roosevelt praised George as &quot;one of the really great thinkers produced by our country&quot; and bemoaned the fact that George&#x27;s writings were not better known and understood. George&#x27;s views influenced the New Deal. Yet even several decades earlier, William Jennings Bryan wrote that George&#x27;s genius had reached the global reading public and that he &quot;was one of the foremost thinkers of the world.&quot; Former President Rutherford B. Hayes said of him: necessary? --&gt;

John Dewey wrote, &quot;It would require less than the fingers of the two hands to enumerate those who from Plato down rank with him,&quot; and that &quot;No man, no graduate of a higher educational institution, has a right to regard himself as an educated man in social thought unless he has some first-hand acquaintance with the theoretical contribution of this great American thinker.&quot; Albert Jay Nock wrote that anyone who rediscovers Henry George will find that &quot;George was one of the first half-dozen [greatest] minds of the nineteenth century, in all the world.&quot; The anti-war activist John Haynes Holmes echoed that sentiment by commenting that George was &quot;one of the half-dozen great Americans of the nineteenth century, and one of the outstanding social reformers of all time.&quot; Edward McGlynn said, &quot;[George] is one of the greatest geniuses that the world has ever seen, and ... the qualities of his heart fully equal the magnificent gifts of his intellect. ... He is a man who could have towered above all his equals in almost any line of literary or scientific pursuit.&quot; Likewise, Leo Tolstoy wrote that George was &quot;one of the greatest men of the 19th century.&quot;

The social scientist and economist John A. Hobson observed in 1897 that &quot;Henry George may be considered to have exercised a more directly powerful formative and educative influence over English radicalism of the last fifteen years than any other man,&quot; and that George &quot;was able to drive an abstract notion, that of economic rent, into the minds of a large number of &#x27;practical&#x27; men, and so generate therefrom a social movement. George had all the popular gifts of the American orator and journalist, with something more. Sincerity rang out of every utterance.&quot; Many others agree with Hobson. George Bernard Shaw, who created socialist organizations such as the Fabian Society, claims that Henry George was responsible for inspiring 5 out of 6 socialist reformers in Britain during the 1880s. The controversial People&#x27;s Budget and the &quot;Land Values (Scotland) Bill&quot; were inspired by Henry George and resulted in a constitutional crisis and the Parliament Act 1911 to reform of the House of Lords, which had blocked the land reform. In Denmark, the Danmarks Retsforbund, known in English as the Justice Party or Single-Tax Party, was founded in 1919. The party&#x27;s platform is based upon the land tax principles of Henry George. The party was elected to parliament for the first time in 1926, and they were moderately successful in the post-war period and managed to join a governing coalition with the Social Democrats and the Social Liberal Party from the years 1957–60, with diminishing success afterwards.

Non-political means have also been attempted to further the cause. A number of &quot;Single Tax Colonies&quot; were started, such as Arden, Delaware and Fairhope, Alabama. In 1904, Lizzie Magie created a board game called The Landlord&#x27;s Game to demonstrate George&#x27;s theories. This was later turned into the popular board game &quot;Monopoly&quot;. 

Joseph Jay &quot;J.J.&quot; Pastoriza led a successful Georgist movement in Houston. Though the Georgist club, the Houston Single Tax League, started there in 1890, Pastoriza lent use of his property to the league in 1903. He retired from the printing business in 1906 in order to dedicate his life to public service, then traveled the United States and Europe while studying various systems of taxing property. He returned to Houston and served as Houston Tax Commissioner from 1911 through 1917. He introduced his &quot;Houston Plan of Taxation&quot; in 1912: improvements to land and merchants&#x27; inventories were taxed at 25 percent of appraised value, unimproved land was taxed at 70 percent of appraisal, and personal property was exempt. However, in 1915, two courts ruled that the Houston Plan violated the Texas Constitution.

Before reading &quot;Progress and Poverty&quot;, Helen Keller was a socialist who believed that Georgism was a good step in the right direction. She later wrote of finding &quot;in Henry George&#x27;s philosophy a rare beauty and power of inspiration, and a splendid faith in the essential nobility of human nature.&quot; Some speculate that the passion, sincerity, clear explanations evident in Henry George&#x27;s writing account for the almost religious passion that many believers in George&#x27;s theories exhibit, and that the promised possibility of creating heaven on Earth filled a spiritual void during an era of secularization. Josiah Wedgwood, the Liberal and later Labour Party politician wrote that ever since reading Henry George&#x27;s work, &quot;I have known &#x27;that there was a man from God, and his name was Henry George.&#x27; I had no need hence-forth for any other faith.&quot;

Although both advocated worker&#x27;s rights, Henry George and Karl Marx were antagonists. Marx saw the Single Tax platform as a step backwards from the transition to communism. On his part, Henry George predicted that the forced introduction of socialism &quot;would, if carried to full expression, mean Egyptian despotism.&quot; Leo Tolstoy deplored that a silence had fallen around George, for he viewed Georgism as reasonable and realistic, as opposed to other utopian movements, and as a &quot;contribution to the enlightenment of the consciousness of mankind, placed on a practical footing,&quot; and that it could help do away with what he called the &quot;Slavery of Our Times&quot;.&quot; Upon Marx&#x27;s death, George admitted he has not read any of his works, which were untranslated into English at the time, but described hims as a man who &quot;so steadfastly, so patiently, and so self-sacrificingly labored for the freedom of the oppressed and the elevation of the downtrodden&quot;.

Henry George&#x27;s popularity waned gradually during the 20th century. However, there are still Georgist organizations. Many influential people who remain famous, such as George Bernard Shaw, were inspired by George or identify as Georgists. In his last book, &quot;Where do we go from here: Chaos or Community?&quot;, Martin Luther King Jr. referred to Henry George in support of a guaranteed minimum income. Bill Moyers quoted Henry George in a speech and identified George as a &quot;great personal hero.&quot; Albert Einstein wrote that &quot;Men like Henry George are rare unfortunately. One cannot imagine a more beautiful combination of intellectual keenness, artistic form and fervent love of justice. Every line is written as if for our generation. The spreading of these works is a really deserving cause, for our generation especially has many and important things to learn from Henry George.&quot;

Mason Gaffney, an American economist and a major Georgist critic of neoclassical economics, argued that neoclassical economics was designed and promoted by landowners and their hired economists to divert attention from George&#x27;s extremely popular philosophy that since land and resources are provided by nature, and their value is given by society, land valuerather than labor or capitalshould provide the tax base to fund government and its expenditures.

British MP, Andrew MacLaren believed George&#x27;s ideas of land taxation would bring about economic justice and argued in favour of them in the House of Commons. Together with his son Leon MacLaren he founded the School of Economic Science, a global organisation teaching Georgist principles.

Joseph Stiglitz wrote that &quot;One of the most important but underappreciated ideas in economics is the Henry George principle of taxing the economic rent of land, and more generally, natural resources.&quot; Stiglitz also claims that we now know land value tax &quot;is even better than Henry George thought.&quot;

The Robert Schalkenbach Foundation publishes copies of George&#x27;s works and related texts on economic reform and sponsors academic research into his policy proposals. The Lincoln Institute of Land Policy was founded to promote the ideas of Henry George but now focuses more generally on land economics and policy. The Henry George School of Social Science of New York and its satellite schools teach classes and conduct outreach.

===Henry George theorem===

In 1977, Joseph Stiglitz showed that under certain conditions, spending by the government on public goods will increase aggregate land rents by at least an equal amount. This result has been dubbed by economists the Henry George theorem, as it characterizes a situation where Henry George&#x27;s &quot;single tax&quot; is not only efficient, but also the only tax necessary to finance public expenditures.

==Economic contributions==
George reconciled the issues of efficiency and equity, showing that both could be satisfied under a system in harmony with natural law. He showed that Ricardo&#x27;s Law of Rent applied not just to an agricultural economy, but even more so to urban economics. And he showed that there is no inherent conflict between labor and capital provided one maintained a clear distinction between classical factors of production, capital and land.

George developed what he saw as a crucial feature of his own theory of economics in a critique of an illustration used by Frédéric Bastiat in order to explain the nature of interest and profit. Bastiat had asked his readers to consider James and William, both carpenters. James has built himself a plane and has lent it to William for a year. Would James be satisfied with the return of an equally good plane a year later? Surely not! He&#x27;d expect a board along with it, as interest. The basic idea of a theory of interest is to understand why. Bastiat said that James had given William over that year &quot;the power, inherent in the instrument, to increase the productivity of his labor,&quot; and wants compensation for that increased productivity.

George did not accept this explanation. He wrote, &quot;I am inclined to think that if all wealth consisted of such things as planes, and all production was such as that of carpenters – that is to say, if wealth consisted but of the inert matter of the universe, and production of working up this inert matter into different shapes – that interest would be but the robbery of industry, and could not long exist.&quot;

George&#x27;s theory had its share of critiques. Austrian school economist Eugen von Böhm-Bawerk, for example, expressed a negative judgment of George&#x27;s discussion of the carpenter&#x27;s plane. In his treatise, &quot;Capital and Interest&quot;, he wrote:

Later, George argued that the role of time in production is pervasive. In &quot;The Science of Political Economy&quot;, he writes:

According to Oscar B. Johannsen, &quot;Since the very basis of the Austrian concept of value is subjective, it is apparent that George&#x27;s understanding of value paralleled theirs. However, he either did not understand or did not appreciate the importance of marginal utility.&quot; On the contrary, George explicitly used marginal utility in his analyses of both the &#x27;margin of production&#x27; in macroeconomics and microeconomic decision theory.

Another spirited response came from British biologist T.H. Huxley in his article &quot;Capital – the Mother of Labour,&quot; published in 1890 in the journal &quot;The Nineteenth Century&quot;. Huxley used the scientific principles of energy to undermine George&#x27;s theory, arguing that, energetically speaking, labor is unproductive.

George&#x27;s writings were also a major influence on Sun Yat-sen&#x27;s program for modernizing China&#x27;s economy. Chiang Kai-shek and Soong Mei-ling praised George&#x27;s economic writings in the 1940s, well after they had stopped being a major topic in the United States.

==Works==
* &quot;Our Land and Land Policy&quot; 1871
* &quot;Progress and Poverty&quot; 1879 (unabridged text)
* &quot;&quot;The Irish Land Question&quot; &quot; 1881 
* &quot;Social Problems&quot; 1883
* &quot;Protection or Free Trade&quot; 1886 unabridged text (1905), alternate 
* &quot;The Standard, New York &quot; 1887 to 1890 A weekly periodical started and usually edited by Henry George.
* &quot;The condition of labor: an open letter to Pope Leo XIII; with encyclopedical letter of Pope Leo XIII, on the condition of labor &quot; 1891
* &quot;A Perplexed Philosopher&quot; 1892
* &quot;The land question : Property in land&quot; 1893
* &quot;Shortest road to the single tax&quot; 1893
* &quot;The Science of Political Economy&quot; (unfinished) 1898

==See also==

* Georgism
* Charles Hall – An early precursor to Henry George
* Henry George Birthplace
* Henry George Theorem
* History of the board game Monopoly
* Land Value Tax
* New York City mayoral elections
* Spaceship Earth
* Tammany Hall#1870-1900
==References==
== Further reading ==

* Barker, Charles Albro. &quot;Henry George&quot;. Oxford University Press (1955); Greenwood Press (1974). .
*Benestad, J. Brian. “A Catholic Response to Henry George’s Critique of Pope Leo XIII’s ‘Rerum Novarum.’” American Journal of Economics and Sociology 71, no. 4 (2012): 913–37. http://www.jstor.org/stable/41721431.
*Hudson, Michael. “Henry George’s Political Critics.” The American Journal of Economics and Sociology 67, no. 1 (2008): 1–46. http://www.jstor.org/stable/27739689.
*Istre, Logan S. &quot;The Enigma of San Francisco: Henry George and the Historians.&quot; &quot;Journal of the Gilded Age and Progressive Era&quot;, no. 1 (2025): 73-92. https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/journal-of-the-gilded-age-and-progressive-era/article/enigma-of-san-francisco-henry-george-and-the-historians/360EE21FBF392ED7B22F128036C3508B#article 
*Lough, Alex Wagner. “Henry George, Frederick Jackson Turner, and the ‘Closing’ of the American Frontier.” California History 89, no. 2 (2012): 4–54. https://doi.org/10.2307/23215319.
*O’Donnell, Edward T. “‘Though Not an Irishman’: Henry George and the American Irish.” The American Journal of Economics and Sociology 56, no. 4 (1997): 407–19. http://www.jstor.org/stable/3487325.
*Peter d’A. Jones. “Henry George and British Socialism.” The American Journal of Economics and Sociology 47, no. 4 (1988): 473–91. http://www.jstor.org/stable/3486564.

== External links ==

* 
* The Henry George Foundation (United Kingdom)
* Robert Schalkenbach Foundation
* Land Value Taxation Campaign (UK)
* The Henry George Foundation of Australia
* The Center for the Study of Economics
* The Henry George Institute – Understanding Economics
* The Henry George School, founded 1932.
* 
* Online Works of Henry George
* Wealth and Want 
* Prosper Australia
* Henry George Foundation OnlyMelbourne
* The Complete Works of Henry George . Publisher: New York, Doubleday, Page &amp; company, 1904. Description: 10 v. fronts (v. 1–9) ports. 21 cm. (searchable facsimile at the University of Georgia Libraries; DjVu &amp; layered PDF format)
* &quot;The Crime of Poverty&quot; by Henry George
* Centro Educativo Internacional Henry George (Managua, Nicaragua), in Spanish
* The Economics of Henry George&#x27;s &quot;Progress and Poverty&quot;, by Edgar H. Johnson, 1910.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q355245" start="0" end="12" title="Henry George" label="Henry George"/>
<link wikidata="Q47555" start="68" end="87" title="political economist" label="political economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635158" start="206" end="221" title="Progressive Era" label="Progressive Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q679595" start="268" end="276" title="Georgism" label="Georgism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085066" start="378" end="382" title="land (economics)" label="land"/>
<link wikidata="Q188460" start="394" end="410" title="natural resource" label="natural resource"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523989" start="492" end="502" title="single tax" label="single tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896920" start="596" end="616" title="Progress and Poverty" label="Progress and Poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q192311" start="787" end="801" title="business cycle" label="business cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057250" start="890" end="909" title="land value taxation" label="land value taxation"/>
<link wikidata="Q200435" start="1022" end="1032" title="free trade" label="free trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q337987" start="1038" end="1051" title="secret ballot" label="secret ballot"/>
<link wikidata="Q931921" start="1170" end="1188" title="Pigouvian taxation" label="Pigouvian taxation"/>
<link wikidata="Q785304" start="1363" end="1385" title="Mayor of New York City" label="Mayor of New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q85720313" start="1389" end="1393" title="1886 New York City mayoral election" label="1886"/>
<link wikidata="Q109510914" start="1402" end="1420" title="United Labor Party (New York)" label="United Labor Party"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1444" end="1448" title="New York City mayoral elections#1897 to 1913" label="1897"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470702" start="1582" end="1605" title="New York State Assembly" label="New York State Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="1622" end="1640" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q28076323" start="1884" end="1896" title="George Henry Soule Jr." label="George Soule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="2149" end="2161" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="2347" end="2359" title="Episcopalian" label="Episcopalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383283" start="2387" end="2404" title="Episcopal Academy" label="Episcopal Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q339484" start="2623" end="2641" title="Franklin Institute" label="Franklin Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="2766" end="2775" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="2780" end="2788" title="Kolkata" label="Calcutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="2917" end="2930" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q837721" start="2936" end="2947" title="Typesetting" label="type setter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3790548" start="3498" end="3514" title="Henry George Jr." label="Henry George Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="3537" end="3565" title="United States Representative" label="United States Representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q42944090" start="3865" end="3883" title="Anna George de Mille" label="Anna Angela George"/>
<link wikidata="Q394670" start="3961" end="3975" title="Agnes de Mille" label="Agnes de Mille"/>
<link wikidata="Q50331642" start="3995" end="4007" title="Peggy George" label="Peggy George"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645960" start="4476" end="4490" title="Irish Catholic" label="Irish Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3790548" start="4496" end="4512" title="Henry George Jr." label="Henry George Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q620629" start="4583" end="4588" title="deism" label="deism"/>
<link wikidata="Q46158" start="4593" end="4601" title="humanism" label="humanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12148490" start="4656" end="4667" title="Placer mining" label="gold mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="5880" end="5887" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="5888" end="5898" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="5925" end="5933" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053930" start="6429" end="6453" title="Central Pacific Railroad" label="Central Pacific Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026858" start="6519" end="6544" title="California State Assembly" label="California State Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q232264" start="6634" end="6651" title="San Francisco Bay" label="San Francisco Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896920" start="6960" end="6980" title="Progress and Poverty" label="Progress and Poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q46607" start="7169" end="7180" title="free market" label="free market"/>
<link wikidata="Q43637" start="7221" end="7232" title="monopoly" label="monopolists"/>
<link wikidata="Q264259" start="7237" end="7250" title="economic rent" label="economic rent"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="7563" end="7570" title="slavery" label="slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057250" start="7626" end="7640" title="land value tax" label="land value tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026858" start="8326" end="8340" title="California State Assembly" label="State Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020399" start="8493" end="8520" title="California Democratic Party" label="California Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q256181" start="8531" end="8550" title="Henry Huntly Haight" label="Henry Huntly Haight"/>
<link wikidata="Q18013" start="8639" end="8649" title="Sacramento" label="Sacramento"/>
<link wikidata="Q25025056" start="8882" end="8902" title="1871 California gubernatorial election" label="Republican landslide"/>
<link wikidata="Q25025053" start="8912" end="8925" title="1875 California gubernatorial election" label="1875 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="8949" end="8957" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q881348" start="8958" end="8971" title="William Irwin (California politician)" label="William Irwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="8999" end="9009" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="9136" end="9148" title="U.S. Senator" label="U.S. Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q548159" start="9149" end="9162" title="John P. Jones (Nevada politician)" label="John P. Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144708" start="9448" end="9460" title="Anti-Chinese sentiment" label="anti-Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q8034999" start="9461" end="9484" title="Workingmen&amp;#x27;s Party of California" label="Workingmen&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307314" start="9492" end="9505" title="Denis Kearney" label="Denis Kearney"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9646" end="9696" title="California Constitutional Conventions#Sacramento Convention of 1878–79" label="California&amp;#x27;s Second Constitutional Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084210" start="10092" end="10120" title="California State Legislature" label="California State Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q131160961" start="10133" end="10137" title="1881 United States Senate election in California" label="1881"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="10149" end="10161" title="U.S. Senator" label="U.S. Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1526814" start="10163" end="10176" title="California State Senator" label="State Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970107" start="10177" end="10189" title="Warren Chase" label="Warren Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1526814" start="10323" end="10335" title="California State Senate" label="State Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019931" start="10405" end="10421" title="California&amp;#x27;s 12th senatorial district" label="Joseph C. Gorman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021987" start="10531" end="10548" title="Irish nationalism" label="Irish nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344183" start="10576" end="10583" title="English Americans" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="10676" end="10684" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q85720313" start="10750" end="10757" title="1886 New York City mayoral election" label="In 1886"/>
<link wikidata="Q109510914" start="10889" end="10907" title="United Labor Party (New York)" label="United Labor Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="10962" end="10980" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q432139" start="11006" end="11018" title="Tammany Hall" label="Tammany Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738550" start="11029" end="11049" title="Abram Stevens Hewitt" label="Abram Stevens Hewitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015020" start="11118" end="11147" title="New York state election, 1887" label="1887 New York state elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148056" start="11200" end="11230" title="Secretary of State of New York" label="Secretary of State of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="11393" end="11400" title="Marxist" label="Marxist"/>
<link wikidata="Q8137" start="11458" end="11465" title="Capital (economics)" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="11472" end="11480" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q969958" start="11543" end="11557" title="Edward McGlynn" label="Edward McGlynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2404539" start="11655" end="11675" title="Terrence Powderly" label="Terrence V. Powderly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416650" start="11694" end="11710" title="Knights of Labor" label="Knights of Labor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12045" end="12052" title="New York City mayoral elections#1897 to 1913" label="In 1897"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="12387" end="12393" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q14706295" start="13017" end="13037" title="Grand Central Palace" label="Grand Central Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q983312" start="13221" end="13233" title="Lyman Abbott" label="Lyman Abbott"/>
<link wikidata="Q969958" start="13242" end="13256" title="Edward McGlynn" label="Edward McGlynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1555866" start="13264" end="13279" title="Gustav Gottheil" label="Gustav Gottheil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7273687" start="13281" end="13296" title="R. Heber Newton" label="R. Heber Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q16058799" start="13317" end="13336" title="John Sherwin Crosby" label="John Sherwin Crosby"/>
<link wikidata="Q372800" start="13504" end="13522" title="John Peter Altgeld" label="John Peter Altgeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q6243917" start="13527" end="13550" title="John Lancaster Spalding" label="John Lancaster Spalding"/>
<link wikidata="Q8014245" start="13552" end="13564" title="William Lafayette Strong" label="Mayor Strong"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="13631" end="13649" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q125006" start="13823" end="13838" title="Brooklyn Bridge" label="Brooklyn Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="13974" end="13982" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q929403" start="14003" end="14021" title="Brooklyn Borough Hall" label="Brooklyn City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471273" start="14672" end="14685" title="Fort Hamilton" label="Fort Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="14803" end="14818" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983260" start="14959" end="14962" title="The Sun (New York)" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q264259" start="15341" end="15354" title="economic rent" label="economic rent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896920" start="15457" end="15477" title="Progress and Poverty" label="Progress and Poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057250" start="15535" end="15553" title="land value tax" label="taxing land values"/>
<link wikidata="Q679595" start="16024" end="16032" title="Georgism" label="Georgism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17128254" start="16895" end="16907" title="Right-of-way (property access)" label="right-of-way"/>
<link wikidata="Q648510" start="16929" end="16959" title="natural monopoly" label="&amp;quot;natural&amp;quot; monopolies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951366" start="17223" end="17239" title="public utilities" label="public utilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105834" start="17244" end="17261" title="Free public transport" label="provided for free"/>
<link wikidata="Q382444" start="17268" end="17281" title="marginal cost" label="marginal cost"/>
<link wikidata="Q473003" start="17550" end="17566" title="municipalization" label="municipalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5721923" start="17681" end="17758" title="Henry George theorem" label="tend to increase land values by more than the total cost of those investments"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085066" start="18081" end="18097" title="land (economics)" label="&amp;quot;land&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q52389" start="19202" end="19209" title="tariffs" label="tariffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q179073" start="19259" end="19272" title="protectionist" label="protectionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308197" start="19334" end="19352" title="federal income tax" label="federal income tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251365" start="19677" end="19701" title="Protection or Free Trade" label="Protection or Free Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160952" start="19756" end="19776" title="Congressional Record" label="Congressional Record"/>
<link wikidata="Q7576124" start="19832" end="19849" title="Spencer MacCallum" label="Spencer MacCallum"/>
<link wikidata="Q602278" start="19972" end="19983" title="Tyler Cowen" label="Tyler Cowen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251365" start="20025" end="20049" title="Protection or Free Trade" label="Protection or Free Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q6197578" start="20134" end="20144" title="Jim Powell (historian)" label="Jim Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q9381" start="20279" end="20289" title="Adam Smith" label="Adam Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q233562" start="20303" end="20320" title="Wealth of Nations" label="Wealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q47426" start="20328" end="20343" title="Milton Friedman" label="Milton Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q337987" start="20818" end="20831" title="secret ballot" label="secret ballot"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="20854" end="20861" title="Harvard" label="Harvard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6192915" start="20872" end="20883" title="Jill Lepore" label="Jill Lepore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550749" start="21773" end="21782" title="United States Note" label="greenback"/>
<link wikidata="Q478641" start="21886" end="21897" title="seigniorage" label="seigniorage"/>
<link wikidata="Q8561238" start="22094" end="22117" title="citizen&amp;#x27;s dividend" label="citizen&amp;#x27;s dividend"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057250" start="22132" end="22146" title="land value tax" label="land value tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416650" start="22176" end="22192" title="Knights of Labor" label="Knights of Labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11851202" start="22193" end="22198" title="Local union" label="local"/>
<link wikidata="Q580182" start="22202" end="22218" title="Burlington, Iowa" label="Burlington, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="22298" end="22323" title="United States House of Representatives" label="U.S. House Representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q352906" start="22324" end="22345" title="David Dudley Field II" label="David Dudley Field II"/>
<link wikidata="Q13858946" start="22351" end="22393" title="New York&amp;#x27;s 7th congressional district" label="New York&amp;#x27;s 7th congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344093" start="22442" end="22463" title="North American Review" label="North American Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q678522" start="22552" end="22564" title="basic income" label="basic income"/>
<link wikidata="Q8561238" start="22715" end="22738" title="citizen&amp;#x27;s dividend" label="citizen&amp;#x27;s dividend"/>
<link wikidata="Q126462" start="22777" end="22789" title="Thomas Paine" label="Thomas Paine"/>
<link wikidata="Q956284" start="23511" end="23525" title="Michael Hudson (economist)" label="Michael Hudson"/>
<link wikidata="Q346975" start="23530" end="23542" title="Adair Turner, Baron Turner of Ecchinswell" label="Adair Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q96376104" start="24121" end="24133" title="debt jubilee" label="debt jubilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q679595" start="25525" end="25533" title="Georgism" label="Georgism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896920" start="25767" end="25787" title="Progress and Poverty" label="Progress and Poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635158" start="25973" end="25988" title="Progressive Era" label="Progressive Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q210918" start="26167" end="26185" title="political spectrum" label="political spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q794394" start="26394" end="26412" title="classical liberalism" label="classical liberals"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="26417" end="26427" title="socialists" label="socialists"/>
<link wikidata="Q5346648" start="26429" end="26442" title="Edwin Markham" label="Edwin Markham"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26581" end="26609" title="Georgism#Lists of Georgists" label="number of famous individuals"/>
<link wikidata="Q372800" start="26699" end="26717" title="John Peter Altgeld" label="John Peter Altgeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q103285" start="26857" end="26867" title="José Martí" label="José Martí"/>
<link wikidata="Q160627" start="26995" end="27016" title="Alfred Russel Wallace" label="Alfred Russel Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q20124" start="27206" end="27227" title="The Origin of Species" label="The Origin of Species"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="27287" end="27308" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q186356" start="27519" end="27527" title="New Deal" label="New Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q205282" start="27563" end="27585" title="William Jennings Bryan" label="William Jennings Bryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q35686" start="27744" end="27763" title="Rutherford B. Hayes" label="Rutherford B. Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q131805" start="27796" end="27806" title="John Dewey" label="John Dewey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634091" start="28190" end="28205" title="Albert Jay Nock" label="Albert Jay Nock"/>
<link wikidata="Q15460850" start="28403" end="28421" title="John Haynes Holmes" label="John Haynes Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q969958" start="28608" end="28622" title="Edward McGlynn" label="Edward McGlynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243" start="28923" end="28934" title="Leo Tolstoy" label="Leo Tolstoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q962155" start="29050" end="29064" title="John A. Hobson" label="John A. Hobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q913401" start="29214" end="29224" title="Radicalism (historical)" label="radicalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q19185" start="29637" end="29656" title="George Bernard Shaw" label="George Bernard Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q192186" start="29706" end="29720" title="Fabian Society" label="Fabian Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374979" start="29855" end="29875" title="People&amp;#x27;s Budget" label="People&amp;#x27;s Budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q15080258" start="30002" end="30021" title="Parliament Act 1911" label="Parliament Act 1911"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="30039" end="30053" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q3771782" start="30106" end="30126" title="Justice Party of Denmark" label="Danmarks Retsforbund"/>
<link wikidata="Q638836" start="30704" end="30719" title="Arden, Delaware" label="Arden, Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q79502" start="30724" end="30741" title="Fairhope, Alabama" label="Fairhope, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q273459" start="30752" end="30764" title="Lizzie Magie" label="Lizzie Magie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550933" start="30793" end="30817" title="The Landlord&amp;#x27;s Game" label="The Landlord&amp;#x27;s Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q17243" start="30913" end="30921" title="Monopoly (game)" label="Monopoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q18619622" start="30931" end="30968" title="Joseph Jay Pastoriza" label="Joseph Jay &amp;quot;J.J.&amp;quot; Pastoriza"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="31007" end="31014" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896920" start="31791" end="31811" title="Progress and Poverty" label="Progress and Poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q38203" start="31819" end="31831" title="Helen Keller" label="Helen Keller"/>
<link wikidata="Q679595" start="31866" end="31874" title="Georgism" label="Georgism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912529" start="32409" end="32424" title="Josiah Wedgwood, 1st Baron Wedgwood" label="Josiah Wedgwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="32430" end="32437" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="32448" end="32460" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q9061" start="32738" end="32747" title="Karl Marx" label="Karl Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="32921" end="32930" title="socialism" label="socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q179352" start="32989" end="32998" title="despotism" label="despotism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243" start="33006" end="33017" title="Leo Tolstoy" label="Leo Tolstoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q679595" start="33082" end="33090" title="Georgism" label="Georgism"/>
<link wikidata="Q679595" start="33774" end="33782" title="Georgism" label="Georgist"/>
<link wikidata="Q19185" start="33849" end="33868" title="George Bernard Shaw" label="George Bernard Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33897" end="33918" title="Georgism#Lists of Georgists" label="identify as Georgists"/>
<link wikidata="" start="33944" end="33989" title="Where do we go from here: Chaos or Community?" label="Where do we go from here: Chaos or Community?"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027" start="33997" end="34019" title="Martin Luther King Jr." label="Martin Luther King Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q2334593" start="34061" end="34086" title="guaranteed minimum income" label="guaranteed minimum income"/>
<link wikidata="Q605370" start="34088" end="34099" title="Bill Moyers" label="Bill Moyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="34192" end="34207" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783578" start="34589" end="34602" title="Mason Gaffney" label="Mason Gaffney"/>
<link wikidata="Q60571" start="34657" end="34679" title="neoclassical economics" label="neoclassical economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="35050" end="35060" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="British MP"/>
<link wikidata="Q4757841" start="35062" end="35077" title="Andrew MacLaren" label="Andrew MacLaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="35195" end="35211" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q16013251" start="35235" end="35248" title="Leon MacLaren" label="Leon MacLaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432427" start="35264" end="35290" title="School of Economic Science" label="School of Economic Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q18430" start="35345" end="35360" title="Joseph Stiglitz" label="Joseph Stiglitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057250" start="35594" end="35608" title="land value tax" label="land value tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q30296585" start="35668" end="35698" title="Robert Schalkenbach Foundation" label="Robert Schalkenbach Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932836" start="35838" end="35870" title="Lincoln Institute of Land Policy" label="Lincoln Institute of Land Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18430" start="36135" end="36150" title="Joseph Stiglitz" label="Joseph Stiglitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q272458" start="36219" end="36230" title="Public good (economics)" label="public good"/>
<link wikidata="Q5721923" start="36342" end="36362" title="Henry George theorem" label="Henry George theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q29524" start="36683" end="36694" title="natural law" label="natural law"/>
<link wikidata="Q13515" start="37121" end="37137" title="Frédéric Bastiat" label="Frédéric Bastiat"/>
<link wikidata="Q26911" start="37185" end="37191" title="Profit (economics)" label="profit"/>
<link wikidata="Q204260" start="37882" end="37888" title="plane (tool)" label="planes"/>
<link wikidata="Q311535" start="38250" end="38271" title="Eugen von Böhm-Bawerk" label="Eugen von Böhm-Bawerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q842271" start="38831" end="38847" title="marginal utility" label="marginal utility"/>
<link wikidata="Q184366" start="39081" end="39092" title="Thomas Henry Huxley" label="T.H. Huxley"/>
<link wikidata="Q8573" start="39420" end="39431" title="Sun Yat-sen" label="Sun Yat-sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16574" start="39485" end="39500" title="Chiang Kai-shek" label="Chiang Kai-shek"/>
<link wikidata="Q17135" start="39505" end="39519" title="Soong Mei-ling" label="Soong Mei-ling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896920" start="39707" end="39727" title="Progress and Poverty" label="Progress and Poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251365" start="39857" end="39881" title="Protection or Free Trade" label="Protection or Free Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q679595" start="40423" end="40431" title="Georgism" label="Georgism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567541" start="40434" end="40446" title="Charles Hall (economist)" label="Charles Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5721864" start="40486" end="40509" title="Henry George Birthplace" label="Henry George Birthplace"/>
<link wikidata="Q5721923" start="40512" end="40532" title="Henry George Theorem" label="Henry George Theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870756" start="40535" end="40569" title="History of the board game Monopoly" label="History of the board game Monopoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057250" start="40572" end="40586" title="Land Value Tax" label="Land Value Tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013332" start="40589" end="40620" title="New York City mayoral elections" label="New York City mayoral elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778319" start="40623" end="40638" title="Spaceship Earth" label="Spaceship Earth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40641" end="40663" title="Tammany Hall#1870-1900" label="Tammany Hall#1870-1900"/>
<link wikidata="Q334677" start="42744" end="42748" title="DjVu" label="DjVu"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143015" wikidata="Q8561238" url="?curid=143015" title="Citizen's dividend">
<text>Citizen&#x27;s dividend is a proposed policy based upon the Georgist principle that the natural world is the common property of all people. It is proposed that all citizens receive regular payments (dividends) from revenue raised by leasing or taxing the monopoly of valuable land and other natural resources.

== History ==
A concept akin to a citizen&#x27;s dividend was known in Classical Athens. In 483 BC, a massive new seam of silver was found in the Athenian silver mines at Laurium. The dispersal of this provoked great debate. The statesman Aristides proposed the profit from this should be distributed among the Athenian citizens. However he was opposed by Themistocles, who proposed the money be spent building warships for the Athenian navy. In the end, Themistocles&#x27; policy was the one adopted.

In the United Kingdom and United States, the idea can be traced back to Thomas Paine&#x27;s essay, &quot;Agrarian Justice&quot;, which is also considered one of the earliest proposals for a social security system. Thomas Paine summarized his view by stating that &quot;Men did not make the earth. It is the value of the improvements only, and not the earth itself, that is individual property. Every proprietor owes to the community a ground rent for the land which he holds.&quot; Paine saw inheritance as being partly a common fund and wanted to supplement the citizen&#x27;s dividend in a tax on inheritance transfers, but Georgist supporters now focus on natural resources.

== Implementations and proposals ==
This concept is a form of universal basic income (UBI), where the citizen&#x27;s dividend depends upon the value of natural resources or what could be titled as common goods like location values, seignorage, the electromagnetic spectrum, the industrial use of air (CO2 production), etc.

=== Permanent Fund Dividend implementation in Alaska ===
The U.S. state of Alaska dispenses a form of citizen&#x27;s dividend in its Permanent Fund dividend, which holds investments initially seeded by the state&#x27;s revenue from mineral resources, particularly petroleum. In 2005, every eligible Alaskan resident (including children) received a check for $845.76. Over the 24-year history of the fund, it has paid out a total of $24,775.45 to every resident. Some believe this dividend as the reason why Alaska has one of the lowest rates of inequality and relatively low levels of poverty compared to other US states. A 2018 paper found that the Alaska Permanent Fund &quot;dividend had no effect on employment, and increased part-time work by 1.8 percentage points (17 percent)... our results suggest that a universal and permanent cash transfer does not significantly decrease aggregate employment.&quot;

=== Carbon emissions reduction proposal ===
The concept is also promoted as a tool to reduce carbon emissions. Peter Barnes created the concept of &quot;Sky Trust&quot; as an example of how this could be implemented. Barnes proposes setting up a public trust to manage the funds, separate from the private sector being taxed. A calculation based on specific assets by Barnes estimates that American citizens could each get $5,000 per year by this model. 

=== Swiss experiment proposal ===
A Swiss campaign in 2013 advocated for a citizen&#x27;s income which could net each citizen an amount equivalent to $34,000. A citizens dividend based on resources according to Thomas Pogge is due to every citizen because everyone owns an inalienable stake in all limited natural resources. His theory goes along with Barnes with the exception of ownership, Pogge contends that the people own the resources. &quot;The Progress Report&quot; says that the dividend should be valued by the free market.

=== Maryland proposal ===
John Moser, a 2018 congressional candidate in Maryland, ran chiefly on the proposal that a citizen&#x27;s dividend based around a portion of all income would eliminate homelessness and hunger, and would act as a collective risk share as used in Nordic model nations.

=== New Physiocratic League ===
The New Physiocratic League, a project advocating for an economic reform revolving around shifting taxation towards land, advocates for a form of citizen&#x27;s dividend as part of its Three Pillars program of income support.

=== Citizen&#x27;s dividend proposal in India ===
Rahul Chimanbhai Mehta, an Indian politician, has proposed a form of citizen&#x27;s dividend. In his system, two-thirds of the royalty payments from mining and wireless spectrum, as well as the rent collected from some public land would be dispensed as monthly payments to all Indians above the age of seven. The remaining third would be allocated for the military. His proposal allocates less funds for parents who have more than four children and for legal minors but more funds for senior citizens. According to his estimate, this can result in a monthly income of approximately Rs. 1000 for every Indian.

=== Other proposals ===
Several philosophers and economists connect left-libertarian ideas with support for UBI. Of these, the most closely related theory to Georgism calls for a citizen&#x27;s dividend—that is, a UBI equal to the monetary rental value of natural resources and socially created wealth. Writers advocating citizen&#x27;s dividends include Peter Barnes (author of &quot;With Liberty and Dividends for All&quot;), economist Nic Tideman and activist Jeff Smith. Barnes proposes setting up a public &quot;Sky Trust&quot; to manage the funds creating from taxing pollution, greenhouse gases and other actions that deplete the value of shared natural resources.

Other theorists use left-libertarian insights without strictly connecting the monetary value of resource value with the level of UBI. Philippe Van Parijs makes a freedom-based argument for the highest sustainable UBI regardless of the value of natural resources, justified partly on the basis that the labor market is imperfectly competitive and produces a significant amount of &quot;job rents.&quot; Guy Standing uses many left-libertarian or &quot;[Thomas] Painist&quot; arguments for UBI, along with progressive and social-democratic arguments for UBI without committing to resource- or rent-based financing of UBI.

To reduce economic inequality to levels he considers more advantageous, Steven Pearlstein proposes a $3000 per year dividend for Americans completing K-12 education, with a requirement to at some point perform three years of public service (or, alternatively, profit sharing).

== See also ==

* Asset-based egalitarianism (basic capital)
* Carbon fee and dividend
* Common good
* Common land
* Common ownership
* Geolibertarianism
* Global resources dividend
* Land value tax
* Property-owning democracy
* Prosperity Bonus
* Public land
* Public property
* Redistribution of income and wealth
* Resource nationalism
* Social ownership
* Sovereign wealth fund
* State ownership
== Notes ==
== References ==
* Clive Lord. &quot;A Citizens’ Income&quot;. John Carpenter, 2003. .
* The Permanent Fund Dividend

== External links ==

* Alaska Permanent Fund Dividend
* Progress.org: Citizen&#x27;s Dividend
* Wealth and Want
* Citizen-ownership Democracy
* The New Physiocratic League</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8561238" start="0" end="23" title="Citizen&amp;#x27;s dividend" label="Citizen&amp;#x27;s dividend"/>
<link wikidata="Q679595" start="60" end="68" title="Georgist" label="Georgist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9828451" start="109" end="124" title="Commons" label="common property"/>
<link wikidata="Q181201" start="199" end="207" title="dividend" label="dividend"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085066" start="276" end="280" title="land (economics)" label="land"/>
<link wikidata="Q188460" start="291" end="307" title="natural resource" label="natural resource"/>
<link wikidata="Q844930" start="382" end="398" title="Classical Athens" label="Classical Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3219865" start="482" end="489" title="Laurium" label="Laurium"/>
<link wikidata="Q294942" start="550" end="559" title="Aristides" label="Aristides"/>
<link wikidata="Q179552" start="667" end="679" title="Themistocles" label="Themistocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="821" end="835" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="840" end="853" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q126462" start="886" end="898" title="Thomas Paine" label="Thomas Paine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4693750" start="919" end="935" title="Agrarian Justice" label="Agrarian Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002092" start="1004" end="1019" title="social security" label="social security"/>
<link wikidata="Q679595" start="1440" end="1448" title="Georgism" label="Georgist"/>
<link wikidata="Q678522" start="1555" end="1577" title="universal basic income" label="universal basic income"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117368" start="1690" end="1702" title="Common property" label="common goods"/>
<link wikidata="Q264259" start="1708" end="1723" title="Economic rent" label="location values"/>
<link wikidata="Q478641" start="1725" end="1735" title="seignorage" label="seignorage"/>
<link wikidata="Q133139" start="1741" end="1765" title="electromagnetic spectrum" label="electromagnetic spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="1892" end="1898" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061000" start="1950" end="1973" title="Permanent Fund Dividend" label="Permanent Fund dividend"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="2081" end="2090" title="petroleum" label="petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172679" start="2840" end="2852" title="Peter Barnes (entrepreneur)" label="Peter Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q66820" start="3396" end="3408" title="Thomas Pogge" label="Thomas Pogge"/>
<link wikidata="Q921098" start="3991" end="4003" title="Nordic model" label="Nordic model"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4323" end="4345" title="Rahul Chimanbhai Mehta" label="Rahul Chimanbhai Mehta"/>
<link wikidata="Q728265" start="4450" end="4466" title="royalty payments" label="royalty payments"/>
<link wikidata="Q902174" start="4483" end="4500" title="wireless spectrum" label="wireless spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3034648" start="4542" end="4553" title="public land" label="public land"/>
<link wikidata="Q8473" start="4679" end="4687" title="military" label="military"/>
<link wikidata="Q191089" start="4808" end="4823" title="senior citizens" label="senior citizens"/>
<link wikidata="Q831192" start="5001" end="5017" title="left-libertarian" label="left-libertarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q679595" start="5091" end="5099" title="Georgism" label="Georgism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172679" start="5288" end="5300" title="Peter Barnes (entrepreneur)" label="Peter Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345191" start="5740" end="5759" title="Philippe Van Parijs" label="Philippe Van Parijs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3122156" start="6008" end="6020" title="Guy Standing (economist)" label="Guy Standing"/>
<link wikidata="Q821102" start="6110" end="6121" title="Progressivism" label="progressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q121254" start="6126" end="6143" title="social-democratic" label="social-democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055020" start="6237" end="6256" title="economic inequality" label="economic inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q7615135" start="6299" end="6316" title="Steven Pearlstein" label="Steven Pearlstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151386" start="6377" end="6391" title="K-12 education" label="K-12 education"/>
<link wikidata="Q161837" start="6452" end="6466" title="public service" label="public service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419726" start="6487" end="6501" title="profit sharing" label="profit sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808778" start="6523" end="6549" title="Asset-based egalitarianism" label="Asset-based egalitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5441157" start="6568" end="6591" title="Carbon fee and dividend" label="Carbon fee and dividend"/>
<link wikidata="Q13534337" start="6594" end="6605" title="Common good" label="Common good"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259176" start="6608" end="6619" title="Common land" label="Common land"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117368" start="6622" end="6638" title="Common ownership" label="Common ownership"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009337" start="6641" end="6658" title="Geolibertarianism" label="Geolibertarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570881" start="6661" end="6686" title="Global resources dividend" label="Global resources dividend"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057250" start="6689" end="6703" title="Land value tax" label="Land value tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q65066100" start="6706" end="6731" title="Property-owning democracy" label="Property-owning democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7250897" start="6734" end="6750" title="Prosperity Bonus" label="Prosperity Bonus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3034648" start="6753" end="6764" title="Public land" label="Public land"/>
<link wikidata="Q702627" start="6767" end="6782" title="Public property" label="Public property"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155757" start="6785" end="6820" title="Redistribution of income and wealth" label="Redistribution of income and wealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315834" start="6823" end="6843" title="Resource nationalism" label="Resource nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190277" start="6846" end="6862" title="Social ownership" label="Social ownership"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061648" start="6865" end="6886" title="Sovereign wealth fund" label="Sovereign wealth fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396633" start="6889" end="6904" title="State ownership" label="State ownership"/>
<link wikidata="Q26236283" start="6936" end="6946" title="Clive Lord" label="Clive Lord"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143016" wikidata="Q2075365" url="?curid=143016" title="University of Puerto Rico">
<text>The University of Puerto Rico (Spanish: &quot;Universidad de Puerto Rico&quot;), often shortened to UPR, is the main public university system in the U.S. Commonwealth of Puerto Rico. It is a government-owned corporation with 11 campuses and approximately 44,200 students and approximately 4,450 faculty members. UPR has the largest and most diverse academic offerings in the commonwealth, with 472 academic programs of which 32 lead to a doctorate.

== History ==
In 1900, at Fajardo, the &quot;Escuela Normal Industrial&quot; (normal school) was established as the first higher education center in Puerto Rico. Its initial enrollment was 20 students and 5 professors. The following year it was moved to Río Piedras. On March 12, 1903, the legislature authorized founding of the University of Puerto Rico, and that day the &quot;Escuela Normal&quot; was proclaimed as its first department.


In 1908, the Morrill-Nelson Act was extended to Puerto Rico, making the university a &quot;Land Grant College,&quot; which authorizes the use of federal land to establish colleges of agriculture, science and engineering. Two years later, in 1910, the College of Liberal Arts was established and the year following that the College of Agriculture at Mayagüez came into being. In 1912, the name was changed to College of Agriculture and Mechanic Arts.

1913 – The Departments of Pharmacy and Law were established.

1923 – The University Act of 1923– the university reorganized administratively it independent Insular Department of Education, provides the Board of Trustees as the governing board, and make the position of Rector as the principal officer. In 1924 the governor appointed the first Rector.

1924 – The administrative structure and identity of the University of Puerto Rico becomes independent from the Department of Public Instruction.

1926 – The School of Commerce (later School of Business Administration) and the School of Tropical Medicine were established.

1927 – Opening of the first graduate program: the Master of Arts in Hispanic Studies.

1928 – The San Felipe Segundo hurricane struck the island of Puerto Rico and caused serious damage in the Río Piedras campus. Staff and faculty began a reconstruction effort.

1935 – The U.S. Congress extended to Puerto Rico the benefits of Bankhead-Jones Act, which provided funding for research and the construction of more buildings.

1936–1939 – Major structures in Spanish Renaissance style are built in the quadrangle in Río Piedras, including buildings such as the Tower Theatre.

1938 – Augusto Rodríguez composed the music and lyrics Arriví Francisco&#x27;s Alma Mater, the university anthem.

1942 – Act No. 135 of May 7, 1942, amendment to the university, created the Higher Education Council as the governing board of the institution and regulator of the higher education system in Puerto Rico.

1946 – The university received accreditation from the Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools.

1966 – Act No. 1 of 1966, restructuring the university. The system change to three campuses-Río Piedras, Mayagüez and Medical Sciences.

1967 – Creation of the regional colleges: Arecibo, Cayey and Humacao. Five more were created in the following years: Ponce (1969), Bayamón (1971), Aguadilla (1972), Carolina (1973), and Utuado (1978).

1979 – WRTU-FM began broadcasting from the Río Piedras campus.

1998 – Act No. 186 of August 7, 1998, provides for the gradual autonomy of regional schools as provided by the Board of Trustees, to lead to eleven autonomous units.

2010–2011 University of Puerto Rico strikes where a series of strikes which occurred as a result of administrative budget cuts and an attempt to impose an $800 quota for students.

July 2010, the Middle States Commission on Higher Education placed the accreditation of the university on probation citing concerns about shortfalls in the governance of the institution. By the end of 2011, all 11 campuses had regained full accreditation after demonstrating significant progress in this area.

2017 – The UPR&#x27;s staff organized a strike in opposition to budget cuts proposed by the Financial Oversight and Management Board for Puerto Rico.

After the impact of Hurricane Maria the university suffered damages totaling over $175 million. The university system was still in the process of acquiring FEMA funding to repair damages and as a result still suffered from structural damage months after the hurricane. The hurricane also affected the process of accreditation since eight campuses where in non compliance according to of the Middle States Commission on Higher Education. The eleven campuses opened within two months of Hurricane Maria, offering a sense of structure and normalcy for professors and students.

2019– During Jorge Haddock tenure the university newspaper, Diálogo, after 32 years in print, was moved online and employees were laid off until only the editor and an assistant remained. They were reassigned, while the newspaper was moved from the central administration to the Arecibo campus.

2021 – In June the Financial Oversight and Management Board cut $94 million from the UPR budget which would have drastically affected the institutions ability to operate. The local government intervened and assigned the money necessary before the August semester commenced.

==Organization==
===Board of trustees===
The board of trustees is the governing body of the University of Puerto Rico.

On April 30, 2013, governor Alejandro García Padilla signed into law Act 13 of 2014 enacted by the 17th Legislative Assembly. The act effectively replaced the incumbent board with an entirely new board. In 2017, the board was changed once again by governor Ricardo Rosselló.

===Campuses===

===Presidents===
===Campus radio===
The campus radio station is called &quot;WRTU Radio Universidad de Puerto Rico&quot;, and it was established in 1980. This is a public radio station with diverse musical and news programming. Its broadcasts both in FM and online.

==Admissions==
UPR has the highest selectivity index of all colleges and universities in Puerto Rico, it has also maintained a systemwide admission rate of 67% since 1997. Its enrollment rate has surpassed 90% during the past five academic years. In terms of tuition, the cost per credit is $157 per undergraduate credit and $300 per graduate credit. For perspective, in 2017 the undergraduate credit cost was $53 and the graduate credit cost was $172. The cost of undergraduate credit is expected to rise until it reaches $177 in 2027.

In recent years, the University of Puerto Rico has experienced a decrease in student enrollment numbers. According to the university&#x27;s reports, during the academic year 2009-2010, a total of 52,791 students were enrolled across all campuses. However, by the academic year 2014-2015, this number had decreased to 47,314 students, and in the academic year 2022-2023, the university had an enrollment of 44,233 students across its 11 campuses.

==Research==
The university has a classification of &quot;R2: Doctoral Universities – High research activity&quot;.

On October 15, 2010, it was awarded over $25 million from the National Science Foundation (NSF) to support research in nanotechnology. The organization within the University of Puerto Rico impacted is called Puerto Rico EPSCoR (Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research). Since its creation 24 years ago, Puerto Rico EPSCoR has received over $180 million from NSF, NASA, the U.S. Department of Energy, and the U.S. Department of Defense.

On August 24, 2020, the university announced ten investigations for preventing and mitigating the spread of COVID-19 as part of $1.7 million the institution received from the local government.

==Rankings and notable facts==
According to the QS world ranking 2022 published in 2021, the University of Puerto Rico ranks number 40 in Latin America having dropped from 37 in 2020, but still higher than previous rankings of 42 in 2018 and 62 in 2015.

As a system, the University of Puerto Rico placed in the 800–1000 bracket in the 2018 edition of QS World University Rankings. Times Higher Education also ranks it in the 801–1000 bracket in the world. UPR was ranked among the best 20 universities in Latin America by SCImago ranking in 2010. The University of Puerto Rico ranked 18th and University of Puerto Rico at Mayagüez ranked 78th by Webometrics in Latin America. The UPR is the number one university in the Caribbean according to Webometrics.

The system&#x27;s only school of engineering at the Mayagüez campus is accredited by ABET and graduates more than 600 engineers per year. The school was chosen as the top engineering school for Hispanics by &quot;Hispanic Engineer &amp; Information Technology Magazine&quot;.

In 2020 the director of NASA grant consortium in Puerto Rico doctor Gerardo Moller, stated that 25% of the Hispanic employees hired by NASA are graduates of the UPR.

Research activity, measured in terms of external funds received, has grown exponentially since 1985, doubling every five years. In 2007–2008 the UPR received over $87 million for research.

==Notable alumni==


==See also==

* School of Tropical Medicine
* 2010 University of Puerto Rico Strike

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
* Official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2075365" start="4" end="29" title="University of Puerto Rico" label="University of Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="31" end="38" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075365" start="100" end="103" title="University of Puerto Rico" label="UPR"/>
<link wikidata="Q13423117" start="117" end="134" title="List of state and territorial universities in the United States" label="public university"/>
<link wikidata="Q609591" start="149" end="166" title="Commonwealth (U.S. insular area)" label="U.S. Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="170" end="181" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q118176" start="191" end="219" title="List of government-owned corporations of Puerto Rico" label="government-owned corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q189533" start="398" end="414" title="academic program" label="academic program"/>
<link wikidata="Q849697" start="438" end="447" title="doctorate" label="doctorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q542833" start="476" end="483" title="Fajardo" label="Fajardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q627006" start="528" end="541" title="normal school" label="normal school"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="599" end="610" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q683206" start="704" end="715" title="Río Piedras" label="Río Piedras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066087" start="905" end="923" title="Morrill Land-Grant Acts" label="Morrill-Nelson Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q615150" start="983" end="1001" title="Land-grant university" label="Land Grant College"/>
<link wikidata="Q206392" start="2066" end="2094" title="1928 Okeechobee hurricane" label="San Felipe Segundo hurricane"/>
<link wikidata="Q4856294" start="2296" end="2314" title="Bankhead–Jones Act of 1935" label="Bankhead-Jones Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q236122" start="2433" end="2450" title="Renaissance architecture" label="Renaissance style"/>
<link wikidata="Q948438" start="2598" end="2621" title="Francisco Arriví" label="Arriví Francisco&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841600" start="2917" end="2966" title="Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools" label="Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896180" start="3539" end="3582" title="2010–2011 University of Puerto Rico strikes" label="2010–2011 University of Puerto Rico strikes"/>
<link wikidata="Q62005974" start="4071" end="4077" title="University of Puerto Rico strikes, 2017" label="strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q104861676" start="4123" end="4179" title="Financial Oversight and Management Board for Puerto Rico" label="Financial Oversight and Management Board for Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q40178187" start="4202" end="4217" title="Hurricane Maria" label="Hurricane Maria"/>
<link wikidata="Q503010" start="4338" end="4342" title="Federal Emergency Management Agency" label="FEMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q87677456" start="4770" end="4783" title="Jorge Haddock Acevedo" label="Jorge Haddock"/>
<link wikidata="Q188628" start="5373" end="5390" title="board of trustees" label="board of trustees"/>
<link wikidata="Q2832449" start="5476" end="5500" title="Alejandro García Padilla" label="Alejandro García Padilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q4553632" start="5547" end="5572" title="17th Legislative Assembly of Puerto Rico" label="17th Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7332181" start="5705" end="5721" title="Ricardo Rosselló" label="Ricardo Rosselló"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436229" start="5780" end="5792" title="campus radio" label="campus radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7955330" start="5817" end="5821" title="WRTU" label="WRTU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368380" start="5991" end="5993" title="FM broadcasting" label="FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q4223026" start="7026" end="7040" title="Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education" label="classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q304878" start="7171" end="7198" title="National Science Foundation" label="National Science Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11468" start="7228" end="7242" title="nanotechnology" label="nanotechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790510" start="8107" end="8135" title="QS World University Rankings" label="QS World University Rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="8261" end="8274" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896177" start="8349" end="8386" title="University of Puerto Rico at Mayagüez" label="University of Puerto Rico at Mayagüez"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238613" start="8402" end="8413" title="Webometrics Ranking of World Universities" label="Webometrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650304" start="8598" end="8602" title="ABET" label="ABET"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="8814" end="8818" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q15275697" start="9184" end="9211" title="School of Tropical Medicine (Puerto Rico)" label="School of Tropical Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896180" start="9214" end="9251" title="2010 University of Puerto Rico Strike" label="2010 University of Puerto Rico Strike"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143019" wikidata="Q2968590" url="?curid=143019" title="Bolsover Castle">
<text>Bolsover Castle is in the town of Bolsover (), in the north-east of the English county of Derbyshire. Built in the early 17th century, the present castle lies on the earthworks and ruins of the 12th-century medieval castle; the first structure of the present castle was built between 1612 and 1617 by Sir Charles Cavendish. The site is now in the care of the English Heritage charity, as both a Grade I listed building and a Scheduled Ancient Monument.

==History==
===Medieval===
The original castle was built by the Peverel family in the 12th century and became Crown property in 1155 when William Peverel the Younger died. The Ferrers family who were Earls of Derby laid claim to the Peverel property.

When a group of barons led by King Henry II&#x27;s sons – Henry the Young King, Geoffrey Duke of Brittany, and Prince Richard, later Richard the Lionheart – revolted against the King&#x27;s rule, Henry spent £116 on building at the castles of Bolsover and Peveril in Derbyshire. The garrison was increased to a force led by 20 knights and was shared with the castles of Peveril and Nottingham during the revolt. King John ascended the throne in 1199 after his brother Richard&#x27;s death. William de Ferrers, 4th Earl of Derby maintained the claim of the Earls of Derby to the Peveril estates. He paid John 2000 marks for the lordship of the Peak, but the Crown retained possession of Bolsover and Peveril Castles. John finally gave them to Ferrers in 1216 to secure his support in the face of country-wide rebellion. However, the castellan Brian de Lisle refused to hand them over. Although Lisle and Ferrers were both John&#x27;s supporters, John gave Ferrers permission to use force to take the castles. The situation was still chaotic when Henry III became king after his father&#x27;s death in 1216. Bolsover fell to Ferrers&#x27; forces in 1217 after a siege.

The castle was returned to crown control in 1223, at which point £33 was spent on repairing the damage the Earl of Derby had caused when capturing the castle six years earlier. Over the next 20 years, four towers were added, the keep was repaired, various parts of the curtain wall were repaired, and a kitchen and barn were built, all at a cost of £181. From 1290 onward, the castle and its surrounding manor were granted to a series of local farmers. Under their custodianship, the castle gradually fell into a state of disrepair.

===Post-medieval===
Bolsover Castle was granted to Francis Talbot, 5th Earl of Shrewsbury, by Edward VI in 1553. His son, the George Talbot, 6th Earl of Shrewsbury was the keeper of Mary, Queen of Scots at Chatsworth House. In 1574, two Scottish servants in the stable at Bolsover, Alexander Hamilton and John Stewart, were suspected of carrying letters secretly to Mary. Stewart mentioned that the bailiff of Bolsover was Henry Smith, Jane Mason was housekeeper, and the maids were Jane Jackson and Elizabeth Wise.

Following Shrewsbury&#x27;s death in 1590, his son Gilbert Talbot, 7th Earl of Shrewsbury, sold the ruins of Bolsover Castle to his step-brother and brother-in-law Sir Charles Cavendish, who wanted to build a new castle on the site. Working with the famous builder and designer Robert Smythson, Cavendish&#x27;s castle was designed for elegant living rather than defence, and was unfinished at the time of the two men&#x27;s deaths, in 1614 and 1617 respectively. Accounts survive for building the early stages of the &quot;Little Castle.&quot; Unusually for this period female labour was recorded, and the women&#x27;s names or husbands&#x27; names are given.

The building of the castle was continued by Cavendish&#x27;s two sons, William and John, who were influenced by the Italian-inspired work of the architect Inigo Jones. The tower, known today as the &#x27;Little Castle&#x27;, was completed around 1621. Construction was interrupted by the Civil Wars of 1642 to 1651, during which the castle was taken by the Parliamentarians, who slighted it, when it fell into a ruinous state.

William Cavendish, who was created Marquess of Newcastle in 1643 and Duke of Newcastle-upon-Tyne in 1665, added a new hall and staterooms to the Terrace Range, and by the time of his death in 1676 the castle had been restored to good order. The main usage of the building extended over twenty years, and it is presumed that the family lived at the castle towards the end of that period. It then passed through Margaret Bentinck, Duchess of Portland into the Bentinck family, and ultimately became one of the seats of the Earls and Dukes of Portland. After 1883, the castle was uninhabited, and in 1945 it was given to the nation by the William Cavendish-Bentinck, 7th Duke of Portland. The Ministry of Works stabilized the buildings and began opening portions to visitations by the public. The castle is now in the care of English Heritage and operated as a tourist attraction.

In October 2007 the television paranormal investigation show &quot;Most Haunted Live!&quot; visited the castle as part of their Halloween events on Living TV, and in 2017 the site was voted the most haunted site by English Heritage staff. &quot;Antiques Roadshow&quot; was held at the castle in July 2015.

Bolsover Castle is a Scheduled Ancient Monument, a &quot;nationally important&quot; historic building and archaeological site which has been given protection against unauthorised change. It is also a Grade I listed building (first listed in 1985) and recognised as an internationally important structure.

==Gallery==
==References==
;Bibliography
*


==Further reading==
*
==External links==

*Bolsover Castle page on English Heritage&#x27;s official site
*Photographs around the Castle
*Bolsover Castle on Google Arts &amp; Culture
*The Elysium Closet on Google Arts &amp; Culture
*Text of Ben Jonson&#x27;s &quot;Love’s Welcome at Bolsover&quot; 1634, Cambridge edition online</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2968590" start="0" end="15" title="Bolsover Castle" label="Bolsover Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2130058" start="34" end="42" title="Bolsover" label="Bolsover"/>
<link wikidata="Q23098" start="90" end="100" title="Derbyshire" label="Derbyshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2958696" start="305" end="322" title="Charles Cavendish (Nottingham MP)" label="Charles Cavendish"/>
<link wikidata="Q936287" start="359" end="375" title="English Heritage" label="English Heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="403" end="418" title="listed building" label="listed building"/>
<link wikidata="Q219538" start="425" end="451" title="Scheduled Ancient Monument" label="Scheduled Ancient Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016843" start="592" end="619" title="William Peverel the Younger" label="William Peverel the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q104852535" start="630" end="644" title="Ferrers family" label="Ferrers family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277265" start="654" end="668" title="Earls of Derby" label="Earls of Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q102140" start="741" end="756" title="Henry II of England" label="Henry II&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q235238" start="764" end="784" title="Henry the Young King" label="Henry the Young King"/>
<link wikidata="Q314550" start="786" end="811" title="Geoffrey II, Duke of Brittany" label="Geoffrey Duke of Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q42305" start="824" end="831" title="Richard I of England" label="Richard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345927" start="863" end="900" title="Revolt of 1173–1174" label="revolted against the King&amp;#x27;s rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q255574" start="962" end="969" title="Peveril Castle" label="Peveril"/>
<link wikidata="Q102083" start="1033" end="1039" title="knight" label="knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q17642916" start="1088" end="1098" title="Nottingham Castle" label="Nottingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q129308" start="1123" end="1127" title="John, King of England" label="John"/>
<link wikidata="Q8020786" start="1196" end="1233" title="William de Ferrers, 4th Earl of Derby" label="William de Ferrers, 4th Earl of Derby"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1319" end="1324" title="Mark (money)#England and Scotland" label="marks"/>
<link wikidata="Q18954088" start="1548" end="1562" title="Brian de Lisle" label="Brian de Lisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q160311" start="1751" end="1760" title="Henry III of England" label="Henry III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550557" start="2278" end="2283" title="manorialism" label="manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q80251" start="2459" end="2497" title="Francis Talbot, 5th Earl of Shrewsbury" label="Francis Talbot, 5th Earl of Shrewsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q83229" start="2502" end="2511" title="Edward VI" label="Edward VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q80271" start="2534" end="2571" title="George Talbot, 6th Earl of Shrewsbury" label="George Talbot, 6th Earl of Shrewsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q131412" start="2590" end="2610" title="Mary, Queen of Scots" label="Mary, Queen of Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068289" start="2614" end="2630" title="Chatsworth House" label="Chatsworth House"/>
<link wikidata="Q80230" start="2976" end="3014" title="Gilbert Talbot, 7th Earl of Shrewsbury" label="Gilbert Talbot, 7th Earl of Shrewsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q104861813" start="3093" end="3110" title="Charles Cavendish (1553–1617)" label="Charles Cavendish"/>
<link wikidata="Q349500" start="3203" end="3218" title="Robert Smythson" label="Robert Smythson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101373" start="3658" end="3665" title="William Cavendish, 1st Duke of Newcastle-upon-Tyne" label="William"/>
<link wikidata="Q295929" start="3742" end="3753" title="Inigo Jones" label="Inigo Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="3875" end="3885" title="English Civil War" label="Civil Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130553" start="3944" end="3960" title="Roundhead" label="Parliamentarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2238935" start="3966" end="3974" title="slighted" label="slighted"/>
<link wikidata="Q2411815" start="4084" end="4111" title="Duke of Newcastle-upon-Tyne" label="Duke of Newcastle-upon-Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q126219" start="4425" end="4463" title="Margaret Bentinck, Duchess of Portland" label="Margaret Bentinck, Duchess of Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q818276" start="4473" end="4488" title="Bentinck family" label="Bentinck family"/>
<link wikidata="Q128214" start="4536" end="4563" title="Earl of Portland" label="Earls and Dukes of Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q335583" start="4651" end="4699" title="William Cavendish-Bentinck, 7th Duke of Portland" label="William Cavendish-Bentinck, 7th Duke of Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q17110533" start="4705" end="4722" title="Ministry of Works (United Kingdom)" label="Ministry of Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q936287" start="4838" end="4854" title="English Heritage" label="English Heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q6916751" start="4961" end="4979" title="Most Haunted Live!" label="Most Haunted Live!"/>
<link wikidata="Q936287" start="5109" end="5125" title="English Heritage" label="English Heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052933" start="5139" end="5156" title="Antiques Roadshow" label="Antiques Roadshow"/>
<link wikidata="Q219538" start="5222" end="5248" title="Scheduled Ancient Monument" label="Scheduled Ancient Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q839954" start="5307" end="5326" title="archaeological site" label="archaeological site"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="5409" end="5424" title="listed building" label="listed building"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143021" wikidata="Q23495177" url="?curid=143021" title="Centers of gravity in non-uniform fields">
<text>In physics, a center of gravity of a material body is a point that may be used for a summary description of gravitational interactions. In a uniform gravitational field, the center of mass serves as the center of gravity. This is a very good approximation for smaller bodies near the surface of Earth, so there is no practical need to distinguish &quot;center of gravity&quot; from &quot;center of mass&quot; in most applications, such as engineering and medicine.

In a non-uniform field, gravitational effects such as potential energy, force, and torque can no longer be calculated using the center of mass alone. In particular, a non-uniform gravitational field can produce a torque on an object, even about an axis through the center of mass. The center of gravity seeks to explain this effect. Formally, a center of gravity is an application point of the resultant gravitational force on the body. Such a point may not exist, and if it exists, it is not unique. One can further define a unique center of gravity by approximating the field as either parallel or spherically symmetric.

The concept of a center of gravity as distinct from the center of mass is rarely used in applications, even in celestial mechanics, where non-uniform fields are important. Since the center of gravity depends on the external field, its motion is harder to determine than the motion of the center of mass. The common method to deal with gravitational torques is a field theory.

==Center of mass==

One way to define the center of gravity of a body is as the unique point in the body if it exists, that satisfies the following requirement: There is no torque about the point for any positioning of the body in the field of force in which it is placed. This center of gravity exists only when the force is uniform, in which case it coincides with the center of mass. This approach dates back to Archimedes.

==Centers of gravity in a field==
When a body is affected by a non-uniform external gravitational field, one can sometimes define a &quot;center of gravity&quot; relative to that field that will act as a point where the gravitational force is applied. Textbooks such as &quot;The Feynman Lectures on Physics&quot; characterize the center of gravity as a point about which there is no torque. In other words, the center of gravity is a point of application for the resultant force. Under this formulation, the center of gravity is defined as a point that satisfies the equation

:formula_1

where and are the total force and torque on the body due to gravity.

One complication concerning is that its defining equation is not generally solvable. If and are not orthogonal, then there is no solution; the force of gravity does not have a resultant and cannot be replaced by a single force at any point. There are some important special cases where and are guaranteed to be orthogonal, such as if all forces lie in a single plane or are aligned with a single point.

If the equation is solvable, there is another complication: its solutions are not unique. Instead, there are infinitely many solutions; the set of all solutions is known as the line of action of the force. This line is parallel to the weight . In general, there is no way to choose a particular point as the unique center of gravity. A single point may still be chosen in some special cases, such as if the gravitational field is parallel or spherically symmetric. These cases are considered below.

===Parallel fields===
Some of the inhomogeneity in a gravitational field may be modeled by a variable but parallel field: , where is some constant unit vector. Although a non-uniform gravitational field cannot be exactly parallel, this approximation can be valid if the body is sufficiently small. The center of gravity may then be defined as a certain weighted average of the locations of the particles composing the body. Whereas the center of mass averages over the mass of each particle, the center of gravity averages over the weight of each particle:

:formula_2

where is the (scalar) weight of the th particle and is the (scalar) total weight of all the particles. This equation always has a unique solution, and in the parallel-field approximation, it is compatible with the torque requirement.

A common illustration concerns the Moon in the field of the Earth. Using the weighted-average definition, the Moon has a center of gravity that is lower (closer to the Earth) than its center of mass, because its lower portion is more strongly influenced by the Earth&#x27;s gravity. This eventually lead to the Moon always showing the same face, a phenomenon known as tidal locking.

===Spherically symmetric fields===
If the external gravitational field is spherically symmetric, then it is equivalent to the field of a point mass at the center of symmetry . In this case, the center of gravity can be defined as the point at which the total force on the body is given by Newton&#x27;s Law:

:formula_3

where is the gravitational constant and is the mass of the body. As long as the total force is nonzero, this equation has a unique solution, and it satisfies the torque requirement. A convenient feature of this definition is that if the body is itself spherically symmetric, then lies at its center of mass. In general, as the distance between and the body increases, the center of gravity approaches the center of mass.

Another way to view this definition is to consider the gravitational field of the body; then is the apparent source of gravitational attraction for an observer located at . For this reason, is sometimes referred to as the center of gravity of &quot;relative to the point&quot; .

===Usage===
The centers of gravity defined above are not fixed points on the body; rather, they change as the position and orientation of the body changes. This characteristic makes the center of gravity difficult to work with, so the concept has little practical use.

When it is necessary to consider a gravitational torque, it is easier to represent gravity as a force acting at the center of mass, plus an orientation-dependent couple. The latter is best approached by treating the gravitational potential as a field.

==Notes==
==References==
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
* 
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="3" end="10" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945123" start="14" end="31" title="center of gravity" label="center of gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q558066" start="149" end="168" title="gravitational field" label="gravitational field"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945123" start="174" end="188" title="center of mass" label="center of mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q155640" start="520" end="536" title="potential energy" label="potential energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11402" start="538" end="543" title="force" label="force"/>
<link wikidata="Q48103" start="549" end="555" title="torque" label="torque"/>
<link wikidata="Q2880612" start="860" end="869" title="resultant force" label="resultant"/>
<link wikidata="Q184274" start="1201" end="1220" title="celestial mechanics" label="celestial mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8739" start="1882" end="1892" title="Archimedes" label="Archimedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q682339" start="2171" end="2202" title="The Feynman Lectures on Physics" label="The Feynman Lectures on Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q214159" start="2655" end="2665" title="orthogonal vector" label="orthogonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2186943" start="3136" end="3150" title="line of action" label="line of action"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="4299" end="4303" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="4324" end="4329" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q109144" start="4632" end="4645" title="tidal locking" label="tidal locking"/>
<link wikidata="Q134465" start="4937" end="4954" title="Newton&amp;#x27;s law of universal gravitation" label="Newton&amp;#x27;s Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q18373" start="4982" end="5004" title="gravitational constant" label="gravitational constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q253897" start="6103" end="6109" title="couple (mechanics)" label="couple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544012" start="6157" end="6180" title="gravitational potential" label="gravitational potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q185674" start="6186" end="6191" title="field (physics)" label="field"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143022" wikidata="Q5252563" url="?curid=143022" title="Deirdre Gogarty">
<text>Deirdre Gogarty (born 10 November 1969) is an Irish former female boxer who is coach of the Ragin&#x27; Cajun Boxing Club. She hails from Drogheda and attended Drogheda Grammar School. Before a law was passed in Ireland preventing women from engaging in boxing events, Gogarty was able to begin her career with a six-round decision win against Anne-Marie Griffin. However, when that law was passed, Gogarty could not engage in competition in Ireland. In consequence, she was based in Lafayette, Louisiana and was managed and trained by Beau Williford.

The law preventing females from participating in the sport of boxing in Ireland has since been revoked and there is an increasing number of females becoming involved with the sport thanks to its Olympic acceptance and the consistent international success of Katie Taylor.

After leaving Ireland, Gogarty&#x27;s next three fights took her to London and Kansas City, Missouri. In London, she defeated Jane Johnson twice, by a four-round knockout and by and eight-round decision. In Kansas City, she drew after six rounds with Stacy Prestage After the rematch with Johnson, she obtained her first knockout in the first round, beating Jane McGhee. Another win followed this and she was matched with Prestage again, resulting in another draw after six rounds.

Following the emerging pattern, another win followed this tie and she was matched against Prestage for a rubber match. However, this time Gogarty suffered her first loss when Prestage won a ten-round decision over her. Two more wins followed this defeat, including a six-round knockout of the top contender Carol Brown and a first-round knockout win over Missy Buchanan. In spite of this winning streak, Gogarty next lost a six-round decision when she faced Mary Ann Almager.

Gogarty followed this defeat with a win, after which she was matched with Isra Girgrah, whom Gogarty knocked out in three rounds. This is considered her biggest win to date. She then boxed another of female boxing&#x27;s top competitors when she faced Laura Serrano, who beat Gogarty by a knockout in round seven. A knockout win in the first round followed this defeat, when she fought Jessica Breitfelder. Gogarty then participated in the fight many credit as putting female boxing on the sports&#x27; fan page: she and Christy Martin faced each other in a six-round match that was televised by Showtime. This fight made the covers of many magazines. Many fans of women&#x27;s boxing considered it the female version of the Thrilla in Manila. Martin won by a six-round decision.

Gogarty succeeded in winning another three fights consecutively before she challenged Bonnie Canino for the Women&#x27;s International Boxing Federation&#x27;s Women&#x27;s World Featherweight Championship. Gogarty became a World Champion after winning the fight on a ten-round decision. This made her the first Irishwoman to win any boxing world title; the fight occurred in the United States in 1997. She defended her title against Monique Strohman and Debra Strohman. Both were defeated in first-round knockouts. In her last fight, Gogarty lost her title to Beverly Szymanski on a 10-round decision.

Gogarty co-wrote her memoir, &quot;My Call to the Ring: A Memoir of a Girl Who Yearns to Box&quot;, with Darrelyn Saloom. The book was published by Glasnevin Publishing on 8 August 2012. The next day, Katie Taylor won a gold medal for Ireland in the 2012 Summer Olympics, which included women&#x27;s boxing for the first time.

In 2015, Gogarty was inducted into the International Women&#x27;s Boxing Hall of Fame in Fort Lauderdale, Florida. The IWBHF was created by founder Sue TL Fox.

==Professional boxing record==

==References==
==External links==
* – official site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5252563" start="0" end="15" title="Deirdre Gogarty" label="Deirdre Gogarty"/>
<link wikidata="Q961015" start="59" end="71" title="Women&amp;#x27;s boxing" label="female boxer"/>
<link wikidata="Q207223" start="138" end="146" title="Drogheda" label="Drogheda"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308189" start="160" end="183" title="Drogheda Grammar School" label="Drogheda Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q32112" start="254" end="260" title="boxing" label="boxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q128891" start="484" end="504" title="Lafayette, Louisiana" label="Lafayette, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q262699" start="811" end="823" title="Katie Taylor" label="Katie Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="840" end="847" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="894" end="900" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q41819" start="905" end="926" title="Kansas City, Missouri" label="Kansas City, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="952" end="964" title="Jane Johnson (boxer)" label="Jane Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q668642" start="988" end="996" title="knockout" label="knockout"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1077" end="1091" title="Stacy Prestage" label="Stacy Prestage"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1184" end="1195" title="Jane McGhee" label="Jane McGhee"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1616" end="1627" title="Carol Brown (boxer)" label="Carol Brown"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1664" end="1678" title="Missy Buchanan" label="Missy Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19938224" start="1767" end="1783" title="Mary Ann Almager" label="Mary Ann Almager"/>
<link wikidata="Q12182187" start="1860" end="1872" title="Isra Girgrah" label="Isra Girgrah"/>
<link wikidata="Q50379670" start="2038" end="2051" title="Laura Serrano" label="Laura Serrano"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2172" end="2191" title="Jessica Breitfelder" label="Jessica Breitfelder"/>
<link wikidata="Q113499669" start="2222" end="2297" title="Christy Martin vs. Deirdre Gogarty" label="the fight many credit as putting female boxing on the sports&amp;#x27; fan page"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354099" start="2307" end="2321" title="Christy Martin (boxer)" label="Christy Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q23589" start="2382" end="2390" title="Showtime (TV network)" label="Showtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271324" start="2511" end="2528" title="Thrilla in Manila" label="Thrilla in Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q4942307" start="2653" end="2666" title="Bonnie Canino" label="Bonnie Canino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367360" start="2675" end="2719" title="Women&amp;#x27;s International Boxing Federation" label="Women&amp;#x27;s International Boxing Federation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3001" end="3017" title="Monique Strohman" label="Monique Strohman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3022" end="3036" title="Debra Strohman" label="Debra Strohman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3128" end="3145" title="Beverly Szymanski" label="Beverly Szymanski"/>
<link wikidata="Q262699" start="3372" end="3384" title="Katie Taylor" label="Katie Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q21189385" start="3538" end="3584" title="International Women&amp;#x27;s Boxing Hall of Fame" label="International Women&amp;#x27;s Boxing Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q165972" start="3588" end="3612" title="Fort Lauderdale, Florida" label="Fort Lauderdale, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3647" end="3657" title="Sue TL Fox" label="Sue TL Fox"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143023" wikidata="Q1440352" url="?curid=143023" title="Equatorial bulge">
<text>An equatorial bulge is a difference between the equatorial and polar diameters of a planet, due to the centrifugal force exerted by the rotation about the body&#x27;s axis. A rotating body tends to form an oblate spheroid rather than a sphere.

==On Earth==

The planet Earth has a rather slight equatorial bulge; its equatorial diameter is about greater than its polar diameter, with a difference of about of the equatorial diameter. If Earth were scaled down to a globe with an equatorial diameter of , that difference would be only . While too small to notice visually, that difference is still more than twice the largest deviations of the actual surface from the ellipsoid, including the tallest mountains and deepest oceanic trenches.

Earth&#x27;s rotation also affects the sea level, the imaginary surface used as a reference frame from which to measure altitudes. This surface coincides with the mean water surface level in oceans, and is extrapolated over land by taking into account the local gravitational potential and the centrifugal force.

The difference of the radii is thus about . An observer standing at sea level on either pole, therefore, is closer to Earth&#x27;s center than if standing at sea level on the Equator. As a result, the highest point on Earth, measured from the center and outwards, is the peak of Mount Chimborazo in Ecuador rather than Mount Everest. But since the ocean also bulges, like Earth and its atmosphere, Chimborazo is not as high above sea level as Everest is. Similarly the lowest point on Earth, measured from the center and outwards, is the Litke Deep in the Arctic Ocean rather than Challenger Deep in the Pacific Ocean. But since the ocean also flattens, like Earth and its atmosphere, Litke Deep is not as low below sea level as Challenger Deep is.

More precisely, Earth&#x27;s surface is usually approximated by an ideal oblate ellipsoid, for the purposes of defining precisely the latitude and longitude grid for cartography, as well as the &quot;center of the Earth&quot;. In the WGS-84 standard Earth ellipsoid, widely used for map-making and the GPS system, Earth&#x27;s radius is assumed to be to the Equator and to either pole, meaning a difference of between the radii or between the diameters, and a relative flattening of 1/298.257223563. The ocean surface is much closer to this standard ellipsoid than the solid surface of Earth is.

== The equilibrium as a balance of energies ==


Gravity tends to contract a celestial body into a sphere, the shape for which all the mass is as close to the center of gravity as possible. Rotation causes a distortion from this spherical shape; a common measure of the distortion is the flattening (sometimes called ellipticity or oblateness), which can depend on a variety of factors including the size, angular velocity, density, and elasticity.

A way for one to get a feel for the type of equilibrium involved is to imagine someone seated in a spinning swivel chair and holding a weight in each hand; if the individual pulls the weights inward towards them, work is being done and their rotational kinetic energy increases. The increase in rotation rate is so strong that at the faster rotation rate the required centripetal force is larger than with the starting rotation rate.

Something analogous to this occurs in planet formation. Matter first coalesces into a slowly rotating disk-shaped distribution, and collisions and friction convert kinetic energy to heat, which allows the disk to self-gravitate into a very oblate spheroid.

As long as the proto-planet is still too oblate to be in equilibrium, the release of gravitational potential energy on contraction keeps driving the increase in rotational kinetic energy. As the contraction proceeds, the rotation rate keeps going up, hence the required force for further contraction keeps going up. There is a point where the increase of rotational kinetic energy on further contraction would be larger than the release of gravitational potential energy. The contraction process can only proceed up to that point, so it halts there.

As long as there is no equilibrium there can be violent convection, and as long as there is violent convection friction can convert kinetic energy to heat, draining rotational kinetic energy from the system. When the equilibrium state has been reached then large scale conversion of kinetic energy to heat ceases. In that sense the equilibrium state is the lowest state of energy that can be reached.

The Earth&#x27;s rotation rate is still slowing down, though gradually, by about two thousandths of a second per rotation every 100 years. Estimates of how fast the Earth was rotating in the past vary, because it is not known exactly how the moon was formed. Estimates of the Earth&#x27;s rotation 500 million years ago are around 20 modern hours per &quot;day&quot;.

The Earth&#x27;s rate of rotation is slowing down mainly because of tidal interactions with the Moon and the Sun. Since the solid parts of the Earth are ductile, the Earth&#x27;s equatorial bulge has been decreasing in step with the decrease in the rate of rotation.

== Effect on gravitational acceleration ==

Because of a planet&#x27;s rotation around its own axis, the gravitational acceleration is less at the equator than at the poles. In the 17th century, following the invention of the pendulum clock, French scientists found that clocks sent to French Guiana, on the northern coast of South America, ran slower than their exact counterparts in Paris. Measurements of the acceleration due to gravity at the equator must also take into account the planet&#x27;s rotation. Any object that is stationary with respect to the surface of the Earth is actually following a circular trajectory, circumnavigating the Earth&#x27;s axis. Pulling an object into such a circular trajectory requires a force. The acceleration that is required to circumnavigate the Earth&#x27;s axis along the equator at one revolution per sidereal day is 0.0339 m/s2. Providing this acceleration decreases the effective gravitational acceleration. At the Equator, the effective gravitational acceleration is 9.7805 m/s2. This means that the true gravitational acceleration at the Equator must be 9.8144 m/s2 (9.7805 + 0.0339 = 9.8144).

At the poles, the gravitational acceleration is 9.8322 m/s2. The difference of 0.0178 m/s2 between the gravitational acceleration at the poles and the true gravitational acceleration at the Equator is because objects located on the Equator are about further away from the center of mass of the Earth than at the poles, which corresponds to a smaller gravitational acceleration.

In summary, there are two contributions to the fact that the effective gravitational acceleration is less strong at the equator than at the poles. About 70% of the difference is contributed by the fact that objects circumnavigate the Earth&#x27;s axis, and about 30% is due to the non-spherical shape of the Earth.

The diagram illustrates that on all latitudes the effective gravitational acceleration is decreased by the requirement of providing a centripetal force; the decreasing effect is strongest on the Equator.

== Effect on satellite orbits ==
The fact that the Earth&#x27;s gravitational field slightly deviates from being spherically symmetrical also affects the orbits of satellites through secular orbital precessions. They depend on the orientation of the Earth&#x27;s symmetry axis in the inertial space, and, in the general case, affect &quot;all&quot; the Keplerian orbital elements with the exception of the semimajor axis. If the reference &quot;z&quot; axis of the coordinate system adopted is aligned along the Earth&#x27;s symmetry axis, then only the longitude of the ascending node Ω, the argument of pericenter ω and the mean anomaly &quot;M&quot; undergo secular precessions.

Such perturbations, which were earlier used to map the Earth&#x27;s gravitational field from space, may play a relevant disturbing role when satellites are used to make tests of general relativity because the much smaller relativistic effects are qualitatively indistinguishable from the oblateness-driven disturbances.

== Formulation ==
The flattening formula_1 for the equilibrium configuration of a self-gravitating spheroid, composed of uniform density incompressible fluid, rotating steadily about some fixed axis, for a small amount of flattening, is approximated by:
formula_2

where 
*formula_3 is the universal gravitational constant,
*formula_4 is the mean radius,
*formula_5 and formula_6 are respectively the equatorial and polar radius,
*formula_7 is the rotation period and formula_8 is the angular velocity,
*formula_9 is the body density and formula_10 is the total body mass.

A related quantity is the body&#x27;s second dynamic form factor, :

: formula_11

with &quot;J&quot;2 for Earth,
where 
: is the central body&#x27;s oblateness,
: is central body&#x27;s equatorial radius ( for Earth),
: is the central body&#x27;s rotation rate ( for Earth),
: is the product of the universal constant of gravitation and the central body&#x27;s mass ( for Earth).

==Typical values==
Real flattening is smaller due to mass concentration in the center of celestial bodies.

== See also ==
*Clairaut&#x27;s theorem (gravity)
*Earth&#x27;s gravity
*Planetary flattening

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1440352" start="3" end="19" title="Equatorial bulge" label="equatorial bulge"/>
<link wikidata="Q23538" start="48" end="55" title="equator" label="equator"/>
<link wikidata="Q37221" start="69" end="77" title="diameter" label="diameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q634" start="84" end="90" title="planet" label="planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q178733" start="103" end="120" title="centrifugal force" label="centrifugal force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995427" start="136" end="144" title="Rotation around a fixed axis" label="rotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q208395" start="206" end="221" title="oblate spheroid" label="oblate spheroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q12507" start="236" end="242" title="sphere" label="sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="270" end="275" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q246526" start="693" end="710" title="list of mountain peaks by prominence" label="tallest mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q119253" start="723" end="737" title="oceanic trench" label="oceanic trench"/>
<link wikidata="Q244743" start="742" end="763" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s rotation" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s rotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q125465" start="781" end="790" title="sea level" label="sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q184876" start="824" end="839" title="reference frame" label="reference frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q190200" start="862" end="870" title="altitude" label="altitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q673166" start="1004" end="1027" title="gravity of Earth" label="gravitational potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q173817" start="1078" end="1083" title="radius" label="radii"/>
<link wikidata="Q183273" start="1144" end="1148" title="geographical pole" label="pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q14081" start="1341" end="1351" title="Chimborazo" label="Chimborazo"/>
<link wikidata="Q736" start="1355" end="1362" title="Ecuador" label="Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q513" start="1375" end="1388" title="Mount Everest" label="Mount Everest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230" start="1438" end="1452" title="atmosphere of Earth" label="its atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937156" start="1594" end="1604" title="Litke Deep" label="Litke Deep"/>
<link wikidata="Q788" start="1612" end="1624" title="Arctic Ocean" label="Arctic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q459173" start="1637" end="1652" title="Challenger Deep" label="Challenger Deep"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="1660" end="1673" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q208395" start="1879" end="1895" title="oblate ellipsoid" label="oblate ellipsoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q34027" start="1940" end="1948" title="latitude" label="latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q36477" start="1953" end="1962" title="longitude" label="longitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q42515" start="1972" end="1983" title="cartography" label="cartography"/>
<link wikidata="Q215848" start="2040" end="2046" title="World Geodetic System" label="WGS-84"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335878" start="2056" end="2071" title="Earth ellipsoid" label="Earth ellipsoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q18822" start="2108" end="2111" title="GPS" label="GPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155470" start="2120" end="2139" title="Earth radius" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s radius"/>
<link wikidata="Q212750" start="2275" end="2285" title="flattening" label="flattening"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440129" start="2310" end="2323" title="ocean surface" label="ocean surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q15316" start="2375" end="2388" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s crust" label="solid surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q11412" start="2452" end="2459" title="Gravity" label="Gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q12507" start="2502" end="2508" title="sphere" label="sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q107617" start="2593" end="2601" title="Rotation" label="Rotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q212750" start="2691" end="2701" title="flattening" label="flattening"/>
<link wikidata="Q161635" start="2809" end="2825" title="angular velocity" label="angular velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q29539" start="2827" end="2834" title="density" label="density"/>
<link wikidata="Q62932" start="2840" end="2850" title="Elasticity (physics)" label="elasticity"/>
<link wikidata="Q42213" start="3066" end="3070" title="Work (physics)" label="work"/>
<link wikidata="Q172881" start="3221" end="3238" title="centripetal force" label="centripetal force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297853" start="3631" end="3661" title="gravitational energy" label="gravitational potential energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q211702" start="5021" end="5028" title="ductile" label="ductile"/>
<link wikidata="Q30006" start="5241" end="5267" title="gravitational acceleration" label="gravitational acceleration"/>
<link wikidata="Q23538" start="5283" end="5290" title="equator" label="equator"/>
<link wikidata="Q183273" start="5303" end="5308" title="geographical pole" label="poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q41751" start="5362" end="5376" title="pendulum clock" label="pendulum clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3769" start="5422" end="5435" title="French Guiana" label="French Guiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="5462" end="5475" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q191747" start="5985" end="5997" title="sidereal day" label="sidereal day"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945123" start="6555" end="6569" title="center of mass" label="center of mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q26540" start="7347" end="7356" title="satellite" label="satellite"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7366" end="7373" title=" Secular variation" label="secular"/>
<link wikidata="Q272626" start="7546" end="7562" title="orbital elements" label="orbital elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q21143897" start="7589" end="7603" title="semimajor axis" label="semimajor axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q270897" start="7737" end="7768" title="longitude of the ascending node" label="longitude of the ascending node"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269302" start="7776" end="7798" title="argument of pericenter" label="argument of pericenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q216715" start="7809" end="7821" title="mean anomaly" label="mean anomaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="8044" end="8062" title="general relativity" label="general relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q212750" start="8209" end="8219" title="flattening" label="flattening"/>
<link wikidata="Q18373" start="8487" end="8509" title="gravitational constant" label="gravitational constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q161635" start="8672" end="8688" title="angular velocity" label="angular velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q212750" start="8911" end="8921" title="oblateness" label="oblateness"/>
<link wikidata="Q18373" start="9071" end="9094" title="gravitational constant" label="constant of gravitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068385" start="9267" end="9300" title="Clairaut&amp;#x27;s theorem (gravity)" label="Clairaut&amp;#x27;s theorem (gravity)"/>
<link wikidata="Q673166" start="9302" end="9322" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s gravity" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q106867959" start="9324" end="9344" title="Planetary flattening" label="Planetary flattening"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143026" wikidata="Q1645268" url="?curid=143026" title="Vineta">
<text>Vineta (sometimes &quot;Wineta&quot;) is the name of a legendary city at the southern coast of the Baltic Sea. The legend evolved around traditions about the Medieval emporium called Jumne, Jomsborg, Julin or similar names by the chronicles, and with which Vineta is sometimes identified.

==Legend==
There are several Vineta legends. All of them portray the Vinetans as having an excessive, voluptuous or blasphemous way of life and then being punished in a flood that took the city to the bottom of the Baltic. In some variants of the myth, the city or parts thereof reappear on certain days or can be seen from a boat, making the warning conveyed by the myth more tangible for the audience.

==Primary sources==
* About 965, Ibrahim ibn Jaqub wrote in Arabic letters about this city. The transcription might be &quot;Weltaba&quot;, which corresponds to modern Polish &quot;Wełtawa&quot; meaning roughly a place among waves.
* 1075/80, Adam of Bremen wrote about an emporium on an island in the Oder estuary, east of his Diocese, where Slavs, Barbarians and Greeks were supposed to live and Saxon merchants stayed for trade. Harald Bluetooth had once found refuge there. The oldest preserved manuscript, from the 11th century, has the spelling &quot;vimne&quot; or , and the second oldest manuscript, from around 1200, has and &quot;iumne&quot; or &quot;jumne&quot; (there is no distinction between v and u or i and j in the written Latin of that time). More recent copies of the text primarily use &quot;Jumne;&quot; in an early modern print the name is spelled &quot;Julinum&quot; and &quot;Juminem.&quot;
* Between 1140 and 1159, three vitae of Otto of Bamberg were written using the name &quot;Julin&quot; for the medieval place located at the site of the later town of Wolin.
* 1163/1168, Helmold of Bosau copied almost word for word the respective sentences written by Adam of Bremen. The oldest preserved handwriting of Helmolds chronicle (ca. 1300) has the place spelled , corrected by the copyist to &quot;iuḿta&quot; (abbreviation of &quot;iumenta&quot; or &quot;iumneta&quot;). Younger copies use &quot;Jumneta&quot; in the text, yet in the header of the respective chapter all copies use &quot;Vinneta.&quot;
* About 1170, the Nordic Knytlinga saga reported a siege of &quot;Jomsborg&quot; by the Dano-Norwegian king Magnus (1043) and a campaign against that place by the Danish king Valdemar I (1170).
* About 1190, Saxo Grammaticus reported the same campaign (1170) and Harald Bluetooth&#x27;s earlier stay there, but called the place &quot;Julin[um].&quot;

==Geographical place==

===Vineta Reef off Koserow / Damerow===
Some variants of the myth have Vineta sunken off Koserow (on the isle of Usedom). The historian Wilhelm Ferdinand Gadebusch from Swinemünde (Świnoujście) made this and other observations the basis for his thesis of Vineta&#x27;s location. According to Gadebusch, Wolin did not have the deep water port that Vineta must have had, and thus discarded the Wolin thesis (see below). David Chyträus in his 16th century &quot;Chronicon Saxoniae&quot; had Vineta &quot;beyond the Peene river near the village of &quot; which was a Vorwerk of Koserow. For Chyträus, Usedom was the land of the Vinetans, while Julin on the neighboring island of Wolin was inhabited by Pomoranians. Since no traces of Slavic settlement have been found on northwest Usedom, this thesis is no longer accepted.

===Ruden===
Several maps published between 1633 and 1700 have the sunken &quot;Wineta&quot; east of the island of Ruden northwest of Usedom. About 1700, reported it in the same spot. The origin of this thesis is the All Saints flood of 1306 that reduced Ruden and other small islands from a much larger landmass that prior to the flood had existed between Mönchgut and Usedom.

===Wolin===
Rudolf Virchow said: &quot;Vineta is Wollin!&quot; Based on the primary sources outlined above, in 1931/32 formulated the thesis that Vineta, Jumne, Julin, Jomsborg etc. are all different spellings used for the same place on the site of today&#x27;s town of Wolin. Beginning in the 1930s, and continued after the annexation of Wolin to Poland after World War II, archaeologists unearthed the remains of a large settlement there. Hofmeister&#x27;s thesis is the only mainstream thesis regarding the location of Vineta in today&#x27;s historiography.

===Barth===
A thesis formulated by Goldmann und Wermusch placed Vineta near Barth, pointing to a possibly different course of the Oder in the Middle Ages and a creative reading of the primary sources outlined above.

== In popular culture ==

=== Poems and music ===
*&quot;Vineta&quot;. poem by Wilhelm Müller (1794–1827), in &quot;Muscheln von der Insel Rügen&quot; (1825)
**Intonation by Johannes Brahms for Chor a cappella in six voices, op. 42 Nr. 2 (1860)
**Intonation by Achim Reichel, for the album &quot;Wilder Wassermann&quot; (2002)
*&quot;Seegespenst&quot;. Poem by Heinrich Heine (1797–1856), in &quot;Die Nordsee. 1. Abteilung&quot; (1826)
*Two texts by Ferdinand Freiligrath (1810–1876): Poem &quot;Meerfahrt&quot; (1838); &quot;Wilhelm Müller. Eine Geisterstimme&quot; (1872)
*&quot;Vineta-Glocken. Valse boston&quot; (1920er Jahre) by (Pseudonym of the Carynthian Johann Theimer)
*&quot;Vineta&quot; (1994). Concert piece and suite for Zither solo by Peter Kiesewetter
*&quot;Vineta&quot; (2001). Sinfonical poem by 
*&quot;Vineta&quot;. Song of the band Puhdys (&quot;Puhdys 1&quot;, 4. Titel)
*&quot;Vineta&quot;. Song by Michael Heck
*&quot;Vineta&quot;. Song from the De Plattfööt album Ierst mol ganz langsam
*&quot;Vineta&quot;. Planned 3. volume of the long poem &quot;Nautilus&quot; by Uwe Tellkamp
*&quot;Vineta&quot;. poetry collection by , 1998
* „Vineta“, Song by Josef Seiler (text) and (music)
* &quot;Vineta&quot;, Choral piece by Ēriks Ešenvalds (2009).
* „Vineta“ (2011). Song of the band (album „Übers Meer“, title 6)

=== Plays, festivals and opera ===
*&quot;Vineta&quot; (1863). Opera by Jan Nepomuk Škroup. First 1870 in Prague (Vineta; Czech)
*&quot;Vineta. Schauspiel.&quot; In: &quot;Zu spät.&quot; Vier Einakter (1902) by Marie Eugenie delle Grazie.
*&quot;The Baltic Legend; about the demise of the mythic city of Vineta&quot;, opera in three acts (1924) by Feliks Nowowiejski.
*&quot;Vineta. Die versunkene Stadt&quot; (1937). Play by Jura Soyfer
*&quot;Vineta&quot; (1960–67). Opera by Rudolf Mors (text und music). First 1968 in Bielefeld
*&quot;Vineta-Festspiele&quot; (since 1997). Open air theater festival of the in Ostseebühne Zinnowitz
*&quot;Republik Vineta&quot; (2000). Play by 
*&quot;Vineta (Oderwassersucht)&quot;. Play by (under the pseudonym Fritz Kater). First 2001 in Leipzig

=== In prose literature ===
*Elisabeth Bürstenbinder (pen name E. Werner): &quot;Vineta&quot;. Novel (1877)
*Theodor Fontane: &quot;Effi Briest&quot;. Novel (1895; c. 17: alluding Heinrich Heine&#x27;s &quot;Seegespenst&quot;)
*Selma Lagerlöf: &quot;The Wonderful Adventures of Nils&quot;. Novel (1906/07; contains a retelling of the myth)
*Oskar Loerke: &quot;Vineta&quot;. Essay(1907)
*: &quot;Vineta. Ein Gegenwartsroman aus künftiger Sicht&quot; (1955)
*Zofia Kossak-Szczucka, Zygmunt Szatkowski: &quot;Troja północy&quot; (&quot;Troy of North&quot;), Pax (1960) 
*Günter Grass: &quot;Der Butt&quot;. Novel (1977); &quot;Die Rättin&quot;. Novel (1986)
* Lawrence Norfolk: &quot;The Pope&#x27;s Rhinoceros&quot;. Novel (1996)
*: &quot;Das Mädchen aus Vineta&quot;. Essay (2000; tells the story of an unsuccessful attempt to deliver Vineta from its curse.)
*Uwe Tellkamp: &quot;&quot;. Essay (2004; draws parallels between Dresden and Vineta)
*: &quot;Die Glocken von Vineta&quot;. Novel (2007)
* Toni Glenn: &quot;Mappa Ordica&quot;, Adventure/Novel (2008)
* / (Oleg Yuriev): &quot;Винета&quot;. Novel (2007, Russian) / &quot;Die russische Fracht&quot;. Novel (2009, German translation)
*: &quot;Vinetas Träume fliegen&quot;, Historical fantasy novel, Otto-Johann-Verlag, Lubmin 2009
*Rolf Kahl: &quot;Rauher Wind am Birkhuhnsee&quot;, contains a travel to Jumne
*: &quot;Vineta&quot;, Literaturverlag Droschl 2013, 

=== Movies ===
*&quot;Vineta, the Sunken City&quot; (1923) by Werner Funck
*&quot;The Wonderful Adventures of Nils.&quot; anime (1980): Episode 15 – Die versunkene Stadt
*&quot;&quot; (2006) by , with Peter Lohmeyer

=== TV-series ===
*&quot;Küstenwache (ZDF), 21. Dezember 2011:&quot; „Der Fluch von Vineta“.

===Board games===
*&quot;Vineta&quot;

===Video games===
*The name of an ocean planet in &quot;Signalis&quot;.
*The name of a track in &quot;Wipeout Pure&quot;.

===Place names===
* In Berlin there is a Vineta Street (Vinetastraße) and a U-Bahn station.
* In Berlin there is also a Vineta square (Vinetaplatz) in Wedding, next to Swinemünder Straße and Wolliner Straße.
* The German Empire&#x27;s navy had the vessels &quot;Vineta&quot; ( of 1863, of 1897, of 1915, and SMS &quot;Möwe&quot;, briefly renamed &quot;Vineta&quot; in 1915)
* In 1903 a square in the center of , Kiel was named Vinetaplatz after SMS Vineta I.
* The (West) German navy from 1961 to 1992 had a mine sweeper „Vineta“ (M2652, Ariadne-class) in 3. Minensuchgeschwader.
* An artwork installation in near Leipzig is called „Vineta.“
* A rare German Empire stamp is called &quot;Vineta provisional&quot;.
* In Swakopmund, Namibia, there is a neighborhood Vineta.
* In Heidelberg there is a student fraternity &quot;Vineta&quot; since 1879.
* In Schleswig-Holstein there is a sports club named TSV Vineta Audorf.
* In Schleswig Holstein (Busdorf) there is a club called Disco-Vineta.
* In Europa-Park Rust (Baden), in the themed land &#x27;Scandinavia&#x27; there was an attraction &#x27;Sunken city &quot;Vineta&quot;&#x27;. It was destroyed in a fire in 2018 and may never be rebuilt.

==See also==
* Kitezh
* Ys

==References==
==Bibliography==
* : &quot;Vineta,&quot; die quellenkritische Lösung eines vielberufenen Problems, in Forschungen und Fortschritte, vol. 8 (1932), pp. 341–343.
* Carl Friedrich von Rumohr: &quot;Über das Verhältnis der seit lange gewöhnlichen Vorstellungen of einer prachtvollen Wineta zu unsrer positiven Kenntniß der Kultur und Kunst der deutschen Ostseeslaven.&quot; In: &quot;Sammlung für Kunst und Historie.&quot; Perthes &amp; Besser, Hamburg, Erster Band Erstes Heft. 1816. Digitalisat der Sächsischen Landesbibliothek- Staats- und Universitätsbibliothek
* : &quot;Geheimnis um Vineta. Legende und Wirklichkeit einer versunkenen Stadt.&quot; Der Kinderbuchverlag Berlin, 4. Auflage 1969.
* Ingrid Lange, P. Werner Lange: &quot;Vineta, Atlantis des Nordens.&quot; Urania-Verlag, Leipzig 1988, 
* , : &quot;Vineta. Die Wiederentdeckung einer versunkenen Stadt.&quot; Bergisch Gladbach 1999.
* Franz Wegener: &quot;Neu-Vineta. Die Rassesiedlungspläne der Ariosophen für die Halbinseln Darß und Zingst.&quot; KFVR 2010, 
* , &quot;Das Vineta Rätsel&quot;. Boddin 2011. .
* Albert Burkhardt von Hinstorff, &quot;Vineta. Sagen und Märchen vom Ostseestrand&quot;

===Further reading===
* The Baltic Sea : New Developments in National Politics and International Cooperation, 1997, edited by Renate Platzöder, Philomène A. Verlaan, 1997, . See: Part I, Chapter 1 by John P. Craven, &quot;Legend, History and Modern Times&quot;.

== External links ==
*Vineta-Festspiele in Zinnowitz auf Usedom
*Vineta-Museum in Barth
*Vineta-Sage auf den Seiten der Vinetastadt Barth</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1645268" start="0" end="6" title="Vineta" label="Vineta"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="99" end="109" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702716" start="190" end="198" title="Jomsborg" label="Jomsborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q504531" start="728" end="745" title="Ibrahim ibn Jaqub" label="Ibrahim ibn Jaqub"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="755" end="761" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q109244" start="938" end="952" title="Adam of Bremen" label="Adam of Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q552" start="997" end="1001" title="Oder" label="Oder"/>
<link wikidata="Q201041" start="1127" end="1143" title="Harald Bluetooth" label="Harald Bluetooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865287" start="1369" end="1419" title="minim (palaeography)" label="there is no distinction between v and u or i and j"/>
<link wikidata="Q77259" start="1650" end="1665" title="Otto of Bamberg" label="Otto of Bamberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862" start="1776" end="1781" title="Wolin (town)" label="Wolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q61177" start="1796" end="1812" title="Helmold of Bosau" label="Helmold of Bosau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753725" start="2248" end="2262" title="Knytlinga saga" label="Knytlinga saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q297194" start="2398" end="2408" title="Valdemar I of Denmark" label="Valdemar I"/>
<link wikidata="Q106837" start="2431" end="2447" title="Saxo Grammaticus" label="Saxo Grammaticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q654107" start="2688" end="2695" title="Koserow" label="Koserow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3255" start="2712" end="2718" title="Usedom" label="Usedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q41599" start="2768" end="2778" title="Swinemünde" label="Swinemünde"/>
<link wikidata="Q65468" start="3017" end="3031" title="David Chyträus" label="David Chyträus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658" start="3111" end="3116" title="Peene" label="Peene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635663" start="3162" end="3169" title="Folwark" label="Vorwerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q148505" start="3274" end="3279" title="Wolin" label="Wolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q464217" start="3534" end="3539" title="Ruden (island)" label="Ruden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3255" start="3553" end="3559" title="Usedom" label="Usedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648536" start="3636" end="3660" title="All Saints&amp;#x27; Flood (1304)" label="All Saints flood of 1306"/>
<link wikidata="Q316623" start="3776" end="3784" title="Mönchgut" label="Mönchgut"/>
<link wikidata="Q76432" start="3810" end="3824" title="Rudolf Virchow" label="Rudolf Virchow"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="4146" end="4152" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4159" end="4171" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q161943" start="4436" end="4441" title="Barth, Germany" label="Barth"/>
<link wikidata="Q57879" start="4656" end="4670" title="Wilhelm Müller" label="Wilhelm Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294" start="4751" end="4766" title="Johannes Brahms" label="Johannes Brahms"/>
<link wikidata="Q340453" start="4838" end="4851" title="Achim Reichel" label="Achim Reichel"/>
<link wikidata="Q44403" start="4938" end="4952" title="Heinrich Heine" label="Heinrich Heine"/>
<link wikidata="Q213719" start="5028" end="5049" title="Ferdinand Freiligrath" label="Ferdinand Freiligrath"/>
<link wikidata="Q500461" start="5328" end="5345" title="Peter Kiesewetter" label="Peter Kiesewetter"/>
<link wikidata="Q657976" start="5432" end="5438" title="Puhdys" label="Puhdys"/>
<link wikidata="Q6831049" start="5501" end="5513" title="Michael Heck" label="Michael Heck"/>
<link wikidata="Q489923" start="5549" end="5561" title="De Plattfööt" label="De Plattfööt"/>
<link wikidata="Q62892" start="5671" end="5683" title="Uwe Tellkamp" label="Uwe Tellkamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q338874" start="5986" end="6004" title="Jan Nepomuk Škroup" label="Jan Nepomuk Škroup"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6028" end="6034" title=":cs:Vineta" label="Vineta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484417" start="6125" end="6151" title="Marie Eugenie delle Grazie" label="Marie Eugenie delle Grazie"/>
<link wikidata="Q765533" start="6262" end="6280" title="Feliks Nowowiejski" label="Feliks Nowowiejski"/>
<link wikidata="Q45267" start="6340" end="6351" title="Jura Soyfer" label="Jura Soyfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2173451" start="6392" end="6403" title="Rudolf Mors" label="Rudolf Mors"/>
<link wikidata="Q205132" start="6539" end="6548" title="Zinnowitz" label="Zinnowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q90920" start="6729" end="6752" title="Elisabeth Bürstenbinder" label="Elisabeth Bürstenbinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q76632" start="6809" end="6824" title="Theodor Fontane" label="Theodor Fontane"/>
<link wikidata="Q44403" start="6880" end="6894" title="Heinrich Heine" label="Heinrich Heine"/>
<link wikidata="Q44519" start="6928" end="6942" title="Selma Lagerlöf" label="Selma Lagerlöf"/>
<link wikidata="Q726254" start="6950" end="6982" title="The Wonderful Adventures of Nils" label="The Wonderful Adventures of Nils"/>
<link wikidata="Q68110" start="7041" end="7053" title="Oskar Loerke" label="Oskar Loerke"/>
<link wikidata="Q218309" start="7158" end="7179" title="Zofia Kossak-Szczucka" label="Zofia Kossak-Szczucka"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7181" end="7199" title="Zygmunt Szatkowski" label="Zygmunt Szatkowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q6538" start="7269" end="7281" title="Günter Grass" label="Günter Grass"/>
<link wikidata="Q842750" start="7289" end="7297" title="Der Butt" label="Der Butt"/>
<link wikidata="Q765047" start="7325" end="7335" title="Die Rättin" label="Die Rättin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392155" start="7358" end="7374" title="Lawrence Norfolk" label="Lawrence Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q62892" start="7560" end="7572" title="Uwe Tellkamp" label="Uwe Tellkamp"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7988" end="7997" title="Rolf Kahl" label="Rolf Kahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q21869969" start="8143" end="8166" title="Vineta, the Sunken City" label="Vineta, the Sunken City"/>
<link wikidata="Q61221942" start="8183" end="8195" title="Werner Funck" label="Werner Funck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072208" start="8203" end="8235" title="The Wonderful Adventures of Nils (anime)" label="The Wonderful Adventures of Nils"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107" start="8243" end="8248" title="anime" label="anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q104741" start="8322" end="8336" title="Peter Lohmeyer" label="Peter Lohmeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q877138" start="8363" end="8374" title="Küstenwache (TV series)" label="Küstenwache"/>
<link wikidata="Q7932468" start="8457" end="8463" title="Vineta (board game)" label="Vineta"/>
<link wikidata="Q109828410" start="8527" end="8535" title="Signalis" label="Signalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3009561" start="8573" end="8585" title="Wipeout Pure" label="Wipeout Pure"/>
<link wikidata="Q570906" start="8670" end="8684" title="Vinetastraße (Berlin U-Bahn)" label="U-Bahn station"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8902" end="8922" title="SMS Möwe (1914)#Interlude as Vineta" label="SMS &amp;quot;Möwe&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707" start="9006" end="9010" title="Kiel" label="Kiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q319359" start="9281" end="9299" title="Vineta provisional" label="Vineta provisional"/>
<link wikidata="Q59698" start="9312" end="9322" title="Swakopmund" label="Swakopmund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="9324" end="9331" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247070" start="9357" end="9363" title="Vineta (Swakopmund)" label="Vineta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2966" start="9370" end="9380" title="Heidelberg" label="Heidelberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q159144" start="9590" end="9601" title="Europa-Park" label="Europa-Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q632924" start="9602" end="9614" title="Rust (Baden)" label="Rust (Baden)"/>
<link wikidata="Q621128" start="9804" end="9810" title="Kitezh" label="Kitezh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048500" start="9813" end="9815" title="Ys" label="Ys"/>
<link wikidata="Q646032" start="9994" end="10019" title="Carl Friedrich von Rumohr" label="Carl Friedrich von Rumohr"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143027" wikidata="Q2425849" url="?curid=143027" title="Aberdeen City Council">
<text>Aberdeen City Council is the local authority for Aberdeen City, one of the 32 council areas of Scotland. In its modern form it was created in 1996. Aberdeen was formerly governed by a corporation from when it was made a burgh in the twelfth century until 1975. Between 1975 and 1996 the city was governed by City of Aberdeen District Council, a lower-tier authority within the Grampian region.

The council has been under no overall control since 2002. Since 2022 it has been led by a Scottish National Party and Liberal Democrat coalition. It meets at Aberdeen Town House and has its main offices at the neighbouring Marischal College.

==History==
===Aberdeen Corporation===
Aberdeen was made a royal burgh by David I (reigned 1124–1153). 
The burgh of Aberdeen was governed by a corporation, also known as the town council. Elections for the council were only introduced in 1833. Prior to that the council was not an elected body; when vacancies arose the existing council appointed successors. As Aberdeen grew, the council&#x27;s powers were inadequate to cater for the needs of the growing urban area. A separate police commission was established in 1795 with powers to levy taxes and provide infrastructure (&#x27;police&#x27; in this context being its older meaning of civic government rather than law enforcement). The first police commission was short-lived, but it was resurrected in 1818 after the town council went bankrupt in 1817. From 1818 until 1871 there was a dual system of local government, with the town council and police commission having different roles in Aberdeen&#x27;s administration. The police commission was eventually abolished in 1871 and its functions absorbed by the town council.
Aberdeen was historically part of Aberdeenshire, but the functions affecting the burgh which operated at county level were relatively few, largely being limited to judicial functions and lieutenancy. When elected county councils were created in 1890 under the Local Government (Scotland) Act 1889, Aberdeen Corporation was deemed capable of running county-level local government functions, and so the burgh was excluded from the area administered by Aberdeenshire County Council.

In 1891 Aberdeen&#x27;s boundaries were significantly enlarged, absorbing the neighbouring burghs of Old Aberdeen and Woodside, plus the Torry area on the south bank of the River Dee. The act of parliament which expanded the burgh also confirmed that Aberdeen was entitled to be called a city; it had commonly been described as a city prior to that, but (like most Scottish cities) without official recognition.

The historic county boundary between Aberdeenshire and Kincardineshire in this area followed the River Dee. Following the absorption of Torry on the south bank of the river in 1891, the city straddled the two counties. Aberdeen was made a county of itself in 1899, removing the city from the two counties for lieutenancy and other purposes as well as local government functions. The city boundaries were subsequently enlarged several times, gaining further territory from both Aberdeenshire and Kincardineshire, notably in 1935, 1952 and 1970.

===City of Aberdeen District Council===
Local government across Scotland was reorganised in 1975 under the Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973, which replaced the counties, burghs and landward districts with a two-tier system of regions and districts. One of the districts was called &#x27;City of Aberdeen&#x27;, which formed part of Grampian Region. City of Aberdeen District Council was therefore a lower-tier district authority, with upper-tier regional functions being provided by Grampian Regional Council.

The City of Aberdeen district covered a larger area than the pre-1975 city, taking in the parishes of Dyce, Newhills, Old Machar, and Peterculter from Aberdeenshire and Nigg from Kincardineshire. All except Dyce had previously ceded territory to the city in pre-1975 boundary changes. The parish of Nigg added in 1975 just covered the residual rural parts of the old parish around Cove Bay; Nigg village itself had been absorbed into the city in 1935. The parish of Old Machar was named after St Machar&#x27;s Cathedral in Old Aberdeen, which had been absorbed into the city in 1891; the parish of Old Machar that was absorbed in 1975 was just the residual part of the cathedral&#x27;s old parish which lay north of the River Don, including Bridge of Don.

===Aberdeen City Council===
Local government was reorganised again in 1996 under the Local Government etc. (Scotland) Act 1994, which abolished the regions and districts created in 1975 and established 32 single-tier council areas across Scotland. The existing City of Aberdeen District became one of the new council areas. The 1994 Act named the new council area &#x27;City of Aberdeen&#x27;, but this was changed to &#x27;Aberdeen City&#x27; by a council resolution on 9 May 1995, before the new council area came into force, allowing the new council to take the name &#x27;Aberdeen City Council&#x27;.

==Political control==
The council has been under no overall control since 2002. Following the 2022 election a Scottish National Party and Liberal Democrats coalition took control of the council.

The first election to the City of Aberdeen District Council was held in 1974, initially operating as a shadow authority alongside the outgoing authorities until the new system came into force on 16 May 1975. A shadow authority was again elected in 1995 ahead of the change to council areas which came into force on 1 April 1996. Political control since 1975 has been as follows:

City of Aberdeen District Council
Aberdeen City Council
===Leadership===
The role of Lord Provost of Aberdeen is largely ceremonial. Political leadership is instead provided by the leader of the council. The leaders since 1996 have been:

===Composition===
Aberdeen City Council currently comprises 45 councillors, who represent the city&#x27;s wards, and is headed by the Lord Provost. Prior to the 2012 council election there were 43 members of Aberdeen City Council.

Between 2003 and 2007, the council was under the control of a Liberal Democrat and Conservative coalition, holding 23 of the 43 seats on the council. Prior to the 2003 election, the council had been considered a Labour stronghold. Following the May 2007 election, contested for the first time using a system of proportional representation, the Liberal Democrats and Scottish National Party (SNP) formed a coalition to run the council, holding 27 of the 43 seats (following an SNP by election gain from the Conservatives on 16 August 2007, the coalition held 28 of the 43 seats). Two Liberal Democrat councillors became independents during this period due to personal controversies, while the four strong Conservative group split in August 2010, with two councillors forming the Scottish Conservative Group and two others the Aberdeen Conservative Group.

After the May 2012 election, the control of the council shifted back to the Labour Party, supported in a coalition by three Conservative and three Independent councillors, giving the administration 23 seats.

The Labour/Conservative/Independent coalition continued after the 2017 election, but with a change in the balance of power within the coalition. Labour were reduced to nine councillors (subsequently suspended from membership by the Scottish Labour Party for forming a coalition with the Conservatives), whilst the Conservatives had eleven councillors elected. These Conservative and suspended &quot;Aberdeen Labour&quot; councillors were joined in coalition by three Independent councillors, one of who had left the Liberal Democrats just days after the council election.

In December 2019 a councillor elected as a Conservative became an Independent following his conviction for sexual assault. This led to the ruling coalition becoming a minority administration comprising only 22 of the 45 councillors.

Between 2017 and 2021 the council had Co-Leaders Douglas Lumsden (Conservative) and Jenny Laing (“Aberdeen Labour”) as a result of the coalition agreement. Following Douglas Lumsden&#x27;s election to the Scottish Parliament in May 2021 Jenny Laing became sole Leader of the council.

After the 2022 election the SNP and Liberal Democrats agreed to form a partnership to lead the Council for the next five years. At the Council&#x27;s statutory meeting on 18 May 2022, SNP councillor David Cameron was elected Lord Provost and Liberal Democrat Councillor Steve Delaney was elected Depute Provost. SNP Group Leader Alex Nicoll and Liberal Democrat Group Leader Ian Yuill became Co-Leaders of the Council.

Following the 2022 election and a subsequent by-election in February 2023 and changes of allegiance up to October 2023, the composition of the council was:

The next election is due in 2027.

==Premises==

Council meetings are held at Aberdeen Town House on Broad Street, which was built in 1874 and substantially extended in 1975, including a new council chamber. The council&#x27;s main offices are now in the neighbouring Marischal College. The council moved into the renovated former college building in 2011.

==Council structure==
Before May 2007, councillors represented 43 single-member wards election on a first-past-the-post basis.

On 3 May 2007, the single transferable vote system was used for the first time and multi-member wards were introduced, each ward electing three or four councillors. The Local Government Boundary Commission for Scotland completed its final recommendations for new wards for all the council areas of Scotland.

Aberdeen is divided into 13 multi-member wards, electing a total of 45 councillors. This system was introduced as a result of the Local Governance (Scotland) Act 2004, and is designed to produce a form of proportional representation.

===Current multi-member ward system===

As of 4 May 2017, the current wards and representative numbers are:


==Election results==

===2022===




===2017===




===2012===




===2007===




==References==

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2425849" start="0" end="21" title="Aberdeen City Council" label="Aberdeen City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q969045" start="29" end="44" title="Local government in Scotland" label="local authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q36405" start="49" end="62" title="Aberdeen City" label="Aberdeen City"/>
<link wikidata="Q461231" start="78" end="103" title="council areas of Scotland" label="council areas of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2097994" start="184" end="195" title="municipal corporation" label="corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q254978" start="220" end="225" title="burgh" label="burgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542364" start="377" end="385" title="Grampian" label="Grampian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7045250" start="422" end="440" title="no overall control" label="no overall control"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658" start="485" end="508" title="Scottish National Party" label="Scottish National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250438" start="513" end="529" title="Scottish Liberal Democrats" label="Liberal Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q17576433" start="553" end="572" title="Aberdeen Town House" label="Aberdeen Town House"/>
<link wikidata="Q11838975" start="618" end="635" title="Marischal College" label="Marischal College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928458" start="697" end="708" title="royal burgh" label="royal burgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q216787" start="712" end="719" title="David I of Scotland" label="David I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209568" start="1119" end="1136" title="Police burgh" label="police commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290674" start="1751" end="1764" title="Aberdeenshire (historic)" label="Aberdeenshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494999" start="1881" end="1889" title="sheriffdom" label="judicial"/>
<link wikidata="Q202435" start="1904" end="1915" title="Lieutenancy areas of Scotland" label="lieutenancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664029" start="1977" end="2013" title="Local Government (Scotland) Act 1889" label="Local Government (Scotland) Act 1889"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350171" start="2299" end="2311" title="Old Aberdeen" label="Old Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8033303" start="2316" end="2324" title="Woodside, Aberdeen" label="Woodside"/>
<link wikidata="Q7827168" start="2335" end="2340" title="Torry" label="Torry"/>
<link wikidata="Q964949" start="2371" end="2380" title="River Dee, Aberdeenshire" label="River Dee"/>
<link wikidata="Q376914" start="2666" end="2681" title="Kincardineshire" label="Kincardineshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q104828357" start="2850" end="2866" title="county of city" label="county of itself"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664037" start="3263" end="3299" title="Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973" label="Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3341" end="3359" title="List of local government areas in Scotland (1930–1975)#Sub-county authorities" label="landward districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q383493" start="3386" end="3407" title="Local government areas of Scotland (1975–1996)" label="regions and districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2374318" start="3773" end="3777" title="Dyce" label="Dyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q4983491" start="3779" end="3787" title="Bucksburn" label="Newhills"/>
<link wikidata="Q29833" start="3805" end="3816" title="Peterculter" label="Peterculter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7033125" start="3840" end="3844" title="Nigg, Aberdeen" label="Nigg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178917" start="4052" end="4060" title="Cove Bay" label="Cove Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2380110" start="4164" end="4190" title="St Machar&amp;#x27;s Cathedral" label="St Machar&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q387736" start="4391" end="4400" title="River Don, Aberdeenshire" label="River Don"/>
<link wikidata="Q4966418" start="4412" end="4425" title="Bridge of Don" label="Bridge of Don"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258386" start="4513" end="4554" title="Local Government etc. (Scotland) Act 1994" label="Local Government etc. (Scotland) Act 1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176207" start="4645" end="4657" title="council area" label="council area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7045250" start="5083" end="5101" title="no overall control" label="no overall control"/>
<link wikidata="Q112039872" start="5128" end="5141" title="2022 Aberdeen City Council election" label="2022 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658" start="5144" end="5167" title="Scottish National Party" label="Scottish National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250438" start="5172" end="5189" title="Scottish Liberal Democrats" label="Liberal Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q6595141" start="5695" end="5719" title="List of provosts of Aberdeen" label="Lord Provost of Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5791" end="5812" title="Local government in Scotland#Leader of the Council" label="leader of the council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195098" start="5955" end="5960" title="ward (politics)" label="wards"/>
<link wikidata="Q6595141" start="5983" end="5995" title="List of Provosts and Lord Provosts of Aberdeen" label="Lord Provost"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250438" start="6143" end="6159" title="Scottish Liberal Democrats" label="Liberal Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243587" start="6164" end="6176" title="Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179541" start="6293" end="6299" title="Scottish Labour Party" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4666901" start="6326" end="6343" title="2007 Aberdeen City Council election" label="May 2007 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="6392" end="6419" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658" start="6447" end="6470" title="Scottish National Party" label="Scottish National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q327591" start="6700" end="6712" title="Independent (politics)" label="independents"/>
<link wikidata="Q4666902" start="6946" end="6963" title="2012 Aberdeen City Council election" label="May 2012 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q29587173" start="7211" end="7224" title="2017 Aberdeen City Council election" label="2017 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q112039872" start="8247" end="8260" title="2022 Aberdeen City Council election" label="2022 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q17576433" start="8892" end="8911" title="Aberdeen Town House" label="Aberdeen Town House"/>
<link wikidata="Q111692066" start="8915" end="8927" title="Broad Street, Aberdeen" label="Broad Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q11838975" start="9082" end="9099" title="Marischal College" label="Marischal College"/>
<link wikidata="Q205759" start="9272" end="9291" title="first-past-the-post" label="first-past-the-post"/>
<link wikidata="Q115807" start="9319" end="9343" title="single transferable vote" label="single transferable vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195098" start="9396" end="9401" title="ward (politics)" label="wards"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664099" start="9469" end="9518" title="Local Government Boundary Commission for Scotland" label="Local Government Boundary Commission for Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q461231" start="9581" end="9606" title="council areas of Scotland" label="council areas of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664013" start="9739" end="9775" title="Local Governance (Scotland) Act 2004" label="Local Governance (Scotland) Act 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="9814" end="9841" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143030" wikidata="Q202174" url="?curid=143030" title="Argyll and Bute">
<text>Argyll and Bute (; , ) is one of 32 unitary council areas in Scotland and a lieutenancy area. The current lord-lieutenant for Argyll and Bute is Jane Margaret MacLeod (14 July 2020). The administrative centre for the council area is in Lochgilphead at Kilmory Castle, a 19th-century Gothic Revival building and estate. The current council leader is Councillor Jim Lynch.

Argyll and Bute covers the second-largest administrative area of any Scottish council. The council area adjoins those of Highland, Perth and Kinross, Stirling and West Dunbartonshire.

==History==
The County of Bute and the County of Argyll were two of the historic counties of Scotland. They were both &quot;shires&quot; (context; the area controlled by a sheriff) in the Middle Ages. From 1890 until 1975 both counties had individual separate elected county councils.

In 1975, under the Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973, Scotland&#x27;s counties, burghs and landward districts were abolished and replaced with upper-tier regions and lower-tier districts. The Strathclyde region was created covering a large part of western Scotland. Strathclyde was divided into nineteen districts, one of which the 1973 Act called &quot;Argyll&quot;, covering most of the former county of Argyll, but also including the Isle of Bute from the County of Bute. The shadow authority elected in 1974 requested a change of name to &quot;Argyll and Bute&quot;, which was agreed by the government before the new district came into being on 16 May 1975.

As created in 1975 the Argyll and Bute district covered the whole area of fourteen of Argyll&#x27;s sixteen districts and part of a fifteenth, plus two from the County of Bute&#x27;s five districts, which were all abolished at the same time:

&quot;From the County of Argyll:&quot;

*Campbeltown Burgh
*Cowal District
*Dunoon Burgh
*Inveraray Burgh
*Islay District
*Jura and Colonsay District
*Kintyre District
*Lochgilphead Burgh
*Mid Argyll District
*Mull District
*North Lorn District: the Lismore and Appin, and Ardchattan electoral divisions only, rest (Ballachulish and Kinlochleven electoral divisions) went to Lochaber district of Highland
*Oban Burgh
*South Lorn District
*Tiree and Coll District
*Tobermory Burgh
&quot;From the County of Bute:&quot;

*Bute District
*Rothesay Burgh
The two County of Bute districts together corresponded to the whole Isle of Bute. The rest County of Bute, being the Isle of Arran and the Cumbraes, went to Cunninghame district. The Ardnamurchan district from Argyll went to the Lochaber district of Highland. The new district was made a single Argyll and Bute lieutenancy area.

Local government was reformed again in 1996 under the Local Government etc. (Scotland) Act 1994, which abolished the regions and districts which had been created in 1975, replacing them with unitary council areas. Argyll and Bute became one of the new council areas, but had its territory enlarged to include the town of Helensburgh and surrounding rural areas which had been in the Dumbarton district prior to 1996, and had formed part of the county of Dunbartonshire prior to 1975. The Helensburgh area had voted in a referendum in 1994 to join Argyll and Bute rather than stay with Dumbarton.

==Council==
==Transport==
===Railways===
The main railway line in Argyll and Bute is the West Highland Line, which links Oban to Glasgow, passing through much of the eastern and northern parts of the area. From the south the line enters Argyll and Bute just to the west of Dumbarton, continuing north via Helensburgh Upper to the eastern shores of the Gare Loch and Loch Long. The line comes inland at Arrochar and Tarbet to meet the western shore of Loch Lomond. At the northern end of the loch the lines leaves Argyll and Bute to enter Stirling council area. The Oban branch of the West Highland Line re-enters the area just west of Tyndrum, and heads west to Oban: stations on this section of the line include Dalmally and Taynuilt railway station. The majority of services on the line are operated by ScotRail: as of 2019 the summer service has six trains a day to Oban, with four on Sundays. In addition to the ScotRail service is the nightly Caledonian Sleeper, although this does not run on the Oban branch.

Helensburgh also has a much more frequent service into Glasgow and beyond via the North Clyde Line, which has its western terminus at the town&#x27;s central railway station.

===Roads===

The main trunk roads in Argyll and Bute are:
*The A82, which runs along the western shore of Loch Lomond, providing the main route between Glasgow and Fort William.
*The A83, which leaves the A82 at Tarbet, heading west and then south to eventually reach Campbeltown by way of Inveraray and Lochgilphead.
*The A85, which leaves the A82 at Tyndrum (just outside Argyll and Bute) and heads west to Oban via Dalmally.
*The A828, which leaves the A85 at Connel and north through Appin to join the A82 at Ballachulish.
*The A815, which leaves the A83 in Glen Kinglas near Cairndow, heading south through Strachur and Dunoon and ends at Toward 40 miles later, on the southern tip of the Cowal peninsula. The A815 is the main road through Cowal.
*The A886, which leaves the A815 at Strachur, passing through Glendaruel, the route includes a ferry link to the Isle of Bute, Colintraive - Rhubodach terminating at Port Bannatyne to the north of Rothesay.

===Ferry services===
 
Due to its heavily indented coastline and many islands, ferries form an important part of the council area&#x27;s transport system. The main ferry operator in Argyll and Bute is Caledonian MacBrayne (CalMac), which operates services from the mainland to most of the inhabited islands. Several other routes are operated by commercial operators, usually on contract to the council, although the Western Ferries service across the Firth of Clyde is run on a commercial basis.

*Bute is served by a route across the Kyles of Bute between Rhubodach and Colintraive in Cowal, as well as a route between Rothesay to Wemyss Bay in Inverclyde. Both routes are operated by CalMac.
*Coll and Tiree are each served from Oban, via a CalMac service that also provides links between the two islands, and a once-weekly link to Barra.
*Gigha is served by a CalMac route from Tayinloan in Kintyre.
*Islay is served by a CalMac route from Kennacraig in Kintyre. The service is timetabled to utilise either one of two ports on the island, with both Port Askaig and Port Ellen having a service to the mainland.
*Feolin on Jura is linked to Port Askaig on Islay via a vehicle ferry run by ASP Ship Management on behalf of Argyll and Bute Council. There is also a passenger-only service between the island&#x27;s main centre, Craighouse, and Tayvallich on the mainland that is operated by Islay Sea Safaris.
*Kerrera is linked to Gallanach (about southwest of Oban) by a passenger-only service operated by CalMac.
*Lismore is served by two ferries, a vehicle and passenger service operated by CalMac that runs from Oban, and a passenger-only service from Port Appin that is operated by ASP Ship Management on behalf of Argyll and Bute Council.
*Mull is served by a route between Oban and Craignure on the island&#x27;s east coast, as well as routes across the Sound of Mull (between Lochaline and Fishnish, and Tobermory and Kilchoan). All three routes are operated by CalMac.
**Iona is linked to Mull via a CalMac service from Fionnphort at Mull&#x27;s southwest tip.
*The island of Seil, which itself is linked to the mainland via the Clachan Bridge, has links to two further islands: Easdale and Luing. Both services are operated by ASP Ship Management on behalf of Argyll and Bute Council.

There are also routes connecting some mainland locations in Argyll and Bute to other parts of the mainland:
*There is a CalMac service across Loch Fyne which provides a link between Portavadie in Cowal and Tarbert in Kintyre.
*The Cowal peninsula route is a passenger-only service from the Dunoon Breakwater to Gourock pier, giving easy access to ScotRail services at Gourock railway station with onward transport to Glasgow Central station. This route was for a period run by a CalMac subsidiary company, Argyll Ferries, but has since January 2019 been operated directly by CalMac.
*CalMac provide a limited (3 ferry each way per week) service between Cambeltown in Kintyre and Ardrosssan in North Aryshire during the summer months.
*Western Ferries, a commercial operator, runs a vehicle and passenger service between Hunters Quay to McInroy&#x27;s Point that also provides a link between Cowal and Inverclyde in (partial) competition with the subsidised CalMac service.
*A service operated by Clyde Marine Services on behalf of Strathclyde Partnership for Transport runs between Kilcreggan and Gourock pier, providing a link from the Rosneath peninsula to the rail network at Gourock.
Argyll and Bute also has ferry services linking it to islands in neighbouring council areas:
*Oban is the mainland terminal for services to Barra in Na h-Eileanan Siar (the Outer Hebrides).
*Lochranza on Arran, in North Ayrshire, has a year-round service to Kintyre: during the summer the mainland port used is Claonaig, however in winter the service is reduced to a single daily return crossing from Tarbert.
There is also a passenger-only ferry service linking Campbeltown and Port Ellen on Islay with Ballycastle in County Antrim, Northern Ireland, running seasonally from April to September, operated by West Coast Tours as the Kintyre Express.

==Cultural references==
The later scenes of the 1963 James Bond film &quot;From Russia with Love&quot; were filmed around the lochs and hills of Argyll and Bute.

The area has also been indirectly immortalised in popular culture by the 1977 hit song &quot;Mull of Kintyre&quot; by then-Kintyre resident Paul McCartney&#x27;s band of the time, Wings.

==Communities==
The area is divided into 56 community council areas, all of which have community councils as at 2023.

*Appin
*Ardchattan
*Ardentinny
*Ardrishaig
*Arrochar, Tarbet and Ardlui
*Avich and Kilchrenan
*Bute
*Cairndow
*Campbeltown
*Cardross
*Colintraive and Glendaruel
*Coll
*Colonsay
*Connel
*Cove and Kilcreggan
*Craignish
*Dunadd
*Dunbeg
*Dunoon
*East Kintyre
*Furnace
*Garelochhead
*Gigha
*Glenorchy and Innishail
*Helensburgh
*Hunters Quay
*Inveraray
*Iona
*Islay
*Jura
*Kilfinan
*Kilmun
*Kilninver and Kilmelford
*Kilmore and Kilbride
*North Knapdale
*The Laggan
*Lismore
*Lochgilphead
*Lochgoil
*Luing
*Luss and Arden
*Mull
*Oban
*Rhu and Shandon
*Rosneath and Clynder
*Sandbank
*Seil and Easdale
*Southend
*South Cowal
*South Knapdale
*Strachur and District
*Tarbert and Skipness
*Taynuilt
*Tiree
*West Kintyre
*West Lochfyne
==Settlements==
Largest settlements by population:

*Achahoish; Airdeny; Appin; Ardbeg (Islay); Ardbeg (Bute); Arden; Ardfern; Aldochlay; Ardlui; Ardmay; Ardgartan; Ardpeaton; Ardrishaig; Arduaine; Arrochar; Ardentinny; Ardnadam
* Barcaldine; Bellochantuy; Benderloch; Blairglas; Blairmore; Bonawe; Bowmore; Bridge of Orchy
*Cairndow; Cardross; Carradale; Clachan; Cairnbaan; Campbeltown; Clachan of Glendaruel; Cladich; Clynder; Colgrain; Colintraive; Connel; Coulport; Cove; Coylet; Craigendoran; Craighouse; Craignure; Craobh Haven; Crarae; Crinan; Clachaig; Carrick Castle;
*Dunoon; Dalavich; Dalmally; Druimdrishaig; Drumlemble; Duchlage; Dunbeg; 
*Edentaggart;
*Faslane Port; Ford; Furnace;
*Glenbranter; Garelochhead; Geilston; Glenbarr; Glencoe; Glenmallan; Grogport;
*Helensburgh; Hunters Quay;
*Innellan; Inveraray; Inverbeg; Inveruglas Isle; Inverchaolain 
*Kames; Keillmore; Kilberry; Kilchattan Bay; Kilchenzie; Kilcreggan; Kilmadan; Kilmartin; Kilmore; Kilmun; Kilninver; Kilmelford; Kilfinan; Kirn;
*Lagavulin; Lochawe; Lochgair; Lochgilphead; Lochgoilhead; Luss;
*Machrihanish; Millhouse; Minard; Muasdale;
*Oban; Ormsary; Otter Ferry;
*Peninver; Portavadie; Port Askaig; Port Bannatyne; Port Charlotte; Port Ellen; Portincaple; Portnahaven; Portkil;
*Rahane; Rhu; Rosneath; Rothesay;
*Saddell; Salen; Sandbank; Shandon; Skipness; Southend; Stewarton; Strachur; Succoth; Strone; St Catherines;
*Tarbert (Kintyre); Tarbet (Dunbartonshire); Tayinloan; Taynuilt; Tayvallich; Tighnabruaich; Tobermory; Torinturk; Toward;
*Whistlefield; Whitehouse;

==Places of interest==


==Islands==


==See also==
*List of places in Argyll and Bute

==References==
==External links==

* Visit Scotland, Argyll &amp; Isles - website
* National Records of Scotland - Website 
* Statistics Scotland, Argyll &amp; Bute - Webpage</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q202174" start="0" end="15" title="Argyll and Bute" label="Argyll and Bute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160920" start="36" end="43" title="unitary authority" label="unitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q461231" start="44" end="57" title="council areas of Scotland" label="council areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q202435" start="76" end="92" title="lieutenancy areas of Scotland" label="lieutenancy area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017159" start="236" end="248" title="Lochgilphead" label="Lochgilphead"/>
<link wikidata="Q17770777" start="252" end="266" title="Kilmory Castle" label="Kilmory Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q186363" start="283" end="297" title="Gothic Revival" label="Gothic Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q208279" start="493" end="501" title="Highland (council area)" label="Highland"/>
<link wikidata="Q207679" start="503" end="520" title="Perth and Kinross" label="Perth and Kinross"/>
<link wikidata="Q217838" start="522" end="530" title="Stirling (council area)" label="Stirling"/>
<link wikidata="Q208121" start="535" end="554" title="West Dunbartonshire" label="West Dunbartonshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q544009" start="583" end="587" title="County of Bute" label="Bute"/>
<link wikidata="Q652539" start="606" end="612" title="Argyll" label="Argyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350181" start="629" end="646" title="shires of Scotland" label="historic counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494998" start="729" end="736" title="sheriff principal" label="sheriff"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="745" end="756" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664037" start="862" end="898" title="Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973" label="Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q254978" start="926" end="931" title="burgh" label="burgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6626641" start="937" end="955" title="List of local government areas in Scotland (1930–1975)" label="landward districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q383493" start="1000" end="1007" title="Local government areas of Scotland (1975–1996)" label="regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q383493" start="1023" end="1032" title="Districts of Scotland" label="districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q124661" start="1038" end="1049" title="Strathclyde" label="Strathclyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147435" start="1283" end="1295" title="Isle of Bute" label="Isle of Bute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012490" start="1793" end="1804" title="Campbeltown" label="Campbeltown"/>
<link wikidata="Q646296" start="1812" end="1817" title="Cowal" label="Cowal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020251" start="1828" end="1834" title="Dunoon" label="Dunoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q219530" start="1842" end="1851" title="Inveraray" label="Inveraray"/>
<link wikidata="Q273" start="1859" end="1864" title="Islay" label="Islay"/>
<link wikidata="Q111509" start="1875" end="1879" title="Jura, Scotland" label="Jura"/>
<link wikidata="Q511539" start="1884" end="1892" title="Colonsay" label="Colonsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q242083" start="1903" end="1910" title="Kintyre" label="Kintyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017159" start="1921" end="1933" title="Lochgilphead" label="Lochgilphead"/>
<link wikidata="Q111444" start="1962" end="1966" title="Isle of Mull" label="Mull"/>
<link wikidata="Q6681413" start="1983" end="1987" title="Lorne, Scotland" label="Lorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247403" start="2002" end="2009" title="Lismore, Scotland" label="Lismore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404409" start="2014" end="2019" title="Appin" label="Appin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787846" start="2025" end="2035" title="Ardchattan and Muckairn" label="Ardchattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q589282" start="2036" end="2055" title="Wards and electoral divisions of the United Kingdom" label="electoral divisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011513" start="2068" end="2080" title="Ballachulish" label="Ballachulish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013614" start="2085" end="2097" title="Kinlochleven" label="Kinlochleven"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181006" start="2127" end="2135" title="Lochaber" label="Lochaber"/>
<link wikidata="Q208279" start="2148" end="2156" title="Highland (council area)" label="Highland"/>
<link wikidata="Q935702" start="2158" end="2162" title="Oban" label="Oban"/>
<link wikidata="Q511617" start="2191" end="2196" title="Tiree" label="Tiree"/>
<link wikidata="Q194451" start="2201" end="2205" title="Coll" label="Coll"/>
<link wikidata="Q416901" start="2216" end="2225" title="Tobermory, Mull" label="Tobermory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147435" start="2271" end="2275" title="Isle of Bute" label="Bute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818828" start="2286" end="2294" title="Rothesay" label="Rothesay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147435" start="2369" end="2381" title="Isle of Bute" label="Isle of Bute"/>
<link wikidata="Q211873" start="2418" end="2431" title="Isle of Arran" label="Isle of Arran"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855295" start="2436" end="2448" title="the Cumbraes" label="the Cumbraes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007561" start="2458" end="2469" title="Cunninghame" label="Cunninghame"/>
<link wikidata="Q639680" start="2484" end="2496" title="Ardnamurchan" label="Ardnamurchan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11798376" start="2596" end="2628" title="Lord Lieutenant of Argyll and Bute" label="Argyll and Bute lieutenancy area"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258386" start="2685" end="2726" title="Local Government etc. (Scotland) Act 1994" label="Local Government etc. (Scotland) Act 1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176207" start="2830" end="2842" title="council area" label="council area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007088" start="2952" end="2963" title="Helensburgh" label="Helensburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q20113814" start="3014" end="3032" title="Dumbarton (district)" label="Dumbarton district"/>
<link wikidata="Q140090" start="3085" end="3099" title="Dunbartonshire" label="Dunbartonshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897324" start="3533" end="3550" title="Helensburgh Upper railway station" label="Helensburgh Upper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624860" start="3580" end="3589" title="Gare Loch" label="Gare Loch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867273" start="3594" end="3603" title="Loch Long" label="Loch Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q3251649" start="3630" end="3649" title="Arrochar and Tarbet railway station" label="Arrochar and Tarbet"/>
<link wikidata="Q208926" start="3679" end="3690" title="Loch Lomond" label="Loch Lomond"/>
<link wikidata="Q217838" start="3766" end="3787" title="Stirling council area" label="Stirling council area"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250464" start="3863" end="3870" title="Tyndrum" label="Tyndrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316273" start="3941" end="3949" title="Dalmally railway station" label="Dalmally"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249938" start="3954" end="3978" title="Taynuilt railway station" label="Taynuilt railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q107980329" start="4033" end="4041" title="ScotRail" label="ScotRail"/>
<link wikidata="Q428145" start="4176" end="4194" title="Caledonian Sleeper" label="Caledonian Sleeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054842" start="4326" end="4342" title="North Clyde Line" label="North Clyde Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q4302282" start="4394" end="4417" title="Helensburgh Central railway station" label="central railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145163" start="4442" end="4452" title="trunk road" label="trunk road"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649638" start="4483" end="4486" title="A82 road" label="A82"/>
<link wikidata="Q848909" start="4584" end="4596" title="Fort William, Highland" label="Fort William"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649643" start="4603" end="4606" title="A83 road" label="A83"/>
<link wikidata="Q596798" start="4632" end="4638" title="Tarbet, Argyll" label="Tarbet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012490" start="4688" end="4699" title="Campbeltown" label="Campbeltown"/>
<link wikidata="Q219530" start="4710" end="4719" title="Inveraray" label="Inveraray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017159" start="4724" end="4736" title="Lochgilphead" label="Lochgilphead"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649651" start="4743" end="4746" title="A85 road" label="A85"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250464" start="4772" end="4779" title="Tyndrum" label="Tyndrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109293" start="4838" end="4846" title="Dalmally" label="Dalmally"/>
<link wikidata="Q16153692" start="4853" end="4857" title="A828 road" label="A828"/>
<link wikidata="Q5161721" start="4883" end="4889" title="Connel" label="Connel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404409" start="4908" end="4913" title="Appin" label="Appin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011513" start="4933" end="4945" title="Ballachulish" label="Ballachulish"/>
<link wikidata="Q89030805" start="4952" end="4956" title="A815 road" label="A815"/>
<link wikidata="Q127541323" start="4982" end="4994" title="Glen Kinglas" label="Glen Kinglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q277053" start="5000" end="5008" title="Cairndow" label="Cairndow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7620870" start="5032" end="5040" title="Strachur" label="Strachur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020251" start="5045" end="5051" title="Dunoon" label="Dunoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829561" start="5064" end="5070" title="Toward" label="Toward"/>
<link wikidata="Q646296" start="5114" end="5119" title="Cowal" label="Cowal"/>
<link wikidata="Q89030881" start="5177" end="5181" title="A886 road" label="A886"/>
<link wikidata="Q7620870" start="5208" end="5216" title="Strachur" label="Strachur"/>
<link wikidata="Q723195" start="5234" end="5244" title="Glendaruel" label="Glendaruel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147435" start="5285" end="5297" title="Isle of Bute" label="Isle of Bute"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145735" start="5299" end="5310" title="Colintraive" label="Colintraive"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777673" start="5313" end="5322" title="Rhubodach" label="Rhubodach"/>
<link wikidata="Q248076" start="5338" end="5352" title="Port Bannatyne" label="Port Bannatyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818828" start="5369" end="5377" title="Rothesay" label="Rothesay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147435" start="5878" end="5882" title="Isle of Bute" label="Bute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642509" start="5915" end="5928" title="Kyles of Bute" label="Kyles of Bute"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777673" start="5937" end="5946" title="Rhubodach" label="Rhubodach"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145735" start="5951" end="5962" title="Colintraive" label="Colintraive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818828" start="6000" end="6008" title="Rothesay, Argyll and Bute" label="Rothesay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011545" start="6012" end="6022" title="Wemyss Bay" label="Wemyss Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q208271" start="6026" end="6036" title="Inverclyde" label="Inverclyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q194451" start="6075" end="6079" title="Coll" label="Coll"/>
<link wikidata="Q511617" start="6084" end="6089" title="Tiree" label="Tiree"/>
<link wikidata="Q935702" start="6111" end="6115" title="Oban" label="Oban"/>
<link wikidata="Q223212" start="6214" end="6219" title="Barra" label="Barra"/>
<link wikidata="Q506284" start="6222" end="6227" title="Gigha" label="Gigha"/>
<link wikidata="Q212090" start="6261" end="6270" title="Tayinloan" label="Tayinloan"/>
<link wikidata="Q242083" start="6274" end="6281" title="Kintyre" label="Kintyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q273" start="6284" end="6289" title="Islay" label="Islay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112023" start="6323" end="6333" title="Kennacraig" label="Kennacraig"/>
<link wikidata="Q242083" start="6337" end="6344" title="Kintyre" label="Kintyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2104659" start="6432" end="6443" title="Port Askaig" label="Port Askaig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019330" start="6448" end="6458" title="Port Ellen" label="Port Ellen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404976" start="6494" end="6500" title="Feolin" label="Feolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q111509" start="6504" end="6508" title="Jura, Scotland" label="Jura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018742" start="6706" end="6716" title="Craighouse" label="Craighouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3399632" start="6722" end="6732" title="Tayvallich" label="Tayvallich"/>
<link wikidata="Q501198" start="6789" end="6796" title="Kerrera" label="Kerrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247403" start="6895" end="6902" title="Lismore, Scotland" label="Lismore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404409" start="7035" end="7045" title="Port Appin" label="Port Appin"/>
<link wikidata="Q111444" start="7125" end="7129" title="Isle of Mull" label="Mull"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920373" start="7168" end="7177" title="Craignure" label="Craignure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867307" start="7263" end="7272" title="Lochaline" label="Lochaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q5455121" start="7277" end="7285" title="Fishnish" label="Fishnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q416901" start="7291" end="7300" title="Tobermory, Mull" label="Tobermory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2544189" start="7305" end="7313" title="Kilchoan" label="Kilchoan"/>
<link wikidata="Q610" start="7359" end="7363" title="Iona" label="Iona"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776813" start="7408" end="7418" title="Fionnphort" label="Fionnphort"/>
<link wikidata="Q607334" start="7464" end="7468" title="Seil" label="Seil"/>
<link wikidata="Q448856" start="7517" end="7531" title="Clachan Bridge" label="Clachan Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046485" start="7567" end="7574" title="Easdale" label="Easdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759502" start="7579" end="7584" title="Luing" label="Luing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231530" start="7857" end="7867" title="Portavadie" label="Portavadie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130032" start="7881" end="7888" title="Tarbert, Kintyre" label="Tarbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q646296" start="7906" end="7911" title="Cowal" label="Cowal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020251" start="7965" end="7971" title="Dunoon" label="Dunoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469984" start="7986" end="7993" title="Gourock" label="Gourock"/>
<link wikidata="Q107980329" start="8022" end="8030" title="ScotRail" label="ScotRail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1831055" start="8043" end="8066" title="Gourock railway station" label="Gourock railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q800825" start="8092" end="8115" title="Glasgow Central station" label="Glasgow Central station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789847" start="8181" end="8195" title="Argyll Ferries" label="Argyll Ferries"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944776" start="8495" end="8507" title="Hunters Quay" label="Hunters Quay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469984" start="8511" end="8531" title="McInroy&amp;#x27;s Point" label="McInroy&amp;#x27;s Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622046" start="8706" end="8743" title="Strathclyde Partnership for Transport" label="Strathclyde Partnership for Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q211892" start="8757" end="8767" title="Kilcreggan" label="Kilcreggan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798398" start="8812" end="8830" title="Rosneath peninsula" label="Rosneath peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q223212" start="9003" end="9008" title="Barra" label="Barra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778400" start="9012" end="9030" title="Comhairle nan Eilean Siar" label="Na h-Eileanan Siar"/>
<link wikidata="Q80967" start="9036" end="9050" title="Outer Hebrides" label="Outer Hebrides"/>
<link wikidata="Q667705" start="9054" end="9063" title="Lochranza" label="Lochranza"/>
<link wikidata="Q211873" start="9067" end="9072" title="Isle of Arran" label="Arran"/>
<link wikidata="Q206926" start="9077" end="9091" title="North Ayrshire" label="North Ayrshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975442" start="9174" end="9182" title="Claonaig" label="Claonaig"/>
<link wikidata="Q805405" start="9367" end="9378" title="Ballycastle, County Antrim" label="Ballycastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q189592" start="9382" end="9395" title="County Antrim" label="County Antrim"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="9397" end="9413" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q844" start="9566" end="9576" title="James Bond" label="James Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q106571" start="9588" end="9609" title="From Russia with Love (film)" label="From Russia with Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172903" start="9639" end="9643" title="loch" label="loch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952215" start="9769" end="9784" title="Mull of Kintyre (song)" label="Mull of Kintyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="9816" end="9830" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q622988" start="9856" end="9861" title="Wings (band)" label="Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q6612187" start="9908" end="9931" title="list of community council areas in Scotland" label="community council areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403338" start="9951" end="9968" title="community council" label="community council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404409" start="9984" end="9989" title="Appin" label="Appin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787846" start="9991" end="10001" title="Ardchattan and Muckairn" label="Ardchattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q639037" start="10003" end="10013" title="Ardentinny" label="Ardentinny"/>
<link wikidata="Q640035" start="10015" end="10025" title="Ardrishaig" label="Ardrishaig"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778632" start="10027" end="10035" title="Arrochar, Argyll" label="Arrochar"/>
<link wikidata="Q596798" start="10037" end="10043" title="Tarbet, Argyll" label="Tarbet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778577" start="10048" end="10054" title="Ardlui" label="Ardlui"/>
<link wikidata="Q5210233" start="10056" end="10061" title="Dalavich" label="Avich"/>
<link wikidata="Q6406652" start="10066" end="10076" title="Kilchrenan" label="Kilchrenan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147435" start="10078" end="10082" title="Isle of Bute" label="Bute"/>
<link wikidata="Q277053" start="10084" end="10092" title="Cairndow" label="Cairndow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012490" start="10094" end="10105" title="Campbeltown" label="Campbeltown"/>
<link wikidata="Q212088" start="10107" end="10115" title="Cardross" label="Cardross"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145735" start="10117" end="10128" title="Colintraive" label="Colintraive"/>
<link wikidata="Q723195" start="10133" end="10143" title="Glendaruel" label="Glendaruel"/>
<link wikidata="Q194451" start="10145" end="10149" title="Coll" label="Coll"/>
<link wikidata="Q511539" start="10151" end="10159" title="Colonsay" label="Colonsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5161721" start="10161" end="10167" title="Connel" label="Connel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138008" start="10169" end="10173" title="Cove, Argyll" label="Cove"/>
<link wikidata="Q211892" start="10178" end="10188" title="Kilcreggan" label="Kilcreggan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777209" start="10190" end="10199" title="Craignish" label="Craignish"/>
<link wikidata="Q233579" start="10201" end="10207" title="Dunadd" label="Dunadd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017182" start="10209" end="10215" title="Dunbeg" label="Dunbeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020251" start="10217" end="10223" title="Dunoon" label="Dunoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q242083" start="10230" end="10237" title="Kintyre" label="Kintyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002171" start="10239" end="10246" title="Furnace, Argyll" label="Furnace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020239" start="10248" end="10260" title="Garelochhead" label="Garelochhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q506284" start="10262" end="10267" title="Gigha" label="Gigha"/>
<link wikidata="Q537248" start="10269" end="10278" title="Glen Orchy" label="Glenorchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007088" start="10294" end="10305" title="Helensburgh" label="Helensburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944776" start="10307" end="10319" title="Hunters Quay" label="Hunters Quay"/>
<link wikidata="Q219530" start="10321" end="10330" title="Inveraray" label="Inveraray"/>
<link wikidata="Q610" start="10332" end="10336" title="Iona" label="Iona"/>
<link wikidata="Q273" start="10338" end="10343" title="Islay" label="Islay"/>
<link wikidata="Q111509" start="10345" end="10349" title="Jura, Scotland" label="Jura"/>
<link wikidata="Q27925283" start="10351" end="10359" title="Kilfinan" label="Kilfinan"/>
<link wikidata="Q723315" start="10361" end="10367" title="Kilmun" label="Kilmun"/>
<link wikidata="Q10947543" start="10383" end="10393" title="Kilmelford" label="Kilmelford"/>
<link wikidata="Q917870" start="10423" end="10431" title="Knapdale" label="Knapdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778018" start="10433" end="10443" title="Machrihanish" label="The Laggan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247403" start="10445" end="10452" title="Lismore, Scotland" label="Lismore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017159" start="10454" end="10466" title="Lochgilphead" label="Lochgilphead"/>
<link wikidata="Q6665107" start="10468" end="10476" title="Lochgoilhead" label="Lochgoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759502" start="10478" end="10483" title="Luing" label="Luing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016323" start="10485" end="10489" title="Luss" label="Luss"/>
<link wikidata="Q211904" start="10494" end="10499" title="Arden, Argyll" label="Arden"/>
<link wikidata="Q111444" start="10501" end="10505" title="Isle of Mull" label="Mull"/>
<link wikidata="Q935702" start="10507" end="10511" title="Oban" label="Oban"/>
<link wikidata="Q219427" start="10513" end="10516" title="Rhu" label="Rhu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7487910" start="10521" end="10528" title="Shandon, Argyll" label="Shandon"/>
<link wikidata="Q213377" start="10530" end="10538" title="Rosneath" label="Rosneath"/>
<link wikidata="Q247920" start="10543" end="10550" title="Clynder" label="Clynder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913513" start="10552" end="10560" title="Sandbank, Argyll" label="Sandbank"/>
<link wikidata="Q607334" start="10562" end="10566" title="Seil" label="Seil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046485" start="10571" end="10578" title="Easdale" label="Easdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569511" start="10580" end="10588" title="Southend, Argyll" label="Southend"/>
<link wikidata="Q646296" start="10596" end="10601" title="Cowal" label="Cowal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7620870" start="10619" end="10627" title="Strachur" label="Strachur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130032" start="10642" end="10649" title="Tarbert, Kintyre" label="Tarbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q496395" start="10654" end="10662" title="Skipness" label="Skipness"/>
<link wikidata="Q499886" start="10664" end="10672" title="Taynuilt" label="Taynuilt"/>
<link wikidata="Q511617" start="10674" end="10679" title="Tiree" label="Tiree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867253" start="10700" end="10708" title="Loch Fyne" label="Lochfyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q371472" start="10762" end="10771" title="Achahoish" label="Achahoish"/>
<link wikidata="Q202174" start="10773" end="10780" title="Airdeny" label="Airdeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404409" start="10782" end="10787" title="Appin" label="Appin"/>
<link wikidata="Q638662" start="10789" end="10803" title="Ardbeg, Islay" label="Ardbeg (Islay)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16833573" start="10805" end="10818" title="Ardbeg, Bute" label="Ardbeg (Bute)"/>
<link wikidata="Q211904" start="10820" end="10825" title="Arden, Dunbartonshire" label="Arden"/>
<link wikidata="Q723319" start="10827" end="10834" title="Ardfern" label="Ardfern"/>
<link wikidata="Q15179126" start="10836" end="10845" title="Aldochlay" label="Aldochlay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778577" start="10847" end="10853" title="Ardlui" label="Ardlui"/>
<link wikidata="Q16833578" start="10855" end="10861" title="Ardmay" label="Ardmay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4788010" start="10863" end="10872" title="Ardgartan" label="Ardgartan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16833581" start="10874" end="10883" title="Ardpeaton" label="Ardpeaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q640035" start="10885" end="10895" title="Ardrishaig" label="Ardrishaig"/>
<link wikidata="Q4788310" start="10897" end="10905" title="Arduaine" label="Arduaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778632" start="10907" end="10915" title="Arrochar, Argyll" label="Arrochar"/>
<link wikidata="Q639037" start="10917" end="10927" title="Ardentinny" label="Ardentinny"/>
<link wikidata="Q4788212" start="10929" end="10937" title="Ardnadam" label="Ardnadam"/>
<link wikidata="Q4859818" start="10940" end="10950" title="Barcaldine, Argyll" label="Barcaldine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4884094" start="10952" end="10964" title="Bellochantuy" label="Bellochantuy"/>
<link wikidata="Q613130" start="10966" end="10976" title="Benderloch" label="Benderloch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10978" end="10987" title="Blairglas" label="Blairglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924218" start="10989" end="10998" title="Blairmore, Argyll" label="Blairmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778262" start="11000" end="11006" title="Bonawe" label="Bonawe"/>
<link wikidata="Q51906" start="11008" end="11015" title="Bowmore" label="Bowmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q913663" start="11017" end="11032" title="Bridge of Orchy" label="Bridge of Orchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q277053" start="11034" end="11042" title="Cairndow" label="Cairndow"/>
<link wikidata="Q212088" start="11044" end="11052" title="Cardross, Argyll and Bute" label="Cardross"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778473" start="11054" end="11063" title="Carradale" label="Carradale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124860" start="11065" end="11072" title="Clachan, Kintyre" label="Clachan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5017679" start="11074" end="11083" title="Cairnbaan" label="Cairnbaan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012490" start="11085" end="11096" title="Campbeltown" label="Campbeltown"/>
<link wikidata="Q723195" start="11098" end="11119" title="Clachan of Glendaruel" label="Clachan of Glendaruel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124925" start="11121" end="11128" title="Cladich" label="Cladich"/>
<link wikidata="Q247920" start="11130" end="11137" title="Clynder" label="Clynder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5144793" start="11139" end="11147" title="Colgrain" label="Colgrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145735" start="11149" end="11160" title="Colintraive" label="Colintraive"/>
<link wikidata="Q5161721" start="11162" end="11168" title="Connel" label="Connel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778769" start="11170" end="11178" title="Coulport (village)" label="Coulport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138008" start="11180" end="11184" title="Cove, Dunbartonshire" label="Cove"/>
<link wikidata="Q28966475" start="11186" end="11192" title="Coylet" label="Coylet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778807" start="11194" end="11206" title="Craigendoran" label="Craigendoran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018742" start="11208" end="11218" title="Craighouse" label="Craighouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920373" start="11220" end="11229" title="Craignure" label="Craignure"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182279" start="11231" end="11243" title="Craobh Haven" label="Craobh Haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q16885236" start="11245" end="11251" title="Crarae" label="Crarae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185734" start="11253" end="11259" title="Crinan (village)" label="Crinan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124859" start="11261" end="11269" title="Clachaig" label="Clachaig"/>
<link wikidata="Q28434566" start="11271" end="11285" title="Carrick Castle (village)" label="Carrick Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020251" start="11288" end="11294" title="Dunoon" label="Dunoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5210233" start="11296" end="11304" title="Dalavich" label="Dalavich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109293" start="11306" end="11314" title="Dalmally" label="Dalmally"/>
<link wikidata="Q16886689" start="11316" end="11329" title="Druimdrishaig" label="Druimdrishaig"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309178" start="11331" end="11341" title="Drumlemble" label="Drumlemble"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136990" start="11343" end="11351" title="Duchlage" label="Duchlage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017182" start="11353" end="11359" title="Dunbeg" label="Dunbeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q16880196" start="11363" end="11374" title="Edentaggart" label="Edentaggart"/>
<link wikidata="Q628776" start="11377" end="11389" title="Faslane Port" label="Faslane Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467602" start="11391" end="11395" title="Ford, Argyll" label="Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002171" start="11397" end="11404" title="Furnace, Scotland" label="Furnace"/>
<link wikidata="Q28966453" start="11407" end="11418" title="Glenbranter" label="Glenbranter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020239" start="11420" end="11432" title="Garelochhead" label="Garelochhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q5530138" start="11434" end="11442" title="Geilston" label="Geilston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5568167" start="11444" end="11452" title="Glenbarr" label="Glenbarr"/>
<link wikidata="Q956688" start="11454" end="11461" title="Glencoe, Highland" label="Glencoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q16885488" start="11463" end="11473" title="Glenmallan" label="Glenmallan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5610116" start="11475" end="11483" title="Grogport" label="Grogport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007088" start="11486" end="11497" title="Helensburgh" label="Helensburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944776" start="11499" end="11511" title="Hunters Quay" label="Hunters Quay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009637" start="11514" end="11522" title="Innellan" label="Innellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q219530" start="11524" end="11533" title="Inveraray" label="Inveraray"/>
<link wikidata="Q16889033" start="11535" end="11543" title="Inverbeg" label="Inverbeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q47923" start="11545" end="11560" title="Inveruglas Isle" label="Inveruglas Isle"/>
<link wikidata="Q28001576" start="11562" end="11575" title="Inverchaolain" label="Inverchaolain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6357027" start="11578" end="11583" title="Kames, Argyll and Bute" label="Kames"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11585" end="11594" title="Keillmore" label="Keillmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q6406546" start="11596" end="11604" title="Kilberry" label="Kilberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060999" start="11606" end="11620" title="Kilchattan Bay" label="Kilchattan Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6407059" start="11622" end="11632" title="Kilchenzie" label="Kilchenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q211892" start="11634" end="11644" title="Kilcreggan" label="Kilcreggan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15238475" start="11646" end="11654" title="Kilmadan" label="Kilmadan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002111" start="11656" end="11665" title="Kilmartin" label="Kilmartin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11667" end="11674" title="Kilmore, Argyll" label="Kilmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q723315" start="11676" end="11682" title="Kilmun" label="Kilmun"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11684" end="11693" title="Kilninver" label="Kilninver"/>
<link wikidata="Q10947543" start="11695" end="11705" title="Kilmelford" label="Kilmelford"/>
<link wikidata="Q27925283" start="11707" end="11715" title="Kilfinan" label="Kilfinan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6415924" start="11717" end="11721" title="Kirn, Argyll" label="Kirn"/>
<link wikidata="Q10981262" start="11724" end="11733" title="Lagavulin" label="Lagavulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368230" start="11735" end="11742" title="Loch Awe" label="Lochawe"/>
<link wikidata="Q10999508" start="11744" end="11752" title="Lochgair" label="Lochgair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017159" start="11754" end="11766" title="Lochgilphead" label="Lochgilphead"/>
<link wikidata="Q6665107" start="11768" end="11780" title="Lochgoilhead" label="Lochgoilhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016323" start="11782" end="11786" title="Luss" label="Luss"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778018" start="11789" end="11801" title="Machrihanish" label="Machrihanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q98605475" start="11803" end="11812" title="Millhouse, Argyll" label="Millhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q24993503" start="11814" end="11820" title="Minard, Argyll" label="Minard"/>
<link wikidata="Q499893" start="11822" end="11830" title="Muasdale" label="Muasdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q935702" start="11833" end="11837" title="Oban" label="Oban"/>
<link wikidata="Q11027651" start="11839" end="11846" title="Ormsary" label="Ormsary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7109389" start="11848" end="11859" title="Otter Ferry" label="Otter Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162994" start="11862" end="11870" title="Peninver" label="Peninver"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231530" start="11872" end="11882" title="Portavadie" label="Portavadie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2104659" start="11884" end="11895" title="Port Askaig" label="Port Askaig"/>
<link wikidata="Q248076" start="11897" end="11911" title="Port Bannatyne" label="Port Bannatyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q51915" start="11913" end="11927" title="Port Charlotte, Islay" label="Port Charlotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019330" start="11929" end="11939" title="Port Ellen" label="Port Ellen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231823" start="11941" end="11952" title="Portincaple" label="Portincaple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002832" start="11954" end="11965" title="Portnahaven" label="Portnahaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231842" start="11967" end="11974" title="Portkil" label="Portkil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283303" start="11977" end="11983" title="Rahane" label="Rahane"/>
<link wikidata="Q219427" start="11985" end="11988" title="Rhu" label="Rhu"/>
<link wikidata="Q213377" start="11990" end="11998" title="Rosneath" label="Rosneath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818828" start="12000" end="12008" title="Rothesay" label="Rothesay"/>
<link wikidata="Q219509" start="12011" end="12018" title="Saddell" label="Saddell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7404274" start="12020" end="12025" title="Salen, Mull" label="Salen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913513" start="12027" end="12035" title="Sandbank, Scotland" label="Sandbank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7487910" start="12037" end="12044" title="Shandon, Scotland" label="Shandon"/>
<link wikidata="Q496395" start="12046" end="12054" title="Skipness" label="Skipness"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569511" start="12056" end="12064" title="Southend, Kintyre" label="Southend"/>
<link wikidata="Q7616000" start="12066" end="12075" title="Stewarton, Kintyre" label="Stewarton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7620870" start="12077" end="12085" title="Strachur" label="Strachur"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632725" start="12087" end="12094" title="Succoth, Scotland" label="Succoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033190" start="12096" end="12102" title="Strone" label="Strone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7592774" start="12104" end="12117" title="St Catherines, Argyll" label="St Catherines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130032" start="12120" end="12137" title="Tarbert, Kintyre" label="Tarbert (Kintyre)"/>
<link wikidata="Q596798" start="12139" end="12162" title="Tarbet, Dunbartonshire" label="Tarbet (Dunbartonshire)"/>
<link wikidata="Q212090" start="12164" end="12173" title="Tayinloan" label="Tayinloan"/>
<link wikidata="Q499886" start="12175" end="12183" title="Taynuilt" label="Taynuilt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3399632" start="12185" end="12195" title="Tayvallich" label="Tayvallich"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801613" start="12197" end="12210" title="Tighnabruaich" label="Tighnabruaich"/>
<link wikidata="Q416901" start="12212" end="12221" title="Tobermory, Mull" label="Tobermory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825824" start="12223" end="12232" title="Torinturk" label="Torinturk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829561" start="12234" end="12240" title="Toward" label="Toward"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994047" start="12243" end="12255" title="Whistlefield, Argyll" label="Whistlefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q13156887" start="12257" end="12267" title="Whitehouse, Kintyre" label="Whitehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6633548" start="12323" end="12356" title="List of places in Argyll and Bute" label="List of places in Argyll and Bute"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143033" wikidata="Q200742" url="?curid=143033" title="Himno Nacional Mexicano">
<text>The &quot;Mexican National Anthem&quot;, also known by its incipit &quot;Mexicans, at the Cry of War&quot;, is the official national anthem of the United Mexican States. Its lyrics, composed by poet Francisco González Bocanegra after a Federal contest in 1853, allude to historical Mexican victories in battle and cries of defending the homeland. In 1854, Jaime Nunó composed the music to the lyrics after a request from González. The national anthem, consisting of ten stanzas and a chorus, effectively entered into use on September 16, 1854.

==Composition==
===Lyrics competition===
On November 12, 1853, President Antonio López de Santa Anna announced a competition to write a national anthem for Mexico. The competition offered a prize for the best poetic composition representing patriotic ideals. Francisco González Bocanegra, a talented poet, was not interested in participating in the competition. He argued that writing love poems involved very different skills from the ones required to write a national anthem. His fiancée, Guadalupe González del Pino (or Pili), had undaunted faith in her fiancé&#x27;s poetic skills and was displeased with his constant refusal to participate in spite of her constant prodding and requests from their friends. Under false pretenses, she lured him to a secluded bedroom in her parents&#x27; house, locked him into the room, and refused to let him out until he produced an entry for the competition. Inside the room in which he was temporarily imprisoned were pictures depicting various events in Mexican history which helped to inspire his work. After four hours of fluent (albeit forced) inspiration, Francisco regained his freedom by slipping all ten verses of his creation under the door. After Francisco received approval from his fiancée and her father, he submitted the poem and won the competition by unanimous vote. González was announced the winner in the publication Official Journal of the Federation (DOF) on February 3, 1854.

=== Music competition ===
A musical composition was chosen at the same time as the lyrics. The winner was Juan Bottesini, but his entry was disliked due to aesthetics. This rejection caused a second national contest to find music for the lyrics. At the end of the second contest, the music that was chosen for González&#x27;s lyrics was composed by Jaime Nunó, the then Catalonian-born King of Spain&#x27;s band leader. At the time of the second anthem competition, Nunó was the leader of several Mexican military bands. He had been invited to direct these bands by President Santa Anna, whom he had met in Cuba. About the time that Nunó first came to Mexico to start performing with the bands, Santa Anna was making his announcement about creating a national anthem for Mexico. Nunó&#x27;s anthem music composition was made like masterpieces of classical music, with a high quality in composition, and was chosen. Out of the few musical compositions submitted, Nunó&#x27;s music, titled &quot;God and Freedom&quot; (&quot;Dios y libertad&quot;), was chosen as the winner on August 12, 1854. The song was officially adopted as the Mexican national anthem on Independence Day, September 16 of that same year. The inaugural performance was directed by Juan Bottesini, sung by soprano Claudia Florenti and tenor Lorenzo Salvi at the Santa Anna Theatre.

== Lyrics ==
=== Current lyrics ===
Since 1943, the full national anthem officially consists of the chorus and the first, fifth, sixth, and tenth stanzas (with the chorus interspersed between each stanza and performed again at the end). The modification of the lyrics was ordered by President Manuel Ávila Camacho in a decree printed in the Diario Oficial de la Federación.

When the national anthem is played at sporting events such as the Olympic Games and the FIFA World Cup, an abridged form (chorus, stanza I, chorus) is used. An unofficial semi-abridged form (chorus, stanza I, chorus, stanza X, chorus) has gained some acceptance in television and radio programming.


=== Original lyrics ===
The following is the original and complete version of the anthem as it became known in 1853.


== Copyright status ==
An urban legend about the copyright status of the anthem states that years after its first performance, Nunó&#x27;s family sold the musical rights to a German music publishing company named Wagner House. Originally, Nunó was supposed to have turned the music rights over to the state in exchange for a prize from the Mexican government. However, according to the myth, the copyright changed hands again, this time to Nunó himself and two Americans, Harry Henneman and Phil Hill.

In reality, this is not correct. It is true that Nunó, Henneman and Hill did register the music with the company BMI (BMI Work #568879), with the Edward B. Marks Music Company as the listed publisher of the anthem. This might be the version that some have suggested is copyrighted in the United States. However, United States copyright law declares the Mexican anthem to be in the public domain inside the United States, since both the lyrics and music were published before 1923. Furthermore, under Mexican copyright law, Article 155 states that the government holds moral rights, but not property rights, to symbols of the state, such as the national anthem, coat of arms and the national flag.

== National regulations ==
In the second chapter of the Law on the National Arms, Flag, and Anthem (), the national anthem is described in very brief terms. While Articles 2 and 3 discuss in detail the coat of arms and the flag, respectively, Article 4 mentions only that the national anthem will be designated by law. Article 4 also mentions that a copy of the lyrics and the musical notation will be kept at two locations, the General National Archive and at the National Library, located in the National Museum of History ().

Chapter 5 of the Law goes into more detail about how to honor, respect and properly perform the national anthem. Article 38 states that the singing, playing, reproduction and circulation of the national anthem are regulated by law and that any interpretation of the anthem must be performed in a &quot;respectful way and in a scope that allows [one] to observe the due solemnity&quot; of the anthem. Article 39 prohibits the anthem from being altered in any fashion, prohibits it from being sung for commercial or promotional purposes, and also disallows the singing or playing of national anthems from other nations, unless you have permission from the Secretary of the Interior () and the diplomatic official from the nation in question. The Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of Public Education (), in Article 40, must grant permission for all reproductions of the national anthem to be produced, unless the anthem is being played during official ceremonies carried on radio or television. Article 41 states that the national anthem is required to be played at the sign-on or sign-off of radio and television programming; with the advent of 24-hour programming schedules in the 1990s and 2000s, many stations now do so at or as close to midnight and 6 a.m. local time as possible by interpretation of the former traditional times of sign-on and sign-off. The extra requirement for television programming is that photos of the Mexican flag must be displayed at the same time the anthem is playing.

Article 42 states that the anthem may only be used during the following occasions: solemn acts of official, civic, cultural, scholastic or sport character. The anthem can also be played to render honors to the Mexican flag and to the President of Mexico. If the national anthem is being used to honor the national flag or the President, the short version of the anthem is played. Article 43 says that special musical honors may be paid to the President and the flag, but no more than once during the same ceremony. Article 44 says that during solemn occasions, if a choir is singing the anthem, the military bands will keep silent. Article 45 says that those who are watching the national anthem performance must stand at attention (&quot;firmes&quot;) and remove any headgear. Article 46 states that the national anthem must be taught to children who are attending primary or secondary school; this article was amended in 2005 to add pre-school to the list. The article also states that each school in the National Education System () will be asked to sing the national anthem each year. Article 47 states that in an official ceremony in which is need to play another anthem, the Mexican anthem will be played first, then the guest state&#x27;s national anthem. Article 48 states that at embassies and consulates of Mexico, the national anthem is played at ceremonies of a solemn nature that involves the Mexican people. If the anthem is played outside of Mexico, Article 48 requires that the Secretary of External Relations (), through proper channels, must grant permission for the national anthem to be played and will also ensure that the anthem is not sung for commercial purposes.

== Cultural significance ==

At the time the Mexican national anthem was written, Mexico was still facing the effects of a bitter defeat in the Mexican–American War at the hands of the United States. The country felt demoralized and also divided, due to the cession of more than half of its territory due to its defeat to the United States. According to historian Javier Garciadiego, who spoke at a 2004 ceremony commemorating the 150th anniversary of the national anthem&#x27;s adoption, the song disregards divisions and strife and encourages national unity. On that same date, Mexico City and other parts of the country stopped what they were doing and performed a nationwide singing of the national anthem. Individuals from other countries also participated, mostly at diplomatic offices or at locations where a high concentration of Mexican expatriates are found. The national anthem has also been described as one of the symbols of the &quot;Mexican identity&quot;.

On the rare occasions when someone performs the national anthem incorrectly, the federal government has been known to impose penalties to maintain the &quot;dignity&quot; of the national symbols. One example is when a performer forgot some of the lyrics at an association football match in Guadalajara, she was fined $400 MXN by the Interior Ministry and released an apology letter to the country through the Interior Ministry. Another infamous case is that of banda musician Julio Preciado, who performed the national anthem at the inauguration of the Caribbean Baseball Series in 2009; El Universal reported that &quot;in a slow tone that has nothing to do with the rhythm of the National Anthem, the singer literally forgot the lyrics of the second stanza and mixed it with others&quot;, this earned the fanfare of those who were present at the stadium (and those watching it live on TV), some of the people attending the inauguration started shouting the phrases &quot;¡sáquenlo!, ¡no se lo sabe! ¡fuera, fuera!&quot; (Get him out! He doesn&#x27;t know it! Out, out!).

In addition, the national anthem is sometimes used as a kind of shibboleth: a tool against people who might not be &quot;true Mexicans&quot; (as opposed to migrants from another Latin American country who pretend that they are from Mexico). The suspected are asked to sing Mexico&#x27;s national anthem and it is widely expected that only &quot;true Mexicans&quot; will know the lyrics and tune and thus will be able to sing it. In one case, a young man of Afro-Mexican descent was stopped by police and forced to sing the national anthem to prove his nationality. In a separate incident in Japan, police officers asked four people to sing the Mexican national anthem after they were arrested in Tokyo on charges of breaking and entering. However, when they could not sing the song, it was discovered that they were Colombians holding forged Mexican passports. They were later charged with more counts on theft of merchandise and money.

The verse (&#x27;If, however, a foreign enemy would dare&#x27;) uses and , which are archaic poetic forms.
Modern prose speakers would use .
Thus, the verse has sometimes been misunderstood as (&#x27;Masiosare, a strange enemy&#x27;) with , an otherwise unused word, as the name of the enemy.
&quot;Masiosare&quot; has been used in Mexico as a first name for real and fictional people and as a common name ( or the homophone ) for the anthem itself or for a threat against the country.

== In other languages ==
Though the &quot;de facto&quot; language of Mexico is Spanish, there are still people who only speak indigenous languages. On December 8, 2005, Article 39 of the national symbols law was adopted to allow for the translation of the lyrics into the native languages. The official translation is performed by the National Institute of Indigenous Languages ().

Officially, the national anthem has been translated into the following native languages: Chinanteco, Hña Hñu, Mixtec, Maya, Nahuatl and Tenek. Other native groups have translated the anthem into their respective language, but it has not been sanctioned by the Government.


== Musical score ==
== Notes ==
== References ==
== External links ==

* President of Mexico&#x27;s page about the anthem, with two recordings 
* Descargas de Videos y audios</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q200742" start="10" end="33" title="Himno Nacional Mexicano" label="Mexican National Anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q200742" start="73" end="100" title="Himno Nacional Mexicano" label="Mexicans, at the Cry of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q23691" start="124" end="139" title="national anthem" label="national anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="147" end="168" title="United Mexican States" label="United Mexican States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051533" start="199" end="227" title="Francisco González Bocanegra" label="Francisco González Bocanegra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136795" start="356" end="366" title="Jaime Nunó" label="Jaime Nunó"/>
<link wikidata="Q628004" start="608" end="617" title="President of Mexico" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q189145" start="618" end="645" title="Antonio López de Santa Anna" label="Antonio López de Santa Anna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051533" start="804" end="832" title="Francisco González Bocanegra" label="Francisco González Bocanegra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051533" start="1036" end="1063" title="Guadalupe González del Pino" label="Guadalupe González del Pino"/>
<link wikidata="Q212763" start="1542" end="1557" title="History of Mexico" label="Mexican history"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079510" start="1923" end="1957" title="Diario Oficial de la Federación" label="Official Journal of the Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q354101" start="2092" end="2106" title="Juan Bottesini" label="Juan Bottesini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136795" start="2335" end="2345" title="Jaime Nunó" label="Jaime Nunó"/>
<link wikidata="Q244504" start="2356" end="2366" title="Catalan people" label="Catalonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q889833" start="2372" end="2385" title="King of Spain" label="King of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q189145" start="2562" end="2572" title="Antonio López de Santa Anna" label="Santa Anna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039931" start="2593" end="2597" title="Spanish Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="2832" end="2847" title="classical music" label="classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145411" start="3144" end="3160" title="Grito de Dolores" label="Independence Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q30903" start="3260" end="3267" title="soprano" label="soprano"/>
<link wikidata="Q5129171" start="3268" end="3284" title="Claudia Florenti" label="Claudia Florenti"/>
<link wikidata="Q27914" start="3289" end="3294" title="tenor" label="tenor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353890" start="3295" end="3308" title="Lorenzo Salvi" label="Lorenzo Salvi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5884540" start="3316" end="3334" title="Santa Anna Theatre" label="Santa Anna Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q315626" start="3630" end="3650" title="Manuel Ávila Camacho" label="Manuel Ávila Camacho"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079510" start="3678" end="3709" title="Diario Oficial de la Federación" label="Diario Oficial de la Federación"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="3778" end="3791" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="3800" end="3814" title="FIFA World Cup" label="FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="4593" end="4602" title="United States" label="Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q891885" start="4748" end="4751" title="Broadcast Music Incorporated" label="BMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q842270" start="4947" end="4974" title="United States copyright law" label="United States copyright law"/>
<link wikidata="Q19652" start="5016" end="5029" title="public domain" label="public domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057599" start="5203" end="5215" title="Moral rights (copyright law)" label="moral rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q170867" start="5296" end="5308" title="Coat of Arms of Mexico" label="coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q122462" start="5317" end="5330" title="Flag of Mexico" label="national flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503521" start="5389" end="5431" title="Law on the National Arms, Flag, and Anthem" label="Law on the National Arms, Flag, and Anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q170867" start="5535" end="5547" title="Coat of Arms of Mexico" label="coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q122462" start="5556" end="5560" title="Flag of Mexico" label="flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860534" start="5762" end="5786" title="General National Archive (Mexico)" label="General National Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q872" start="6845" end="6850" title="radio" label="radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="6854" end="6864" title="television" label="television"/>
<link wikidata="Q23808804" start="6941" end="6948" title="sign-on" label="sign-on"/>
<link wikidata="Q23808804" start="6952" end="6960" title="sign-off" label="sign-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q628004" start="7608" end="7627" title="President of Mexico" label="President of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="9207" end="9227" title="Mexican–American War" label="Mexican–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="9248" end="9261" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186695" start="9321" end="9328" title="Mexican Cession" label="cession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="9643" end="9654" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q476713" start="9909" end="9919" title="expatriate" label="expatriate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="10296" end="10316" title="association football" label="association football"/>
<link wikidata="Q9022" start="10326" end="10337" title="Guadalajara, Jalisco" label="Guadalajara"/>
<link wikidata="Q4730" start="10358" end="10361" title="MXN" label="MXN"/>
<link wikidata="Q2812726" start="10497" end="10502" title="Banda music" label="banda"/>
<link wikidata="Q6309481" start="10512" end="10526" title="Julio Preciado" label="Julio Preciado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188403" start="10589" end="10614" title="Caribbean Series" label="Caribbean Baseball Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321495" start="10624" end="10636" title="El Universal (Mexico City)" label="El Universal"/>
<link wikidata="Q840625" start="11174" end="11184" title="shibboleth" label="shibboleth"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="11288" end="11301" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921225" start="11567" end="11579" title="Afro-Mexican" label="Afro-Mexican"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="11806" end="11811" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="11926" end="11934" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156877" start="12224" end="12237" title="mondegreen" label="misunderstood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661395" start="12661" end="12681" title="Languages of Mexico" label="indigenous languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q3300362" start="12870" end="12912" title="National Institute of Indigenous Languages" label="National Institute of Indigenous Languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q35828" start="13007" end="13017" title="Chinanteco" label="Chinanteco"/>
<link wikidata="Q36355" start="13019" end="13026" title="Hña Hñu" label="Hña Hñu"/>
<link wikidata="Q36363" start="13028" end="13034" title="Mixtec language" label="Mixtec"/>
<link wikidata="Q13354" start="13036" end="13040" title="Yucatec Maya language" label="Maya"/>
<link wikidata="Q13300" start="13042" end="13049" title="Nahuatl" label="Nahuatl"/>
<link wikidata="Q35573" start="13054" end="13059" title="Tenek" label="Tenek"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143036" wikidata="Q208121" url="?curid=143036" title="West Dunbartonshire">
<text>West Dunbartonshire (; , ) is one of the 32 local government council areas of Scotland. The area lies to the north-west of the Glasgow City council area and contains many of Glasgow&#x27;s commuter towns and villages. West Dunbartonshire also borders Argyll and Bute, East Dunbartonshire, Renfrewshire and Stirling.

The council area was formed in 1996 from the former Clydebank district and the eastern part of Dumbarton district, which had both been part of Strathclyde Region.

West Dunbartonshire has three main urban areas: Clydebank, Dumbarton and the Vale of Leven. The area also includes the intervening rural areas, including the Kilpatrick Hills and the south-eastern bank of Loch Lomond. The council is based at 16 Church Street in Dumbarton, although Clydebank is the largest town.

==History==
West Dunbartonshire was created in 1996 under the Local Government etc. (Scotland) Act 1994, which abolished the regions and districts which had been created in 1975, replacing them with unitary council areas. West Dunbartonshire covered the area of the abolished Clydebank district and the eastern part of Dumbarton district. In a referendum in 1994 the largely rural western part of the old Dumbarton district, including the town of Helensburgh, had voted to join Argyll and Bute rather than stay with Dumbarton.

The 1994 act originally named the new district &quot;Dumbarton and Clydebank&quot;, but the shadow authority elected in 1995 requested a change of name to &quot;West Dunbartonshire&quot;, which was agreed by the government before the new council area came into force.

==Communities==
The area is divided into 17 community council areas, 10 of which have community councils as at 2023 (being those with asterisks in the list below):

*Alexandria*
*Balloch and Haldane
*Bonhill and Dalmonach*
*Bowling and Milton*
*Clydebank East*
*Dalmuir and Mountblow
*Dumbarton East and Central*
*Dumbarton North
*Dumbarton West
*Duntocher and Hardgate
*Faifley*
*Kilmaronock*
*Linnvale and Drumry
*Old Kilpatrick*
*Parkhall, North Kilbowie and Central*
*Renton
*Silverton and Overtoun*
==Governance==
The council comprises 22 councillors elected from 6 wards.

===Political control===
The first election was held in 1995, initially operating as a shadow authority alongside the outgoing authorities until the new system came into force on 1 April 1996. Political control of West Dunbartonshire Council since 1996 has been as follows:

===Leadership===
The leaders of the council since 1996 have been:

===Composition===
Following the 2022 election and subsequent by-elections and changes of allegiance up to August 2024, the composition of the council was:

The next election is due in 2027.

===Premises===
The council is based at the former Burgh Hall at 16 Church Street in Dumbarton. It also has an area office in the main shopping centre in Clydebank.

When the council was created in 1996, it inherited several buildings from its predecessors, including Municipal Buildings and Crosslet House from Dumbarton District Council, Clydebank Town Hall and the nearby Council Offices on Rosebery Place from Clydebank District Council, and the County Buildings, Dumbarton from Strathclyde Regional Council.

The council gradually consolidated its offices, with Crosslet House being demolished in 2015, the Rosebery Place offices being demolished in 2017, and the County Buildings being demolished in 2019.

In 2018 the council consolidated most of its offices to Burgh Hall, which had been vacant for some years. The front part of the 1866 building was retained and a modern office complex built to the rear. The Municipal Buildings in Dumbarton are still used by the council as a register office, whilst Clydebank Town Hall is now primarily an events venue.

==Elections==
Since 2007 elections have been held every five years under the single transferable vote system, introduced by the Local Governance (Scotland) Act 2004. Election results since 1995 have been as follows:


===Wards===

Six multi-member wards were created for the 2007 election, replacing 22 single-member wards which had been in place since the creation of the council in 1995:

==Wider politics==
===Independence referendum===
On 18 September 2014, West Dunbartonshire was one of the four council areas which had a majority &quot;Yes&quot; vote in the Scottish Independence Referendum at 54% with an 87.9% turnout rate.

==Settlements==
Largest settlements by population:

==Main sights==
* Erskine Bridge
* Dumbarton Castle
* Inchmurrin, the largest freshwater island in the British Isles
* Kilpatrick Hills
* Loch Lomond
* Loch Lomond and the Trossachs National Park
* Overtoun Bridge
* River Leven

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q208121" start="0" end="19" title="West Dunbartonshire" label="West Dunbartonshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q969045" start="44" end="60" title="Local government in Scotland" label="local government"/>
<link wikidata="Q461231" start="61" end="74" title="council areas" label="council areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="78" end="86" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q130637" start="127" end="152" title="Glasgow City council area" label="Glasgow City council area"/>
<link wikidata="Q828359" start="189" end="202" title="commuter town" label="commuter town"/>
<link wikidata="Q202174" start="251" end="266" title="Argyll and Bute" label="Argyll and Bute"/>
<link wikidata="Q211889" start="268" end="287" title="East Dunbartonshire" label="East Dunbartonshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q211091" start="289" end="301" title="Renfrewshire" label="Renfrewshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q217838" start="306" end="314" title="Stirling (council area)" label="Stirling"/>
<link wikidata="Q86749891" start="369" end="387" title="Clydebank (district)" label="Clydebank district"/>
<link wikidata="Q20113814" start="412" end="430" title="Dumbarton (district)" label="Dumbarton district"/>
<link wikidata="Q124661" start="460" end="471" title="Strathclyde" label="Strathclyde"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="472" end="478" title="Regions and districts of Scotland#Regions" label="Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q996502" start="529" end="538" title="Clydebank" label="Clydebank"/>
<link wikidata="Q34779" start="540" end="549" title="Dumbarton" label="Dumbarton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7909549" start="558" end="571" title="Vale of Leven" label="Vale of Leven"/>
<link wikidata="Q6408146" start="639" end="655" title="Kilpatrick Hills" label="Kilpatrick Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q208926" start="686" end="697" title="Loch Lomond" label="Loch Lomond"/>
<link wikidata="Q17572083" start="723" end="739" title="Dumbarton Burgh Hall" label="16 Church Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258386" start="857" end="898" title="Local Government etc. (Scotland) Act 1994" label="Local Government etc. (Scotland) Act 1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q383493" start="920" end="941" title="Local government areas of Scotland (1975–1996)" label="regions and districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176207" start="1002" end="1014" title="council area" label="council area"/>
<link wikidata="Q86749891" start="1071" end="1089" title="Clydebank (district)" label="Clydebank district"/>
<link wikidata="Q20113814" start="1114" end="1132" title="Dumbarton (district)" label="Dumbarton district"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007088" start="1242" end="1253" title="Helensburgh" label="Helensburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q202174" start="1273" end="1288" title="Argyll and Bute" label="Argyll and Bute"/>
<link wikidata="Q6612187" start="1636" end="1659" title="list of community council areas in Scotland" label="community council areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403338" start="1678" end="1695" title="community council" label="community council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240659" start="1758" end="1768" title="Alexandria, West Dunbartonshire" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q805302" start="1771" end="1790" title="Balloch, West Dunbartonshire" label="Balloch and Haldane"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093370" start="1792" end="1813" title="Bonhill" label="Bonhill and Dalmonach"/>
<link wikidata="Q895452" start="1816" end="1823" title="Bowling, West Dunbartonshire" label="Bowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3577138" start="1828" end="1834" title="Milton, West Dunbartonshire" label="Milton"/>
<link wikidata="Q996502" start="1837" end="1846" title="Clydebank" label="Clydebank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158064" start="1854" end="1861" title="Dalmuir" label="Dalmuir"/>
<link wikidata="Q996502" start="1866" end="1875" title="Mountblow" label="Mountblow"/>
<link wikidata="Q34779" start="1877" end="1886" title="Dumbarton" label="Dumbarton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5315758" start="1939" end="1948" title="Duntocher" label="Duntocher"/>
<link wikidata="Q15059301" start="1953" end="1961" title="Hardgate" label="Hardgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5429651" start="1963" end="1970" title="Faifley" label="Faifley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524430" start="1973" end="1984" title="Kilmaronock" label="Kilmaronock"/>
<link wikidata="Q996502" start="1987" end="1995" title="Linnvale" label="Linnvale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309277" start="2000" end="2006" title="Drumry" label="Drumry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064938" start="2008" end="2022" title="Old Kilpatrick" label="Old Kilpatrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q996502" start="2041" end="2049" title="Kilbowie" label="Kilbowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313552" start="2064" end="2070" title="Renton, West Dunbartonshire" label="Renton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7516835" start="2072" end="2081" title="Silverton, Dumbarton" label="Silverton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015449" start="2466" end="2488" title="leader of the council" label="leaders of the council"/>
<link wikidata="Q112083650" start="2544" end="2557" title="2022 West Dunbartonshire Council election" label="2022 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q17572083" start="2753" end="2763" title="Dumbarton Burgh Hall" label="Burgh Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q17848306" start="2970" end="2989" title="Municipal Buildings, Dumbarton" label="Municipal Buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q20113814" start="3014" end="3040" title="Dumbarton (district)" label="Dumbarton District Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q17848009" start="3042" end="3061" title="Clydebank Town Hall" label="Clydebank Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q86749891" start="3116" end="3142" title="Clydebank (district)" label="Clydebank District Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q115743057" start="3152" end="3179" title="County Buildings, Dumbarton" label="County Buildings, Dumbarton"/>
<link wikidata="Q124661" start="3185" end="3196" title="Strathclyde" label="Strathclyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q29127138" start="3689" end="3704" title="register office" label="register office"/>
<link wikidata="Q115807" start="3845" end="3869" title="single transferable vote" label="single transferable vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664013" start="3896" end="3932" title="Local Governance (Scotland) Act 2004" label="Local Governance (Scotland) Act 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458570" start="4333" end="4365" title="Scottish Independence Referendum" label="Scottish Independence Referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5395818" start="4472" end="4486" title="Erskine Bridge" label="Erskine Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2177200" start="4489" end="4505" title="Dumbarton Castle" label="Dumbarton Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q47921" start="4508" end="4518" title="Inchmurrin" label="Inchmurrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6408146" start="4573" end="4589" title="Kilpatrick Hills" label="Kilpatrick Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q208926" start="4592" end="4603" title="Loch Lomond" label="Loch Lomond"/>
<link wikidata="Q116661" start="4606" end="4649" title="Loch Lomond and the Trossachs National Park" label="Loch Lomond and the Trossachs National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q17848538" start="4652" end="4667" title="Overtoun Bridge" label="Overtoun Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2559923" start="4670" end="4681" title="River Leven, Dunbartonshire" label="River Leven"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143039" wikidata="Q206926" url="?curid=143039" title="North Ayrshire">
<text>North Ayrshire (, ) is one of 32 council areas in Scotland. The council area borders Inverclyde to the north, Renfrewshire and East Renfrewshire to the northeast, and East Ayrshire and South Ayrshire to the east and south respectively. The local authority is North Ayrshire Council, formed in 1996 with the same boundaries as the district of Cunninghame which existed from 1975 to 1996.

Located in the west central Lowlands with the Firth of Clyde to its west, the council area covers the northern portion of the historic county of Ayrshire, in addition to the islands of Arran and The Cumbraes from the historic county of Buteshire. North Ayrshire has a population of roughly people. Its largest towns are Irvine and Kilwinning.

==History==
North Ayrshire was created in 1996 under the Local Government etc. (Scotland) Act 1994, which replaced Scotland&#x27;s previous local government structure of upper-tier regions and lower-tier districts with unitary council areas providing all local government services. North Ayrshire covered the same area as the abolished Cunninghame district, and also took over the functions of the abolished Strathclyde Regional Council within the area. The area&#x27;s name references its location within the historic county of Ayrshire, which had been abolished for local government purposes in 1975 when Cunninghame district and Strathclyde region had been created, although the islands of Arran and The Cumbraes had been in Buteshire prior to 1975. North Ayrshire forms part of the Ayrshire and Arran lieutenancy area. 

==Geography==
The council headquarters are located in Irvine, which is North Ayrshire&#x27;s largest town. The area also contains the towns of Ardrossan, Beith, Dalry, Kilbirnie, Kilwinning, Largs, Saltcoats, Skelmorlie, Stevenston, West Kilbride, as well as the Isle of Arran and Great and Little Cumbrae. The Isle of Arran covers nearly half of the council area&#x27;s territory, but is home to less than 4% of the population. North Ayrshire is known for its rural countryside, coastlines, beaches and landmarks.

The towns in the north of the area, Skelmorlie, Largs, Fairlie and West Kilbride are affluent commuting towns and with them being on the coast, are very popular with tourists during the summer months. Towns in the south include Ardrossan, Saltcoats and Stevenston. Towards the south of the area is Kilwinning and Irvine, the main settlement and largest town in the area. The inland towns of Dalry, Kilbirnie and Beith were steel towns with large steel mills, but these are long gone. Tourism is the main industry on Arran and Cumbrae; however, the number of holiday homes on the latter has begun to squeeze locals out of the housing market. Regeneration is currently taking place at Ardrossan Harbour and Irvine town centre, and there has been a rapid increase in the construction of new housing in recent years.

Kelburn Castle, Fairlie, is the home of the 10th Earl of Glasgow, Patrick Robin Archibald Boyle. The grounds have belonged to the Boyle family since the 1100s. In 2007, the castle was transformed by the Graffiti Project.

==Economy==

North Ayrshire has a slightly higher level of unemployment compared to the Scottish average. North Ayrshire launched an Economic Recovery and Renewal Strategy in September 2020 focusing on economic recovery and a renewal approach which aims to sets out a comprehensive plan for an inclusive and green economic recovery for North Ayrshire. An £8.8 million Investment Fund will be used as a key element of a Green New Deal by:

* Maximising renewable energy generation using the council&#x27;s land and assets.
* The creation of a new Green Jobs Fund to ensure a just transition for North Ayrshire.
* Investing in commercial estate including improving sustainability.
* Tackling vacant and derelict land and buildings in town centres.
* Supporting community economic development including through community regeneration and ownership.
* A tree-planting programme to support carbon absorption.

In May 2020, North Ayrshire Council became the first council in Scotland to become a Community Wealth Building (CWB) Council, setting out a new economic model focused on wellbeing and inclusion. North Ayrshire Council seeks to use Community Wealth Building objectives to support the recovery and renewal of North Ayrshire by creating an economy that works for people, place and planet.

The North Ayrshire approach will see the creation of a new £660,000 Community Wealth Building Business Fund to provide assistance to local business and facilitating the development of co-operatives, employee ownership and social enterprises, supporting local supply chains, fair employment, digital adoption and the transition to a green economy. North Ayrshire is to benefit from the Ayrshire Growth Deal, an economic plan created by both the Scottish Government and UK Government. The £250 million Ayrshire Growth Deal is also central to the plans to support economic recovery through a bold and ambitious investment programme to create and secure jobs within the area of North Ayrshire.

==Education==
Education in North Ayrshire is provided by North Ayrshire Council, the local authority responsible for the area. Education is provided to children in the area through early years centres, primary schools, secondary schools, home schooling and additional support need facilities. There are currently ten secondary schools in North Ayrshire, all under the responsibility of North Ayrshire Council – Ardrossan Academy, Arran High School, Auchenharvie Academy, Garnock Community Campus, Greenwood Academy, Irvine Royal Academy, Kilwinning Academy, Largs Academy, Lockhart Campus and St Matthew&#x27;s Academy.

==Governance==
The council has been under no overall control since 2007, with various minority administrations led by both Labour and the Scottish National Party (SNP) operating since then. Following the 2022 election the council is under no overall control, being led by an SNP minority administration. The next election is due in 2027.

===Political control===
The first election to North Ayrshire Council was held in 1995, initially operating as a shadow authority alongside the outgoing authorities until the new system came into force on 1 April 1996. Political control of the council since 1996 has been as follows:

===Leadership===
The leaders of the council since 1996 have been:

===Composition===
Following the 2022 election, subsequent by-elections in May 2024 &amp; September 2024, and the defection of two Conservative members of the Council to Reform UK, the composition of the council was:

The next election is due in 2027.

===Elections===
Since 2007 elections have been held every five years under the single transferable vote system, introduced by the Local Governance (Scotland) Act 2004. Election results since 1995 have been as follows:


===Premises===
The council is based at Cunnninghame House on Friars Croft in Irvine, which was built in 1975 as the headquarters for the Cunninghame District Council, forming part of the new town centre for Irvine following its designation as a New Town.

===Wards===
As of 2022, the council area is divided into nine multi-member wards returning 33 members, composed as follows:

===Wider politics===
At the House of Commons, North Ayrshire is covered by the Central Ayrshire and North Ayrshire and Arran Parliamentary constituencies, both of which are represented by MPs belonging to the Scottish Labour Party. In the Scottish Parliament, the council area is divided into Cunninghame North and Cunninghame South, both represented by MSPs from the Scottish National Party. The council has been a member of the Islands Forum since 2022.

==Settlements==
The main administration centre and largest settlement in North Ayrshire is Irvine, a new town on the coast of the Firth of Clyde. The second biggest settlement is Kilwinning, followed by Saltcoats which is part of the &#x27;Three Towns&#x27; - Ardrossan, Saltcoats and Stevenston.
On the Isle of Arran, the largest village is Lamlash and there are numerous smaller villages. On Great Cumbrae, the only town on the island is Millport.

Largest settlements by population:
===Towns (mainland)===

* Ardrossan
* Beith
* Dalry
* Irvine
* Kilbirnie
* Kilwinning
* Largs
* Saltcoats
* Stevenston
* West Kilbride

===Villages (mainland)===
* Ardeer
* Auchentiber
* Barrmill
* Benslie
* Dreghorn
* Drybridge
* Fairlie
* Gateside
* Girdle Toll
* Glengarnock
* Longbar
* Skelmorlie
* Springside
* Stanecastle

===Suburbs (mainland)===

* Barkip
* Broomlands
* Bourtreehill
* Burnhouse
* Castlepark
* Crosbie
* Chapeltoun
* Cunninghamhead
* Dalgarven
* Drakemyre
* Eglinton
* Fergushill
* Fullarton
* Giffordland
* Greenhills
* Hessilhead hamlet
* Highfield
* Hunterston
* Kelburn
* Lawthorn
* Lylestone
* Meigle
* Meikle Auchengree
* Montgreenan
* Nettlehirst
* Perceton
* Portencross
* Routenburn
* Seamill
* Sevenacres
* Shewalton
* Torranyard

===Villages (Isle of Arran)===
* Birchburn
* Blackwaterfoot
* Brodick
* Catacol
* Cladach
* Corrie
* Dippen
* Kildonan
* Kilmory
* Lagg
* Lamlash
* Lochranza
* Machrie
* Pirnmill
* Sannox
* Shiskine
* Sliddery
* Whitefarland
* Whiting Bay

===Settlements (Great Cumbrae)===

* Millport

==Places of interest==
*Kelburn Castle
*Barrmill Park
*Clyde Muirshiel Regional Park
*Eglinton Country Park, Irvine
*Eglinton Tournament Bridge
*Irvine Harbour
*Spier&#x27;s Old School Grounds

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q206926" start="0" end="14" title="North Ayrshire" label="North Ayrshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q461231" start="33" end="46" title="Council areas of Scotland" label="council areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="50" end="58" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q208271" start="85" end="95" title="Inverclyde" label="Inverclyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q211091" start="110" end="122" title="Renfrewshire" label="Renfrewshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q211925" start="127" end="144" title="East Renfrewshire" label="East Renfrewshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q209135" start="167" end="180" title="East Ayrshire" label="East Ayrshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q209131" start="185" end="199" title="South Ayrshire" label="South Ayrshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007561" start="342" end="353" title="Cunninghame" label="Cunninghame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2327668" start="408" end="424" title="central Lowlands" label="central Lowlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q35654" start="434" end="448" title="Firth of Clyde" label="Firth of Clyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q793283" start="533" end="541" title="Ayrshire" label="Ayrshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q211873" start="573" end="578" title="Isle of Arran" label="Arran"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855295" start="583" end="595" title="The Cumbraes" label="The Cumbraes"/>
<link wikidata="Q544009" start="624" end="633" title="Buteshire" label="Buteshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774629" start="708" end="714" title="Irvine, North Ayrshire" label="Irvine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013827" start="719" end="729" title="Kilwinning" label="Kilwinning"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258386" start="789" end="830" title="Local Government etc. (Scotland) Act 1994" label="Local Government etc. (Scotland) Act 1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176207" start="959" end="971" title="council area" label="council area"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007561" start="1068" end="1079" title="Cunninghame" label="Cunninghame"/>
<link wikidata="Q124661" start="1140" end="1168" title="Strathclyde Regional Council" label="Strathclyde Regional Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350181" start="1242" end="1257" title="shires of Scotland" label="historic county"/>
<link wikidata="Q211873" start="1425" end="1430" title="Isle of Arran" label="Arran"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855295" start="1435" end="1447" title="The Cumbraes" label="The Cumbraes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2440447" start="1518" end="1536" title="Ayrshire and Arran" label="Ayrshire and Arran"/>
<link wikidata="Q202435" start="1537" end="1553" title="lieutenancy areas of Scotland" label="lieutenancy area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774629" start="1611" end="1617" title="Irvine, North Ayrshire" label="Irvine"/>
<link wikidata="Q640073" start="1700" end="1709" title="Ardrossan" label="Ardrossan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013620" start="1711" end="1716" title="Beith" label="Beith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3467446" start="1718" end="1723" title="Dalry, North Ayrshire" label="Dalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016743" start="1725" end="1734" title="Kilbirnie" label="Kilbirnie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013827" start="1736" end="1746" title="Kilwinning" label="Kilwinning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016169" start="1748" end="1753" title="Largs" label="Largs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018756" start="1755" end="1764" title="Saltcoats" label="Saltcoats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013753" start="1766" end="1776" title="Skelmorlie" label="Skelmorlie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376078" start="1778" end="1788" title="Stevenston" label="Stevenston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010320" start="1790" end="1803" title="West Kilbride" label="West Kilbride"/>
<link wikidata="Q211873" start="1820" end="1833" title="Isle of Arran" label="Isle of Arran"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855295" start="1838" end="1862" title="The Cumbraes" label="Great and Little Cumbrae"/>
<link wikidata="Q6385519" start="2887" end="2901" title="Kelburn Castle" label="Kelburn Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277274" start="2931" end="2951" title="Earl of Glasgow" label="10th Earl of Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6385519" start="3090" end="3106" title="Kelburn Castle" label="Graffiti Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q6316391" start="3683" end="3698" title="just transition" label="just transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154948" start="3868" end="3898" title="community economic development" label="community economic development"/>
<link wikidata="Q598188" start="4733" end="4746" title="green economy" label="green economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q32521" start="4845" end="4864" title="Scottish Government" label="Scottish Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="4869" end="4882" title="UK Government" label="UK Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q4788261" start="5503" end="5520" title="Ardrossan Academy" label="Ardrossan Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4795833" start="5522" end="5539" title="Arran High School" label="Arran High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4819401" start="5541" end="5561" title="Auchenharvie Academy" label="Auchenharvie Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604983" start="5589" end="5606" title="Greenwood Academy, Dreghorn" label="Greenwood Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6074375" start="5608" end="5628" title="Irvine Royal Academy" label="Irvine Royal Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6408294" start="5630" end="5648" title="Kilwinning Academy" label="Kilwinning Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6489303" start="5650" end="5663" title="Largs Academy" label="Largs Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7594690" start="5685" end="5710" title="St Matthew&amp;#x27;s Academy" label="St Matthew&amp;#x27;s Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7045250" start="5755" end="5773" title="no overall control" label="no overall control"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179541" start="5836" end="5842" title="Scottish Labour" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658" start="5851" end="5874" title="Scottish National Party" label="Scottish National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7045250" start="5952" end="5970" title="no overall control" label="no overall control"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015449" start="6357" end="6379" title="leader of the council" label="leaders of the council"/>
<link wikidata="Q111973491" start="6435" end="6448" title="2022 North Ayrshire Council election" label="2022 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="6533" end="6545" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q104721252" start="6572" end="6581" title="Reform UK" label="Reform UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q115807" start="6734" end="6758" title="single transferable vote" label="single transferable vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664013" start="6785" end="6821" title="Local Governance (Scotland) Act 2004" label="Local Governance (Scotland) Act 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q589282" start="7206" end="7211" title="Wards and electoral divisions of the United Kingdom" label="wards"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="7284" end="7300" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238991" start="7335" end="7351" title="Central Ayrshire (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Central Ayrshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032569" start="7356" end="7380" title="North Ayrshire and Arran (UK Parliament constituency)" label="North Ayrshire and Arran"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179541" start="7465" end="7486" title="Scottish Labour Party" label="Scottish Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="7495" end="7514" title="Scottish Parliament" label="Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144044" start="7549" end="7566" title="Cunninghame North (Scottish Parliament constituency)" label="Cunninghame North"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144052" start="7571" end="7588" title="Cunninghame South (Scottish Parliament constituency)" label="Cunninghame South"/>
<link wikidata="Q130784044" start="7686" end="7699" title="Islands Forum (United Kingdom)" label="Islands Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774629" start="7804" end="7810" title="Irvine, North Ayrshire" label="Irvine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074523" start="7814" end="7822" title="new town" label="new town"/>
<link wikidata="Q35654" start="7843" end="7857" title="Firth of Clyde" label="Firth of Clyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013827" start="7892" end="7902" title="Kilwinning" label="Kilwinning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018756" start="7916" end="7925" title="Saltcoats" label="Saltcoats"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7953" end="7964" title="Three Towns#Scotland" label="Three Towns"/>
<link wikidata="Q640073" start="7973" end="7982" title="Ardrossan" label="Ardrossan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018756" start="7984" end="7993" title="Saltcoats" label="Saltcoats"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376078" start="7998" end="8008" title="Stevenston" label="Stevenston"/>
<link wikidata="Q211873" start="8017" end="8030" title="Isle of Arran" label="Isle of Arran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011746" start="8055" end="8062" title="Lamlash" label="Lamlash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544267" start="8107" end="8120" title="Great Cumbrae" label="Great Cumbrae"/>
<link wikidata="Q391948" start="8153" end="8161" title="Millport, Cumbrae" label="Millport"/>
<link wikidata="Q640073" start="8225" end="8234" title="Ardrossan" label="Ardrossan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013620" start="8237" end="8242" title="Beith" label="Beith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3467446" start="8245" end="8250" title="Dalry, North Ayrshire" label="Dalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774629" start="8253" end="8259" title="Irvine, North Ayrshire" label="Irvine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016743" start="8262" end="8271" title="Kilbirnie" label="Kilbirnie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013827" start="8274" end="8284" title="Kilwinning" label="Kilwinning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016169" start="8287" end="8292" title="Largs" label="Largs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018756" start="8295" end="8304" title="Saltcoats" label="Saltcoats"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376078" start="8307" end="8317" title="Stevenston" label="Stevenston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010320" start="8320" end="8333" title="West Kilbride" label="West Kilbride"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787878" start="8363" end="8369" title="Ardeer, North Ayrshire" label="Ardeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4819417" start="8372" end="8383" title="Auchentiber" label="Auchentiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863782" start="8386" end="8394" title="Barrmill, North Ayrshire" label="Barrmill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4890221" start="8397" end="8404" title="Benslie" label="Benslie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5306868" start="8407" end="8415" title="Dreghorn" label="Dreghorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309646" start="8418" end="8427" title="Drybridge" label="Drybridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5430546" start="8430" end="8437" title="Fairlie, North Ayrshire" label="Fairlie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527176" start="8440" end="8448" title="Gateside, North Ayrshire" label="Gateside"/>
<link wikidata="Q5564206" start="8451" end="8462" title="Girdle Toll" label="Girdle Toll"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776624" start="8465" end="8476" title="Glengarnock" label="Glengarnock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673602" start="8479" end="8486" title="Longbar" label="Longbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013753" start="8489" end="8499" title="Skelmorlie" label="Skelmorlie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7581176" start="8502" end="8512" title="Springside, North Ayrshire" label="Springside"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598690" start="8515" end="8526" title="Stanecastle" label="Stanecastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4861067" start="8556" end="8562" title="Barkip" label="Barkip"/>
<link wikidata="Q4975335" start="8565" end="8575" title="Broomlands" label="Broomlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q4950367" start="8578" end="8590" title="Bourtreehill" label="Bourtreehill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999769" start="8593" end="8602" title="Burnhouse" label="Burnhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188015" start="8618" end="8625" title="Crosbie Castle and the Fullarton estate" label="Crosbie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5073140" start="8628" end="8638" title="Chapeltoun" label="Chapeltoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2611265" start="8641" end="8655" title="Cunninghamhead" label="Cunninghamhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q15059262" start="8658" end="8667" title="Dalgarven" label="Dalgarven"/>
<link wikidata="Q5305646" start="8670" end="8679" title="Drakemyre, North Ayrshire" label="Drakemyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5348071" start="8682" end="8690" title="Eglinton Country Park" label="Eglinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5444214" start="8693" end="8703" title="Fergushill" label="Fergushill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508219" start="8706" end="8715" title="Fullarton" label="Fullarton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5559955" start="8718" end="8729" title="Giffordland" label="Giffordland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604127" start="8732" end="8742" title="Greenhills, North Ayrshire" label="Greenhills"/>
<link wikidata="Q18349289" start="8745" end="8762" title="Hessilhead hamlet" label="Hessilhead hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060081" start="8765" end="8774" title="Highfield, North Ayrshire" label="Highfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q15226930" start="8777" end="8787" title="Hunterston" label="Hunterston"/>
<link wikidata="Q6385519" start="8790" end="8797" title="Kelburn Castle" label="Kelburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q78353560" start="8800" end="8808" title="Lawthorn" label="Lawthorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6707987" start="8811" end="8820" title="Lylestone" label="Lylestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q78018708" start="8823" end="8829" title="Meigle, North Ayrshire" label="Meigle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6810053" start="8832" end="8849" title="Meikle Auchengree" label="Meikle Auchengree"/>
<link wikidata="Q6905852" start="8852" end="8863" title="Montgreenan" label="Montgreenan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12063770" start="8866" end="8877" title="Nettlehirst" label="Nettlehirst"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167049" start="8880" end="8888" title="Perceton" label="Perceton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231564" start="8891" end="8902" title="Portencross" label="Portencross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016169" start="8905" end="8915" title="Largs" label="Routenburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440724" start="8918" end="8925" title="Seamill" label="Seamill"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900930" start="8928" end="8938" title="Monkredding House, North Ayrshire" label="Sevenacres"/>
<link wikidata="Q7495720" start="8941" end="8950" title="Shewalton House and estate" label="Shewalton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7826936" start="8953" end="8963" title="Torranyard" label="Torranyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776651" start="8998" end="9007" title="Birchburn" label="Birchburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905614" start="9010" end="9024" title="Blackwaterfoot" label="Blackwaterfoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q924520" start="9027" end="9034" title="Brodick" label="Brodick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5051165" start="9037" end="9044" title="Catacol" label="Catacol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124908" start="9047" end="9054" title="Cladach" label="Cladach"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172951" start="9057" end="9063" title="Corrie, Arran" label="Corrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280056" start="9066" end="9072" title="Dippen, Arran" label="Dippen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6406783" start="9075" end="9083" title="Kildonan, Arran" label="Kildonan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6408048" start="9086" end="9093" title="Kilmory, Arran" label="Kilmory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6472052" start="9096" end="9100" title="Lagg, Arran" label="Lagg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011746" start="9103" end="9110" title="Lamlash" label="Lamlash"/>
<link wikidata="Q667705" start="9113" end="9122" title="Lochranza" label="Lochranza"/>
<link wikidata="Q16742060" start="9125" end="9132" title="Machrie" label="Machrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198054" start="9135" end="9143" title="Pirnmill" label="Pirnmill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3472354" start="9146" end="9152" title="Sannox" label="Sannox"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776651" start="9155" end="9163" title="Shiskine" label="Shiskine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7540291" start="9166" end="9174" title="Sliddery" label="Sliddery"/>
<link wikidata="Q13156798" start="9177" end="9189" title="Whitefarland" label="Whitefarland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567813" start="9192" end="9203" title="Whiting Bay" label="Whiting Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q391948" start="9242" end="9250" title="Millport, Cumbrae" label="Millport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6385519" start="9276" end="9290" title="Kelburn Castle" label="Kelburn Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863782" start="9292" end="9305" title="Barrmill" label="Barrmill Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5136989" start="9307" end="9336" title="Clyde Muirshiel Regional Park" label="Clyde Muirshiel Regional Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5348071" start="9338" end="9359" title="Eglinton Country Park" label="Eglinton Country Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774629" start="9361" end="9367" title="Irvine, North Ayrshire" label="Irvine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5348079" start="9369" end="9395" title="Eglinton Tournament Bridge" label="Eglinton Tournament Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6074329" start="9397" end="9411" title="Irvine Harbour" label="Irvine Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577113" start="9413" end="9444" title="Spier&amp;#x27;s school" label="Spier&amp;#x27;s Old School Grounds"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143040" wikidata="Q3357357" url="?curid=143040" title="Ossie Ocasio">
<text>Osvaldo &quot;Ossie&quot; Ocasio (born August 12, 1955) is a Puerto Rican former boxer who held the World Cruiserweight Championship from 1982 to 1984. He was also a Top Contender and Heavyweight Challenger in 1979. He scored notable wins against Former Cruiserweight Champion Dwight Muhammad Qawi as well as beating Top Heavyweight Contender Jimmy Young and Heavyweight Contender Pierre Coetzer, as well as drawing with Future Heavyweight Champion Michael Dokes. Nicknamed &quot;Jaws&quot;, his peculiar nickname was the result of him accidentally biting another boxer during a sparring session.

==Heavyweight contender==
Ocasio campaigned in the heavyweight division, turning pro in 1976 and putting together 10 wins before signing with Don King and making a name for himself outpointing King fighter Kevin Isaac.

In 1978 on the undercard of the Larry Holmes/Ken Norton title fight Ocasio scored a major upset when he outpointed the highly regarded Jimmy Young, who&#x27;d outpointed George Foreman only a while back. In a rematch, Ocasio underlined his superiority by again outpointing a this time in-shape Young, in Puerto Rico. It was Ocasio&#x27;s career high in the Heavyweight division.

This earned him his only world heavyweight title shot, against Larry Holmes in 1979. Attempting to become the first Hispanic to win the world Heavyweight championship, Ocasio was badly outclassed and was knock out in the seventh round.

In 1980 he fought red hot undefeated prospect Michael Dokes and was unlucky to only get a draw. However a rematch saw Ocasio surprisingly knocked out in 1 round. The following year he travelled to the UK and made little effort against local prospect John L. Gardner, before collapsing without getting hit in the 6th round.

==Cruiserweight World Champion==
He later went down in weight, to fight in the then newly created division of the Cruiserweights. In 1982 he was matched with Robbie Williams in South Africa for the vacant WBA title. Ocasio became a world champion by beating Williams by a 15-round split decision. He shared honors as world champion of that division with countryman Carlos De León, the WBC world champion.

Ocasio made three successful defenses, winning 15-round decisions over Young Joe Louis and Randy Stephens, appearing on Jet Magazine the week before the Stephens bout, and knocking out John Odhiambo in the 15th round in Guaynabo, Puerto Rico. After the bout Ocasio turned down a fight with Great Britain fighter David Pearce, after Morgans Palle had provided contracts to make the fight in the USA, due to the BBBoC not sanctioning the cruiserweight division in the UK. Ossie eventually decided to return to South Africa, where he lost his title to Piet Crous by a 15-round decision. One month before losing the title, his brother had been murdered.

Ocasio, during his championship run, was able to buy a house in Trujillo Alto, where he maintained a large farm. He also participated in a Puerto Rican movie, playing a slave in the production.

In 1986, he made a comeback, winning two fights including a 10-round decision over former world champion Dwight Muhammad Qawi in Atlantic City. Most fans had Qawi winning all 10 rounds, and this is considered one of the worst decisions in boxing history. He attempted to regain his world championship against Evander Holyfield in Marseille, France, but lost by a knockout in 11 rounds.

==Return to Heavyweight==
He returned to the heavyweight division in 1988, defeating Pierre Coetzer in South Africa, but losing the decision in a rematch. After this fight he was relegated to trialhorse status.

In 1989 he made Ray Mercer look bad, losing an 8-round decision. In 1990 he dropped decisions to Tyrell Biggs and Bruce Seldon, then travelled to the UK for two fights losing and being the first opponent to take Lennox Lewis to the distance and scoring an upset when stopping Jess Harding in 8 rounds. Ocasio then travelled to Australia, where he was outpointed by the erratic Mike Hunter.

One last comeback in 1992 resulted in a dreary points loss to ex-contender Carl Williams, but it was hard hitting Hispanic prospect Alex Garcia who convinced the usually durable Ocasio to retire- he decked Ocasio several times before knocking him out in the 8th.

He retired from boxing with a record of 23 wins, 13 losses and 1 draw, with 12 knockout wins. He currently resides in Orlando, Florida.

==Professional boxing record==

==See also==

*List of cruiserweight boxing champions
*List of Puerto Rican boxing world champions

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3357357" start="0" end="32" title="Ossie Ocasio" label="Osvaldo &amp;quot;Ossie&amp;quot; Ocasio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="61" end="73" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rican"/>
<link wikidata="Q32112" start="81" end="86" title="boxing" label="boxer"/>
<link wikidata="Q867600" start="106" end="119" title="cruiserweight (boxing)" label="Cruiserweight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268500" start="277" end="297" title="Dwight Muhammad Qawi" label="Dwight Muhammad Qawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639938" start="343" end="354" title="Jimmy Young (boxer)" label="Jimmy Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q4456439" start="381" end="395" title="Pierre Coetzer" label="Pierre Coetzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q961948" start="449" end="462" title="Michael Dokes" label="Michael Dokes"/>
<link wikidata="Q344977" start="740" end="748" title="Don King (boxing promoter)" label="Don King"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639938" start="953" end="964" title="Jimmy Young (boxer)" label="Jimmy Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q370932" start="1261" end="1273" title="Larry Holmes" label="Larry Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q961948" start="1481" end="1494" title="Michael Dokes" label="Michael Dokes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6243578" start="1685" end="1700" title="John L. Gardner (boxer)" label="John L. Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042851" start="2124" end="2138" title="Carlos De León" label="Carlos De León"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177768" start="2285" end="2297" title="Jet Magazine" label="Jet Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="2455" end="2468" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5238466" start="2477" end="2489" title="David Pearce (boxer)" label="David Pearce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268500" start="3116" end="3136" title="Dwight Muhammad Qawi" label="Dwight Muhammad Qawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q313451" start="3320" end="3337" title="Evander Holyfield" label="Evander Holyfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q4456439" start="3483" end="3497" title="Pierre Coetzer" label="Pierre Coetzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q532540" start="3626" end="3636" title="Ray Mercer" label="Ray Mercer"/>
<link wikidata="Q614667" start="3707" end="3719" title="Tyrell Biggs" label="Tyrell Biggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q725437" start="3724" end="3736" title="Bruce Seldon" label="Bruce Seldon"/>
<link wikidata="Q295328" start="3822" end="3834" title="Lennox Lewis" label="Lennox Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2589377" start="3987" end="3998" title="Mike Hunter (boxer)" label="Mike Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q614934" start="4076" end="4089" title="Carl Williams (boxer)" label="Carl Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1980548" start="4449" end="4487" title="List of cruiserweight boxing champions" label="List of cruiserweight boxing champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6595179" start="4489" end="4532" title="List of Puerto Rican boxing world champions" label="List of Puerto Rican boxing world champions"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143047" wikidata="Q192854" url="?curid=143047" title="Solar time">
<text>Solar time is a calculation of the passage of time based on the position of the Sun in the sky. The fundamental unit of solar time is the day, based on the synodic rotation period. Traditionally, there are three types of time reckoning based on astronomical observations: [[Solar time|apparent solar time]] and [[Solar time|mean solar time]] (discussed in this article), and &quot;sidereal time&quot;, which is based on the apparent motions of stars other than the Sun.

==Introduction==
A tall pole vertically fixed in the ground casts a shadow on any sunny day. At one moment during the day, the shadow will point exactly north or south (or disappear when and if the Sun moves directly overhead). That instant is called &quot;local apparent noon&quot;, or 12:00 local apparent time. About 24 hours later the shadow will again point north–south, the Sun seeming to have covered a 360-degree arc around Earth&#x27;s axis. When the Sun has covered exactly 15 degrees (1/24 of a circle, both angles being measured in a plane perpendicular to Earth&#x27;s axis), local apparent time is 13:00 exactly; after 15 more degrees it will be 14:00 exactly.

The problem is that in September the Sun takes less time (as measured by an accurate clock) to make an apparent revolution than it does in December; 24 &quot;hours&quot; of solar time can be 21 seconds less or 29 seconds more than 24 hours of clock time. This change is quantified by the equation of time, and is due to the eccentricity of Earth&#x27;s orbit (as in, Earth&#x27;s orbit is not perfectly circular, meaning that the EarthSun distance varies throughout the year), and the fact that Earth&#x27;s axis is not perpendicular to the plane of its orbit (the so-called obliquity of the ecliptic).

The effect of this is that a clock running at a constant ratee.g. completing the same number of pendulum swings in each hourcannot follow the actual Sun; instead it follows an imaginary &quot;mean Sun&quot; that moves along the celestial equator at a constant rate that matches the real Sun&#x27;s average rate over the year. This is &quot;mean solar time&quot;, which is still not perfectly constant from one century to the next but is close enough for most purposes. , a mean solar day is about 86,400.002 SI seconds, i.e., about 24.0000006 hours.

==Apparent solar time==

The apparent sun is the true sun as seen by an observer on Earth. Apparent solar time or true solar time is based on the apparent motion of the actual Sun. It is based on the apparent solar day, the interval between two successive returns of the Sun to the local meridian. Apparent solar time can be crudely measured by a sundial.

The length of a solar day varies through the year, and the accumulated effect produces seasonal deviations of up to 16 minutes from the mean. The effect has two main causes. First, due to the eccentricity of Earth&#x27;s orbit, Earth moves faster when it is nearest the Sun (perihelion) and slower when it is farthest from the Sun (aphelion) (see Kepler&#x27;s laws of planetary motion). Second, due to Earth&#x27;s axial tilt (known as the &quot;obliquity of the ecliptic&quot;), the Sun&#x27;s annual motion is along a great circle (the ecliptic) that is tilted to Earth&#x27;s celestial equator. When the Sun crosses the equator at both equinoxes, the Sun&#x27;s daily shift (relative to the background stars) is at an angle to the equator, so the projection of this shift onto the equator is less than its average for the year; when the Sun is farthest from the equator at both solstices, the Sun&#x27;s shift in position from one day to the next is parallel to the equator, so the projection onto the equator of this shift is larger than the average for the year (see tropical year). In June and December when the sun is farthest from the celestial equator, a given shift along the ecliptic corresponds to a large shift at the equator. Therefore, apparent solar days are shorter in March and September than in June or December.

These lengths will change slightly in a few years and significantly in thousands of years.

==Mean solar time ==
Mean solar time is the hour angle of the mean position of the Sun, plus 12 hours. This 12 hour offset comes from the decision to make each day start at midnight for civil purposes, whereas the hour angle or the mean sun is measured from the local meridian. , this is realized with the UT1 time scale, constructed mathematically from very-long-baseline interferometry observations of the diurnal motions of radio sources located in other galaxies, and other observations. The duration of daylight varies during the year but the length of a mean solar day is nearly constant, unlike that of an apparent solar day. An apparent solar day can be 20 seconds shorter or 30 seconds longer than a mean solar day. Long or short days occur in succession, so the difference builds up until mean time is ahead of apparent time by about 14 minutes near February 6, and behind apparent time by about 16 minutes near November 3. The equation of time is this difference, which is cyclical and does not accumulate from year to year.

Mean time follows the mean sun. Jean Meeus describes the mean sun as follows:

The length of the mean solar day is slowly increasing due to the tidal acceleration of the Moon by Earth and the corresponding slowing of Earth&#x27;s rotation by the Moon.

==History==
The sun has always been visible in the sky, and its position forms the basis of apparent solar time, the timekeeping method used in antiquity. An Egyptian obelisk constructed c. 3500 BC, a gnomon in China dated 2300 BC, and an Egyptian sundial dated 1500 BC are some of the earliest methods for measuring the sun&#x27;s position.

Babylonian astronomers knew that the hours of daylight varied throughout the year. A tablet from 649 BC shows that they used a 2:1 ratio for the longest day to the shortest day, and estimated the variation using a linear zigzag function. It is not clear if they knew of the variation in the length of the solar day and the corresponding equation of time. Ptolemy clearly distinguishes the mean solar day and apparent solar day in his &quot;Almagest&quot; (2nd century), and he tabulated the equation of time in his &quot;Handy Tables&quot;. 

Apparent solar time grew less useful as commerce increased and mechanical clocks improved. Mean solar time was introduced in almanacs in England in 1834 and in France in 1835. Because the sun was difficult to observe directly due to its large size in the sky, mean solar time was determined as a fixed ratio of time as observed by the stars, which used point-like observations. A specific standard for measuring &quot;mean solar time&quot; from midnight came to be called Universal Time.

Conceptually Universal Time is the rotation of the Earth with respect to the sun and hence is mean solar time. However, UT1, the version in common use since 1955, uses a slightly different definition of rotation that corrects for the motion of Earth&#x27;s poles as it rotates. The difference between this corrected mean solar time and Coordinated Universal Time (UTC) determines whether a leap second is needed. (Since 1972 the UTC time scale has run on SI seconds, and the SI second, when adopted, was already a little shorter than the current value of the second of mean solar time.)

==See also==
* Local mean time
* Meridian circle
* Earth rotation
* Synodic day

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
*Sunrise and Sunset and maximum Sun altitude, all year long, anywhere
*Astrarium Solar Tempometer: Apparent solar time in a digital display.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q192854" start="0" end="10" title="Solar time" label="Solar time"/>
<link wikidata="Q11471" start="46" end="50" title="time" label="time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653577" start="64" end="83" title="position of the Sun" label="position of the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q527" start="91" end="94" title="sky" label="sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q573" start="138" end="141" title="day" label="day"/>
<link wikidata="Q2444002" start="156" end="179" title="synodic rotation period" label="synodic rotation period"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="272" end="306" title="#Apparent solar time" label="[[Solar time|apparent solar time]]"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="311" end="341" title="#Mean solar time" label="[[Solar time|mean solar time]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q191747" start="381" end="394" title="sidereal time" label="sidereal time"/>
<link wikidata="Q523" start="444" end="448" title="star" label="star"/>
<link wikidata="Q168182" start="722" end="753" title="solar noon" label="&amp;quot;local apparent noon&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q186058" start="1435" end="1451" title="equation of time" label="equation of time"/>
<link wikidata="Q208474" start="1471" end="1483" title="Orbital eccentricity" label="eccentricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q179745" start="1722" end="1747" title="obliquity of the ecliptic" label="obliquity of the ecliptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12457" start="2259" end="2261" title="International System of Units" label="SI"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="2478" end="2481" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q148901" start="2590" end="2598" title="meridian (astronomy)" label="meridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q80793" start="2649" end="2656" title="sundial" label="sundial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348808" start="2867" end="2885" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s orbit" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="2934" end="2944" title="perihelion" label="perihelion"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="2991" end="2999" title="aphelion" label="aphelion"/>
<link wikidata="Q83219" start="3006" end="3044" title="Kepler&amp;#x27;s laws of planetary motion" label="Kepler&amp;#x27;s laws of planetary motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q179745" start="3075" end="3085" title="axial tilt" label="axial tilt"/>
<link wikidata="Q79852" start="3123" end="3131" title="ecliptic" label="ecliptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q146657" start="3180" end="3192" title="great circle" label="great circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q79852" start="3198" end="3206" title="ecliptic" label="ecliptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q187646" start="3239" end="3256" title="celestial equator" label="celestial equator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315" start="3299" end="3306" title="equinox" label="equinox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720536" start="3469" end="3476" title="mean motion" label="average"/>
<link wikidata="Q123524" start="3541" end="3549" title="solstice" label="solstice"/>
<link wikidata="Q189607" start="3732" end="3745" title="tropical year" label="tropical year"/>
<link wikidata="Q734439" start="4129" end="4139" title="hour angle" label="hour angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796622" start="4147" end="4151" title="mean" label="mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q874572" start="4391" end="4394" title="Universal Time" label="UT1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148351" start="4439" end="4472" title="very-long-baseline interferometry" label="very-long-baseline interferometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195520" start="4493" end="4507" title="diurnal motion" label="diurnal motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q186058" start="5023" end="5039" title="equation of time" label="equation of time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281654" start="5154" end="5164" title="Jean Meeus" label="Jean Meeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477230" start="5266" end="5284" title="tidal acceleration" label="tidal acceleration"/>
<link wikidata="Q170980" start="5542" end="5549" title="obelisk" label="obelisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q236279" start="5576" end="5582" title="gnomon" label="gnomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q80793" start="5623" end="5630" title="sundial" label="sundial"/>
<link wikidata="Q47690" start="5718" end="5727" title="Babylonia" label="Babylonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q186058" start="6055" end="6071" title="equation of time" label="equation of time"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="6073" end="6080" title="Ptolemy" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q155952" start="6158" end="6166" title="Almagest" label="Almagest"/>
<link wikidata="Q874572" start="6763" end="6777" title="Universal Time" label="Universal Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536" start="7086" end="7112" title="Coordinated Universal Time" label="Coordinated Universal Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q194230" start="7140" end="7151" title="leap second" label="leap second"/>
<link wikidata="Q11574" start="7205" end="7215" title="second" label="SI seconds"/>
<link wikidata="Q219919" start="7353" end="7368" title="Local mean time" label="Local mean time"/>
<link wikidata="Q364882" start="7371" end="7386" title="Meridian circle" label="Meridian circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q244743" start="7389" end="7403" title="Earth rotation" label="Earth rotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2444002" start="7406" end="7417" title="Synodic day" label="Synodic day"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143048" wikidata="Q209135" url="?curid=143048" title="East Ayrshire">
<text>East Ayrshire (; ) is one of 32 unitary council areas of Scotland. It shares borders with Dumfries and Galloway, East Renfrewshire, North Ayrshire, South Ayrshire and South Lanarkshire. The headquarters of the council are located on London Road, Kilmarnock. With South Ayrshire and the mainland areas of North Ayrshire, it formed the former county of Ayrshire.

East Ayrshire had a population of 122,100 at the 2011 census, making it the 16th most populous local authority in Scotland. Spanning a geographical area of , East Ayrshire is the 14th-largest local authority in Scotland in terms of geographical area. The majority of the population of East Ayrshire live within and surrounding the main town, Kilmarnock. Other large population areas in East Ayrshire include Cumnock, the second-largest town, and smaller towns and villages such as Stewarton, Darvel and Hurlford.

The area is home to the largest education campus in Scotland, the Robert Burns Academy, which is located in the second largest town, Cumnock.

==History==
===Early settlements===

The area in which is now East Ayrshire features indications of early settlement as far back as 397. The presence of the Dragon Stone in Darvel, along with cup and ring markings near to the Ballochmyle Viaduct at Mauchline, indicate early occupation and settlement in and around East Ayrshire. The areas first permanent settlements is said to date from the expansion of Christianity in Scotland, after St Ninian established a church at Whithorn.

===13th–15th century===

East Ayrshire is home to a number of towers, castles and other structures which were constructed between the 13th–15th century. Many of the areas castles played a prominent role, largely in part due to barons being at the peak of military and political powers. Many of the barons were involved in wider Scottish politics and affairs, in particular, resistance to the advances of Edward I towards Scotland. Prominent Scottish independence figure William Wallace has close connections with East Ayrshire. The Wallace family had a castle at Riccarton, later part of Kilmarnock, as well as his surprise attack on the English at Loudoun Hill in 1297. Wallace is also associated with Lockhart&#x27;s Tower in the town of Galston. Lockhart&#x27;s Tower was largely rebuilt during the middle ages, and is commonly referred to as Barr Castle presently. Wallace is said to &quot;have made a daring escape&quot; from Lockhart&#x27;s Tower at one point.

During the First War of Scottish Independence, the areas Loudoun Hill was the scene of a Scottish victory over the English during the Battle of Loudoun Hill on 10 May 1307. The battlefield at Loudoun Hill is currently under research to be included in the Inventory of Historic Battlefields in Scotland and protected by Historic Scotland under the Scottish Historical Environment Policy of 2009.

===17th century===

During the 17th century, the Covenanters were particularly active in the East Ayrshire area, as well as along Scotland&#x27;s west coast where they began promoting &quot;National Covenant&quot;. During this period, a significant number of Covenanters died as a result of advocating their beliefs. In order to commemorate those lost, a number of sites and monuments in East Ayrshire were erected, including Fenwick Kirk Yard, the Laigh Kirk in Kilmarnock, Galston Kirk Yard, Loudoun Old Parish Kirk near Galston, Newmilns Keep and Kirkyard, Threepwood near Galston, Lochgoyne Farm above Fenwick, Priesthill Farm near Muirkirk, Mauchline, Sorn, Cumnock and Airds Moss near Cumnock. In 1648, Mauchline was the location of a battle between the Covenanters and Royalists, known as the Battle of Mauchline Muir. A Covenanters Memorial was erected in Loan Green in Mauchline, commemorating the five martyrs who were hanged at the site in 1685.

During the 17th century, the establishment of &#x27;Burghs of Barony&#x27; titles evolved. Many towns in modern day East Ayrshire were granted charters which allowed them to use the newly created title. Such towns and settlements which were granted Burgh of Barony status included Newmilns in 1491, Auchinleck in 1507, Cumnock in 1509, Kilmarnock in 1592 and Riccarton in 1638. With the settlements using the newly granted titles, the settlements were said to have &quot;flourished and prospered after the granting of their Charters, with lively trade in agriculture, livestock and textiles&quot;.

===18th–19th century===
The arrival of the 18th century saw economic prosperity arrive in the area, with the main hub for industry arguably being Kilmarnock. During the 18th and 19th centuries, East Ayrshire became one of the industrial powerhouses of the expanding British Empire. Largely it was textile production which dominated the industrial expansion in the area, with other industries including muslin, cotton, blankets, carpets and woollen goods being produced in Kilmarnock. Other settlements, such as Stewarton, became known internationally its manufacturing of bonnets, and the Irvine Valley region had become renowned for its specialised lace industry.

During this period, coal mining was considered an important economic asset across the area, particularly in communities such as Dalmellington and Patna. Additionally, iron making was developed at locations such as at Dunaskin in the Doon Valley, ultimately in which all were contributed to the importance of industry in East Ayrshire. The areas strength in industry and manufacturing allowed other sectors to develop in many parts of East Ayrshire, including the manufacturing of railway rolling stock in Kilmarnock which would later become exported internationally.

===Strathclyde Regional Council===

In May 1975, the county council was abolished and its functions were transferred to Strathclyde Regional Council. Subsequently, the county area was divided between four new districts within the two-tier Strathclyde region: Cumnock and Doon Valley, Cunninghame, Kilmarnock and Loudoun and Kyle and Carrick. The Cunninghame district included the Isle of Arran, Great Cumbrae and Little Cumbrae, which had until then been administered as part of the County of Bute.

The former Kilmarnock and Loudoun District Council was twinned with Sukhumi, Abkhazia. Following a review of such links in 2005, East Ayrshire continues the link as a friendship link.

===East Ayrshire Council===

East Ayrshire, and its associated political body, East Ayrshire Council, was created in 1996 under the Local Government etc. (Scotland) Act 1994, which replaced Scotland&#x27;s previous local government structure of upper-tier regions and lower-tier districts with unitary council areas providing all local government services. East Ayrshire covered the combined area of the abolished Kilmarnock and Loudoun and Cumnock and Doon Valley districts, and also took over the functions of the abolished Strathclyde Regional Council within the area. The area&#x27;s name references its location within the historic county of Ayrshire, which had been abolished for local government purposes in 1975 when Kilmarnock and Loudoun, Cumnock and Doon Valley, and Strathclyde region had been created.

In April 1996 the two-tier system of regions and districts was abolished and Ayrshire was divided between the unitary council areas of East Ayrshire (covering the area of the former Kilmarnock &amp; Loudoun District and Cumnock &amp; Doon Valley District), North Ayrshire (covering the area of the former Cunninghame District Council) and South Ayrshire (covering the area of the former Kyle and Carrick District). There are many early settlements within East Ayrshire. There are many early settlements within East Ayrshire. The Burns Monument Centre and Dick Institute (both in Kilmarnock) are notable museums and cultural venues.

In 2017, East Ayrshire Council was named as the UK Council of the Year. In 2016, East Ayrshire Council was awarded and recognised for its recycling and resource management.

==Economy==


===Economic history===
Historically the economy of East Ayrshire was dependent on industries such as coal mining, textiles and general manufacturing which largely fell into decline in Scotland during the 1970s and 1980s. Certain parts of East Ayrshire, particularly in the south of the region, such as Auchinleck, Bellsbank and Dalmellington have struggled to recover from the economic hardship caused by the decline and gradual closure of traditional industries, and are supported through various initiatives to try and rejuvenate their economies.

Kilmarnock has seen a gradual decline in manufacturing performance in recent years. In 2009, Diageo, owner of whisky maker Johnnie Walker (which had been founded in Kilmarnock) announced the proposed closure of the bottling plant facility in Hill Street, and in 2012, Diageo closed the facility with the loss of 700 jobs. In December 2015, Kilmarnock was awarded the title of Scotland&#x27;s Most Improved Town due to efforts towards town regeneration and restoration.

===Modern economy===

In rural communities of the authority, agriculture continues to be the leading sources of employment and economic productivity, particularly in the southern communities of the area. The public sector is the largest employer within the area, with the council and NHS Ayrshire and Arran being significant employers. Kilmarnock is home to the HALO Urban Regeneration company which was founded by Marie Macklin CBE, with a focus on providing opportunities for new businesses within the area, and with an estimated Gross Domestic Product (GDP) revenue of £205 million to the Scottish economy, it supports 1,500 jobs within the area.

===Tourism===
Food and drink as well as local tourism provides a large sum to the economy of East Ayrshire, with visitor attractions such as Dean Castle, Palace Theatre and Dumfries House generating large means of income for the area.

Places of interest within East Ayrshire include:

*Aiket Castle
*Auchinleck House
*Dalmore House and Estate 
*Dean Castle
*Dumfries House
*Kilmaurs Place
*Loch Doon
*Loudoun Castle
*Robertland House
*Rowallan Castle
*Scottish Industrial Railway Centre
*Sorn Castle
*Stair House

===Gross Domestic Product===
In 2022, the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of East Ayrshire (which includes the mainland of North Ayrshire for purposes of calculating GDP) was estimated at £5.075 billion. Amongst Scotland&#x27;s 32 local council areas, combined, East Ayrshire and mainland North Ayrshire are ranked as the 12th largest amongst Scottish areas by GDP rank.

The average gross weekly page for full time employees in East Ayrshire in 2023 was £708.80, higher than the Scotland average of £702.40.

===Employment trends===

Between January–December 2023, an estimated 56,300 people were classed as economically active within East Ayrshire, with 55,600 classed as in employment, 49,400 employees of businesses or organisations, with a further 5,700 classed as self employed. During this period, East Ayrshire had an unemployment rate of 3.2%, about 1,900 people of the population.

The largest category of economic activity in East Ayrshire in 2023 was professional occupations, with an estimated 10,600 people (19.2%) of the East Ayrshire population employed in this sector. Other large sectors for employment across East Ayrshire include skilled trades tccupations (14.0%), caring, leisure And other service occupations (13.3%), elementary occupations (9.0%), Managers, Directors And Senior Officials (7.7%) and process plant and machine operatives (7.4%).

==Services==
===Health Care===


Health care in East Ayrshire is provided by NHS Ayrshire and Arran, one of the fourteen regions of NHS Scotland. The health boards main, and largest, hospital is University Hospital Crosshouse located between the village of Crosshouse and the administrative town of East Ayrshire, Kilmarnock. Other NHS Ayrshire and Arran hospitals within East Ayrshire include East Ayrshire Community Hospital in Cumnock, and the former Kirklandside Hospital in Hurlford.

Work on University Hospital Crosshouse, which was commissioned to replace the Kilmarnock Infirmary, began on the site in August 1972 with completion expected in May 1977. The contractor, Melville Dundas &amp; Whitson, encountered difficulties with the water supply and ventilation systems and the facility was only officially opened by George Younger, Secretary of State for Scotland, as Crosshouse Hospital in June 1984. A new maternity unit, which replaced a similar facility at Ayrshire Central Hospital in Irvine was opened in the grounds of the hospital in 2006. In March 2012, the hospital officially became University Hospital Crosshouse as a result of a partnership with the University of the West of Scotland.

Kirklandside Hospital, in neighbouring village Hurlford closed between 2018 and 2020. Kirklandside hospital provided consultant-led services for frail elderly patients. It had 25 long-stay beds for inpatient care and a day hospital which provided assessment and rehabilitation facilities.

East Ayrshire is served by a number of general practice (GP) surgeries under NHS Scotland and a variety of other healthcare services including dental treatment and pharmacies.

===Education===

East Ayrshire has nine secondary schools, forty-three primary schools, four schools which cater for children with additional support needs, thirty-three early education childhood centres and three children&#x27;s houses.

Kilmarnock Academy is one of only two schools in the world to have educated two Nobel laureates: Alexander Fleming and John Boyd Orr. Both men attended Kilmarnock Academy when it was located on North Hamilton Street; the school has since relocated to Sutherland Drive.

Grange Academy in Kilmarnock, is one of only seven Scottish Football Association (SFA) Performance Schools.

The Robert Burns Academy in Cumnock is the largest educational campus in Scotland.

The area&#x27;s secondary schools include:

*Doon Academy
*Grange Academy
*Kilmarnock Academy 
*Loudoun Academy
*Robert Burns Academy
*St Joseph&#x27;s Academy
*Stewarton Academy
Kilmarnock is home to a campus of Ayrshire College, which provides a range of courses to adults as well as school-aged pupils. It is funded by East Ayrshire council and other educational providers. The campus opened in October 2016 in a new, £53 million, building on the site of the Johnnie Walker bottling plant. It superseded the Kilmarnock College building on Holehouse Road.

==Politics and governance==


Policy and decision making in East Ayrshire is the responsibility of East Ayrshire Council, the body of elected councillors elected to represent East Ayrshire on the council. The council chambers and HQ is located on London Road in Kilmarnock.

Elected members to the UK Parliament

Elected members to the Scottish Parliament &quot;Constituency MSPs&quot;

&quot;Regional List MSPs&quot;

==Geography==

===Geographical location===
East Ayrshire is located on the west coat of Scotland, sharing borders with the following neighbouring council areas; North Ayrshire, South Ayrshire, Dumfries and Galloway, East Renfrewshire and South Lanarkshire. Blackcraig Hill reaches an elevation of 2,298 feet (700 metres), the highest peak in East Ayrshire. Combining the existing Kilmarnock &amp; Loudoun and Cumnock &amp; Doon Valley government districts offered a simple solution to the issue of giving territory to be administered from Kilmarnock, with the population also roughly balanced with those of Cunninghame and Kyle &amp; Carrick (which became North Ayrshire and South Ayrshire respectively); however, it did mean some settlements historically within Kyle, more closely aligned to Ayr for amenities and which would typically have been described as located in the south of the county – particularly Dalrymple, Drongan, Patna and Dalmellington, the latter of which is south of Dundonald, South Ayrshire – became politically aligned to the East division.

The local council boasts the proximity to Glasgow, the largest city in Scotland, as a unique selling point for the area. Additionally, the area is said to &quot;combine an idyllic mix of rural beauty and urban living&quot;, and being set in the &quot;midst of some of Scotland&#x27;s finest countryside&quot;.

===Settlements===

Kilmarnock is the largest town in East Ayrshire, and has served as the administrative centre of East Ayrshire Council since 1996. It is the East Ayrshire region&#x27;s main commercial and industrial centre. The town grew considerably during the 1870s and the town&#x27;s growth subsumed the village of Bonnyton, and by the 1960s, new purpose built suburbs such as New Farm Loch were constructed to accommodate the increasing population of Kilmarnock. By mid–2020, the population of the town was estimated to be 46,970, making Kilmarnock the 14th most populated settlement in Scotland as well as the largest town in Ayrshire by population.

The second largest town in East Ayrshire is Cumnock, which sits at the confluence of the Glaisnock Water and the Lugar Water. There are three neighbouring housing projects which lie just outside the town boundaries, Craigens, Logan and Netherthird, with the former ironworks settlement of Lugar also just outside the town, contributing to a population of around 13,000 in the immediate locale. A new housing development, Knockroon, was granted planning permission on 9 December 2009 by East Ayrshire Council. The town is home to the Robert Burns Academy, a new educational campus housing the main Robert Burns Academy secondary school following the merger of Cumnock Academy and Auchinleck Academy, Lochnorris Primary School and Cherry Trees Early Childhood Centre. The campus is the largest educational establishment in Scotland.

Largest settlements by population:

===Towns and villages===

*Auchinleck
*Bellsbank
*&quot;Bonnyton&quot; (former village, now an area of Kilmarnock)
*Burnton
*Catrine
*Chapeltoun
*Coalhall
*Corsehill
*Craigens
*Craigmalloch
*Cronberry
*Crookedholm
*Crosshouse
*Cumnock
*Dalmellington
*Dalrymple
*Darvel
*Drongan
*Dunlop
*Fenwick
*Galston
*Gatehead
*Glenbuck
*Greenholm
*Haugh
*Hurlford
*Kilmarnock
*Kilmaurs
*Knockentiber
*Logan
*Lugar
*Lugton
*Mauchline
*Moscow
*Muirkirk
*Netherthird
*New Cumnock
*Newmilns
*Ochiltree
*Patna
*Polnessan
*Priestland
*Rankinston
*Riccarton
*Sinclairston
*Skares
*Sorn
*Stair
*Stewarton
*Trabboch
*Waterside
==See also==

* Ayrshire; the geographical area that contains East Ayrshire, North Ayrshire and South Ayrshire
* Kilmarnock; the administrative town of East Ayrshire Council

==References==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q209135" start="0" end="13" title="East Ayrshire" label="East Ayrshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q461231" start="40" end="65" title="council areas of Scotland" label="council areas of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q126514" start="90" end="111" title="Dumfries and Galloway" label="Dumfries and Galloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q211925" start="113" end="130" title="East Renfrewshire" label="East Renfrewshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q206926" start="132" end="146" title="North Ayrshire" label="North Ayrshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q209131" start="148" end="162" title="South Ayrshire" label="South Ayrshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q209142" start="167" end="184" title="South Lanarkshire" label="South Lanarkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q576562" start="246" end="256" title="Kilmarnock" label="Kilmarnock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350181" start="334" end="347" title="Shires of Scotland" label="former county"/>
<link wikidata="Q793283" start="351" end="359" title="Ayrshire" label="Ayrshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q461231" start="438" end="484" title="List of Scottish council areas by population" label="16th most populous local authority in Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q461231" start="541" end="611" title="List of Scottish council areas by area" label="14th-largest local authority in Scotland in terms of geographical area"/>
<link wikidata="Q576562" start="704" end="714" title="Kilmarnock" label="Kilmarnock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010019" start="770" end="777" title="Cumnock" label="Cumnock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011948" start="843" end="852" title="Stewarton" label="Stewarton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016753" start="854" end="860" title="Darvel" label="Darvel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5946704" start="865" end="873" title="Hurlford" label="Hurlford"/>
<link wikidata="Q104758857" start="942" end="962" title="Robert Burns Academy" label="Robert Burns Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010019" start="1009" end="1016" title="Cumnock" label="Cumnock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016753" start="1192" end="1198" title="Darvel" label="Darvel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4851829" start="1245" end="1264" title="Ballochmyle Viaduct" label="Ballochmyle Viaduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020265" start="1268" end="1277" title="Mauchline" label="Mauchline"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="1906" end="1914" title="Edward I" label="Edward I"/>
<link wikidata="Q82457" start="1972" end="1987" title="William Wallace" label="William Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q4588903" start="2151" end="2163" title="Loudoun Hill" label="Loudoun Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3997296" start="2242" end="2249" title="Galston, East Ayrshire" label="Galston"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242848" start="2481" end="2515" title="First War of Scottish Independence" label="First War of Scottish Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590555" start="2604" end="2626" title="Battle of Loudoun Hill" label="Battle of Loudoun Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q6059933" start="2725" end="2771" title="Inventory of Historic Battlefields in Scotland" label="Inventory of Historic Battlefields in Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q111854" start="2789" end="2806" title="Historic Scotland" label="Historic Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138040" start="2915" end="2926" title="Covenanters" label="Covenanters"/>
<link wikidata="Q4315013" start="3056" end="3073" title="National Covenant" label="National Covenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6473804" start="3315" end="3325" title="Laigh Kirk, Kilmarnock" label="Laigh Kirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020265" start="3575" end="3584" title="Mauchline" label="Mauchline"/>
<link wikidata="Q3997922" start="4105" end="4113" title="Newmilns" label="Newmilns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013757" start="4123" end="4133" title="Auchinleck" label="Auchinleck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010019" start="4143" end="4150" title="Cumnock" label="Cumnock"/>
<link wikidata="Q576562" start="4160" end="4170" title="Kilmarnock" label="Kilmarnock"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="4689" end="4703" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3997899" start="5217" end="5230" title="Dalmellington" label="Dalmellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q80484" start="5235" end="5240" title="Patna" label="Patna"/>
<link wikidata="Q124661" start="5777" end="5805" title="Strathclyde Regional Council" label="Strathclyde Regional Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q124661" start="5896" end="5907" title="Strathclyde" label="Strathclyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q383493" start="5908" end="5914" title="Local government areas of Scotland 1973 to 1996" label="region"/>
<link wikidata="Q5194160" start="5916" end="5939" title="Cumnock and Doon Valley" label="Cumnock and Doon Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007561" start="5941" end="5952" title="Cunninghame" label="Cunninghame"/>
<link wikidata="Q6407992" start="5954" end="5976" title="Kilmarnock and Loudoun (district)" label="Kilmarnock and Loudoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q6451531" start="5981" end="5997" title="Kyle and Carrick" label="Kyle and Carrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q211873" start="6037" end="6050" title="Isle of Arran" label="Isle of Arran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544267" start="6052" end="6065" title="Great Cumbrae" label="Great Cumbrae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3057918" start="6070" end="6084" title="Little Cumbrae" label="Little Cumbrae"/>
<link wikidata="Q544009" start="6140" end="6154" title="County of Bute" label="County of Bute"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="6212" end="6219" title="twin towns" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q40811" start="6225" end="6232" title="Sukhumi" label="Sukhumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q31354462" start="6234" end="6242" title="Abkhazia" label="Abkhazia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28530252" start="6421" end="6442" title="East Ayrshire Council" label="East Ayrshire Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258386" start="6474" end="6515" title="Local Government etc. (Scotland) Act 1994" label="Local Government etc. (Scotland) Act 1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q6407992" start="6756" end="6778" title="Kilmarnock and Loudoun (district)" label="Kilmarnock and Loudoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q5194160" start="6783" end="6806" title="Cumnock and Doon Valley" label="Cumnock and Doon Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q124661" start="6868" end="6879" title="Strathclyde" label="Strathclyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350181" start="6970" end="6985" title="shires of Scotland" label="historic county"/>
<link wikidata="Q793283" start="6989" end="6997" title="Ayrshire" label="Ayrshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q383493" start="7195" end="7216" title="Local government areas of Scotland (1973–1996)" label="regions and districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q461231" start="7268" end="7289" title="Subdivisions of Scotland" label="unitary council areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q206926" start="7415" end="7429" title="North Ayrshire" label="North Ayrshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q209131" start="7497" end="7511" title="South Ayrshire" label="South Ayrshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5000082" start="7687" end="7708" title="Burns Monument, Kilmarnock" label="Burns Monument Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5273047" start="7713" end="7727" title="Dick Institute" label="Dick Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q12880211" start="8080" end="8091" title="coal mining" label="coal mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q28823" start="8093" end="8101" title="textiles" label="textiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013757" start="8281" end="8291" title="Auchinleck" label="Auchinleck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012319" start="8293" end="8302" title="Bellsbank" label="Bellsbank"/>
<link wikidata="Q3997899" start="8307" end="8320" title="Dalmellington" label="Dalmellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q161140" start="8622" end="8628" title="Diageo" label="Diageo"/>
<link wikidata="Q382947" start="8639" end="8645" title="Scotch whisky" label="whisky"/>
<link wikidata="Q502268" start="8652" end="8666" title="Johnnie Walker" label="Johnnie Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="9060" end="9071" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6954112" start="9283" end="9305" title="NHS Ayrshire and Arran" label="NHS Ayrshire and Arran"/>
<link wikidata="Q105474683" start="9361" end="9384" title="HALO Urban Regeneration" label="HALO Urban Regeneration"/>
<link wikidata="Q105140655" start="9414" end="9427" title="Marie Macklin" label="Marie Macklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5246061" start="9791" end="9802" title="Dean Castle" label="Dean Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7126195" start="9804" end="9818" title="Palace Theatre (Kilmarnock)" label="Palace Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5313796" start="9823" end="9837" title="Dumfries House" label="Dumfries House"/>
<link wikidata="Q4862999" start="9937" end="9949" title="Aiket Castle" label="Aiket Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q77782940" start="9951" end="9967" title="Auchinleck House" label="Auchinleck House"/>
<link wikidata="Q5211566" start="9969" end="9993" title="Dalmore House and Estate" label="Dalmore House and Estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5246061" start="9996" end="10007" title="Dean Castle" label="Dean Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5313796" start="10009" end="10023" title="Dumfries House" label="Dumfries House"/>
<link wikidata="Q6408006" start="10025" end="10039" title="Kilmaurs Place" label="Kilmaurs Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547670" start="10041" end="10050" title="Loch Doon" label="Loch Doon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1871345" start="10052" end="10066" title="Loudoun Castle" label="Loudoun Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5050345" start="10068" end="10084" title="Robertland House" label="Robertland House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371768" start="10086" end="10101" title="Rowallan Castle" label="Rowallan Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437788" start="10103" end="10137" title="Scottish Industrial Railway Centre" label="Scottish Industrial Railway Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7563594" start="10139" end="10150" title="Sorn Castle" label="Sorn Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566639" start="10152" end="10163" title="Stair House" label="Stair House"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="10207" end="10229" title="Gross Domestic Product" label="Gross Domestic Product"/>
<link wikidata="Q206926" start="10285" end="10299" title="North Ayrshire" label="North Ayrshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6954112" start="11609" end="11631" title="NHS Ayrshire and Arran" label="NHS Ayrshire and Arran"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933548" start="11664" end="11676" title="NHS Scotland" label="NHS Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894766" start="11727" end="11757" title="University Hospital Crosshouse" label="University Hospital Crosshouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q996516" start="11789" end="11799" title="Crosshouse" label="Crosshouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327766" start="11926" end="11958" title="East Ayrshire Community Hospital" label="East Ayrshire Community Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q6415749" start="11986" end="12007" title="Kirklandside Hospital" label="Kirklandside Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5946704" start="12011" end="12019" title="Hurlford" label="Hurlford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6407983" start="12100" end="12120" title="Kilmarnock Infirmary" label="Kilmarnock Infirmary"/>
<link wikidata="Q21003929" start="12209" end="12238" title="Melville Dundas" label="Melville Dundas &amp;amp; Whitson"/>
<link wikidata="Q333145" start="12358" end="12372" title="George Younger, 4th Viscount Younger of Leckie" label="George Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q111784" start="12374" end="12405" title="Secretary of State for Scotland" label="Secretary of State for Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4831679" start="12503" end="12528" title="Ayrshire Central Hospital" label="Ayrshire Central Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774629" start="12532" end="12538" title="Irvine, North Ayrshire" label="Irvine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296153" start="12705" end="12739" title="University of the West of Scotland" label="University of the West of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6415749" start="12742" end="12763" title="Kirklandside Hospital" label="Kirklandside Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5946704" start="12789" end="12797" title="Hurlford" label="Hurlford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3145296" start="12961" end="12973" title="day hospital" label="day hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q11607623" start="13071" end="13087" title="general practice" label="general practice"/>
<link wikidata="Q6407977" start="13448" end="13466" title="Kilmarnock Academy" label="Kilmarnock Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q339619" start="13528" end="13543" title="List of Nobel laureates" label="Nobel laureates"/>
<link wikidata="Q37064" start="13545" end="13562" title="Alexander Fleming" label="Alexander Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q315143" start="13567" end="13580" title="John Boyd Orr" label="John Boyd Orr"/>
<link wikidata="Q5595632" start="13718" end="13732" title="Grange Academy, Kilmarnock" label="Grange Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q478320" start="13769" end="13824" title="Scottish Football Association" label="Scottish Football Association (SFA) Performance Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q104758857" start="13831" end="13851" title="Robert Burns Academy" label="Robert Burns Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297142" start="13956" end="13968" title="Doon Academy" label="Doon Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5595632" start="13970" end="13984" title="Grange Academy, Kilmarnock" label="Grange Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6407977" start="13986" end="14004" title="Kilmarnock Academy" label="Kilmarnock Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6686017" start="14007" end="14022" title="Loudoun Academy" label="Loudoun Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q104758857" start="14024" end="14044" title="Robert Burns Academy" label="Robert Burns Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7401499" start="14046" end="14070" title="Saint Joseph&amp;#x27;s Academy, Kilmarnock" label="St Joseph&amp;#x27;s Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q104781731" start="14072" end="14089" title="Stewarton Academy" label="Stewarton Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16918337" start="14124" end="14140" title="Ayrshire College" label="Ayrshire College"/>
<link wikidata="Q21997573" start="14422" end="14440" title="Kilmarnock College" label="Kilmarnock College"/>
<link wikidata="Q28530252" start="14569" end="14590" title="East Ayrshire Council" label="East Ayrshire Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q206926" start="15050" end="15064" title="North Ayrshire" label="North Ayrshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q209131" start="15066" end="15080" title="South Ayrshire" label="South Ayrshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q126514" start="15082" end="15103" title="Dumfries and Galloway" label="Dumfries and Galloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q211925" start="15105" end="15122" title="East Renfrewshire" label="East Renfrewshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q209142" start="15127" end="15144" title="South Lanarkshire" label="South Lanarkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918277" start="15652" end="15656" title="Kyle, Ayrshire" label="Kyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q654216" start="15682" end="15685" title="Ayr" label="Ayr"/>
<link wikidata="Q5211618" start="15799" end="15808" title="Dalrymple, East Ayrshire" label="Dalrymple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013798" start="15810" end="15817" title="Drongan" label="Drongan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3997927" start="15819" end="15824" title="Patna, East Ayrshire" label="Patna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3997899" start="15829" end="15842" title="Dalmellington" label="Dalmellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5314885" start="15876" end="15901" title="Dundonald, South Ayrshire" label="Dundonald, South Ayrshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="15996" end="16003" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q576562" start="16284" end="16294" title="Kilmarnock" label="Kilmarnock"/>
<link wikidata="Q28530252" start="16380" end="16401" title="East Ayrshire Council" label="East Ayrshire Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q4942530" start="16586" end="16594" title="Bonnyton, East Ayrshire" label="Bonnyton"/>
<link wikidata="Q12063826" start="16648" end="16661" title="New Farm Loch" label="New Farm Loch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815294" start="16825" end="16867" title="List of towns and cities in Scotland by population" label="14th most populated settlement in Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q793283" start="16899" end="16907" title="Ayrshire" label="Ayrshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010019" start="16968" end="16975" title="Cumnock" label="Cumnock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5566496" start="17013" end="17028" title="Glaisnock Water" label="Glaisnock Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q6699729" start="17037" end="17048" title="Lugar Water" label="Lugar Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q6532502" start="17079" end="17095" title="housing projects" label="housing projects"/>
<link wikidata="Q6666880" start="17150" end="17155" title="Logan, East Ayrshire" label="Logan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15059239" start="17160" end="17171" title="Netherthird" label="Netherthird"/>
<link wikidata="Q10832530" start="17189" end="17198" title="ironworks" label="ironworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6699724" start="17213" end="17218" title="Lugar, East Ayrshire" label="Lugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6422937" start="17345" end="17354" title="Knockroon" label="Knockroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q28530252" start="17410" end="17431" title="East Ayrshire Council" label="East Ayrshire Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q104758857" start="17457" end="17477" title="Robert Burns Academy" label="Robert Burns Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q48817984" start="17583" end="17598" title="Cumnock Academy" label="Cumnock Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013757" start="17819" end="17829" title="Auchinleck" label="Auchinleck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012319" start="17831" end="17840" title="Bellsbank" label="Bellsbank"/>
<link wikidata="Q4942530" start="17848" end="17856" title="Bonnyton, East Ayrshire" label="Bonnyton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3997899" start="17908" end="17915" title="Burnton" label="Burnton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010000" start="17917" end="17924" title="Catrine" label="Catrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5073140" start="17926" end="17936" title="Chapeltoun" label="Chapeltoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q4862996" start="17948" end="17957" title="Barony and Castle of Corsehill" label="Corsehill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5181719" start="17969" end="17981" title="Craigmalloch" label="Craigmalloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187696" start="17983" end="17992" title="Cronberry" label="Cronberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5946704" start="17994" end="18005" title="Crookedholm" label="Crookedholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q996516" start="18007" end="18017" title="Crosshouse" label="Crosshouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010019" start="18019" end="18026" title="Cumnock" label="Cumnock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3997899" start="18028" end="18041" title="Dalmellington" label="Dalmellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5211618" start="18043" end="18052" title="Dalrymple, East Ayrshire" label="Dalrymple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016753" start="18054" end="18060" title="Darvel" label="Darvel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013798" start="18062" end="18069" title="Drongan" label="Drongan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041358" start="18071" end="18077" title="Dunlop, East Ayrshire" label="Dunlop"/>
<link wikidata="Q5443668" start="18079" end="18086" title="Fenwick, East Ayrshire" label="Fenwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3997296" start="18088" end="18095" title="Galston, East Ayrshire" label="Galston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495758" start="18097" end="18105" title="Gatehead, East Ayrshire" label="Gatehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q5568211" start="18107" end="18115" title="Glenbuck" label="Glenbuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q3997922" start="18117" end="18126" title="Greenholm" label="Greenholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5682415" start="18128" end="18133" title="Haugh, East Ayrshire" label="Haugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5946704" start="18135" end="18143" title="Hurlford" label="Hurlford"/>
<link wikidata="Q576562" start="18145" end="18155" title="Kilmarnock" label="Kilmarnock"/>
<link wikidata="Q205448" start="18157" end="18165" title="Kilmaurs" label="Kilmaurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776621" start="18167" end="18179" title="Knockentiber" label="Knockentiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q6666880" start="18181" end="18186" title="Logan, East Ayrshire" label="Logan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6699724" start="18188" end="18193" title="Lugar, East Ayrshire" label="Lugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6699838" start="18195" end="18201" title="Lugton" label="Lugton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020265" start="18203" end="18212" title="Mauchline" label="Mauchline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949024" start="18214" end="18220" title="Moscow, East Ayrshire" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008937" start="18222" end="18230" title="Muirkirk" label="Muirkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q15059239" start="18232" end="18243" title="Netherthird" label="Netherthird"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011095" start="18245" end="18256" title="New Cumnock" label="New Cumnock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3997922" start="18258" end="18266" title="Newmilns" label="Newmilns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011252" start="18268" end="18277" title="Ochiltree" label="Ochiltree"/>
<link wikidata="Q3997927" start="18279" end="18284" title="Patna, East Ayrshire" label="Patna"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225879" start="18286" end="18295" title="Polnessan" label="Polnessan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242907" start="18297" end="18307" title="Priestland" label="Priestland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7293307" start="18309" end="18319" title="Rankinston" label="Rankinston"/>
<link wikidata="Q45853" start="18321" end="18330" title="Riccarton, Ayrshire" label="Riccarton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7534000" start="18346" end="18352" title="Skares" label="Skares"/>
<link wikidata="Q7563593" start="18354" end="18358" title="Sorn, East Ayrshire" label="Sorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7597079" start="18360" end="18365" title="Stair, East Ayrshire" label="Stair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011948" start="18367" end="18376" title="Stewarton" label="Stewarton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831058" start="18378" end="18386" title="Trabboch" label="Trabboch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7974438" start="18388" end="18397" title="Waterside, East Ayrshire" label="Waterside"/>
<link wikidata="Q793283" start="18414" end="18422" title="Ayrshire" label="Ayrshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q206926" start="18475" end="18489" title="North Ayrshire" label="North Ayrshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q209131" start="18494" end="18508" title="South Ayrshire" label="South Ayrshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q576562" start="18511" end="18521" title="Kilmarnock" label="Kilmarnock"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143051" wikidata="Q209131" url="?curid=143051" title="South Ayrshire">
<text>South Ayrshire (; , ) is one of thirty-two council areas of Scotland, covering the southern part of Ayrshire. It borders onto Dumfries and Galloway, East Ayrshire and North Ayrshire. South Ayrshire had an estimated population in 2021 of 112,450, making it the 19th–largest subdivision in Scotland by population. With an area of 472 sq mi, South Ayrshire ranks as the 15th largest subdivision in Scotland.

South Ayrshire&#x27;s administrative centre is located in its largest town, Ayr. The headquarters for its associated political body, South Ayrshire Council, is housed at the towns County Buildings located in Wellington Square. Ayr is the former county town of the historic Ayrshire county, with the political activity of the Ayrshire County Council being based at County Buildings.

==History==
South Ayrshire was created in 1996 under the Local Government etc. (Scotland) Act 1994, which replaced Scotland&#x27;s previous local government structure of upper-tier regions and lower-tier districts with unitary council areas providing all local government services. South Ayrshire covered the same area as the abolished Kyle and Carrick district, and also took over the functions of the abolished Strathclyde Regional Council within the area. The area&#x27;s name references its location within the historic county of Ayrshire, which had been abolished for local government purposes in 1975 when Kyle and Carrick district and Strathclyde region had been created.

In 2021, South Ayrshire submitted a bid for city status as part of the 2022 Platinum Jubilee Celebrations. The bid was based on the area&#x27;s rich history and links to royalty, and received backing from organisations and businesses including Ayrshire College and Scottish Enterprise. The bid was ultimately unsuccessful, with eight other settlements across the UK, overseas territories and crown dependencies being awarded city status, including Scottish town Dunfermline.

==Geography==
Geographically, South Ayrshire is located on the western coast of Scotland, sharing borders with neighbouring local authorities East Ayrshire, Dumfries and Galloway and North Ayrshire. The climate in South Ayrshire, typical of that in western Scotland, is milder than that of eastern Scotland due to the stronger maritime influence, as the prevailing winds blow from the sea into South Ayrshire, which is located primarily on the western coast of Scotland. The warm Gulf Stream also has a strong influence on western Scotland. With winds mainly blowing from the sea the annual mean temperatures are in the range in coastal areas of South Ayrshire such as Ayr and Troon.

The sea reaches its lowest temperature in February or early March so that on average February is the coldest month in some coastal parts of South Ayrshire along with the Rhins of Galloway, Kintyre and the Hebrides. In February the mean daily minimum temperature varies from about 2 °C in most of the islands, 1 to 2 °C along most of the Solway Firth and lowland inland areas, but less than −1 °C in parts of the Southern Uplands and central Highlands. Inland, where the influence of the sea is less, January is the coldest month with mean daily minimum temperatures generally between −3 and 0 °C.

The number of hours of natural sunshine in South Ayrshire is controlled by the length of day and by cloudiness. In general, December is the dullest month and May or June the sunniest. Sunshine duration decreases with increasing altitude, increasing latitude and distance from the coast. Local topography also exerts a strong influence and in the winter deep glens and north-facing slopes can be in shade for long periods. Industrial pollution and smoke haze can also reduce sunshine amounts, but the decline in heavy industry in the Ayrshire area, primarily in Ayr in South Ayrshire along with Kilmarnock in East Ayrshire, has resulted in an increase in sunshine duration particularly in the winter months.

Average annual rainfall totals range from less than in the upper Clyde valley and along the coasts of Ayrshire and Dumfries and Galloway to on average over over the higher parts of the west Highlands, approaching the maximum values found in the UK (over further north).

==Demography==
===Population===

In 2022, the population of South Ayrshire stood at 112,450, with 47.8% male and 52.2% female. The population of South Ayrshire is projected to decrease by 6.5% to 105,191, whilst the population of Scotland nationally is projected to increase 2.5%. The number of children in South Ayrshire is expected to decrease by 17%, with the working age population of the area set to fall by 14% by 2043. The population aged over 75 years is expected to increase by 65% in South Ayrshire by 2043.

South Ayrshire accounted for 2% of the overall Scottish population in 2022, with 20 of the most deprived data zones in Scotland being in South Ayrshire, making the area the 12th highest across Scotland.

===Settlements===


South Ayrshire&#x27;s population is mostly concentrated around the adjoining coastal towns of Ayr, Prestwick and Troon located to the north-west of the council, which represents 68% of the council&#x27;s total population according to data derived from the 2011 census, with a combined population of 76,846. Other areas of significance include the towns of Maybole and Girvan which are located to the south of the council area in the district of Carrick.

Largest settlements by population:

A list of settlements in South Ayrshire may be found below:

===Towns===
Ayr is the administrative centre of the South Ayrshire Council, and the historic county town of Ayrshire. With a population of 47,982, Ayr is the 14th largest settlement in Scotland and largest town in Ayrshire by population. The town is contiguous with the smaller town of Prestwick to the north. Ayr submitted unsuccessful bids for city status in 2000 and 2002, and as part of the wider South Ayrshire area in 2022. Ayr was established as a Royal Burgh in 1205 and is the county town of Ayrshire. It served as Ayrshire&#x27;s central marketplace and harbour throughout the medieval period and was a port during the early modern period.

Troon is the second largest town in South Ayrshire and is about north of Ayr and northwest of Glasgow Prestwick Airport. Troon has a port with ferry and freight services, and a yacht marina and since March 2024, Caledonian MacBrayne have operated a ferry service to Brodick on the Isle of Arran. In the 2001 census the population of Troon, not including the nearby village of Loans but including the Barassie area, was estimated at 14,766, a 4.77% increase on the 1991 estimate of 14,094. The population in 2024 is just over 15,000

South Ayrshire&#x27;s five towns are as follows: 
*Ayr
*Girvan
*Prestwick
*Troon
*Maybole

===Villages and hamlets===

*Alloway (Suburb of Ayr)
*Annbank
*Ballantrae
*Barassie (Suburb of Troon)
*Barr
*Barrhill
*Colmonell
*Coodham
*Coylton
*Craigie
*Crosshill
*Dailly
*Dundonald
*Dunure
*Failford
*Joppa (Suburb of Coylton)
*Kirkmichael
*Kirkoswald
*Lendalfoot
*Loans
*Maidens
*Monkton
*Mossblown
*Minishant
*Old Dailly
*Pinmore
*Pinwherry
*Straiton
*Symington
*Tarbolton
*Turnberry
==Economy==

The economy of South Ayrshire, like many other areas, was badly affected during the worldwide financial crisis from 2009 to 2012. Despite this, total Gross Value Added for South Ayrshire has seen a steady increase over the last 20 years, reaching a peak in 2015 of £2.4 billion. South Ayrshire&#x27;s GVA represents 1.9% of the total Scottish Gross Value Added income which is consistent with the previous 20 years. By 2022, South Ayrshire Gross Domestic Product (GDP) estimates stood at £2.710 billion.

The largest employment industry in South Ayrshire and Scotland is the public administration, education and health sector. Compared with Scotland, proportionally there are more South Ayrshire residents employed in this sector than Scotland, while there are proportionally fewer employed in banking, finance and insurance sector than Scotland. Despite being a coastal area, the smallest employment in South Ayrshire is in the agriculture and fishing sector.

===Regional Economic Partnership===

The council and its neighbours of East Ayrshire and North Ayrshire work together on economic growth as the Ayrshire Regional Economic Partnership, with support from the Scottish and UK governments and other private and public sector organisations.

===Employment trends===
Across South Ayrshire in 2023, 47,500 people were classed as being economically active, with 44,700 people categorised as being in employment (36,800 employed by a business or organisation and an additional 7,500 people classed as self employed). In the same period, a total of 1,700 people in South Ayrshire were unemployed, an unemployment rate of 3.7% which is higher than the Scottish average unemployment rate of 3.5%.

Professional Occupations make up the largest employment figures based on occupation in South Ayrshire, with an estimated 8,900 people (20.0%) of the population employed in the area. Other large sectors of employment across South Ayrshire include the associate professional occupations sector (13.1%), the care, leisure and social care sector (10.2%) and managerial and directors occupations (9.1%).

The average gross weekly salary for a full time employee in South Ayrshire in 2023 was £753.40, higher than the Scottish average gross weekly salary figure of £702.40.

===Tourism===
The tourism sector of South Ayrshire is a major contributor to the local economy, with the area having attractions including Burns Cottage, the Robert Burns Birthplace Museum, Turnberry Castle and Culzean Castle.

The Royal Troon Golf Club is featured on the rota of courses used for the Open Championship, with the most recent Open Championship being held at Royal Troon in 2024. Additionally, the Turnberry Golf Course has also hosted the Open Championship, the most recent being in 2009. However, since the course came under the ownership of Donald Trump, the 45th President of the United States, The R&amp;A, the governing body for golf said following the 2021 storming of the United States Capitol, that it had &quot;no plans to stage any of its competitions at Turnberry&quot; and would not do so &quot;until we are convinced that the focus will be on the championship, the players and the course itself&quot;.

Other notable places of interest within South Ayrshire include:

*Ailsa Craig
*Bachelor&#x27;s Club, Tarbolton
*Bargany Gardens
*Blairquhan
*Burns Cottage
*Robert Burns Birthplace Museum (Robert Burns)
*Carrick Forest
*Crossraguel Abbey
*Culzean Castle
*Electric Brae
*Penkill Castle
*Souter Johnnie&#x27;s Cottage
*Royal Troon Golf Club
*Turnberry Hotel and Golf Course

==Media==
===Television===
In terms of television, South Ayrshire is served by:
*&quot;BBC Reporting Scotland&quot;
*&quot;STV News&quot; (Central)
*&quot;ITV News Lookaround&quot; can also be received in southern parts.

===Radio===
Radio stations that broadcast to South Ayrshire are:
*BBC Radio Scotland on 93.9 FM
*Clyde 1 (Ayrshire) on 96.7 FM

===Newspapers===
Local newspaper is served by &quot;The Ayrshire Post&quot;.

==Education==

Provision for education in South Ayrshire is provided by South Ayrshire Council, the local authority for the area, offered via eight secondary schools, forty primary schools, two special needs schools and thirty-five Early Years Centres. In terms of early years provision, there are also a number of private establishments which are operated in conjunction with South Ayrshire Council, rather than managed and operated entirely by the council. South Ayrshire Council also owns and operates Dolphin House, an outdoor learning programme for upper primary school aged pupils across South Ayrshire which is located within the grounds of Culzean Country Park. In 2022, the education sector within South Ayrshire Council employed 1,165 full time equivalent teachers at the 2022 census.

Between 2022–2023, 7,769 children were enrolled across South Ayrshire primary schools and 6,206 enrolled in the areas secondary schools. Additionally, South Ayrshire Council runs five out of school care services and two holiday childcare clubs. Based on figures from 2023–2024, a total of 6,596 pupils attend secondary schools across South Ayrshire, with Belmont Academy in Ayr being the largest in terms of pupil numbers, with a total of 1,225 pupils attending Belmont Academy. In contrast, Carrick Academy has the smallest school roll, with a total of 391 pupils attending the school. A total of 7,441 children were enrolled in South Ayrshire&#x27;s primary schools between 2023–2024, with Forehill Primary School having the largest pupil roll amongst the areas primary schools, with a total of 458 children attending the school. Straiton Primary School had the smallest pupil roll, with a total of 18 children attending the school in 2024.

As of 2024, there are a total of eight secondary schools within South Ayrshire:

* Ayr Academy (Non-denominational, Ayr)
* Belmont Academy (Non-denominational, Ayr)
* Carrick Academy (Non-denominational, Maybole)
* Girvan Academy (Non-denominational, Girvan)
* Kyle Academy (Non-denominational, Ayr)
* Marr College (Non-denominational, Troon)
* Queen Margaret Academy (Roman Catholic, Ayr)
* Prestwick Academy (Non-denominational, Prestwick)

In addition to the eight secondary schools which are operated by South Ayrshire Council, Ayr is home to Wellington School, a private day school which educates children from 3–18.

==Governance==
===South Ayrshire Council===
South Ayrshire is governed by South Ayrshire Council which has been under no overall control since 2003, in which time various coalitions and minority administrations have operated. Since the last election in 2022, the council has been led by a Conservative minority administration which took office with support from two independent councillors and abstentions from Labour. The next election is due in 2027.

The council&#x27;s civic head takes the title of provost. This is a largely ceremonial role, chairing council meetings and acting as the area&#x27;s first citizen. Although an elected councillor, the provost is expected to be politically impartial. Political leadership is provided by the leader of the council. 

The head of the councils operational service is the Chief Executive Mike Newall who works with the elected representatives of the council on matters concerning governance, legislation, policy and regulation. Additionally, the Chief Executive of the council is the lead officer during an emergency response as a result of an occurring significant civil emergency and also is the councils chief returning officer during parliamentary elections. The chief executive is supported by their depute, currently Lyndsay McRoberts, who also serves as the councils Director of Education.

===Wider politics===

At the 2014 Scottish independence referendum South Ayrshire rejected independence by an above-average margin of 57.9% &quot;No&quot; to 42.1% &quot;Yes&quot;. With a turnout of 86.1%, there were 34,402 &quot;Yes&quot; votes and 47,247 &quot;No&quot; votes. Nationally 55.3% of voters voted &quot;No&quot; in the referendum compared to 44.7%, who voted &quot;Yes&quot; – resulting in Scotland remaining a devolved part of the United Kingdom.

At the 2016 United Kingdom European Union membership referendum a majority of voters in South Ayrshire voted for the United Kingdom to remain a member of the European Union (EU), with 59% of voters in South Ayrshire voting for the United Kingdom to remain a member of the EU and 41% voting for the United Kingdom to leave the European Union. With a turnout of 69.8%, 36,265 votes were cast for remain and 25,241 were cast for leave. 62% of Scottish voters voted remain whilst 38% voted leave, whilst nationally 51.8% of voters in the United Kingdom as a whole voting to leave and 48.2% voting to remain.

===Parliamentary representation===

UK Parliament

South Ayrshire forms part of two UK Parliamentary constituencies, listed below:

Scottish Parliament

&quot;Constituency MSPs&quot; 
South Ayrshire forms part of two Scottish Parliamentary constituency seats, listed below:

&quot;Regional List MSPs&quot; 
As part of the South Scotland electoral region, South Ayrshire is represented by 7 regional MSPs who are elected to represent the entire South Scotland region – all regional list MSPs elected for the South Scotland region are listed below:

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q209131" start="0" end="14" title="South Ayrshire" label="South Ayrshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q461231" start="43" end="56" title="council areas" label="council areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="60" end="68" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q793283" start="100" end="108" title="Ayrshire" label="Ayrshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q126514" start="126" end="147" title="Dumfries and Galloway" label="Dumfries and Galloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q209135" start="149" end="162" title="East Ayrshire" label="East Ayrshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q206926" start="167" end="181" title="North Ayrshire" label="North Ayrshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q461231" start="273" end="310" title="Subdivisions of Scotland" label="subdivision in Scotland by population"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306755" start="428" end="449" title="administrative centre" label="administrative centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q654216" start="482" end="485" title="Ayr" label="Ayr"/>
<link wikidata="Q99229587" start="539" end="561" title="South Ayrshire Council" label="South Ayrshire Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q17122052" start="586" end="602" title="County Buildings, Ayr" label="County Buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357964" start="651" end="662" title="county town" label="county town"/>
<link wikidata="Q793283" start="679" end="687" title="Ayrshire" label="Ayrshire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="731" end="754" title="Ayrshire#Local government" label="Ayrshire County Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258386" start="846" end="887" title="Local Government etc. (Scotland) Act 1994" label="Local Government etc. (Scotland) Act 1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q6451531" start="1125" end="1141" title="Kyle and Carrick" label="Kyle and Carrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q124661" start="1202" end="1230" title="Strathclyde Regional Council" label="Strathclyde Regional Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350181" start="1304" end="1319" title="shires of Scotland" label="historic county"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867820" start="1513" end="1524" title="city status in the United Kingdom" label="city status"/>
<link wikidata="Q104533546" start="1540" end="1574" title="Platinum Jubilee of Elizabeth II" label="2022 Platinum Jubilee Celebrations"/>
<link wikidata="Q16918337" start="1713" end="1729" title="Ayrshire College" label="Ayrshire College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437711" start="1734" end="1753" title="Scottish Enterprise" label="Scottish Enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q46395" start="1836" end="1856" title="British Overseas Territories" label="overseas territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q185086" start="1861" end="1879" title="crown dependencies" label="crown dependencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q211950" start="1931" end="1942" title="Dunfermline" label="Dunfermline"/>
<link wikidata="Q209135" start="2087" end="2100" title="East Ayrshire" label="East Ayrshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q126514" start="2102" end="2123" title="Dumfries and Galloway" label="Dumfries and Galloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q206926" start="2128" end="2142" title="North Ayrshire" label="North Ayrshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q130905" start="2425" end="2436" title="Gulf Stream" label="Gulf Stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q654216" start="2614" end="2617" title="Ayr" label="Ayr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021167" start="2622" end="2627" title="Troon" label="Troon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348561" start="2800" end="2817" title="Rhins of Galloway" label="Rhins of Galloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q242083" start="2819" end="2826" title="Kintyre" label="Kintyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q123377" start="2835" end="2843" title="Hebrides" label="Hebrides"/>
<link wikidata="Q126514" start="4051" end="4072" title="Dumfries and Galloway" label="Dumfries and Galloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="5206" end="5217" title="United Kingdom Census 2011" label="2011 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q4216038" start="5395" end="5402" title="Carrick, Scotland" label="Carrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q99229587" start="5554" end="5576" title="South Ayrshire Council" label="South Ayrshire Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350181" start="5595" end="5606" title="Shires of Scotland" label="county town"/>
<link wikidata="Q793283" start="5610" end="5618" title="Ayrshire" label="Ayrshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815294" start="5660" end="5695" title="List of towns and cities in Scotland by population" label="14th largest settlement in Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q939049" start="5788" end="5797" title="Prestwick" label="Prestwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867820" start="5848" end="5859" title="City status in the United Kingdom" label="city status"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="6089" end="6104" title="medieval period" label="medieval period"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308718" start="6131" end="6150" title="early modern period" label="early modern period"/>
<link wikidata="Q654216" start="6226" end="6229" title="Ayr" label="Ayr"/>
<link wikidata="Q8992" start="6247" end="6272" title="Glasgow Prestwick Airport" label="Glasgow Prestwick Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q721207" start="6336" end="6342" title="marina" label="marina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026582" start="6365" end="6385" title="Caledonian MacBrayne" label="Caledonian MacBrayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q924520" start="6419" end="6426" title="Brodick" label="Brodick"/>
<link wikidata="Q211873" start="6434" end="6447" title="Isle of Arran" label="Isle of Arran"/>
<link wikidata="Q6663494" start="6529" end="6534" title="Loans, South Ayrshire" label="Loans"/>
<link wikidata="Q654216" start="6737" end="6740" title="Ayr" label="Ayr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011787" start="6742" end="6748" title="Girvan" label="Girvan"/>
<link wikidata="Q939049" start="6750" end="6759" title="Prestwick" label="Prestwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021167" start="6761" end="6766" title="Troon" label="Troon"/>
<link wikidata="Q603616" start="6768" end="6775" title="Maybole" label="Maybole"/>
<link wikidata="Q3396445" start="6806" end="6813" title="Alloway" label="Alloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q188509" start="6815" end="6821" title="Suburban area" label="Suburb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013611" start="6831" end="6838" title="Annbank" label="Annbank"/>
<link wikidata="Q3997904" start="6840" end="6850" title="Ballantrae" label="Ballantrae"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858467" start="6852" end="6860" title="Barassie" label="Barassie"/>
<link wikidata="Q188509" start="6862" end="6868" title="Suburban area" label="Suburb"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863092" start="6880" end="6884" title="Barr, Ayrshire" label="Barr"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863470" start="6886" end="6894" title="Barrhill, South Ayrshire" label="Barrhill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5147750" start="6896" end="6905" title="Colmonell" label="Colmonell"/>
<link wikidata="Q68375900" start="6907" end="6914" title="Coodham" label="Coodham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011801" start="6916" end="6923" title="Coylton" label="Coylton"/>
<link wikidata="Q59259936" start="6925" end="6932" title="Craigie Village and Parish" label="Craigie"/>
<link wikidata="Q30359349" start="6934" end="6943" title="Crosshill, South Ayrshire" label="Crosshill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011838" start="6945" end="6951" title="Dailly" label="Dailly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5314885" start="6953" end="6962" title="Dundonald, South Ayrshire" label="Dundonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q5315777" start="6964" end="6970" title="Dunure" label="Dunure"/>
<link wikidata="Q5429681" start="6972" end="6980" title="Failford" label="Failford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6276200" start="6982" end="6987" title="Joppa, South Ayrshire" label="Joppa"/>
<link wikidata="Q188509" start="6989" end="6995" title="Suburban area" label="Suburb"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776817" start="7009" end="7020" title="Kirkmichael, South Ayrshire" label="Kirkmichael"/>
<link wikidata="Q6415798" start="7022" end="7032" title="Kirkoswald, South Ayrshire" label="Kirkoswald"/>
<link wikidata="Q59841996" start="7034" end="7044" title="Lendalfoot" label="Lendalfoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6663494" start="7046" end="7051" title="Loans, South Ayrshire" label="Loans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6735448" start="7053" end="7060" title="Maidens, South Ayrshire" label="Maidens"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900996" start="7062" end="7069" title="Monkton, Ayrshire" label="Monkton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009960" start="7071" end="7080" title="Mossblown" label="Mossblown"/>
<link wikidata="Q59260628" start="7082" end="7091" title="Minishant" label="Minishant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7083820" start="7093" end="7103" title="Old Dailly" label="Old Dailly"/>
<link wikidata="Q65963170" start="7114" end="7123" title="Pinwherry" label="Pinwherry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621158" start="7125" end="7133" title="Straiton" label="Straiton"/>
<link wikidata="Q12070430" start="7135" end="7144" title="Symington, South Ayrshire" label="Symington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011743" start="7146" end="7155" title="Tarbolton" label="Tarbolton"/>
<link wikidata="Q65963165" start="7157" end="7166" title="Turnberry, South Ayrshire" label="Turnberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="7620" end="7642" title="Gross Domestic Product" label="Gross Domestic Product"/>
<link wikidata="Q209135" start="8213" end="8226" title="East Ayrshire" label="East Ayrshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q206926" start="8231" end="8245" title="North Ayrshire" label="North Ayrshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5000064" start="9585" end="9598" title="Burns Cottage" label="Burns Cottage"/>
<link wikidata="Q124365137" start="9604" end="9634" title="Robert Burns Birthplace Museum" label="Robert Burns Birthplace Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590136" start="9636" end="9652" title="Turnberry Castle" label="Turnberry Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q899545" start="9657" end="9671" title="Culzean Castle" label="Culzean Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q662996" start="9678" end="9699" title="Royal Troon Golf Club" label="Royal Troon Golf Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q848797" start="9748" end="9765" title="Open Championship" label="Open Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q126915614" start="9835" end="9839" title="2024 Open Championship" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096062" start="9859" end="9880" title="Turnberry (golf course)" label="Turnberry Golf Course"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821444" start="9945" end="9949" title="2009 Open Championship" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="10005" end="10017" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="10028" end="10058" title="President of the United States" label="President of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q104901447" start="10060" end="10071" title="The R&amp;amp;A" label="The R&amp;amp;A"/>
<link wikidata="Q104705419" start="10120" end="10162" title="2021 storming of the United States Capitol" label="2021 storming of the United States Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q405346" start="10444" end="10455" title="Ailsa Craig" label="Ailsa Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011743" start="10479" end="10488" title="Tarbolton" label="Tarbolton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924231" start="10507" end="10517" title="Blairquhan" label="Blairquhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5000064" start="10519" end="10532" title="Burns Cottage" label="Burns Cottage"/>
<link wikidata="Q81960" start="10566" end="10578" title="Robert Burns" label="Robert Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309696" start="10581" end="10595" title="Carrick Forest" label="Carrick Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164332" start="10597" end="10614" title="Crossraguel Abbey" label="Crossraguel Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q899545" start="10616" end="10630" title="Culzean Castle" label="Culzean Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325829" start="10632" end="10645" title="Electric Brae" label="Electric Brae"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163069" start="10647" end="10661" title="Penkill Castle" label="Penkill Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q662996" start="10694" end="10715" title="Royal Troon Golf Club" label="Royal Troon Golf Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096062" start="10717" end="10748" title="Turnberry (golf course)" label="Turnberry Hotel and Golf Course"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406319" start="10837" end="10859" title="BBC Reporting Scotland" label="BBC Reporting Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7394869" start="10873" end="10881" title="STV News" label="STV News"/>
<link wikidata="Q6675197" start="10905" end="10924" title="ITV News Lookaround" label="ITV News Lookaround"/>
<link wikidata="Q2876757" start="11038" end="11056" title="BBC Radio Scotland" label="BBC Radio Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985129" start="11069" end="11087" title="Clyde 1 (Ayrshire)" label="Clyde 1 (Ayrshire)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4831687" start="11152" end="11169" title="Ayrshire Post" label="The Ayrshire Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q99229587" start="11250" end="11272" title="South Ayrshire Council" label="South Ayrshire Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q899545" start="11826" end="11846" title="Culzean Castle" label="Culzean Country Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q4884321" start="12329" end="12344" title="Belmont Academy" label="Belmont Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046136" start="12466" end="12481" title="Carrick Academy" label="Carrick Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4831611" start="13001" end="13012" title="Ayr Academy" label="Ayr Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7882536" start="13014" end="13032" title="Non-denominational" label="Non-denominational"/>
<link wikidata="Q654216" start="13034" end="13037" title="Ayr" label="Ayr"/>
<link wikidata="Q4884321" start="13041" end="13056" title="Belmont Academy" label="Belmont Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046136" start="13085" end="13100" title="Carrick Academy" label="Carrick Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q603616" start="13122" end="13129" title="Maybole" label="Maybole"/>
<link wikidata="Q5564846" start="13133" end="13147" title="Girvan Academy" label="Girvan Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011787" start="13169" end="13175" title="Girvan" label="Girvan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6451025" start="13179" end="13191" title="Kyle Academy" label="Kyle Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6772758" start="13220" end="13232" title="Marr College" label="Marr College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021167" start="13254" end="13259" title="Troon" label="Troon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270433" start="13263" end="13285" title="Queen Margaret Academy" label="Queen Margaret Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="13287" end="13301" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242079" start="13310" end="13327" title="Prestwick Academy" label="Prestwick Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q939049" start="13349" end="13358" title="Prestwick" label="Prestwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7981483" start="13465" end="13482" title="Wellington School, Ayr" label="Wellington School"/>
<link wikidata="Q99229587" start="13615" end="13637" title="South Ayrshire Council" label="South Ayrshire Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7045250" start="13659" end="13677" title="no overall control" label="no overall control"/>
<link wikidata="Q111953832" start="13777" end="13798" title="2022 South Ayrshire Council election" label="last election in 2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243587" start="13830" end="13842" title="Scottish Conservatives" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q327591" start="13907" end="13918" title="independent politician" label="independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179541" start="13952" end="13958" title="Scottish Labour" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252809" start="14044" end="14051" title="provost (civil)" label="provost"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015449" start="14284" end="14305" title="leader of the council" label="leader of the council"/>
<link wikidata="Q484876" start="14361" end="14376" title="Chief Executive" label="Chief Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513949" start="14702" end="14719" title="returning officer" label="returning officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458570" start="14916" end="14953" title="2014 Scottish independence referendum" label="2014 Scottish independence referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q891905" start="14978" end="14990" title="Scottish independence" label="independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q744894" start="15313" end="15321" title="Devolution in the United Kingdom" label="devolved"/>
<link wikidata="Q21812812" start="15358" end="15414" title="2016 United Kingdom European Union membership referendum" label="2016 United Kingdom European Union membership referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="15509" end="15523" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749544" start="16278" end="16292" title="South Scotland (Scottish Parliament electoral region)" label="South Scotland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143053" wikidata="Q211925" url="?curid=143053" title="East Renfrewshire">
<text>East Renfrewshire (; ) is one of 32 council areas of Scotland. It was formed in 1996, as a successor to the Eastwood district of the Strathclyde region. The northeastern part of the council area is close to Glasgow and many of the council area&#x27;s northern settlements fall into the Greater Glasgow urban area.

Clockwise, East Renfrewshire borders Glasgow City council area to the northeast, South Lanarkshire to the southeast, East Ayrshire to the southwest, North Ayrshire to the west and Renfrewshire to the northwest.

Until 1975, the council area formed part of the county of Renfrewshire for local government purposes along with the modern council areas of Renfrewshire and Inverclyde. These three council areas together still form a single lieutenancy area called Renfrewshire.

== History ==
East Renfrewshire was created in 1996 under the Local Government etc. (Scotland) Act 1994, which replaced Scotland&#x27;s previous local government structure of upper-tier regions and lower-tier districts with unitary council areas providing all local government services. East Renfrewshire covered the whole of the abolished Eastwood district and part of Renfrew district, being the Barrhead electoral division, which roughly corresponded to the pre-1975 burgh of Barrhead and parish of Neilston, both lying in the valley of the Levern Water. The new council also took over the functions of the abolished Strathclyde Regional Council within the area.

The area&#x27;s name references its location within the historic county of Renfrewshire, which had been abolished for local government purposes in 1975 when Eastwood district and Strathclyde region had been created. East Renfrewshire forms part of the Renfrewshire lieutenancy.

The area that is now East Renfrewshire has been inhabited since prehistoric times. At Dunwan Hill near Eaglesham and at Duncarnock near Newton Mearns there were Iron Age hill forts, both thought to have been occupied between around 1200BC and 400AD.

During the Industrial Revolution the Levern valley became a centre for the textiles industry, with several mills being established in Neilston and Barrhead.

Giffnock initially grew to house the workers at Giffnock Quarries, which opened in 1835. The honey-coloured stone from Giffnock was used at Glasgow University and Glasgow Central station among many other buildings. Following the development of the railways in the mid-nineteenth century, the parts of the area close to Glasgow became increasingly suburban in character.

In 1941, Rudolf Hess, one of Adolf Hitler&#x27;s top deputies within the Nazi Party, parachuted into Floors Farm, near the village of Waterfoot, on a secret mission to meet the Duke of Hamilton and Brandon for peace negotiations. The botched landing led to his capture and arrest.

In 1971 a gas explosion at a parade of shops in Clarkston killed 22 people and injured more than 100.

In a 2007 Reader&#x27;s Digest poll, &quot;East Renfrewshire&quot; was voted the second best place in Britain to raise a family, ranking just behind East Dunbartonshire to the north of Glasgow.

In January 2008, East Renfrewshire became the first Scottish local authority to create a Facebook page to publicise its services.

==Geography==
East Renfrewshire covers an area to the south and south-west of Glasgow. Many of the district&#x27;s settlements are classed as part of the Greater Glasgow urban area for statistical purposes. The largest of these, in terms of population, are Newton Mearns, Barrhead, Giffnock and Clarkston. The area becomes more rural away from the Glasgow urban area with areas of moorland and numerous small lochs, many of which have been turned into reservoirs. The moors include part of the Whitelee Wind Farm.

A 2011 survey showed that 41% of Scotland&#x27;s Jewish population lived in East Renfrewshire, making up 2.4% of the area&#x27;s population.

The area is divided into eleven community council areas, all of which have community councils:
*Barrhead
*Broom, Kirkhill and Mearnskirk
*Busby
*Clarkston
*Crookfur, Greenfarm and Mearns Village
*Eaglesham and Waterfoot
*Giffnock
*Neilston
*Netherlee and Stamperland
*Thornliebank
*Uplawmoor
==Localities==
Largest localities by population

==Economy==
East Renfrewshire is home to many small to medium businesses. The interests of these businesses are looked after by the East Renfrewshire Chamber of Commerce.

The local newspapers are the &quot;Barrhead News&quot;, covering the local authority with emphasis on the western half of the area, which primarily includes the town of Barrhead and the villages of Neilston and Uplawmoor, and the &quot;Glasgow South and Eastwood Extra&quot;, which is delivered free to homes and businesses, which has its emphasis on the eastern half of the local authority, but also covers news across the western half as well as the south of Glasgow.

==Governance==
===Political control===
The first election to East Renfrewshire Council was held in 1995, initially operating as a shadow authority alongside the outgoing authorities until the new system came into force on 1 April 1996. Political control of the council since 1996 has been as follows:

===Leadership===
The leaders of the council since 1996 have been:

===Premises===

The council has its headquarters at Eastwood Park on Rouken Glen Road in Giffnock, in a building which was completed in 1980 for the former Eastwood District Council.

The council also has an office and customer service centre at 211 Main Street in Barrhead, built in 2003.

==Elections==

Since 2007 elections have been held every five years under the single transferable vote system, introduced by the Local Governance (Scotland) Act 2004. Election results since 1995 have been as follows:

===Wards===

Six multi-member wards (20 seats) were created for the 2007 election, replacing 20 single-member wards which had been in place since the creation of the council in 1995. This representation decreased to 18 seats across five renamed and redrawn wards for the 2017 election:

==References==
==External links==
* East Renfrewshire Events Guide
* East Renfrewshire - History of the various suburbs</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q211925" start="0" end="17" title="East Renfrewshire" label="East Renfrewshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q461231" start="36" end="61" title="council areas of Scotland" label="council areas of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5331003" start="108" end="116" title="Eastwood (district)" label="Eastwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q124661" start="133" end="144" title="Strathclyde" label="Strathclyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="207" end="214" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600557" start="286" end="301" title="Greater Glasgow" label="Greater Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q130637" start="352" end="377" title="Glasgow City council area" label="Glasgow City council area"/>
<link wikidata="Q209142" start="396" end="413" title="South Lanarkshire" label="South Lanarkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q209135" start="432" end="445" title="East Ayrshire" label="East Ayrshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q206926" start="464" end="478" title="North Ayrshire" label="North Ayrshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q211091" start="495" end="507" title="Renfrewshire" label="Renfrewshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350181" start="575" end="581" title="counties of Scotland" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q20723659" start="585" end="597" title="Renfrewshire (historic)" label="Renfrewshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q211091" start="667" end="679" title="Renfrewshire" label="Renfrewshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q208271" start="684" end="694" title="Inverclyde" label="Inverclyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q202435" start="751" end="767" title="lieutenancy areas of Scotland" label="lieutenancy area"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258386" start="852" end="893" title="Local Government etc. (Scotland) Act 1994" label="Local Government etc. (Scotland) Act 1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176207" start="1022" end="1034" title="council area" label="council area"/>
<link wikidata="Q5331003" start="1130" end="1138" title="Eastwood, Strathclyde" label="Eastwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313155" start="1160" end="1176" title="Renfrew district" label="Renfrew district"/>
<link wikidata="Q2598252" start="1188" end="1196" title="Barrhead" label="Barrhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q589282" start="1197" end="1215" title="Wards and electoral divisions of the United Kingdom" label="electoral division"/>
<link wikidata="Q254978" start="1260" end="1265" title="burgh" label="burgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q747777" start="1292" end="1300" title="Neilston" label="Neilston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2654887" start="1334" end="1346" title="Levern Water" label="Levern Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q124661" start="1410" end="1438" title="Strathclyde Regional Council" label="Strathclyde Regional Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350181" start="1513" end="1528" title="shires of Scotland" label="historic county"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679648" start="1709" end="1733" title="Lord Lieutenant of Renfrewshire" label="Renfrewshire lieutenancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q638046" start="1839" end="1848" title="Eaglesham" label="Eaglesham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018543" start="1872" end="1885" title="Newton Mearns" label="Newton Mearns"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="1897" end="1905" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="1998" end="2019" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016935" start="2145" end="2153" title="Giffnock" label="Giffnock"/>
<link wikidata="Q192775" start="2285" end="2303" title="Glasgow University" label="Glasgow University"/>
<link wikidata="Q800825" start="2308" end="2331" title="Glasgow Central station" label="Glasgow Central station"/>
<link wikidata="Q75866" start="2525" end="2536" title="Rudolf Hess" label="Rudolf Hess"/>
<link wikidata="Q7973987" start="2650" end="2659" title="Waterfoot, East Renfrewshire" label="Waterfoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q15059344" start="2693" end="2721" title="Duke of Hamilton and Brandon" label="Duke of Hamilton and Brandon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5127664" start="2808" end="2821" title="Clarkston explosion" label="gas explosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1446963" start="2846" end="2855" title="Clarkston, East Renfrewshire" label="Clarkston"/>
<link wikidata="Q371820" start="2911" end="2931" title="Reader&amp;#x27;s Digest" label="Reader&amp;#x27;s Digest"/>
<link wikidata="Q211889" start="3050" end="3069" title="East Dunbartonshire" label="East Dunbartonshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="3185" end="3193" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="3305" end="3312" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600557" start="3381" end="3396" title="Greater Glasgow" label="Greater Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018543" start="3484" end="3497" title="Newton Mearns" label="Newton Mearns"/>
<link wikidata="Q2598252" start="3499" end="3507" title="Barrhead" label="Barrhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016935" start="3509" end="3517" title="Giffnock" label="Giffnock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1446963" start="3522" end="3531" title="Clarkston, East Renfrewshire" label="Clarkston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092661" start="3608" end="3616" title="moorland" label="moorland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172903" start="3636" end="3640" title="loch" label="loch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4019566" start="3721" end="3739" title="Whitelee Wind Farm" label="Whitelee Wind Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869778" start="3775" end="3808" title="History of the Jews in Scotland" label="Scotland&amp;#x27;s Jewish population"/>
<link wikidata="Q6612187" start="3916" end="3939" title="List of community council areas in Scotland" label="community council areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403338" start="3959" end="3976" title="community council" label="community council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2598252" start="3980" end="3988" title="Barrhead" label="Barrhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018543" start="4010" end="4020" title="Mearnskirk" label="Mearnskirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001296" start="4022" end="4027" title="Busby, East Renfrewshire" label="Busby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1446963" start="4029" end="4038" title="Clarkston, East Renfrewshire" label="Clarkston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018543" start="4040" end="4048" title="Crookfur" label="Crookfur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018543" start="4064" end="4070" title="Newton Mearns" label="Mearns"/>
<link wikidata="Q638046" start="4080" end="4089" title="Eaglesham" label="Eaglesham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7973987" start="4094" end="4103" title="Waterfoot, East Renfrewshire" label="Waterfoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016935" start="4105" end="4113" title="Giffnock" label="Giffnock"/>
<link wikidata="Q747777" start="4115" end="4123" title="Neilston" label="Neilston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023546" start="4125" end="4134" title="Netherlee" label="Netherlee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7597495" start="4139" end="4150" title="Stamperland" label="Stamperland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7796469" start="4152" end="4164" title="Thornliebank" label="Thornliebank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011705" start="4166" end="4175" title="Uplawmoor" label="Uplawmoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="4858" end="4865" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015449" start="5191" end="5213" title="leader of the council" label="leaders of the council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016935" start="5326" end="5334" title="Giffnock" label="Giffnock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2598252" start="5502" end="5510" title="Barrhead" label="Barrhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q115807" start="5606" end="5630" title="single transferable vote" label="single transferable vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664013" start="5657" end="5693" title="Local Governance (Scotland) Act 2004" label="Local Governance (Scotland) Act 2004"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5776" end="5781" title="Wards of the United Kingdom#Scotland" label="wards"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="143057" wikidata="Q209142" url="?curid=143057" title="South Lanarkshire">
<text>South Lanarkshire (; ) is one of 32 unitary authorities of Scotland. It borders the south-east of the Glasgow City council area and contains some of Greater Glasgow&#x27;s suburban towns, as well as many rural towns and villages. It also shares borders with Dumfries and Galloway, East Ayrshire, East Renfrewshire, North Lanarkshire, the Scottish Borders and West Lothian. It includes most of the historic county of Lanarkshire.

==History==
South Lanarkshire covers the southern part of the historic county of Lanarkshire. Lanarkshire had existed as a shire from around the time of King David I, who ruled Scotland from 1124 to 1153. The county took its name from the original county town at Lanark, which had been the site of the first Parliament of Scotland under Kenneth II in 978.

Local government was reformed in 1975 under the Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973, which replaced Scotland&#x27;s counties, burghs and landward districts with a two-tier structure of upper-tier regions and lower-tier districts. Lanarkshire became part of the Strathclyde region, which was divided in 19 districts.

South Lanarkshire was created in 1996, when the regions and districts created in 1975 were replaced with single-tier council areas. South Lanarkshire covered the whole area of three of the abolished Strathclyde districts, being Clydesdale, East Kilbride and Hamilton, plus an area including Rutherglen and Cambuslang from the City of Glasgow district. The Rutherglen and Cambuslang area was included following a referendum on whether to stay in Glasgow or become part of the new South Lanarkshire council area.

== Geography ==
The large and varied geographical territory takes in rural and upland areas, market towns such as Lanark, Strathaven and Carluke, the urban burghs of Rutherglen, Cambuslang, and East Kilbride which was Scotland&#x27;s first new town.

==Governance==

South Lanarkshire is served by the South Lanarkshire Council. The council has its headquarters in Hamilton.

== Demographics ==
==Settlements==
Largest settlements by population:
===Other settlements===
==Places of interest==
*Bothwell Castle
*Calderglen Country Park, East Kilbride
*Chatelherault Country Park, Hamilton, including Cadzow Castle
*Clyde Valley
*Craignethan Castle
*David Livingstone Centre, Blantyre
*Dollan Aqua Centre, East Kilbride
*Falls of Clyde
*Hamilton Mausoleum
*James Hamilton Heritage Park, East Kilbride
*John Hastie Museum, Strathaven
*Lanark Loch
*Little Sparta, near Dunsyre near Lanark
*Low Parks Museum, Hamilton
*New Lanark, a World Heritage Site
*Rutherglen Town Hall and medieval church tower
*Sites of the Battle of Drumclog and the Battle of Bothwell Bridge
*Strathaven Castle
*Wilsontown Ironworks

==Education==
Beginning in 2003, South Lanarkshire Council embarked on a Schools Modernisation Programme, which envisioned the full suite of schools being either rebuilt or refubished and modernised. These include 124 primary schools – including 62 with nursery classes and 16 ASN bases; 17 secondary schools; 12 nursery centres; four ASN primary schools; three ASN secondary schools; and 15 community rooms or wings within the primary school builds. The total cost is about £1.2 billion. The final Primary School to be rebuilt was Black Mount Primary, which officially opened in October 2019, (although a new school for the expanding area of Jackton: Jackton Primary School was opened in 2023). At the beginning of 2024, the project was fully completed with the completion of the Early Learning Unit in Hamilton, which is a specialist nursery catering for mainstream and ASN children. At the peak of the project, about 9 nurseries and primary schools were being rebuilt each year. It is thought that this was the largest schools modernisation project in Europe, and that the Council now has the most modern, well-equipped primary school estate in the whole of Europe.

There are currently about 46,000 children - 15,000 primary school children and 19,000 secondary school pupils - in the school system in South Lanarkshire.

Gaelic Medium Education is offered at Mount Cameron Primary School, and Calderglen High School - both in East Kilbride.

===Secondary education===
* Biggar High School 
* Calderglen High School 
* Calderside Academy 
* Carluke High School 
* Cathkin High School 
* Duncanrig Secondary School 
* Fernhill School 
* Hamilton College
* Hamilton Grammar School 
* Holy Cross High School 
* John Ogilvie High School 
* Lanark Grammar School 
* Larkhall Academy
* Lesmahagow High School 
* Rutherglen High School
* Sanderson High School
* St Andrew&#x27;s and St Bride&#x27;s High School 
* Stonelaw High School 
* Strathaven Academy 
* Trinity High School 
* Uddingston Grammar School 

===Tertiary education===
* South Lanarkshire College
* University of the West of Scotland (formerly Bell College, University Of Paisley)

==See also==
*List of Category A listed buildings in South Lanarkshire
*Routes To Work South
*Scheduled monuments in South Lanarkshire

==Notes==
==References==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q209142" start="0" end="17" title="South Lanarkshire" label="South Lanarkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q461231" start="36" end="55" title="Council areas of Scotland" label="unitary authorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="59" end="67" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q130637" start="102" end="127" title="Glasgow City council area" label="Glasgow City council area"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600557" start="149" end="164" title="Greater Glasgow" label="Greater Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q188509" start="172" end="186" title="suburb" label="suburban towns"/>
<link wikidata="Q126514" start="258" end="279" title="Dumfries and Galloway" label="Dumfries and Galloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q209135" start="281" end="294" title="East Ayrshire" label="East Ayrshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q211925" start="296" end="313" title="East Renfrewshire" label="East Renfrewshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q207111" start="315" end="332" title="North Lanarkshire" label="North Lanarkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q211113" start="338" end="354" title="Scottish Borders" label="Scottish Borders"/>
<link wikidata="Q204940" start="359" end="371" title="West Lothian" label="West Lothian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350181" start="406" end="412" title="counties of Scotland" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q530296" start="416" end="427" title="Lanarkshire" label="Lanarkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q216787" start="588" end="595" title="David I of Scotland" label="David I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002124" start="693" end="699" title="Lanark" label="Lanark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650523" start="738" end="760" title="Parliament of Scotland" label="Parliament of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q352800" start="767" end="777" title="Kenneth II of Scotland" label="Kenneth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664037" start="835" end="871" title="Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973" label="Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q6626641" start="925" end="942" title="landward district" label="landward district"/>
<link wikidata="Q124661" start="1049" end="1060" title="Strathclyde" label="Strathclyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q796188" start="1333" end="1343" title="Clydesdale (district)" label="Clydesdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q85845856" start="1345" end="1358" title="East Kilbride (district)" label="East Kilbride"/>
<link wikidata="Q21467491" start="1363" end="1371" title="Hamilton (district)" label="Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287588" start="1396" end="1406" title="Rutherglen" label="Rutherglen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018505" start="1411" end="1421" title="Cambuslang" label="Cambuslang"/>
<link wikidata="Q77606319" start="1431" end="1446" title="City of Glasgow (1975–1996)" label="City of Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002124" start="1731" end="1737" title="Lanark" label="Lanark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013550" start="1739" end="1749" title="Strathaven" label="Strathaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011389" start="1754" end="1761" title="Carluke" label="Carluke"/>
<link wikidata="Q254978" start="1773" end="1778" title="burgh" label="burgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287588" start="1783" end="1793" title="Rutherglen" label="Rutherglen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018505" start="1795" end="1805" title="Cambuslang" label="Cambuslang"/>
<link wikidata="Q654226" start="1811" end="1824" title="East Kilbride" label="East Kilbride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074523" start="1857" end="1865" title="new town" label="new town"/>
<link wikidata="Q4131" start="1982" end="1990" title="Hamilton, South Lanarkshire" label="Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2412005" start="2111" end="2126" title="Bothwell Castle" label="Bothwell Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q28164893" start="2128" end="2151" title="Calderglen Country Park" label="Calderglen Country Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q108862133" start="2168" end="2194" title="Chatelherault Country Park" label="Chatelherault Country Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q17850103" start="2216" end="2229" title="Cadzow Castle" label="Cadzow Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q19721" start="2231" end="2243" title="River Clyde" label="Clyde Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092053" start="2245" end="2263" title="Craignethan Castle" label="Craignethan Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566556" start="2265" end="2289" title="David Livingstone Centre" label="David Livingstone Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5289193" start="2301" end="2319" title="Dollan Baths" label="Dollan Aqua Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q37493" start="2336" end="2350" title="Falls of Clyde (waterfalls)" label="Falls of Clyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645056" start="2352" end="2370" title="Hamilton Mausoleum" label="Hamilton Mausoleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6482917" start="2449" end="2460" title="Lanark Loch" label="Lanark Loch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314090" start="2462" end="2475" title="Little Sparta" label="Little Sparta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041378" start="2482" end="2489" title="Dunsyre" label="Dunsyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q16840881" start="2503" end="2519" title="Hamilton Low Parks Museum" label="Low Parks Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q743108" start="2531" end="2541" title="New Lanark" label="New Lanark"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="2545" end="2564" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q17572369" start="2566" end="2586" title="Rutherglen Town Hall" label="Rutherglen Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870928" start="2627" end="2645" title="Battle of Drumclog" label="Battle of Drumclog"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888187" start="2654" end="2679" title="Battle of Bothwell Bridge" label="Battle of Bothwell Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2899116" start="2681" end="2698" title="Strathaven Castle" label="Strathaven Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023306" start="2700" end="2720" title="Wilsontown Ironworks" label="Wilsontown Ironworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4906871" start="4197" end="4215" title="Biggar High School" label="Biggar High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019057" start="4219" end="4241" title="Calderglen High School" label="Calderglen High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019062" start="4245" end="4263" title="Calderside Academy" label="Calderside Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043092" start="4267" end="4286" title="Carluke High School" label="Carluke High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5053041" start="4290" end="4309" title="Cathkin High School" label="Cathkin High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5314677" start="4313" end="4339" title="Duncanrig Secondary School" label="Duncanrig Secondary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445094" start="4343" end="4358" title="Fernhill School, Rutherglen" label="Fernhill School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5644886" start="4362" end="4378" title="Hamilton College, South Lanarkshire" label="Hamilton College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5644959" start="4381" end="4404" title="Hamilton Grammar School" label="Hamilton Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5885258" start="4408" end="4430" title="Holy Cross High School, Hamilton" label="Holy Cross High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6251152" start="4434" end="4458" title="John Ogilvie High School" label="John Ogilvie High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6482911" start="4462" end="4483" title="Lanark Grammar School" label="Lanark Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q107236375" start="4487" end="4503" title="Larkhall Academy" label="Larkhall Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q104694562" start="4506" end="4528" title="Lesmahagow High School" label="Lesmahagow High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q107171730" start="4532" end="4554" title="Rutherglen High School" label="Rutherglen High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q107171763" start="4557" end="4578" title="Sanderson High School, East Kilbride" label="Sanderson High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7592410" start="4581" end="4629" title="St Andrew&amp;#x27;s and St Bride&amp;#x27;s High School" label="St Andrew&amp;#x27;s and St Bride&amp;#x27;s High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7619250" start="4633" end="4653" title="Stonelaw High School" label="Stonelaw High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622025" start="4657" end="4675" title="Strathaven Academy" label="Strathaven Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7842841" start="4679" end="4698" title="Trinity High School, Rutherglen" label="Trinity High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7877057" start="4702" end="4727" title="Uddingston Grammar School" label="Uddingston Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q16900353" start="4757" end="4782" title="South Lanarkshire College" label="South Lanarkshire College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296153" start="4785" end="4819" title="University of the West of Scotland" label="University of the West of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883144" start="4830" end="4842" title="Bell College" label="Bell College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6566377" start="4882" end="4938" title="List of Category A listed buildings in South Lanarkshire" label="List of Category A listed buildings in South Lanarkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q18162094" start="4940" end="4960" title="Routes To Work South" label="Routes To Work South"/>
<link wikidata="Q40889144" start="4962" end="5002" title="Scheduled monuments in South Lanarkshire" label="Scheduled monuments in South Lanarkshire"/>
</links>
</doc>
