<doc id="140271" wikidata="Q647332" url="?curid=140271" title="Kardashev scale">
<text>The Kardashev scale () is a method of measuring a civilization&#x27;s level of technological advancement based on the amount of energy it is capable of harnessing and using. The measure was proposed by Soviet astronomer Nikolai Kardashev in 1964, and was named after him.

Kardashev first outlined his scale in a paper presented at the 1964 conference that communicated findings on BS-29-76, Byurakan Conference in the Armenian SSR (which he initiated), a scientific meeting that reviewed the Soviet radio astronomy space listening program. The paper was titled &quot;&quot; (&quot;Transmission of Information by Extraterrestrial Civilizations&quot;). Starting from a functional definition of civilization, based on the immutability of physical laws and using human civilization as a model for extrapolation, Kardashev&#x27;s initial model was developed. He proposed a classification of civilizations into three types, based on the axiom of exponential growth:
*A [[Kardashev scale|Type I]] civilization is able to access all the energy available on its planet and store it for consumption.
*A Type II civilization can directly consume a star&#x27;s energy, most likely through the use of a Dyson sphere.
*A Type III civilization is able to capture all the energy emitted by its galaxy, and every object within it, such as every star, black hole, etc.

Under this scale, the sum of human civilization does not reach Type I status (though it continues to approach it). Various extensions of the scale have since been proposed, including a wider range of power levels (Types 0, IV, and V) and the use of metrics other than pure power (e.g., computational growth or food consumption).

In a second article, entitled &quot;Strategies of Searching for Extraterrestrial Intelligence&quot;, published in 1980, Kardashev wonders about the ability of a civilization, which he defines by its ability to access energy, to sustain itself, and to integrate information from its environment. Two more articles followed: &quot;On the Inevitability and the Possible Structure of Super Civilizations&quot; and &quot;Cosmology and Civilizations&quot;, published in 1985 and 1997, respectively; the Soviet astronomer proposed ways to detect super civilizations and to direct the SETI (Search for Extra Terrestrial Intelligence) programs. A number of scientists have conducted searches for possible civilizations, but with no conclusive results. However, in part thanks to such searches, unusual objects, now known to be either pulsars or quasars, were identified.

== Origin of the classification ==

=== First publication (1964) ===

Kardashev presented for the first time a classification of civilizations according to the level of the rate of their energy consumption, or ability to harness power, in an article entitled &quot;Transmission of Information by Extraterrestrial Civilizations&quot;, published in 1964 first in Russian in the March–April issue of the Astronomicheskii Zhurnal, then in English in the September–October 1964 issue of the Soviet Astronomical Journal. In this article, the scientist presents a calculation of the evolution of the power needs of humanity. Assuming that overall human power use will continue to increase, he calculated that the rate of energy consumption will cross specific mileposts. Kardashev proposed a typology of technological civilizations based on the evolutive attainment of the three power harnessing mileposts he described.

A civilization known as &quot;Type I&quot; has achieved a technological level close to the one attained on earth at the time Kardashev’s article was submitted (December 1963), with a rate of energy consumption evaluated at about 4 x 1012 watts (W). A civilization known as &quot;Type II&quot; would surpass the first by fourteen orders of magnitude, matching the entire power emitted by the Sun in about 3,200 years, i.e, our home star’s “output“ at that time, predicted at 4 × 1026 W. Finally, a civilization known as &quot;Type III&quot; reaches the milepost set in 5,800 years when humanity’s rate of energy consumption is predicted by the author to match the power emitted by the approximated 1011 stars in our home galaxy, the Milky Way, which involves harnessing power of up to an estimated 4 x 1037 W. 

Assuming the development of radio, Kardashev predicted that in the following two decades (i.e. in the 1980s) it would be possible to build antennas of 100,000 m2 capable of detecting Type II and III civilizations. A Type I civilization like that of earth would be able to receive the extraordinary energetic emissions of the other types of civilizations, which would supposedly be able to emit continuously.

Kardashev then examined the characteristics of a transmission from an artificial source. He mentioned the two cosmic radio sources discovered in 1963 by the California Institute of Technology, CTA-21 and CTA-102 in particular, which would have characteristics close to those of a presumed artificial source. The most suitable region of the galaxy for observing Type II and III civilizations would then be the Galactic Center, due to the high density of the stellar population it harbors. He then recommended that the search programs for such artificial sources should focus on other nearby galaxies, such as the Andromeda Galaxy, the Magellanic Clouds, M87, or Centaurus A. Kardashev concluded his paper by noting that the possible discovery of even the simplest organisms on Mars would increase the likelihood that Type II civilizations exist in the galaxy.

=== Second publication (1980) ===

==== Towards an energetic definition of civilization ====
In 1980, Nikolai Kardashev published a second article entitled &quot;Strategies of Searching for Extraterrestrial Intelligence: A Fundamental Approach to the Basic Problem,&quot; in which he stated that:

According to the Soviet astronomer, our civilization would be too young to be able to contact another civilization that would certainly be more advanced than us; the solar system is too young with its five billion years, and the first ancestors of today&#x27;s man appeared only 6 million years ago at the earliest; the oldest celestial objects are between 10 and 14 billion years old; it is clear that the other civilizations are incomparably older than the human civilization. Therefore, the knowledge of these civilizations must be greater than ours, and, he reasoned, they must surely be aware of what we are doing.

Kardashev believed it is probable that the present state of our civilization is only one of the stages through which civilizations pass during their evolution. It is thus possible to define civilization on the basis of this universal characteristic, which allowed Aleksandr Lyapunov to define life as &quot;a highly stable state of matter, which uses information encoded by the states of individual molecules to produce maintaining reactions&quot;, which Kardashev calls the &quot;functional definition of civilization&quot;. He therefore suggests thinking of civilization as a &quot;highly stable state of matter capable of acquiring, making abstract analysis of, and utilizing information to obtain qualitatively new information about its environment and about itself, to improve its capabilities of gathering new information for producing sustaining reactions.&quot; Civilization is therefore characterized by the quality of the information acquired by its operating program, and by the energy required to implement these functions. By &quot;information about its environment and about itself&quot;, Kardashev specified that it is data about organic or inorganic nature, science, technology, economy, culture, arts, etc. From this definition, he proposed a diagram representing the interactions between a civilization and its environment, and enumerated a number of scientific problems arising from these interactions with the information available in the Universe.

From this definition, Kardashev drew three conclusions. The first postulated that because of the vast and unlimited set of activities required by scientific problems, the period during which civilizations must transmit and communicate is necessarily long, even unlimited. On the other hand, since our present development covers only a negligible fraction of this communication phase, Kardashev hypothesized the high improbability that we will meet &quot;brothers in intelligence&quot; who are at the same stage of evolution as are we. After all, highly advanced civilizations know and use the laws of physics to a degree that we have yet to suspect. Kardashev asserted that &quot;this last point should be taken into account in the research programs of extraterrestrial civilizations&quot; and concluded that it is very likely that our present state is only one of the stages through which every civilization passes during its evolution.

==== Two strategies for searching for intelligent signals ====
Kardashev then analyzed various models and hypotheses of the evolution of civilization. Answering the question of the Russian astronomer Iosif Shklovsky, who in an article published in 1977 and titled &quot;Possibility of the Intelligent Life in the Universe Being Unique&quot; found it strange that the &quot;shock wave of intelligence&quot; of a supercivilization had not yet reached the limits of the whole Universe, Kardashev put forward two explanatory hypotheses. In the first, he postulated that it would not be useful for a supercivilization to expand the space it occupies in order to maintain its activity, and in the second, it is possible that a civilization, instead of dispersing itself in space, would rather continue its activities of information analysis in order to discover new fundamental laws (such as the exploration of the microcosm, or black holes for example).

However, such civilization activities require the use of abundant energy. According to the laws of thermodynamics, an important part of this consumed energy must be converted into radiation of a bolometric magnitude approximately equal to that of the radiation background surrounding the source. The spectral distribution of this intensity must be close to that of a black body. This would be a possible way to search for extraterrestrial civilizations. Such energy consumption would also require a large amount of solid matter for stellar engineering activities, which Kardashev called &quot;cosmic miracles&quot;. In short, information about the possible existence of an extraterrestrial civilization would come in the form of electromagnetic radiation.

With regard to the fate of civilizations, Kardashev saw two concepts, from which two strategies for the search for extraterrestrial civilizations can be derived. The first, which he called &quot;terrestrial chauvinism&quot;, is based on the principle that civilizations can only stabilize or perish at a level of development close to ours currently reached. The second, which he called the &quot;evolutionary concept&quot;, holds that civilizations are capable of reaching higher levels of development than that of contemporary humanity. In the first case, the best search strategy using astronomical detection means (e.g., the SETI program) would be to observe the most powerful (and often the most distant) sources of radiation in space. The observer will then be able to determine if they are natural emission sources, and only then can the search focus on objects with weaker radiation. In the second case, he recommended to search for new and powerful sources of radiation, especially in the poorly known regions of the electromagnetic spectrum. These sources could be significant or periodic monochromatic signals from the galactic center, from other galaxies or from quasars and other exotic cosmic objects. Kardashev believed that the search should focus on the millimeter wavelength spectrum, close to the maximum intensity of the cosmic microwave background, rather than in the 21-centimeter band (which is the domain of investigation of the SETI program). According to Kardashev, in order to capture the significant radiation of an advanced civilization emitted by a megastructure (such as a Dyson sphere), a radio telescope with a diameter larger than that of the Earth would have to be placed in orbital space.

Kardashev concluded by predicting that the search for extraterrestrial civilizations would lead to positive results in the [then] next decade, giving humanity access to a vast amount of information about the Universe and its evolution over a period of several billion years.

=== Third publication (1985) ===

==== Discovering supercivilizations ====
In the article &quot;On the Inevitability and the Possible Structure of Supercivilizations&quot; published in 1985, Kardashev evokes the possible scenarios and the means of investigation available to humanity for the detection of hypothetical extraterrestrial supercivilizations. The Soviet astronomer reminds us that we search for these supercivilizations on the basis of our own development criteria, and that predictions are possible only for extraterrestrial worlds close to our technological level, the others being beyond our intellectual representation. Nevertheless, it seems useful to him to conceive models of supercivilizations based at the same time on imagination and on our present scientific knowledge. Since the laws of physics are immutable, even if new laws are discovered in the future, they will not abolish those already known.

According to Kardashev, theoretical models of supercivilizations must meet two basic assumptions. The first is that the range of supercivilization activities that obey the laws of physics is limited only by natural and scientific constraints, while the second is that the evolution of supercivilization activities cannot be interrupted or limited by intrinsic, inherent contingencies, such as large-scale social conflicts. For Kardashev, unlike other scientists, supercivilizations cannot self-destruct or retrogress. According to these principles, there must exist in space megastructures of great size, emitting a lot of energy and information, and existing for billions of years, while being compact enough to rapidly exchange large amounts of data between them. A supercivilization would thus create a technological structure of cosmic dimensions. As an example, Kardashev cites Freeman Dyson&#x27;s megastructure, in the form of a sphere of several astronomical units in diameter. Other phenomena may indicate highly technological activities, such as artificially exploding stars or the changing of stellar orbits to store mass and energy. Giant molecular clouds also hold great potential for astroengineering. Kardashev even raises the possibility of a supercivilization reshaping the entire galaxy.

Then he evokes the theoretical and mathematical possibility of the existence of a megastructure in the form of a disk rotating on itself at a constant angular velocity. According to him, the search for intelligent signals should be directed to the detection of such megastructures at the characteristic radiation (20 μm). Quasars or galactic centers can be excellent candidates to testify to the existence of a supercivilization since they emit strong infrared radiation, which indicates a solid structure. The astronomer advises to look for these objects in a wavelength range from a few microns to a few millimeters. Large intelligent structures can also be detected by the fact that they screen or reflect the surrounding radiation.

==== Possible scenarios for the evolution of supercivilizations ====

Kardashev believes that it is very likely that a supercivilization has already detected and observed humanity through cosmic-sized telescopes. He discusses this in a 1997 article on the subject, entitled &quot;Radioastron – a Radio Telescope Much Greater than the Earth&quot;. For this supercivilization, the science of &quot;cosmic ethnography&quot; must be highly developed. However, the fact that no contact has been made so far could be explained by ethical considerations of these civilizations. Based on this principle, Kardashev sees only two possible evolutionary scenarios for a supercivilization: natural evolution and evolution after contact with other extraterrestrial civilizations. He considers more likely the scenario based on contact between two civilizations highly developed technologically and culturally advanced civilizations; this scenario, which he calls the &quot;Urbanization Hypothesis&quot;, would result in the regrouping and unification of several civilizations within a few compact regions of the Universe.

Kardashev lists, in the form of investigative tools, six possible scenarios (summarized in a table at the end of his 1997 article) that explain the evolution of a civilization. Each of the scenarios corresponds to a probability, one or more objects to be observed, an adapted procedure, and, finally the possible consequences for our civilization:

# The scenario of a large unification of civilizations over an extent of one to ten billion light-years with concentration in a certain region has a probability of 60%. These civilizations are to be searched for in the most powerful quasars and in the galactic bulge, at a radiation level higher than 1038 watts, in the wavelengths from 10 μm to 1 cm, as well as in the other regions of the spectrum. This is to detect megastructures or signals with a wavelength of 1.5 mm and omnidirectional emission up to 21 cm. In the event of contact, humanity would see progress in all areas of society in order to join this supercivilization; it is also expected that an ethnographic conservatory would be created on Earth.
# The scenario of a unification on the scale of the galactic cluster has only a 20% probability of realization. Kardashev advises to observe the Virgo cluster (especially M87) and other clusters in a similar way as in the first scenario. The consequences for humanity are the same as in the first scenario.
# The scenario of a unification on the scale of galaxies has only a 10% probability. To confirm it, we must study the galactic centers, both of the Milky Way and of neighboring galaxies (such as M31, M33), according to a procedure similar to that of the first scenario. The consequences for humanity are the same as in the first scenario.
# The scenario of a complete colonization of space has no probability of being realized according to Kardashev because if it were realizable then &quot;they&quot; would already be on Earth; yet this is not the case. However, in the case of a contact, the consequences on humanity are the same as in the first scenario.
# This scenario assumes that all civilizations would have destroyed themselves before any contact. Kardashev estimates the probability of this to be 10%. Humanity should be able to detect ancient megastructures in the vicinity of the nearest stars. As a result, no contact with humanity can take place.
# The last scenario suggests that we are the first or the only ones in the Universe. Kardashev estimates its probability at 10%. Only exobiology can confirm or falsify such a scenario. We can imagine a potential contact in the distant future, and then the consequences would be similar to those of the other five scenarios.

=== Fourth publication (1997) ===

In the article &quot;Cosmology and Civilizations&quot; published in 1997, Kardashev reiterates the need to carefully observe astronomical objects with strong radiation in order to detect supercivilizations. However, the discovery of a civilization at a stage of development similar to ours is unlikely. The existence of such supercivilizations is made possible by the fact that life on Earth is recent compared to the age of the Universe (8 × 109 years before the formation of the Solar System). He then examines the conditions for the appearance of life on cosmological time scales. Assuming the rate of evolution of life on Earth and considering the age of the Universe, it is reasonable to assume that a civilization could have reached our level of technological development in 6 × 109 years. Such civilizations can be observed in nearby regions, since the farther away we observe, the younger the objects are. Recent discoveries of sources of intense radiation deadly to life show that life could have flourished under cover for the time necessary for its appearance and maintenance. Another argument for the possibility of a very old supercivilization is that most of the objects that could be megastructures have not yet been discovered and mapped. In addition, 95% of the matter remains invisible or can only be inferred by the gravitational influence it produces.

According to Kardashev, it is essential to focus our search tools on new objects radiating at a wavelength of a few microns to a few millimeters, and at a temperature of 3 to 300 K, which is characteristic of large structures of solid matter. It would then be possible to detect structures belonging to Type II in our galaxy or in those nearby. Type III structures can also be observed at large cosmological distances. Kardashev recalls that a study was conducted on 3000 sources of the IRAS catalog from the four directions of the sky. Two temperature bands were targeted: from 110 to 120 K and from 280 to 290 K. The analysis showed that the 110–120 K sources are clustered in the Galactic plane and in its center. Kardashev explains that only more powerful observations in the infrared and submillimeter range can reveal possible artificial sources of radiation. He then refers to projects that he has proposed, in particular that of putting into orbit a cryogenic space telescope (the &quot;Millimetron Project&quot;).

According to Kardashev, these results, combined with those of other research on the age of certain cosmic objects, suggest that civilizations dating from 6 to 8 billion years ago may exist in our galaxy. It is likely that they have long since discovered our own civilization, a hypothesis that could answer the question posed by Enrico Fermi when he formulated his paradox: &quot;Where are they?&quot;. Without the discovery of artificial sources, however, Shklovsky&#x27;s theory that civilizations self-destruct as a result of large-scale social conflicts would be proven. Kardashev mentions another hypothesis that, in his opinion, is capable of explaining the dynamics of the supercivilizations: the &quot;feedback effect&quot; (theorized by Sebastian von Hoerner in 1975), which is based on the hypothesis that at a high technological level, civilizations tend to converge rather than to isolate themselves. The distance between supercivilizations could then be determined by half the time of the technological evolution of the oldest civilization, which would be about 3 to 4 billion years. On the other hand, this supercivilization may not have been present in our galaxy for a long time. Kardashev concludes by saying that since the expansion of the Universe is infinite, the number and lifetime of such supercivilizations are also infinite.

== Categories defined by Kardashev ==
The hypothetical classification, known as the Kardashev scale, distinguishes three stages in the evolution of civilizations according to the dual criteria of access and energy consumption. The purpose of this classification is to guide the search for extraterrestrial civilizations, particularly within SETI, in which Kardashev participated, and this on the assumption that a fraction of the energy used by each type is intended for communication with other civilizations. To make this scale more understandable, Lemarchand compares the speed at which a volume of information equivalent to 100,000 average-sized books can be transmitted across the galaxy. A Type II civilization can send this data using a transmission beam that lasts for only 100 seconds. A similar amount of information can be sent across intergalactic distances of about ten million light years, with a transmission time of several weeks. A Type III civilization can send the same amount of data to the entire observable universe with a transmission time of 3 seconds.

Kardashev&#x27;s classification is based on the assumption of a growth rate of 1% per year. Kardashev believed that it would take humanity 3,200 years to reach Type II, and 5,800 years to reach Type III. However, Dr. Michio Kaku believes that humanity must increase its energy consumption by 3% per year to reach Type I in 100–200 years. These types are thus separated from each other by a growth rate of several billion.

=== Type I ===
A civilization &quot;close to the level currently achieved on Earth, with an energy consumption of ≈4 erg/sec&quot; (4 watts). A Type I civilization is usually defined as one that can harness all the energy that reaches its home planet from its parent star (for Earth, this value is about 2 watts), which is about four orders of magnitude higher than the amount currently achieved on Earth, with an energy consumption of ≈2 watts by 2020. The astronomer Guillermo A. Lemarchand defined Type I as a level close to today&#x27;s terrestrial civilization, with an energy capacity equivalent to Earth&#x27;s solar irradiance, between and  watts.

=== Type II ===
A civilization capable of harnessing the energy radiated by its own large star – for example, by successfully completing a Dyson sphere or Matrioshka brain – with an energy consumption of ≈4 erg/sec. Lemarchand defined such civilizations as being able to harness and channel the entire radiation output of their star. The energy consumption would then be comparable to the luminosity of the Sun, about 4 erg/sec (4 watts).

=== Type III ===
A civilization with energy on the scale of its own galaxy, with an energy consumption of ≈4 erg/sec. Lemarchand defined civilizations of this type as having access to energy comparable to the luminosity of the entire Milky Way galaxy, about 4 erg/sec (4 watts).

In accordance with the data available at the time, Kardashev did not go beyond a Type III civilization. However, new types (0, IV, V, and VI) have been proposed.

== Reassessments of the Kardashev scale ==

=== Sagan&#x27;s finer classification ===
In 1973, Carl Sagan discovered Kardashev&#x27;s work on the classification of civilizations. He found that the differences between the types Kardashev identified were so great that they did not allow for the best possible modeling of the evolution of civilizations. Consequently, Sagan proposes a more refined classification, still based on Kardashev&#x27;s types, but integrating intermediate levels using the following logarithmic interpolation formula:

formula_1,

where &quot;K&quot; is the Kardashev type of a civilization and &quot;W&quot; is the amount of power it uses, in watts. Thus, a &quot;Type 1.1&quot; civilization would be defined by a power of 1017 watts, while a &quot;Type 2.3&quot; civilization would be able to harness 1029 watts.

Moreover, the above formula could be used to extrapolate beyond Kardashev&#x27;s original types. For example, a Type 0 civilization, not defined by Kardashev, would control about 1 MW of power (equivalent to having around 100 campfires burning at any given time); on Earth, the emergence of Type 0 civilizations is roughly concurrent with the rise of civilization in a general sense.

Sagan estimated that, according to this revised scale, 1970s humanity would be Type 0.7 (about 10 terawatts), equivalent to 0.16% of the power available on Earth. This level is characterized, according to him, by the ability to self-destruct, which he calls &quot;technological adolescence&quot;. In 2021, the total world energy consumption was 595.15 exajoules (165,319 TWh), equivalent to an average power consumption of 18.87 TW or a Kardashev rating of 0.73 (to 2 s.f.).

Sagan also suggests that, for completeness, an alphabetical scale should be added to indicate the level of social development, expressed in the amount of information available to the civilization. Thus, a Class A civilization would be based on 106 bits of information (less than any recorded human culture), a Class B on 107, a Class C on 108, and so on. Humanity in 1973 would belong to the &quot;0.7 H&quot; class. According to Sagan, the first civilization with which humanity would come into contact could be between &quot;1.5 J&quot; and &quot;1.8 K&quot;; a galactic supercivilization would be at the &quot;3 Q&quot; stage, while a federation of galaxies could be at the &quot;4 Z&quot; stage. The information and energy axes are not strictly interdependent, so even a level Z civilization would not have to be Kardashev Type III. Sagan believed that no civilization had yet reached level Z, speculating that so much unique information would exceed that of all the intelligent species in a galactic supercluster, and observing that the universe is not old enough to exchange information effectively over large distances.

In 2017, the total amount of information generated on the internet was 26 zettabytes (with an estimated 120 zettabytes in 2023), equivalent to 0.73 R/S on Sagan&#x27;s combined scale.

=== Kaku and the knowledge economy ===
In &quot;Physics of the Future&quot; (2011), American physicist Michio Kaku examines the conditions for humanity to converge on a Type I planetary civilization. This convergence is based primarily on the knowledge economy. Kaku uses the Kardashev scale, but develops it by adding an additional stage: a Type IV civilization would be able to draw the energy it needs from extragalactic radiation. By studying the evolution of technologies that have changed history (paper, the integrated circuit), Kaku believes that humanity is moving toward a civilization of planetary dimensions, the &quot;starting point&quot; of which is the Internet.

A Type I civilization consumes power on the order of thousands to millions of times our current planetary output, about 100 trillion trillion watts. It would have enough energy to manipulate the occurrence of certain natural phenomena, such as earthquakes or volcanoes, and could build cities on the oceans. We can see the beginnings of a Type I civilization in the fact that a global language is developing (English), a global communication system is emerging (the Internet), a global economic system is in the making (the establishment of the European Union), and even a globalized culture is standardizing humanity (mass media, television, rock music, and Hollywood movies). To achieve Type I, humanity must be able to communicate with the rest of the world and to focus on several areas: building infrastructure to facilitate communication and cooperation, education, research and development, and innovation, as well as building strong ties between diasporas and their countries of origin, and between migrants and non-migrants. If development fails, it is likely that the world will not be able to achieve Type II. If these areas do not develop, Kaku predicts that humanity will sink into the &quot;abyss&quot;: an advanced civilization must grow faster than the frequency of occurrence of extinction-level cosmic catastrophes, such as comet or asteroid impacts. A Type I civilization should also be able to master space travel to deflect threatening objects. It would also have to anticipate the onset of ice ages and modify the climate long before they occur to avoid them.

In addition, in his books &quot;Hyperspace&quot; and &quot;Parallel Worlds&quot;, Michio Kaku has discussed a Type IV civilization that could harness &quot;extragalactic&quot; energy sources such as dark energy.

=== Zubrin&#x27;s planet mastery ===
In &quot;Entering Space: Creating a Spacefaring Civilization&quot;, Robert Zubrin suggests another form: his definition of a Type I civilization is described as one that has achieved full mastery of the resources of its planet (global), a Type II of its solar system (interplanetary), and a Type III would have unleashed the full potential of the galaxy (starfaring civilization). Metrics other than pure energy consumption have also been proposed.

He ponders the possibility of a Type IV civilization, one that would dominate the universe, noting that there are limits to how minds can connect and interact on a galactic or intergalactic basis. As an example, he mentions that communication from the center of our galaxy to its edge would take about 50,000 years (since nothing can travel faster than light, according to our understanding of physics).

=== Barrow&#x27;s microdimensional mastering ===
The astronomer John D. Barrow of the University of Sussex has hypothesized that there are other stages beyond Type III. These Type IV, V, or even VI civilizations would be able to manipulate cosmic structures (galaxies, galactic clusters, superclusters) and even escape the Big Crunch through holes in space.

Barrow also proposes an &quot;anti-Kardashev scale&quot;: he observes that humans have found it more cost effective to extend their ability to manipulate their environment to smaller and smaller scales rather than to larger and larger ones. He, therefore, proposes a reverse classification, from Type I-minus to Type Omega-minus:
* Type I-minus is capable of manipulating objects on the scale of itself: building structures, mining, joining and breaking solids;
* Type II-minus is capable of manipulating genes and altering the development of living things, transplanting or replacing parts of themselves, reading and manipulating their genetic code;
* Type III-minus is capable of manipulating molecules and molecular bonds, creating new materials;
* Type IV-minus is capable of manipulating individual atoms, creating nanotechnology at the atomic level, and creating complex forms of artificial life;
* Type V-minus is capable of manipulating the atomic nucleus and engineering the nucleons that compose it;
* Type VI-minus is capable of manipulating the most elementary particles of matter (quarks and leptons) to create organized complexity among populations of elementary particles; 
* Type Omega-minus is capable of manipulating the fundamental structure of space and time.
&quot;In Impossibility: The Limits of Science and the Science of Limits&quot; (1998), Barrow proposes a scale ranging from &quot;BI&quot; to &quot;BVI&quot;, with an ultimate stage he calls &quot;BΩ&quot;, the former characterized by the possibility of manipulating one&#x27;s environment, while the latter allows for the modification of spacetime.

=== Galántai&#x27;s miniaturization and resilience to catastrophes ===

Zoltan Galántai recognizes the important role that Kardashev&#x27;s classification has played in the SETI program, but he believes that another scale is possible, without using energy consumption, by resorting to miniaturization. The hypothesis of Donald Tarter, researcher at SETI, is that a civilization based on nanotechnology would not need an ever-increasing amount of energy. A Type I civilization that masters local space travel could colonize its planetary system and even the Oort cloud without needing an amount of energy that would make it Type II. This scale loses its meaning beyond Type II, since it is impossible to predict the evolution of civilizations over long distances in a galactic colonization process. Finally, the Kardashev scale is the product of an era of insufficient scientific knowledge, which considered the possibility of stellar object CTA-102 as an artificial Type III source, whereas today we know that it is a galactic nucleus.

In another article, Zoltan Galántai suggests considering another scale, no longer based on energy consumption, but on a civilization&#x27;s ability to survive natural and cosmic disasters. Type I would describe a civilization capable of surviving a local natural disaster, like the Anasazi. A Type II civilization would have the means to withstand a regional or continental disaster, and finally Type III could face a global disaster such as an asteroid&#x27;s impact, a supervolcano&#x27;s eruption, or an ice age. Beyond the first three types are civilizations that have scattered throughout the galaxy. The Type IV civilization would still be vulnerable to some cosmic threats, while the Type V civilization would be technically immortal, as no cosmic catastrophe could reach it. The Kardashev scale can be a relevant tool for preventing catastrophes, whether human or natural, according to Richard Wilson, who relates this scale to the power of destruction, in TNT. A Type I civilization would use 25 megatons of equivalent TNT per second, a Type II civilization 4 × 109 times more (4 billion hydrogen bombs per second), while a Type III civilization would use 1011 times more.

== Progression through the types ==
=== Towards type I ===
According to Carl Sagan, Type I should be reached around 2100.

Physicist and futurist Michio Kaku has suggested that, if humans increase their energy consumption at an average rate of 3 percent per year, they could reach Type I status in 100–200 years, Type II status in a few thousand years, and Type III status in 100,000 to a million years.

Physicist Freeman Dyson has calculated that Type I should be reached in about 200 years, while Richard Carrigan has estimated that the Earth is just four-tenths of the way to Type I on the Sagan scale. If Type I is reached soon (in the year 3000 for Richard Wilson), it would be accompanied by profound social upheavals, but also by a significant risk of self-destruction.

According to Per Calissendorff, energy consumption cannot be the main parameter to explain the transition from one type to another. Civilizations must have the means to maintain their growth rate despite climatic conditions and major natural disasters, even on the cosmic scale. A civilization moving towards Type II must have mastered space travel, interplanetary communication, stellar engineering, and climate. It must also have developed a planetary communication system, such as the Internet. For Michio Kaku, the only serious threat to a Type II civilization would be the explosion of a nearby supernova, while no known cosmic catastrophe would be capable of wiping out a Type III civilization.

According to Philip T. Metzger, humanity has reached Type I, but faces an energy challenge. In his 2011 paper &quot;Nature&#x27;s Way of Making Audacious Space Projects Viable&quot;, he states that the Earth&#x27;s non-renewable energy sources are nearly exhausted; natural gas will be depleted by 2020–2030, coal by 2035, uranium by 2056, while oil production peaked in 2006–2008. Nuclear energy cannot fully meet the world&#x27;s energy needs (it represented only 6% in 2011). In addition, renewable energy cannot meet the growing demand for energy. Most of the minerals used by humans are in danger of becoming scarce; 11 minerals are already classified as having passed their peak production. For Metzger, humanity must therefore undertake a &quot;100-year project&quot; aimed at building a spacecraft (&quot;100 Year Starship&quot;) capable of accessing the vast energy resources of the Solar System. For Metzger, it is even probable that if extraterrestrials coveted the energy resources of our Solar System, they would not look for them on Earth, but on the various asteroids and planetoids. Robotics is the only way to access so many dispersed resources, and humanity should embark on a second long-term project, which Metzger calls the &quot;robotsphere&quot;, that would begin with the energetic exploitation of the Moon (estimated at 2.3 × 1013 J/year). This first step would make it possible to reach Type II in 53 years. Then the robotsphere (self-replicating and self-learning automated probes) would extend to the rest of the Solar System. Current advances in artificial intelligence suggest that the foundations of a robotsphere could be reached early in the next century, beginning in 2100. Metzger sees eight benefits for humanity in building the 100 Year Starship, including zero launch costs because the spacecraft will be built in space by robots that can do so with little human assistance (drastically reducing manufacturing costs), the creation of a Solar System-wide economy, and the use of resources from celestial objects and possibly terraforming them.

=== Towards type II ===
Viorel Badescu and Richard B. Cathcart have studied the possibility that a Type II civilization could use a 450 million kilometer device to direct solar radiation and thus be able to impart a kinetic motion to its star that deviates it from its usual trajectory by about 35 to 40 parsecs, allowing it, among other things, to capture its energy and navigate the galaxy.

For Claude Semay, &quot;a Type II civilization could be detected at great distances (by what is called &quot;astro-technical leakage&quot;), provided that it is not located in a region of the galaxy that is too distant from us, or that it does not occupy a location that is obscured from us by clouds of gas or dust&quot;.

=== Towards type III ===

A Type III civilization should be detectable because of the large amount of radiation captured on a galaxy-wide scale. Calissendorff suggests using 75% of the total light emitted by a galaxy to determine that a Type III civilization uses many Dyson spheres. If only three or four of these spheres occupy the galaxy, it does not necessarily mean that the civilization has reached Type III, and it may still be in transition; however, such civilizations may remain beyond the reach of our understanding and instruments. Sagan believes that the nearest Type III civilization is at an average distance of 10,000 light-years from us, but that it is not interested in classical radio transmissions, being of a different technological level. Only small, low-level civilizations could communicate with us.

Semay observes that &quot;a Type III civilization should not be confused with what science fiction writers call a &#x27;galactic empire&#x27;&quot;, knowing that it can only exist if interstellar travel is achieved. Semay argues that there is no evidence that this will ever be possible. Based on Dyson&#x27;s calculations, Semay believes that such a journey would take three centuries, with an average distance between stars of about 7 light years. Overall, the speed of the colonization front, which ranges from 4 × 10−4 to 5 × 10−3 light-years per year, would result in humanity spreading throughout the galaxy in a period of 16 to 200 million years. &quot;A Type III civilization, having thus &quot;domesticated&quot; its galaxy by building a large number of Dyson spheres, would be detectable over intergalactic distances of several million light-years.&quot;

A Type III civilization could theoretically live inside a supermassive black hole, in a stable periodic orbit, which would make it completely undetectable, according to V. I. Dokuchaev.

=== Towards type IV ===
Zoltan Galántai notes that neither Kardashev nor Sagan thought to extend the scale and define a Type IV (which would use the energy of an entire Universe). They simply did not envision a civilization capable of manipulating its environment on the largest possible scale (about 14 billion parsecs). The concept of a Type IV supercivilization approaches divine possibilities, enabling the creation of, and travel through, alternate Universes of such a civilization&#x27;s own design, although the latter possibility is reserved for a Type V civilization by Carrigan. The fraction of energy captured by a civilization capable of powering itself on a black hole could also be used to classify civilizations.

== Possible scenarios ==
According to Kardashev, the most important parameters to define the existence of a civilization are three: the presence of very powerful energy sources, the use of non-standard technologies, and the transmission of significant amounts of information of various kinds through space.

=== Energy sources ===
Kardashev&#x27;s classification is based on the hypothesis that an advanced civilization uses significant energy, which implies that it must be de facto detectable over long distances, as summarized by Zoltan Galántai. For Kardashev, the limit of a civilization&#x27;s energy consumption is originally located in the region of the electromagnetic spectrum from 106 to 108 Hz, which allows two observations related to thermodynamics. First, all the energy consumed is inevitably converted into heat. Second, this energy can only be dissipated in the form of radiation scattered in space. These two findings are the pillars of Kardashev&#x27;s theory that cosmic objects with strong radiation could be artificial sources. He also considered the possibility of detecting an artificial source by emphasizing the spectral line of hydrogen in its use for nuclear fusion.

Dutil and Dumas consider several physical limits to continuous energy production, such as photosynthesis (about 10 TW), climate (about 127 TW), and solar flux (174,000 TW). The only inexhaustible source of energy that can sustain a civilization for over several billion years, is deuterium (used in nuclear fusion). The sustainability of a civilization must therefore involve &quot;strict control of the exploitation of available resources&quot;; this difficulty in exceeding energy limits may explain the fact that the vast majority of civilizations fail to engage in a space colonization project.

Astrophysicist Makoto Inoue and economist Hiromitsu Yokoo have explored the possibility that a Type III civilization could extract energy from a supermassive black hole (SMBH). The captured energy could meet the extraordinary needs of a civilization that requires about 4 × 1044 erg/s. The energy would be captured in the form of radiation emitted by the matter rushing into the star, by means of collectors located within the accretion disk. These collectors are similar to Dyson spheres. The overflow, as well as the waste of the civilization, would be redirected towards the black hole. A fraction of this energy, directed as a high-powered beam, could be useful for space travel. A galactic club of civilizations could transmit the energy through networks within the galaxy. Within the various central power stations that make up the network, power transmission is periodically switched between transmitter and receiver, according to the galactic rotation. To be efficient, this network should be located at the center of the galaxy.

=== The technology ===
This parameter is one of the most undetectable in the Universe due to the fact that solid matter structures are at low temperatures and emit weak radiation. Their luminosity, which is difficult to observe, also makes it impossible to observe them with telescopes. Likewise, we cannot detect them by their gravitational effects. On the other hand their existence can be detected by analyzing the wavelengths between 8 and 13 microns, corresponding to surface temperatures of 300 K. A hypothetical Dyson sphere could thus be detected, provided that the observation is made from space. Locally, the significant dip in luminosity that would result from a giant Dyson sphere (or &quot;Fermi bubble&quot;) would allow the detection of a Type III civilization.

A megastructure like a Dyson sphere could be the result of a technology based on self-replicating probes, as those imagined by von Neumann. A Type III civilization would indeed have the means to disperse a significant number of these spheres throughout the galaxy, which would have the effect of attenuating the light emitted by the galaxy. Kaku also considers this to be the most efficient method of colonizing space. For example, a galaxy 100,000 light years in diameter would be explored in half a million years. Paul Davies has suggested that a civilization could colonize the galaxy by scattering miniature probes, no larger than the palm of a hand, using nanotechnology. This thesis is realistic, he explains, because it is obvious that the technology is becoming increasingly miniaturized and proportionally less expensive.

Type II megastructures would be easier to detect. This would be the case of a Dyson sphere used as a &quot;stellar engine&quot;, as well as the contribution of heavy elements. Similarly, &quot;Shkadov thrusters&quot;, which would produce a lateral thrust of 4.4 parsecs on their star by reflecting solar radiation through a structure made of mirrors, would be observable objects. This device would break the symmetry of solar radiation and counteract gravitational forces, allowing a Type II civilization to move its home solar system through space. Drake and Shklovski have also considered the possibility of &quot;seeding&quot; a star (Stellar salting) by artificially adding extremely rare elements such as technetium or promethium. Such an intervention in a star&#x27;s composition would be detectable.

It is still possible that humanity could discover traces of lost Type I, II, or III civilizations. The search for material traces of such civilizations (e.g. Dyson spheres or stellar engines), an &quot;interesting alternative&quot; to the conventional SETI program, lays the foundation for a &quot;cosmic archaeology&quot; according to Richard A. Carrigan. Efforts to detect intelligence markers in the atmospheres of exoplanets (such as freon, oxygen, or even ozone, residues of biotic activity according to James Lovelock&#x27;s research) are one of the most promising avenues. A civilization watching its star die (as a red giant, for example) could have tried to prolong its existence through megastructures that should be detectable. The possible traces could be nuclear remnants, to be sought within the spectral types going from A5 to F2 according to Whitmire and Wright. It could also be a change in the isotopic ratio, due to a stellar engine, or an unusual spectral modulation in the composition of the star.

=== The interstellar transmission of information ===
According to Kardashev, the transmissions of an extraterrestrial civilization (what SERENDIP is looking for) can be divided into two types. On the one hand, there can be an exchange of information between highly developed civilizations or civilizations at similar stages of evolution. On the other hand, the transmission of information can be aimed at raising the level of other less developed civilizations. If supercivilizations do exist, the transmissions of the first type must remain inaccessible to our observation because they must be unidirectional and not be directed toward the Solar System. Conversely, those of the second type must be easily detectable by our listening devices. A signal of artificial origin should contain more than 10 and less than 100 bits. The latter would be of two types: transient and stable. Several criteria allow us to distinguish a signal of artificial origin from others. First, the optimal region of the spectrum to host artificial signals is the one where the temperature of the cosmic microwave background is the lowest. Second, artificial sources must have a minimum angular size. Finally, the presence of suspicious data in other regions of the spectrum (such as circular polarization, radio and optical frequencies, or X-ray emissions) can confirm that it is an intelligent transmission. Two sources among those studied have parameters close to those expected: 1934-63 and 3C 273B.

For L. M. Gindilis, there are two criteria for a signal to be called artificial: one related to the artificial nature of the source and the other related to a particular radiation, intentionally designed to ensure communication and facilitate detection. Only Type II or III civilizations can communicate using isotropic transmissions that allow omnidirectional reception. In a 1 MHz band (which requires about 1024 watts), detection of signals from a Type II civilization is possible up to 1,000 light-years away, while signals from a Type III civilization are detectable virtually throughout the observable Universe. However, building an omnidirectional transmitter powerful enough to transmit over a range of 1,000 light years would take several million years. According to V.S. Troitsky, the energy required and the limitations in its production would be two obstacles to completing this project in a reasonable time.

For Zoltan Galántai, we would not be able to distinguish between an intelligent extraterrestrial signal and a signal of natural origin. Therefore, he does not believe that Type II, III or even IV civilizations can be detected. Even if humanity reaches Type IV, it will not be able to detect another supercivilization of a similar level, and we will consider their changes in the universe to be the result of natural causes. Thus, there may be many Type IV civilizations in the universe, but none of them will be able to detect the others. Moreover, the dimensions of the universe make these supercivilizations like islands far from the others, which Dyson defines as a &quot;Carroll Universe&quot;.

For Alexander L. Zaitsev, the radio transmission of interstellar messages (IRM) is the most likely method used by civilizations. Planetary radio telescopes and those installed on asteroids would make it possible to listen to the many messages that could be sent to us. In 2007, the SETI program analyzed the only television frequencies sent by a Type 0 civilization, notes Michio Kaku. Therefore, our galaxy may have communications from Type II and III civilizations, but our listening devices can only detect Type 0 messages.

== Search and detection of civilizations ==

=== The Byurakan Conference (1964) ===

From 1962, Kardashev was a member of a SETI research group at the Sternberg Astronomical Institute in Moscow. In 1964, he organized the first Soviet conference on the possibility of extraterrestrial civilizations, which was held at the Byurakan astrophysical observatory in Armenia. This national conference was held in response to the American seminar known as the &quot;Green Bank conference&quot; of 1961, which was held at the Green Bank observatory in the United States. It brought together radio astronomers with the aim of &quot;finding rational technical and linguistic solutions to the problem of communication with an extraterrestrial civilization that is more advanced than the Earth&#x27;s civilization&quot;. Kardashev presented his classification, while Troitskii announced that it was possible to detect signals from other galaxies.

For Kardashev, &quot;in the next 5 to 10 years, all the sources of radiation with the largest observable flux, in all the regions of the electromagnetic spectrum, will have been discovered and studied&quot;, the sensitivity of the listening devices having indeed reached their technical limits. According to him, the entire electromagnetic spectrum will be known and, consequently, the list of the objects that could be artificial sources could thus be extended. The search for artificial signals will then have to concentrate on objects of maximum luminosity or radiation belonging to a certain region of the spectrum, but also on objects of significant mass, and on those that represent the essence of matter in the Universe. As early as 1971, Kardashev considered that this observation requires the preparation of a plan of listening and analysis, which will allow the success of the search for extraterrestrial civilizations. Humanity will then be able to solve the &quot;main dilemma&quot;, as it was stated by Enrico Fermi. This dilemma is, according to the Soviet astronomer, is certainly connected with our lack of information and knowledge.

Kardashev believes that a research project like Ozma is incapable of detecting a Type I civilization (an idea also promoted by Kaplan in 1971), and that SETI should instead focus on searching for intense radio signals that could emanate from active Type II or III civilizations. To prove the effectiveness of this approach, Kardashev therefore turned his attention to two radio sources discovered by the California Institute of Technology, nicknamed CTA-21 and CTA-102. Subsequently, Gennadii Borisovich Sholomitskii then used the Russian astronomical research station to study the data from CTA-102. He found that this radio source is characterized by its variability. Kardashev then considered that this could be an indication of an artificial emission source, albeit of rather short life span.

=== Towards a &quot;physical eschatology&quot; ===
The knowledge of these hypothetical supercivilizations must fit into a wide range of physical laws that contain the entirety of our current knowledge, since the technical and scientific developments of mankind can be considered as an inevitable and necessary stage in the process of the evolution of a civilization. Based on this principle, Kardashev proposes to define several concepts applicable to extraterrestrial civilizations. The physical laws, which are universal, can be used as a common basis for understanding other civilizations and, in particular, allow us to develop an objective research program. Michio Kaku also believes that the evolution of civilizations obeys the &quot;iron laws of physics&quot; and in particular the laws of thermodynamics, those of stable matter (baryonic matter) and those of planetary evolution (probability of occurrence of natural or cosmic catastrophes). The anthropic principle also makes it possible to predict the sociological characteristics at the basis of any civilization.

However, these universal laws are not the only parameters to consider. Zoltan Galántai explains that &quot;it is impossible to calculate the future of the Universe over long periods of time without including the effects of life and intelligence&quot;, a position close to that of Freeman Dyson. Taking into account these two phenomena, the universal physical laws and the intelligence resulting from life, defines a &quot;physical eschatology&quot;, as Galántai puts it. This approach began in the 1970s with the work of Kardashev, and then physical eschatology gradually interested a number of scientists and thinkers, notes Dyson.

=== A functional definition of civilization ===

Observation of the development of living organisms shows that they are characterized by the tendency to store a maximum amount of information, both about the environment and about themselves. This information then leads to an abstract analysis, which plays an important role in the development of life forms. Thus, Kardashev defines civilization from a functional perspective as &quot;a state of very stable matter capable of acquiring, abstractly analyzing and applying information in order to extract data about the environment and itself, in order to develop survival reactions &quot;. However, this functional definition of civilization implies that it cannot have a goal or end, since it is based on the principle of accumulating more and more information. Taking up von Hoerner&#x27;s categories, Kardashev sees four possible scenarios for the development of civilizations:

# Total destruction of life.
# Destruction of only intelligent life.
# Degeneration.
# Loss of interest.

However, he refuses to see these as inevitable ends. But the assumption that the only limit to the development of a civilization can be the existence of a finite amount of information, in all areas, is also false, since it is highly improbable that information in the Universe is infinite. Given these two hypotheses, Kardashev argues that there is no universal civilization (supercivilization) because highly developed civilizations lose interest in space exploration. In any case, and despite the problem of the end of civilizations, he concludes, in the light of his functional definition of the advanced civilization, that the latter must use mass and energy on fantastic scales. According to him, there is no reason to denounce the hypothesis that the expansion of the Universe would not be an effect of the intelligent activity of a supercivilization.

=== Human civilization: a model for extrapolation ===
Kardashev poses the following question: &quot;Is it possible to describe the development of a civilization in general terms over large cosmological periods?&quot; Now many of the fundamental parameters that characterize the development of civilization on Earth are growing exponentially. In the field of energy, astronomer Don Goldsmith estimated that the Earth receives about one billionth of the Sun&#x27;s energy, and that humans use about one millionth of it. So we consume about one millionth of a billionth of the Sun&#x27;s total energy. Since human expansion is exponential, we can determine how long it will take for humanity to go from Type II to Type III according to Michio Kaku. Thus, the rate of development of our own world remains the only criterion for extrapolating the state of civilizations older than humanity. The same is true for social values and basic needs according to Ashkenazi. Therefore, the time to double technical knowledge is about ten years, and to double energy output, available reserves, and population is about 25 years. Two scenarios are then possible: spatial expansion or energy stagnation, the latter being possible only for 125 years, according to Kardashev, using the following relationship formula_2:

formula_3

where formula_4 is the number of years, formula_5 is a parameter that increases annually as a function of formula_6 and of formula_4 according to formula_8 and formula_9, a growth rate.

If formula_2, then humanity&#x27;s energy consumption will exceed the incident solar power (1.742 × 1017 W) after 240 years, the total power of the Sun (3.826 × 1026 W) after 800 years, and that of the Galaxy (7.29 × 1036 W) after 1,500 years. Based on this calculation, Zuckerman estimates the number of civilizations that could exist in our galaxy at 10,000. Kardashev concludes that the current exponential growth is a transitional phase in the development of a civilization, and that it is inevitably limited by natural factors. In fact, he believes that the required mass and energy will continue to grow exponentially for another 1,000 years. Civilization is thus defined by an exponential rate of increase. Humanity as a model for thinking about the development of extraterrestrial civilizations has its limitations, which can be truly overcome by a multidisciplinary approach according to the work of Kathryn Denning.

===Research conducted===
In 1963, Nikolai Kardashev and Gennady Borissovich Sholomitskii studied the CTA 102 radio source on the 920 MHz band from the &quot;Crimea Deep Space Station&quot;, looking for signs of a Type III civilization. CTA 102 had been discovered by Sholomitskii a year earlier, and Kardashev quickly saw it as a possible artificial source to study in order to validate his classification. The observation lasted until February 1965, and on April 12, Sholomitskii announced to the press (via the Russian ITAR-TASS) that Soviet astronomers had discovered a signal that could be of extraterrestrial origin. On April 14, he gave a conference in Moscow where he repeated his announcement; but by November 1964, two American astronomers had identified CTA 102 as a quasar, and their publication definitively closed the &quot;CTA 102 case&quot;. It was the study of this source that had led to the Byurakan conference in 1964.

In 1975 and 1976, the American astronomers Frank Drake and Carl Sagan searched at Arecibo for signs of Type II civilizations in four galaxies of the Local Group: M33, M49, Leo I and Leo II. The year before, the two men had sent mankind&#x27;s first message to M13. The results were published as &quot;The Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence&quot; in &quot;Scientific American&quot; in May 1975.

In 1976, Kardashev, Troitskii, and Gindilis used the RATAN-600 radio telescope in the North Caucasus to search for signals from Type II or III civilizations in the Milky Way and other nearby galaxies. The radio telescope was built in 1966 under the supervision of Gindilis to listen at centimeter wavelengths.

In 1987, Tarter, Kardashev, and Slysh used the VLA to detect possible infrared sources near the galactic center from the IRAS telescope catalog. All three were looking for evidence of hypothetical Dyson spheres. The objects turn out to be OH/IR type stars.

A small-scale search for possible Type III sources was conducted by James Annis in 1999 and published in the &quot;Journal of the British Interplanetary Society&quot; under the title &quot;Placing a limit on star-fed Kardashev type III civilizations&quot;. An astrophysicist at Fermilab (US), Annis studied a sample of 31 galaxies, both spiral and elliptical, using the Tully-Fisher diagram, in which the absolute magnitude is a function of the galaxies&#x27; rotational speed. Annis suggested that 75% of the least luminous objects (i.e., those with a decrease in absolute magnitude of 1.5 compared to the diagram) could be considered as possible candidates. However, no object with this characteristic is observed in his survey. On the other hand, Annis uses the available astronomical data to estimate the probability that a Type III civilization could exist. He shows that the average time that could allow for the emergence of such a civilization is 300 billion years, so none can exist in our present Universe.

Per Calissendorff conducted a study on a sample of spiral galaxies from two databases: 4,861 from the &quot;Spiral Field I-band&quot; (SFI++ catalog compiled by Springob et al. in 2005) and 95 from that of Reyes et al. in 2011. The same procedure was followed as in Annis, but the sample of galaxies used is 80 times larger than that used in the Annis study. Some sources were classified as &quot;lopsided&quot;: they appear asymmetric in shape, meaning that one side of the galactic disc is more massive and less luminous than the other. This characteristic, according to Calissendorff, could be an indication that the galaxy is home to a civilization that has placed Dyson spheres in its main part. This can be explained by the fact that the colonization starts from one side of the galactic disk, making it appear darker and leading a distant observer to believe that the core has moved to that same side. On the other hand, a galaxy hosting Dyson spheres should be characterized by a significant source of far-infrared radiation. The fact remains that a Type III civilization can consume energy through a Dyson sphere without surrounding a star. Indeed, such megastructures could also extract energy from a black hole, according to the study by Inoue and Yokoo (2011). However, such a structure would not reduce the luminosity of an observed galaxy. Calissendorff&#x27;s study concludes that 11 of the sources analyzed (out of a catalog of 2,411 galaxies, or 0.46%) show possible evidence of a Type III civilization. Searching for objects that obscure 90% of the light leaves only one source remains that meets the criteria. These positive sources show a low redshift (so they are old, about 100 million years), which is consistent with possible Type III civilizations, that could have flourished only in the early past. To have a better chance of detecting Type III artificial sources, Calissendorff suggests taking several photographs in a row, fast enough to fix the movement of turbulence in the atmosphere, applying different photometric filters and looking for dark areas (the case of a Dyson sphere being assembled by a Type II civilization), or analyzing the infrared spectrum of galaxies. A much larger sample of objects should be studied.

=== Observational evidence ===
In 2015, a study of galactic mid-infrared emissions concluded that &quot;Kardashev Type III civilizations are either very rare or do not exist in the local Universe&quot;.

In 2016, Paul Gilster, author of the Centauri Dreams website, described a signal apparently coming from the star HD 164595 as requiring the power of a Type I or Type II civilization, if produced by extraterrestrial lifeforms. In August 2016, however, it was discovered that the origin of the signal was most likely a military satellite orbiting the Earth.

=== Possible listening criteria ===

==== Kardashev&#x27;s point of view ====
According to Kardashev, our ignorance of the physical possibilities of communication through space is great. We know only a negligible fraction of the electromagnetic spectrum and, therefore, of the existing sources of information in the Universe. Thus, of the 89% of information that we lack, 42% concerns the range from 109 to 1014 Hz (centimetric, millimetric, submillimetric and infrared waves) and 25% concerns the range from 1015 to 1018 Hz (ultraviolet radiation and X-rays). Kardashev distinguishes two categories of listening areas: objects emitting in a broad frequency spectrum and objects emitting on the contrary in a narrow spectral line, the second category posing much more theoretical problems than the first, while being central, both for astrophysics and for the search for extraterrestrial civilizations. Despite advances in astrophysics, the available information is still insufficient to prove the absence of supercivilizations, based on the inability to observe signs of activity. However, because of the possibility that planetary systems are much older than our own, and considering that cosmic objects such as quasars could be products of supercivilization activity, a detailed program of listening and searching for intelligent signs remains valid. This program includes:

* Monitoring the sky at 3, 10, 30, 100 and 300 microns, especially at 1, 3, and 10 mm, in order to identify one hundred of the most powerful sources among those observed and at each frequency;
* Study in detail the properties of quasars and other unusual objects;
* Search for monochromatic anomalies among the most powerful radio sources (such as a hydroxyl emission line), in the decimeter band;
* Search for periodic signals (pulsars) of interstellar origin, in the same band;
* Searches for monochromatic signals of different frequencies, always in the same band.

According to Kardashev, only a radio interferometer with a base, either of the order of or larger than the diameter of the Earth, placed in orbital space, would allow listening to centimetric and decimetric frequencies. Once a set of unusual sources has been selected, the next step is to look for significant content in the radiations from these objects. In 1998, Nikolai Kardashev, S. F. Likhachev, and V. I. Zhuravlev proposed two SETI space projects to detect artificial sources: the &quot;Millimetron&quot; project (an orbiting observatory with a 10-meter diameter mirror) and the &quot;VLBI optical telescope&quot; (for interferometric synthesis of ultraviolet, optical, and infrared images).

==== Other leads ====
For Samuil Aronovich Kaplan, &quot;the most reliable criterion&quot; remains the small angular diameter of the radio source. The wavelength of 21 cm, privileged since 1959, according to the study of Cocconi and Morrison, is not the only listening region. Kaplan, in 1971, also mentioned the radio region of the spectrum, characterized by the hydroxyl radical (OH). For Livio, the means of detection should focus on globular clusters, the regions most likely to harbor planets similar to the Earth.

For Guillermo A. Lemarchand, extraterrestrial civilizations should not use an omnidirectional transmitter. Instead, they should look for signals of weak information, intermittent and unidirectional. They will certainly need to use interferometry to inspect solar systems where life might appear. From Earth, it would be possible to pick up such signals at distances of up to , where is the observation date in years, knowing that . However, there are many techniques for transmitting an interstellar message, ranging from bosons to particles and even antiparticles.

An artificial source located in the accretion disk of a supermassive black hole would be undetectable by the beams used to transmit the collected energy. In fact, the probability of detecting a beam of one micron arc-second is less than 10−23. Moreover, the energy emitted by the black hole would not allow detection of the energy used by the Type III civilization. On the other hand, the specular reflection system of the radiation could be detected by the shadow it casts on the accretion disk.

A Type III civilization using a &quot;Fermi bubble&quot; would be detectable by the fact that it decreases the luminosity of a region of the galaxy. An infrared observation would make it possible to highlight it, especially in elliptical galaxies, Annis suggests.

=== Unusual objects ===

The quasar 3C 9 is cited by Kardashev as early as 1971. The study of the quasar 3C 273 shows that it has a solid structure. Other quasars (3C 279, 3C 345, 3C 84) have properties close to those expected from an artificial source, especially since the emissions are powerful in the intermediate region of the spectrum (between radio and optical frequencies). Quasars are potential artificial sources, especially since their age corresponds to the technical possibilities of supercivilizations. Radio sources at the center of galaxies can also be artificial sources, according to Kardashev, even if in 2013 they were proven to be supermassive black holes. In 1971, Kardashev believed that the objects most likely to be artificial sources could be discovered in the [then] next few years.

The extraordinary periodicity of pulsar emissions was already considered an artificial source in 1968 by Antony Hewish, the discoverer of the first pulsar (CP 19019). The press of the time nicknamed this object &quot;LGM-1&quot; (for &quot;little green men&quot;), following the clumsiness of Hewish, who did not wait for the necessary verifications. Kaplan, in 1971, removed the pulsar from the list of objects that could be a source of artificial origin.

In 2011, James and Dominic Benford examined the possibilities that exist to distinguish pulsars from possible artificial sources emitting intelligent signals, such as: bandwidth (signals of about 100 MHz could be artificial), pulse length (to reduce costs, the pulse should be short) and frequency (about 10 GHz, also for economic reasons). The radio source PSR J1928+15 (observed in 2005 near the Galactic disk, at a frequency of 1.44 GHz, at Arecibo) could be of extraterrestrial origin. James and Dominic Benford consider three scenarios in which the cost factor is taken into account. If the source is cost-optimized, it belongs to a civilization of Type 0.35 (the Earth being of Type 0.73). If it is not cost-optimized and operates with a small antenna, the Type is 0.86. With a large antenna, it would be from a Type 0.66. Using this cost/efficiency method, it can be estimated that low-intensity sources may be the most prevalent, but also the most difficult to observe.

== Criticisms of the classification ==

=== Irrelevant assumptions ===
William I. Newman and Carl Sagan believe that the growth of energy consumption alone cannot describe the evolution of civilizations; it is also necessary to consider population growth, and in particular the fact that it can be limited by the transport capacity of interplanetary means of travel. They conclude that there can be no ancient civilizations of galactic dimensions, nor galactic empires, although the possibility of networks of colonized worlds (of about 5 to 10 planets) is strong.

The scale theorized by Kardashev was born in the geopolitical context of the Cold War, in which energy had supreme value. According to Guillermo A. Lemarchand, a physicist at the University of Buenos Aires, there are four arguments against Kardashev&#x27;s classification:

# Long range omnidirectional transmitters would be very energy intensive. Using directional or intermittent devices, each pointing in a different direction, would require much less energy. Type II or III civilizations might therefore be defined by something other than exponential energy consumption.
# The assumption of exponential energy consumption is certainly wrong, because if we analyze per capita energy consumption throughout human history, it forms a series of logistic curves with a saturation point for each technological innovation. Therefore, a steady state or limited growth is more likely.
# According to the principle of mediocrity, applied to the search for extraterrestrial civilizations by Sagan and Shklovskii in 1966 on the basis of John Richard Gott&#x27;s calculations, civilizations more important than ours must be so rare that they do not have the possibility to dominate and be visible.
# Finally, research and listening programs in Harvard University and Buenos Aires (Horowitz and Sagan in 1993 or Lemarchand et al. in 1997) have not provided any scientific proof of the existence of artificial sources, neither in the Milky Way nor in nearby galaxies (M33, M81, the Whirlpool Galaxy or Centaurus A), or even in the Virgo cluster.

For the British meteorologist Lewis Fry Richardson, author of a statistical study on mortality (published in &quot;Statistics of Deadly Quarrels&quot;, 1960), man&#x27;s aggressiveness does not allow us to predict a life span that will allow humanity to reach more evolved stages. He estimates that man&#x27;s violent impulses will destroy the social order over a period of 1000 years. Moreover, mankind will probably be destroyed with weapons of mass destruction within a few centuries at the most.

Transhumanists Paul Hughes and John Smart explain the absence of signals from a Type III civilization with two hypotheses: either it has self-destructed or it has not followed the trajectory described by Kardashev. The growth of energy consumption should lead to a climate crisis, which Yvan Dutil and Stéphane Dumas set at 1 W/m of the Earth or 127 TW for the entire planet. At a growth rate of 2% per year, an industrial civilization should stop growing quite early in its history (after a few centuries). In summary, the impossibility of sustainably securing energy resources may explain the absence of Type II and III civilizations.

For Zoltan Galántai, it is not possible to imagine a civilization project that spans centuries (like a Dyson sphere) or even millions of years, unless one imagines a thought and an ethic different from ours, within the reach of an ancestral civilization. He therefore proposes to classify civilizations according to their ability to carry out large-scale civilization projects over the long term.

Finally, for Freeman Dyson, communication and life can continue forever in an open Universe with a finite amount of energy; intelligence is therefore the only fundamental parameter for a civilization to survive in the very long term, and energy is then no longer what defines it, a thesis he develops in his article &quot;Time Without End: Physics and Biology in an Open Universe&quot;.

== Energy development ==
=== Type I civilization methods ===
* Large-scale application of fusion power: In terms of mass–energy equivalence, Type I implies the conversion of about 2 kg of matter to energy per second. An equivalent energy release could theoretically be achieved by fusing about 280 kg of hydrogen into helium per second, a rate roughly equivalent to 8.9 kg/year. One cubic kilometer of water contains about  kg of hydrogen, and the Earth&#x27;s oceans contain about 1.3 cubic kilometers of water, meaning that humans on Earth could sustain this rate of consumption over geological time scales, in terms of available hydrogen.
* Antimatter in large quantities would provide a mechanism to produce power on a scale several orders of magnitude beyond the current level of technology. In antimatter-matter collisions, all of the rest mass of the particles is converted to radiant energy. Their energy density (energy released per mass) is about four orders of magnitude greater than that from using nuclear fission, and about two orders of magnitude greater than the best possible yield from fusion. The reaction of 1 kg of antimatter with 1 kg of matter would produce 1.8 J (180 petajoules) of energy. Although antimatter is sometimes proposed as a source of energy, this does not seem feasible. Artificially producing antimatter – according to current understanding of the laws of physics – involves first converting energy into mass, which yields no net energy. Artificially created antimatter is usable only as an energy storage medium, not as an energy source, unless future technological developments (contrary to the conservation of the baryon number, such as a CP violation in favor of antimatter) allow the conversion of ordinary matter into anti-matter. Theoretically, humans may be able to cultivate and harvest a number of naturally occurring sources of antimatter in the future.
* Renewable energy by converting sunlight into electricity – either directly through solar cells and concentrating solar power, or indirectly through biofuels, wind, and hydroelectric power: There is no known way for a human civilization to harness the equivalent of the Earth&#x27;s total absorbed solar energy without completely covering the surface with man-made structures, which is not feasible with current technology. However, if a civilization constructed very large space-based solar power satellites, Type I power levels might become achievable—these could convert sunlight to microwave power and beam it to collectors on Earth.

=== Type II civilization methods ===

* Type II civilizations could use the same techniques as a Type I civilization, but applied to a large number of planets in a large number of star systems.
* A Dyson sphere or Dyson swarm and similar constructs are hypothetical megastructures originally described by Freeman Dyson as a system of orbiting solar power satellites designed to completely encircle a star and capture most or all of its energy output.
* Another means of generating usable energy would be to feed a stellar mass into a black hole, and collect the photons emitted by the accretion disk. A less exotic means would be to simply capture photons already escaping from the accretion disk, thereby reducing a black hole&#x27;s angular momentum; this is known as the Penrose process. However, this may only be possible for a Type III civilization.
* Star lifting is a process by which an advanced civilization could remove a substantial portion of a star&#x27;s matter in a controlled manner for other uses.
* Antimatter is likely to be produced as an industrial byproduct of a number of megascale engineering processes (such as the aforementioned star lifting), and could therefore be recycled.
* In multiple star systems with a sufficiently large number of stars: absorbing a small but significant fraction of the output of each individual star.
* Stellar engines can be used to move stars.

=== Type III civilization methods ===
* Type III civilizations might use the same techniques as a Type II civilization, but applied individually to all possible stars in one or more galaxies.
* They may also be able to tap into the energy released by the supermassive black holes believed to exist at the center of most galaxies.
* White holes could theoretically provide large amounts of energy by collecting the matter ejected outward.
* Capturing the energy of gamma-ray bursts is another theoretically possible power source for an advanced civilization.
* The emissions from quasars are comparable to those from small active galaxies and could be a massive power source if they could be collected.

== Civilization implications ==
There are many historical examples of human civilization undergoing large-scale transitions, such as the Industrial Revolution. The transitions between Kardashev scale levels could potentially represent similarly dramatic periods of social upheaval, as they involve exceeding the hard limits of the resources available within a civilization&#x27;s existing territory. A common speculation is that the transition from Type 0 to Type I could carry a strong risk of self-destruction, since in some scenarios there would be no room for further expansion on the civilization&#x27;s home planet, as in a Malthusian catastrophe.

For example, excessive energy consumption without adequate heat removal could plausibly render the planet of a Type I approaching civilization unsuitable for the biology of the dominant life forms and their food sources. Using Earth as an example, ocean temperatures above 95 °F (35 °C) would endanger marine life and make it difficult, if not impossible, for mammals to cool to temperatures suitable for their metabolism. Of course, these theoretical speculations may not become problems, possibly through the application of future engineering and technology. Also, by the time a civilization reaches Type I, it may have colonized other planets or established O&#x27;Neill-type colonies, so that waste heat could be distributed throughout the star system.

The limitations of biological life forms and the evolution of computer technology may lead to the transformation of the civilization through mind uploading and artificial general intelligence in general during the transition from Type I to Type II, leading to a digitized civilization.

== See also ==
* Astronomical engineering
* Clarke&#x27;s three laws
* Drake equation
* Dyson sphere
* Gerhard Lenski
* Great Filter
* HD 164595
* Orders of magnitude (energy)
* Orders of magnitude (power)
* Quiet and loud aliens
* Tabby&#x27;s Star (KIC 8462852)
* Terraforming
* White&#x27;s law
* World energy supply and consumption
== Notes ==
== References ==
== Further reading ==

* Dyson, Freeman J. &quot;Energy in the Universe&quot; Article in September 1971 &quot;Scientific American&quot; magazine (Special September Issue on &quot;Energy&quot;)
* Wind Powering America 
* Clean Energy for Planetary Survival: International Development Research Centre
* LBL Scientists Research Global Warming 
* E³ Handbook
* Clarke H2 energy systems
* 
* Shkadov Thruster 
* 
* &quot;Supercivilizations as Possible Products of the Progressive Evolution of Matter&quot;: also by Kardashev
* &quot;Search for Artificial Stellar Sources of Infrared Radiation&quot;, by Freeman J. Dyson
* &quot;The Radio Search For Intelligent Extraterrestral Life&quot;, by Frank Drake
* 
== External links ==
* 
* by Universe Today.
* from Dr. Michio Kaku.
* by Space.com.
* 
* 
* by Kurzgesagt, explaining and visualizing the topic.
* , an audio podcast by SciFi Thoughts.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q647332" start="4" end="19" title="Kardashev scale" label="Kardashev scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q8432" start="50" end="62" title="civilization" label="civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q11016" start="79" end="92" title="technology" label="technological"/>
<link wikidata="Q11379" start="128" end="134" title="energy" label="energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q318814" start="220" end="237" title="Nikolai Kardashev" label="Nikolai Kardashev"/>
<link wikidata="Q123334350" start="392" end="411" title="Byurakan Conference" label="Byurakan Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q132856" start="419" end="431" title="Armenian Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Armenian SSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q4306" start="500" end="515" title="radio astronomy" label="radio astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q408891" start="736" end="748" title="physical law" label="physical law"/>
<link wikidata="Q8432" start="760" end="778" title="human civilization" label="human civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q744069" start="794" end="807" title="extrapolation" label="extrapolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17736" start="932" end="937" title="axiom" label="axiom"/>
<link wikidata="Q582659" start="941" end="959" title="exponential growth" label="exponential growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q20803832" start="964" end="1003" title="Planetary civilization" label="[[Kardashev scale|Type I]] civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q11379" start="1030" end="1036" title="energy" label="energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q634" start="1054" end="1060" title="planet" label="planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q647332" start="1094" end="1101" title="Kardashev scale" label="Type II"/>
<link wikidata="Q523" start="1138" end="1142" title="star" label="star"/>
<link wikidata="Q469" start="1191" end="1203" title="Dyson sphere" label="Dyson sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q647332" start="1208" end="1216" title="Kardashev scale" label="Type III"/>
<link wikidata="Q318" start="1279" end="1285" title="galaxy" label="galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q589" start="1335" end="1345" title="black hole" label="black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q178655" start="1639" end="1659" title="Moore&amp;#x27;s Law" label="computational growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q570714" start="1663" end="1679" title="bioenergetics" label="food consumption"/>
<link wikidata="Q484587" start="2260" end="2264" title="Search for extraterrestrial intelligence" label="SETI"/>
<link wikidata="Q4360" start="2508" end="2514" title="pulsar" label="pulsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q83373" start="2519" end="2525" title="quasar" label="quasar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027134" start="2947" end="2971" title="Astronomy Reports" label="Astronomicheskii Zhurnal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8432" start="3462" end="3474" title="civilization" label="civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="3698" end="3702" title="watt" label="watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q523" start="3891" end="3895" title="star" label="star"/>
<link wikidata="Q318" start="4180" end="4186" title="galaxy" label="galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q872" start="4299" end="4304" title="radio" label="radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q161562" start="4837" end="4871" title="California Institute of Technology" label="California Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277659" start="4884" end="4891" title="CTA-102" label="CTA-102"/>
<link wikidata="Q649112" start="5089" end="5104" title="Galactic Center" label="Galactic Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469" start="5292" end="5308" title="Andromeda Galaxy" label="Andromeda Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q50028" start="5314" end="5331" title="Magellanic Clouds" label="Magellanic Clouds"/>
<link wikidata="Q14041" start="5333" end="5336" title="Messier 87" label="M87"/>
<link wikidata="Q487255" start="5341" end="5352" title="Centaurus A" label="Centaurus A"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="5456" end="5460" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="6004" end="6016" title="Solar System" label="solar system"/>
<link wikidata="Q8432" start="6649" end="6661" title="civilization" label="civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q310788" start="6723" end="6741" title="Aleksandr Lyapunov" label="Aleksandr Lyapunov"/>
<link wikidata="Q11028" start="7391" end="7402" title="information" label="information"/>
<link wikidata="Q11379" start="7449" end="7455" title="energy" label="energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="7633" end="7640" title="science" label="science"/>
<link wikidata="Q11016" start="7642" end="7652" title="technology" label="technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q159810" start="7654" end="7661" title="economy" label="economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11042" start="7663" end="7670" title="culture" label="culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018526" start="7672" end="7676" title="The arts" label="arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4288710" start="8292" end="8311" title="Interstellar communication" label="communication phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q408891" start="8522" end="8537" title="Scientific law" label="laws of physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q93909" start="9068" end="9083" title="Iosif Shklovsky" label="Iosif Shklovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1" start="9341" end="9349" title="Universe" label="Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q589" start="9791" end="9801" title="black hole" label="black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q849392" start="9909" end="9931" title="laws of thermodynamics" label="laws of thermodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q159653" start="10013" end="10033" title="Absolute magnitude" label="bolometric magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q161424" start="10185" end="10195" title="black body" label="black body"/>
<link wikidata="Q15303593" start="10350" end="10369" title="stellar engineering" label="stellar engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q12969754" start="10547" end="10572" title="electromagnetic radiation" label="electromagnetic radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q226418" start="10782" end="10792" title="chauvinism" label="chauvinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q484587" start="11203" end="11207" title="Search for extraterrestrial intelligence" label="SETI"/>
<link wikidata="Q133139" start="11600" end="11624" title="electromagnetic spectrum" label="electromagnetic spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q910519" start="11673" end="11686" title="Monochromatic radiation" label="monochromatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q649112" start="11704" end="11719" title="Galactic Center" label="galactic center"/>
<link wikidata="Q83373" start="11749" end="11755" title="quasar" label="quasar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7631676" start="11845" end="11875" title="Submillimetre astronomy" label="millimeter wavelength spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q15605" start="11915" end="11942" title="cosmic microwave background" label="cosmic microwave background"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406191" start="11963" end="11981" title="Hydrogen line" label="21-centimeter band"/>
<link wikidata="Q957798" start="12153" end="12166" title="megastructure" label="megastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q469" start="12178" end="12190" title="Dyson sphere" label="Dyson sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1" start="12508" end="12516" title="Universe" label="Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719301" start="12881" end="12929" title="Extraterrestrial hypothesis" label="hypothetical extraterrestrial supercivilizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q408891" start="13379" end="13394" title="Scientific law" label="laws of physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q957798" start="14076" end="14089" title="megastructure" label="megastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q11379" start="14124" end="14130" title="energy" label="energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11028" start="14135" end="14146" title="information" label="information"/>
<link wikidata="Q153717" start="14384" end="14397" title="Freeman Dyson" label="Freeman Dyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q469" start="14437" end="14443" title="Dyson sphere" label="sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811" start="14455" end="14472" title="astronomical unit" label="astronomical unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4130" start="14613" end="14618" title="orbit" label="orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q272447" start="14646" end="14668" title="Molecular cloud" label="Giant molecular clouds"/>
<link wikidata="Q28792482" start="14699" end="14715" title="Astronomical engineering" label="astroengineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q834020" start="14959" end="14975" title="Angular frequency" label="angular velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q83373" start="15130" end="15136" title="Quasar" label="Quasar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="15260" end="15268" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q41364" start="15369" end="15379" title="wavelength" label="wavelength"/>
<link wikidata="Q33580" start="16015" end="16046" title="Fermi paradox" label="no contact has been made so far"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157015" start="16069" end="16114" title="Zoo hypothesis" label="ethical considerations of these civilizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7234813" start="16244" end="16309" title="Potential cultural impact of extraterrestrial contact" label="evolution after contact with other extraterrestrial civilizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1" start="16643" end="16651" title="Universe" label="Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q9492" start="16870" end="16881" title="probability" label="probability"/>
<link wikidata="Q83373" start="17236" end="17242" title="quasar" label="quasar"/>
<link wikidata="Q854155" start="17255" end="17269" title="galactic bulge" label="galactic bulge"/>
<link wikidata="Q132151" start="17664" end="17676" title="Ethnography" label="ethnographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11387" start="17769" end="17785" title="Open cluster" label="galactic cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q271818" start="17862" end="17875" title="Virgo Cluster" label="Virgo cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q14041" start="17888" end="17891" title="Messier 87" label="M87"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="18172" end="18181" title="Milky Way" label="Milky Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469" start="18219" end="18222" title="Andromeda Galaxy" label="M31"/>
<link wikidata="Q13724" start="18224" end="18227" title="Triangulum Galaxy" label="M33"/>
<link wikidata="Q686876" start="18392" end="18413" title="Space colonization" label="colonization of space"/>
<link wikidata="Q207247" start="18916" end="18929" title="List of nearest stars and brown dwarfs" label="nearest stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q411" start="19119" end="19129" title="Astrobiology" label="exobiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q14841174" start="19197" end="19204" title="First contact (science fiction)" label="contact"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098275" start="19723" end="19736" title="History of life" label="life on Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q500699" start="19763" end="19782" title="Age of the universe" label="age of the Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535" start="19809" end="19838" title="Formation and evolution of the Solar System" label="formation of the Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q11523" start="20281" end="20309" title="Gamma ray" label="sources of intense radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q79925" start="20624" end="20648" title="Dark matter" label="matter remains invisible"/>
<link wikidata="Q11579" start="20897" end="20898" title="Kelvin" label="K"/>
<link wikidata="Q724913" start="21205" end="21209" title="IRAS" label="IRAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239165" start="21401" end="21415" title="Galactic plane" label="Galactic plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="21498" end="21506" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q7631676" start="21511" end="21524" title="Submillimetre astronomy" label="submillimeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q192116" start="21676" end="21685" title="Cryogenics" label="cryogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q148578" start="21686" end="21701" title="space telescope" label="space telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q8753" start="22071" end="22083" title="Enrico Fermi" label="Enrico Fermi"/>
<link wikidata="Q33580" start="22107" end="22114" title="Fermi paradox" label="paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q88445" start="22488" end="22509" title="Sebastian von Hoerner" label="Sebastian von Hoerner"/>
<link wikidata="Q41719" start="22542" end="22552" title="hypothesis" label="hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129469" start="22983" end="23008" title="Expansion of the universe" label="expansion of the Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11379" start="23300" end="23306" title="energy" label="energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q484587" start="23434" end="23438" title="Search for extraterrestrial intelligence" label="SETI"/>
<link wikidata="Q593354" start="23939" end="23952" title="Warm–hot intergalactic medium" label="intergalactic"/>
<link wikidata="Q221392" start="24111" end="24130" title="observable universe" label="observable universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q486882" start="24388" end="24399" title="Michio Kaku" label="Michio Kaku"/>
<link wikidata="Q185153" start="24711" end="24714" title="erg" label="erg"/>
<link wikidata="Q518730" start="24928" end="24947" title="Order of magnitude" label="orders of magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q7556707" start="25212" end="25228" title="solar irradiance" label="solar irradiance"/>
<link wikidata="Q469" start="25390" end="25402" title="Dyson sphere" label="Dyson sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420453" start="25406" end="25422" title="Matrioshka brain" label="Matrioshka brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="25658" end="25661" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="25682" end="25686" title="watt" label="watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q318" start="25759" end="25765" title="galaxy" label="galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="25925" end="25934" title="Milky Way" label="Milky Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q410" start="26229" end="26239" title="Carl Sagan" label="Carl Sagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q937378" start="26641" end="26652" title="Logarithmic scale" label="logarithmic"/>
<link wikidata="Q187631" start="26653" end="26666" title="interpolation" label="interpolation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27317" end="27337" title="Cradle of civilization#Rise of civilization" label="rise of civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="27457" end="27466" title="terawatts" label="terawatts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853339" start="27675" end="27699" title="World energy supply and consumption" label="world energy consumption"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27711" end="27720" title="Joule#Exajoule" label="exajoules"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27730" end="27733" title="Kilowatt-hour#Watt-hour multiples" label="TWh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056761" start="27827" end="27831" title="Significant figures" label="s.f."/>
<link wikidata="Q1510761" start="27942" end="27960" title="Social change" label="social development"/>
<link wikidata="Q8805" start="28083" end="28086" title="bit" label="bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q27521" start="28831" end="28852" title="galactic supercluster" label="galactic supercluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="29021" end="29029" title="internet" label="internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q48816503" start="29034" end="29047" title="Zettabyte Era" label="26 zettabytes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7189704" start="29196" end="29217" title="Physics of the Future" label="Physics of the Future"/>
<link wikidata="Q486882" start="29251" end="29262" title="Michio Kaku" label="Michio Kaku"/>
<link wikidata="Q830170" start="29391" end="29408" title="knowledge economy" label="knowledge economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422204" start="29558" end="29581" title="Extragalactic cosmic ray" label="extragalactic radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11472" start="29652" end="29657" title="paper" label="paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q80831" start="29663" end="29681" title="integrated circuit" label="integrated circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="29816" end="29824" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q25342" start="29858" end="29863" title="Power (physics)" label="power"/>
<link wikidata="Q7944" start="30071" end="30081" title="earthquake" label="earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="30086" end="30093" title="volcano" label="volcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q9430" start="30127" end="30132" title="ocean" label="ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="30236" end="30243" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="30293" end="30301" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="30372" end="30386" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q11033" start="30446" end="30456" title="mass media" label="mass media"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="30458" end="30468" title="television" label="television"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="30470" end="30480" title="rock music" label="rock music"/>
<link wikidata="Q380675" start="30486" end="30502" title="Cinema of the United States" label="Hollywood movies"/>
<link wikidata="Q121359" start="30628" end="30642" title="infrastructure" label="infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q8434" start="30688" end="30697" title="education" label="education"/>
<link wikidata="Q276099" start="30699" end="30723" title="research and development" label="research and development"/>
<link wikidata="Q174165" start="30729" end="30739" title="innovation" label="innovation"/>
<link wikidata="Q133004" start="30781" end="30789" title="diaspora" label="diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531622" start="31123" end="31139" title="Extinction-level threat" label="extinction-level"/>
<link wikidata="Q463796" start="31169" end="31194" title="Impact event" label="comet or asteroid impacts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916" start="31248" end="31260" title="Spaceflight" label="space travel"/>
<link wikidata="Q49367" start="31339" end="31346" title="ice age" label="ice age"/>
<link wikidata="Q5702636" start="31442" end="31452" title="Hyperspace (book)" label="Hyperspace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7134990" start="31469" end="31484" title="Parallel Worlds (book)" label="Parallel Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q18343" start="31609" end="31620" title="dark energy" label="dark energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q504677" start="31728" end="31741" title="Robert Zubrin" label="Robert Zubrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="32376" end="32382" title="Milky Way" label="galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7643754" start="32432" end="32468" title="Superluminal communication" label="nothing can travel faster than light"/>
<link wikidata="Q471540" start="32579" end="32593" title="John D. Barrow" label="John D. Barrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161297" start="32601" end="32621" title="University of Sussex" label="University of Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q221037" start="32838" end="32848" title="Big Crunch" label="Big Crunch"/>
<link wikidata="Q101333" start="33206" end="33218" title="Mechanical engineering" label="Type I-minus"/>
<link wikidata="Q327092" start="33338" end="33351" title="Medical engineering" label="Type II-minus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187" start="33379" end="33383" title="gene" label="gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q180618" start="33511" end="33523" title="genetic code" label="genetic code"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523861" start="33527" end="33541" title="Molecular engineering" label="Type III-minus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11369" start="33569" end="33577" title="molecule" label="molecule"/>
<link wikidata="Q127920" start="33583" end="33598" title="Covalent bond" label="molecular bonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q11468" start="33626" end="33639" title="Nanotechnology" label="Type IV-minus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9121" start="33678" end="33682" title="atom" label="atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q263847" start="33760" end="33775" title="artificial life" label="artificial life"/>
<link wikidata="Q83504" start="33779" end="33791" title="Nuclear engineering" label="Type V-minus"/>
<link wikidata="Q37147" start="33823" end="33837" title="atomic nucleus" label="atomic nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q102165" start="33858" end="33865" title="nucleon" label="nucleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q544405" start="33886" end="33899" title="Femtotechnology" label="Type VI-minus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6718" start="33968" end="33973" title="quark" label="quark"/>
<link wikidata="Q82586" start="33979" end="33985" title="lepton" label="lepton"/>
<link wikidata="Q133327" start="34138" end="34152" title="Spacetime" label="space and time"/>
<link wikidata="Q133327" start="34492" end="34501" title="spacetime" label="spacetime"/>
<link wikidata="Q11468" start="34891" end="34905" title="nanotechnology" label="nanotechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q40864" start="35061" end="35071" title="Oort cloud" label="Oort cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277659" start="35445" end="35452" title="CTA-102" label="CTA-102"/>
<link wikidata="Q46587" start="35522" end="35538" title="Active galactic nucleus" label="galactic nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q478805" start="35823" end="35830" title="Ancestral Puebloans" label="Anasazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q463796" start="35986" end="36008" title="Impact event" label="asteroid&amp;#x27;s impact"/>
<link wikidata="Q332614" start="36012" end="36024" title="supervolcano" label="supervolcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q49367" start="36048" end="36055" title="ice age" label="ice age"/>
<link wikidata="Q170167" start="36506" end="36509" title="TNT" label="TNT"/>
<link wikidata="Q193227" start="36546" end="36554" title="TNT equivalent" label="megatons"/>
<link wikidata="Q486882" start="36870" end="36881" title="Michio Kaku" label="Michio Kaku"/>
<link wikidata="Q153717" start="37139" end="37152" title="Freeman Dyson" label="Freeman Dyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7330030" start="37379" end="37393" title="Richard Wilson (physicist)" label="Richard Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916" start="37839" end="37851" title="Spaceflight" label="space travel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349167" start="37853" end="37881" title="Interplanetary communications" label="interplanetary communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q15303593" start="37883" end="37902" title="stellar engineering" label="stellar engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q921851" start="37908" end="37915" title="Climate engineering" label="climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="37991" end="37999" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3937" start="38103" end="38112" title="supernova" label="supernova"/>
<link wikidata="Q80901370" start="38218" end="38235" title="Philip T. Metzger" label="Philip T. Metzger"/>
<link wikidata="Q936791" start="38420" end="38433" title="Non-renewable resource" label="non-renewable"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="38471" end="38482" title="natural gas" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q24489" start="38514" end="38518" title="coal" label="coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098" start="38528" end="38535" title="uranium" label="uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349660" start="38551" end="38565" title="Extraction of petroleum" label="oil production"/>
<link wikidata="Q12739" start="38587" end="38601" title="Nuclear power" label="Nuclear energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="39097" end="39109" title="Solar System" label="Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q3863" start="39278" end="39286" title="asteroid" label="asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022867" start="39292" end="39302" title="Minor planet" label="planetoids"/>
<link wikidata="Q170978" start="39304" end="39312" title="Robotics" label="Robotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="39531" end="39535" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q25269" start="39561" end="39562" title="Joule" label="J"/>
<link wikidata="Q691243" start="39661" end="39677" title="Self-replicating machine" label="self-replicating"/>
<link wikidata="Q2539" start="39682" end="39695" title="Machine learning" label="self-learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="39780" end="39803" title="artificial intelligence" label="artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q204520" start="40267" end="40279" title="terraforming" label="terraforming"/>
<link wikidata="Q7556707" start="40458" end="40473" title="Solar irradiance" label="solar radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12129" start="40591" end="40597" title="parsec" label="parsec"/>
<link wikidata="Q11379" start="40648" end="40654" title="energy" label="energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q469" start="41274" end="41286" title="Dyson sphere" label="Dyson sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q653007" start="41950" end="41965" title="galactic empire" label="galactic empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q834826" start="42013" end="42032" title="interstellar travel" label="interstellar travel"/>
<link wikidata="Q40392" start="42754" end="42777" title="supermassive black hole" label="supermassive black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q12129" start="43195" end="43201" title="parsec" label="parsec"/>
<link wikidata="Q3327819" start="43327" end="43346" title="Multiverse" label="alternate Universes"/>
<link wikidata="Q133139" start="44274" end="44298" title="electromagnetic spectrum" label="electromagnetic spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11473" start="44360" end="44374" title="thermodynamics" label="thermodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q212111" start="44751" end="44764" title="spectral line" label="spectral line"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="44768" end="44776" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q13082" start="44792" end="44806" title="nuclear fusion" label="nuclear fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11982" start="44899" end="44913" title="photosynthesis" label="photosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="44924" end="44926" title="Terawatt" label="TW"/>
<link wikidata="Q7556707" start="44957" end="44967" title="Solar irradiance" label="solar flux"/>
<link wikidata="Q102296" start="45089" end="45098" title="deuterium" label="deuterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q13082" start="45108" end="45122" title="nuclear fusion" label="nuclear fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q40392" start="45554" end="45577" title="supermassive black hole" label="supermassive black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q237604" start="45836" end="45850" title="accretion disk" label="accretion disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q487875" start="46040" end="46057" title="Maser" label="high-powered beam"/>
<link wikidata="Q11412" start="46776" end="46797" title="Gravity" label="gravitational effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q41364" start="46866" end="46876" title="wavelength" label="wavelength"/>
<link wikidata="Q469" start="46967" end="46979" title="Dyson sphere" label="Dyson sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q957798" start="47228" end="47241" title="megastructure" label="megastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q691243" start="47307" end="47330" title="Self-replicating machine" label="self-replicating probes"/>
<link wikidata="Q17455" start="47353" end="47364" title="John von Neumann" label="von Neumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q535733" start="47742" end="47753" title="Paul Davies" label="Paul Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q11468" start="47887" end="47901" title="nanotechnology" label="nanotechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q469" start="48136" end="48148" title="Dyson sphere" label="Dyson sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331666" start="48165" end="48179" title="stellar engine" label="stellar engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12129" start="48320" end="48326" title="parsec" label="parsec"/>
<link wikidata="Q11412" start="48509" end="48529" title="Gravity" label="gravitational forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054" start="48768" end="48778" title="technetium" label="technetium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809" start="48782" end="48792" title="promethium" label="promethium"/>
<link wikidata="Q780173" start="49164" end="49182" title="Xenoarchaeology" label="cosmic archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q44559" start="49284" end="49293" title="exoplanet" label="exoplanet"/>
<link wikidata="Q12858303" start="49304" end="49309" title="freon" label="freon"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="49311" end="49317" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q36933" start="49327" end="49332" title="ozone" label="ozone"/>
<link wikidata="Q210898" start="49375" end="49389" title="James Lovelock" label="James Lovelock"/>
<link wikidata="Q50081" start="49489" end="49498" title="red giant" label="red giant"/>
<link wikidata="Q25377588" start="49676" end="49690" title="Stellar classification" label="spectral types"/>
<link wikidata="Q471805" start="49702" end="49704" title="A-type main-sequence star" label="A5"/>
<link wikidata="Q3450" start="49708" end="49710" title="Main sequence" label="F2"/>
<link wikidata="Q659662" start="49778" end="49792" title="Natural abundance" label="isotopic ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599940" start="50023" end="50031" title="SERENDIP" label="SERENDIP"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="50527" end="50539" title="Solar System" label="Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q8805" start="50706" end="50709" title="bit" label="bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q15605" start="50961" end="50988" title="cosmic microwave background" label="cosmic microwave background"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121676" start="51148" end="51169" title="circular polarization" label="circular polarization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154519" start="51205" end="51220" title="Astrophysical X-ray source" label="X-ray emissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q229318" start="51359" end="51366" title="3C 273" label="3C 273B"/>
<link wikidata="Q273163" start="51679" end="51688" title="Isotropy" label="isotropic"/>
<link wikidata="Q531" start="51865" end="51875" title="light-year" label="light-year"/>
<link wikidata="Q221392" start="51966" end="51985" title="Observable universe" label="observable Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q38082" start="52966" end="52973" title="Lewis Carroll" label="Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q184356" start="53130" end="53145" title="radio telescope" label="radio telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q3863" start="53170" end="53178" title="asteroid" label="asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q484587" start="53273" end="53285" title="Search for extraterrestrial intelligence" label="SETI program"/>
<link wikidata="Q486882" start="53364" end="53375" title="Michio Kaku" label="Michio Kaku"/>
<link wikidata="Q484587" start="53643" end="53647" title="Search for extraterrestrial intelligence" label="SETI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853182" start="53670" end="53702" title="Sternberg Astronomical Institute" label="Sternberg Astronomical Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633149" start="53746" end="53752" title="Soviet people" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q399" start="53878" end="53885" title="Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41677406" start="54035" end="54057" title="Green Bank Observatory" label="Green Bank observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4306" start="54100" end="54117" title="Radio astronomy" label="radio astronomers"/>
<link wikidata="Q133139" start="54590" end="54614" title="electromagnetic spectrum" label="electromagnetic spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q105902" start="55002" end="55012" title="luminosity" label="luminosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q33580" start="55429" end="55441" title="Fermi paradox" label="main dilemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q8753" start="55469" end="55481" title="Enrico Fermi" label="Enrico Fermi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421024" start="55652" end="55656" title="Project Ozma" label="Ozma"/>
<link wikidata="Q161562" start="56008" end="56042" title="California Institute of Technology" label="California Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277659" start="56065" end="56072" title="CTA-102" label="CTA-102"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931185" start="56224" end="56236" title="Astronomical radio source" label="radio source"/>
<link wikidata="Q408891" start="56538" end="56551" title="Scientific law" label="physical laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q8432" start="56755" end="56767" title="civilization" label="civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q486882" start="57065" end="57076" title="Michio Kaku" label="Michio Kaku"/>
<link wikidata="Q849392" start="57192" end="57214" title="laws of thermodynamics" label="laws of thermodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q159731" start="57240" end="57255" title="Baryon" label="baryonic matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="57270" end="57289" title="Solar System" label="planetary evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q240581" start="57357" end="57376" title="anthropic principle" label="anthropic principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q153717" start="57759" end="57772" title="Freeman Dyson" label="Freeman Dyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q83500" start="57851" end="57863" title="intelligence" label="intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q170337" start="57910" end="57921" title="eschatology" label="eschatology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239" start="58196" end="58212" title="Organism" label="living organisms"/>
<link wikidata="Q11028" start="58292" end="58303" title="information" label="information"/>
<link wikidata="Q126692" start="58765" end="58786" title="Pragmatism" label="functional definition"/>
<link wikidata="Q4503831" start="58833" end="58837" title="goal" label="goal"/>
<link wikidata="Q41719" start="59455" end="59465" title="Hypothesis" label="hypotheses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129469" start="59906" end="59931" title="Expansion of the universe" label="expansion of the Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q582659" start="60327" end="60348" title="Exponential growth" label="growing exponentially"/>
<link wikidata="Q486882" start="60741" end="60752" title="Michio Kaku" label="Michio Kaku"/>
<link wikidata="Q744069" start="60832" end="60845" title="Extrapolation" label="extrapolating"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="61656" end="61659" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q318" start="61851" end="61857" title="galaxy" label="galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11423" start="62080" end="62084" title="mass" label="mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q11379" start="62089" end="62095" title="energy" label="energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q849359" start="62365" end="62391" title="Interdisciplinarity" label="multidisciplinary approach"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277659" start="62536" end="62543" title="CTA-102" label="CTA 102"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931185" start="62544" end="62556" title="Astronomical radio source" label="radio source"/>
<link wikidata="Q223799" start="62956" end="62965" title="TASS" label="ITAR-TASS"/>
<link wikidata="Q83373" start="63212" end="63218" title="quasar" label="quasar"/>
<link wikidata="Q299149" start="63417" end="63428" title="Frank Drake" label="Frank Drake"/>
<link wikidata="Q410" start="63433" end="63443" title="Carl Sagan" label="Carl Sagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q44547" start="63456" end="63463" title="Arecibo Telescope" label="Arecibo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3944" start="63523" end="63534" title="Local Group" label="Local Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q13724" start="63536" end="63539" title="Triangulum Galaxy" label="M33"/>
<link wikidata="Q13952" start="63541" end="63544" title="Messier 49" label="M49"/>
<link wikidata="Q35810" start="63546" end="63551" title="Leo I (dwarf galaxy)" label="Leo I"/>
<link wikidata="Q35776" start="63556" end="63562" title="Leo II (dwarf galaxy)" label="Leo II"/>
<link wikidata="Q384071" start="63602" end="63630" title="Arecibo message" label="mankind&amp;#x27;s first message"/>
<link wikidata="Q11312" start="63634" end="63637" title="Messier 13" label="M13"/>
<link wikidata="Q39379" start="63735" end="63754" title="Scientific American" label="Scientific American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1590725" start="63828" end="63837" title="RATAN-600" label="RATAN-600"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="63939" end="63948" title="Milky Way" label="Milky Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q445596" start="64095" end="64101" title="Jill Tarter" label="Tarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q461382" start="64133" end="64136" title="Very Large Array" label="VLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q724913" start="64207" end="64211" title="IRAS" label="IRAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q469" start="64283" end="64295" title="Dyson sphere" label="Dyson sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q104116" start="64325" end="64327" title="Hydroxy group" label="OH"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="64328" end="64330" title="Infrared" label="IR"/>
<link wikidata="Q337641" start="64622" end="64630" title="Fermilab" label="Fermilab"/>
<link wikidata="Q2488" start="64681" end="64687" title="Spiral galaxy" label="spiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q184348" start="64692" end="64702" title="Elliptical galaxy" label="elliptical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147069" start="64714" end="64734" title="Tully–Fisher relation" label="Tully-Fisher diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q159653" start="64749" end="64767" title="absolute magnitude" label="absolute magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q12485" start="65787" end="65797" title="Symmetry" label="asymmetric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150541" start="65837" end="65850" title="galactic disc" label="galactic disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="66376" end="66384" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q957798" start="66525" end="66538" title="megastructure" label="megastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q589" start="66573" end="66583" title="black hole" label="black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q76250" start="67025" end="67033" title="redshift" label="redshift"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073340" start="67397" end="67416" title="Photometry (astronomy)" label="photometric filters"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="67680" end="67688" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q221392" start="67797" end="67811" title="Observable universe" label="local Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q75048157" start="67933" end="67942" title="HD 164595" label="HD 164595"/>
<link wikidata="Q133139" start="68406" end="68430" title="electromagnetic spectrum" label="electromagnetic spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q212111" start="68893" end="68906" title="spectral line" label="spectral line"/>
<link wikidata="Q37547" start="69012" end="69024" title="astrophysics" label="astrophysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q83373" start="69391" end="69397" title="quasar" label="quasar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931185" start="69880" end="69893" title="Astronomical radio source" label="radio sources"/>
<link wikidata="Q104116" start="69905" end="69913" title="Hydroxy group" label="hydroxyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q4360" start="69984" end="69990" title="pulsar" label="pulsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q850283" start="70155" end="70175" title="Interferometry" label="radio interferometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="70247" end="70252" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q484587" start="70558" end="70562" title="Search for extraterrestrial intelligence" label="SETI"/>
<link wikidata="Q4213061" start="70850" end="70873" title="Samuil Kaplan" label="Samuil Aronovich Kaplan"/>
<link wikidata="Q718647" start="70933" end="70949" title="angular diameter" label="angular diameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q41364" start="70975" end="70985" title="wavelength" label="wavelength"/>
<link wikidata="Q427071" start="71188" end="71204" title="hydroxyl radical" label="hydroxyl radical"/>
<link wikidata="Q11276" start="71261" end="71277" title="globular cluster" label="globular cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q850283" start="71576" end="71590" title="interferometry" label="interferometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q43101" start="71867" end="71872" title="boson" label="boson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621273" start="71877" end="71885" title="particle" label="particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q182717" start="71896" end="71908" title="antiparticle" label="antiparticle"/>
<link wikidata="Q237604" start="71948" end="71962" title="accretion disk" label="accretion disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q40392" start="71968" end="71991" title="supermassive black hole" label="supermassive black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q175821" start="72118" end="72124" title="Micrometre" label="micron"/>
<link wikidata="Q12097402" start="72125" end="72135" title="Minute and second of arc" label="arc-second"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079524" start="72301" end="72320" title="specular reflection" label="specular reflection"/>
<link wikidata="Q649112" start="72448" end="72460" title="Galactic Center" label="Fermi bubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q184348" start="72637" end="72656" title="Elliptical galaxy" label="elliptical galaxies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640294" start="72711" end="72715" title="3C 9" label="3C 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q229318" start="72780" end="72786" title="3C 273" label="3C 273"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272112" start="72839" end="72845" title="3C 279" label="3C 279"/>
<link wikidata="Q120083529" start="72847" end="72853" title="3C 345" label="3C 345"/>
<link wikidata="Q4360" start="73519" end="73525" title="pulsar" label="pulsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q189990" start="73591" end="73604" title="Antony Hewish" label="Antony Hewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319958" start="73642" end="73650" title="PSR B1919+21" label="CP 19019"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931185" start="74289" end="74301" title="Astronomical radio source" label="radio source"/>
<link wikidata="Q102327045" start="74388" end="74395" title="Arecibo Observatory" label="Arecibo"/>
<link wikidata="Q410" start="75016" end="75026" title="Carl Sagan" label="Carl Sagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q386191" start="75160" end="75177" title="population growth" label="population growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="75566" end="75574" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052379" start="76234" end="76249" title="Logistic function" label="logistic curves"/>
<link wikidata="Q544697" start="76388" end="76411" title="Mediocrity principle" label="principle of mediocrity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540117" start="76518" end="76535" title="J. Richard Gott" label="John Richard Gott"/>
<link wikidata="Q2697812" start="76946" end="76949" title="M33 X-7" label="M33"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536497" start="76951" end="76954" title="M81 Group" label="M81"/>
<link wikidata="Q13957" start="76960" end="76976" title="Whirlpool Galaxy" label="Whirlpool Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q487255" start="76980" end="76991" title="Centaurus A" label="Centaurus A"/>
<link wikidata="Q271818" start="77009" end="77022" title="Virgo Cluster" label="Virgo cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q163016" start="77055" end="77075" title="Lewis Fry Richardson" label="Lewis Fry Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q188419" start="77241" end="77250" title="Life expectancy" label="life span"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549918" start="77343" end="77351" title="Impulsivity" label="impulses"/>
<link wikidata="Q49394" start="77461" end="77488" title="Weapon of mass destruction" label="weapons of mass destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q194100" start="77526" end="77540" title="Transhumanism" label="Transhumanists"/>
<link wikidata="Q3573355" start="77813" end="77823" title="Yvan Dutil" label="Yvan Dutil"/>
<link wikidata="Q26334942" start="77828" end="77842" title="Stéphane Dumas (astrophysicist)" label="Stéphane Dumas"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="77852" end="77853" title="Watt" label="W"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="77863" end="77868" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="77876" end="77878" title="Terawatt" label="TW"/>
<link wikidata="Q469" start="78267" end="78279" title="Dyson sphere" label="Dyson sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q9465" start="78345" end="78350" title="Ethics" label="ethic"/>
<link wikidata="Q153717" start="78575" end="78588" title="Freeman Dyson" label="Freeman Dyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647152" start="78640" end="78653" title="Shape of the universe" label="open Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q641442" start="79040" end="79052" title="fusion power" label="fusion power"/>
<link wikidata="Q35875" start="79066" end="79089" title="mass–energy equivalence" label="mass–energy equivalence"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="79254" end="79262" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q223073" start="79263" end="79267" title="Proton–proton chain reaction" label="into"/>
<link wikidata="Q560" start="79268" end="79274" title="helium" label="helium"/>
<link wikidata="Q9430" start="79411" end="79416" title="ocean" label="ocean"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="79432" end="79461" title="ocean#Physical properties" label="1.3 cubic kilometers of water"/>
<link wikidata="Q83197" start="79594" end="79604" title="Antimatter" label="Antimatter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097654" start="79791" end="79800" title="rest mass" label="rest mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259526" start="79834" end="79848" title="radiant energy" label="radiant energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q828402" start="79856" end="79870" title="energy density" label="energy density"/>
<link wikidata="Q11429" start="79961" end="79976" title="nuclear fission" label="nuclear fission"/>
<link wikidata="Q13082" start="80054" end="80060" title="nuclear fusion" label="fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11570" start="80080" end="80082" title="kilogram" label="kg"/>
<link wikidata="Q25269" start="80135" end="80136" title="joule" label="J"/>
<link wikidata="Q25269" start="80142" end="80152" title="petajoules" label="petajoules"/>
<link wikidata="Q110346" start="80606" end="80619" title="baryon number" label="baryon number"/>
<link wikidata="Q12794416" start="80631" end="80643" title="CP violation" label="CP violation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12705" start="80856" end="80872" title="Renewable energy" label="Renewable energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q58803" start="80939" end="80949" title="solar cell" label="solar cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q285927" start="80955" end="80980" title="concentrating solar power" label="concentrating solar power"/>
<link wikidata="Q128991" start="81004" end="81011" title="biofuel" label="biofuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q43302" start="81014" end="81018" title="wind power" label="wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="81024" end="81043" title="hydroelectric power" label="hydroelectric power"/>
<link wikidata="Q8432" start="81073" end="81091" title="civilization" label="human civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981843" start="81329" end="81352" title="space-based solar power" label="space-based solar power"/>
<link wikidata="Q26540" start="81353" end="81362" title="satellite" label="satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q469" start="81692" end="81704" title="Dyson sphere" label="Dyson sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q469" start="81708" end="81719" title="Dyson swarm" label="Dyson swarm"/>
<link wikidata="Q957798" start="81760" end="81773" title="megastructure" label="megastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q153717" start="81799" end="81812" title="Freeman Dyson" label="Freeman Dyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981843" start="81837" end="81858" title="solar power satellite" label="solar power satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q523" start="81894" end="81898" title="star" label="star"/>
<link wikidata="Q589" start="82028" end="82038" title="black hole" label="black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q237604" start="82079" end="82093" title="accretion disk" label="accretion disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q161254" start="82229" end="82245" title="angular momentum" label="angular momentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q616172" start="82268" end="82283" title="Penrose process" label="Penrose process"/>
<link wikidata="Q7601227" start="82351" end="82363" title="Star lifting" label="Star lifting"/>
<link wikidata="Q83197" start="82511" end="82521" title="Antimatter" label="Antimatter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128255" start="82564" end="82573" title="byproduct" label="byproduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q6808853" start="82589" end="82610" title="megascale engineering" label="megascale engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q595871" start="82702" end="82723" title="star system" label="multiple star systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331666" start="82851" end="82865" title="Stellar engine" label="Stellar engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q40392" start="83150" end="83173" title="supermassive black hole" label="supermassive black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q131468" start="83227" end="83238" title="White holes" label="White holes"/>
<link wikidata="Q22247" start="83359" end="83374" title="gamma-ray burst" label="gamma-ray burst"/>
<link wikidata="Q83373" start="83474" end="83481" title="quasars" label="quasars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="83735" end="83756" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q828341" start="84228" end="84250" title="Malthusian catastrophe" label="Malthusian catastrophe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="84430" end="84449" title="Human" label="dominant life forms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057" start="84664" end="84674" title="metabolism" label="metabolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17737" start="84693" end="84704" title="theoretical" label="theoretical"/>
<link wikidata="Q921851" start="84786" end="84797" title="climate engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q11016" start="84802" end="84812" title="technology" label="technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043389" start="84914" end="84940" title="O&amp;#x27;Neill cylinder" label="O&amp;#x27;Neill-type colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267982" start="85152" end="85166" title="mind uploading" label="mind uploading"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264109" start="85171" end="85202" title="artificial general intelligence" label="artificial general intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420453" start="85273" end="85295" title="Matrioshka brain" label="digitized civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q28792482" start="85315" end="85339" title="Astronomical engineering" label="Astronomical engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q513453" start="85342" end="85366" title="Clarke&amp;#x27;s three laws" label="Clarke&amp;#x27;s three laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q180316" start="85369" end="85383" title="Drake equation" label="Drake equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q469" start="85386" end="85398" title="Dyson sphere" label="Dyson sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q325840" start="85401" end="85415" title="Gerhard Lenski" label="Gerhard Lenski"/>
<link wikidata="Q4106593" start="85418" end="85430" title="Great Filter" label="Great Filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q75048157" start="85433" end="85442" title="HD 164595" label="HD 164595"/>
<link wikidata="Q282791" start="85445" end="85473" title="Orders of magnitude (energy)" label="Orders of magnitude (energy)"/>
<link wikidata="Q365764" start="85476" end="85503" title="Orders of magnitude (power)" label="Orders of magnitude (power)"/>
<link wikidata="Q115625470" start="85506" end="85527" title="Quiet and loud aliens" label="Quiet and loud aliens"/>
<link wikidata="Q21104086" start="85530" end="85547" title="Tabby&amp;#x27;s Star" label="Tabby&amp;#x27;s Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q204520" start="85564" end="85576" title="Terraforming" label="Terraforming"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994255" start="85579" end="85595" title="White&amp;#x27;s law" label="White&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853339" start="85598" end="85633" title="World energy supply and consumption" label="World energy supply and consumption"/>
<link wikidata="Q39379" start="85773" end="85792" title="Scientific American" label="Scientific American"/>
<link wikidata="Q153717" start="86261" end="86277" title="Freeman J. Dyson" label="Freeman J. Dyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q299149" start="86350" end="86361" title="Frank Drake" label="Frank Drake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894217" start="86394" end="86408" title="Universe Today" label="Universe Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q486882" start="86421" end="86432" title="Michio Kaku" label="Michio Kaku"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112835" start="86439" end="86448" title="Space.com" label="Space.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q23893763" start="86461" end="86471" title="Kurzgesagt" label="Kurzgesagt"/>
<link wikidata="Q451553" start="86488" end="86499" title="Visualization (graphics)" label="visualizing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="86535" end="86549" title="SciFi Thoughts" label="SciFi Thoughts"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="140272" wikidata="Q2566403" url="?curid=140272" title="Drago Doctrine">
<text>The Drago Doctrine was announced in 1902 by Argentine Minister of Foreign Affairs Luis María Drago in a diplomatic note to the United States. This doctrine stated that simply failing to repay national debt was not a valid reason for foreign intervention, especially by a power outside of the Western Hemisphere. The doctrine was a response to the European powers&#x27; blockade of Venezuela, which occurred after the country defaulted on its debt. Washington accepted and used the Drago doctrine. In order to prevent further interventions, the United States took control of the customs of several Latin American countries to ensure debt payments were made to Europe.

Drago was responding to a tension between the Monroe Doctrine keeping Europe out and the European demand for repayments of debts. It assumed the principle of sovereign equality that the United States had long supported. It explicitly stated that no foreign power, including the United States, could use force against a nation in the Western Hemisphere to collect government debts.

In 1904, the Roosevelt Corollary was issued by the United States in response to the Drago Doctrine and asserted the right of the United States to intervene in Latin America in the interests of American business and Latin American independence from European powers.

A modified version, known as the Porter Convention after Horace Porter, was adopted at The Hague in 1907 and added that arbitration and litigation should always be used first.

==History==
It grew from the ideas expressed by Carlos Calvo in &quot;Derecho internacional teórico y práctico de Europa y América&quot;, commonly known as the Calvo Doctrine. The Calvo Doctrine proposed to prohibit diplomatic intervention before local resources were exhausted. 

The Drago Doctrine itself was a response to the actions of Britain, Germany, and Italy, which, in 1902, had blockaded Venezuela in response to Venezuelan government&#x27;s refusal to pay its massive foreign debt that had been acquired under previous administrations before President Cipriano Castro took power. Secretary of State John Hay was taken aback by the reference to the Monroe Doctrine and delayed six weeks before responding by quoting Theodore Roosevelt&#x27;s 1901 annual message to Congress: &quot;We do not guarantee any state against punishment if it misconducts itself.&quot;

Roosevelt himself, although he would lavish praise on Drago&#x27;s doctrine in later years, had earlier written in his capacity as Vice President to the German diplomat Hermann Speck von Sternburg that &quot;if any South American State misbehaves towards any European country, let the European country spank it.&quot;

The Drago Doctrine was used by Venezuela as a rationale for its vote in support of Argentina at the Organization of American States meeting on the Argentine debt crisis that involved NML Capital.

==See also==

* Calvo doctrine

==References==

==Further reading==
* Drago, Luis M., and H. Edward Nettles. &quot;The Drago Doctrine in international law and politics.&quot; &quot; Hispanic American Historical Review&quot; 8.2 (1928): 204-223. online

* Hershey, Amos S. &quot;The Calvo and Drago Doctrines.&quot; &quot;American Journal of International Law&quot; 1.1 (1907): 26-45. online
* Scarfi, Juan Pablo. &quot;In the name of the Americas: the Pan-American Redefinition of the Monroe Doctrine and the emerging language of American International Law in the Western Hemisphere, 1898-1933.&quot; &quot;Diplomatic History&quot; 40.2 (2016): 189-218. online
* Woolsey, T. S. (1921). &quot;&quot;. &quot;American Journal of International Law&quot;. 15 (4): 558–559</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2566403" start="4" end="18" title="Drago Doctrine" label="Drago Doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q726607" start="82" end="98" title="Luis María Drago" label="Luis María Drago"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="127" end="140" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q481367" start="347" end="390" title="Venezuelan crisis of 1902–1903" label="European powers&amp;#x27; blockade of Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q181026" start="714" end="729" title="Monroe Doctrine" label="Monroe Doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143231" start="1063" end="1082" title="Roosevelt Corollary" label="Roosevelt Corollary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566403" start="1349" end="1366" title="Drago Doctrine" label="Porter Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140470" start="1373" end="1386" title="Horace Porter" label="Horace Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q36600" start="1403" end="1412" title="The Hague" label="The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033928" start="1541" end="1553" title="Carlos Calvo (historian)" label="Carlos Calvo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454701" start="1653" end="1667" title="Calvo Doctrine" label="Calvo Doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q481367" start="1882" end="1901" title="Venezuela Crisis of 1902–03" label="blockaded Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q469575" start="2057" end="2072" title="Cipriano Castro" label="Cipriano Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q117101" start="2104" end="2112" title="John Milton Hay" label="John Hay"/>
<link wikidata="Q181026" start="2153" end="2168" title="Monroe Doctrine" label="Monroe Doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="2220" end="2238" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q214071" start="2536" end="2563" title="Hermann Speck von Sternburg" label="Hermann Speck von Sternburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="2717" end="2726" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q123759" start="2786" end="2817" title="Organization of American States" label="Organization of American States"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789435" start="2833" end="2854" title="Argentine debt restructuring" label="Argentine debt crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6511841" start="2869" end="2880" title="NML Capital" label="NML Capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454701" start="2899" end="2913" title="Calvo Doctrine" label="Calvo doctrine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="140274" wikidata="Q223974" url="?curid=140274" title="Bot">
<text>Bot or BOT may refer to:

==Sciences==

===Computing and technology===
* Chatbot, a computer program that converses in natural language
* Internet bot, a software application that runs automated tasks (scripts) over the Internet
**Spambot, an internet bot designed to assist in the sending of spam
* Internet Relay Chat bot, a set of scripts or an independent program that connects to IRC as a client
* Robot, or &quot;bot&quot;, a mechanical device that can perform physical tasks
* Social bot, a type of chatbot that is employed in social media networks to automatically generate messages
**Twitter bot, a program used to produce automated posts on the Twitter microblogging service
* Video game bot, a computer-controlled player or opponent
* Wikipedia bot, an internet bot which performs tasks in Wikipedia
* Zombie computer, part of a botnet

===Biology and medicine===
* BOT, base of tongue, in medicine
* Bot, the lesion caused by a botfly larva
*Borderline ovarian tumor, a tumor of the ovaries

==Places==
* Bni Ounjel Tafraout, a commune in Taounate Province, Taza-Al Hoceima-Taounate, Morocco
* Bot, Tarragona, a town in Spain
* Bot River, South Africa
* Botswana, IOC and FIFA trigram BOT
* British Overseas Territories, territories under the jurisdiction and sovereignty of the United Kingdom
* Bucharest Old Town

==People==
* Ajaw B&#x27;ot, 8th century Maya king of the city of Seibal
* Ben Bot, Dutch politician
* G. W. Bot, Australian printmaker, sculptor, painter and graphic artist
* Jeanne Bot, French supercentenarian
* Theo Bot, Dutch politician

==Brands and enterprises==
* Bank of Taiwan, a bank headquartered in Taipei, Taiwan
* Bank of Tanzania, the central bank of the United Republic of Tanzania
* Bank of Thailand, the central bank of Thailand
* Blue Orange Theatre, an independent theatre in Birmingham, England
* Bolt On Technology, an American software development company
* The Bank of Tokyo, a defunct Japanese bank now part of The Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi UFJ
* Bot, a line of budget desktop PCs manufactured by Alienware

==Business ==
* Balance of trade, difference between the monetary value of exports and imports
* Build–operate–transfer, a form of project financing

==Sports==
* Bobby Orr Trophy, the championship trophy of the Eastern Conference of the Ontario Hockey League
* Brava Opening Tournament, a football tournament in Brava, Cape Verde

==Transportation==
* Air Botswana (ICAO: BOT)
* Bosset Airport (IATA: BOT), in Bosset, Papua New Guinea
* Bryn Oer Tramway, a narrow gauge railway built in South Wales in 1814

==Other uses==
*&quot;B.O.T.&quot;, a 1986 episode of &quot;The Transformers&quot;
* Bot caste, a Hindu caste of Nepali origin found in the Indian state of Uttar Pradesh
* Bot people, or Boto people, a community in Jammu and Kashmir
* &quot;Bot&quot;, short for &quot;ubosot&quot;, the ordination hall of a Buddhist temple in Thailand
* Barn Owl Trust, a charity in Waterleat, Ashburton, Devon, England
* Bon Om Touk, the Cambodian Water Festival

== See also ==
* Bots (disambiguation)
* Bott (disambiguation)
* Break On Through (disambiguation)
* Burr Oak Township (disambiguation)
* Robot (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q223974" start="0" end="3" title="Bot" label="Bot"/>
<link wikidata="Q223974" start="7" end="10" title="Bot" label="BOT"/>
<link wikidata="Q870780" start="73" end="80" title="Chatbot" label="Chatbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q191865" start="138" end="150" title="Internet bot" label="Internet bot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306702" start="231" end="238" title="Spambot" label="Spambot"/>
<link wikidata="Q507703" start="300" end="323" title="IRC bot" label="Internet Relay Chat bot"/>
<link wikidata="Q11012" start="403" end="408" title="Robot" label="Robot"/>
<link wikidata="Q28136656" start="484" end="494" title="Social bot" label="Social bot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3687628" start="593" end="604" title="Twitter bot" label="Twitter bot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187338" start="687" end="701" title="Video game bot" label="Video game bot"/>
<link wikidata="Q85815517" start="746" end="759" title="Wikipedia bot" label="Wikipedia bot"/>
<link wikidata="Q219164" start="813" end="828" title="Zombie (computing)" label="Zombie computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9614" start="890" end="896" title="tongue" label="tongue"/>
<link wikidata="Q27485" start="940" end="946" title="botfly" label="botfly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7645976" start="954" end="978" title="Borderline ovarian tumor" label="Borderline ovarian tumor"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199678" start="1017" end="1036" title="Bni Ounjel Tafraout" label="Bni Ounjel Tafraout"/>
<link wikidata="Q589488" start="1106" end="1120" title="Bot, Tarragona" label="Bot, Tarragona"/>
<link wikidata="Q3644396" start="1140" end="1149" title="Bot River" label="Bot River"/>
<link wikidata="Q963" start="1166" end="1174" title="Botswana" label="Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q46395" start="1203" end="1231" title="British Overseas Territories" label="British Overseas Territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q12723820" start="1308" end="1326" title="Bucharest Old Town" label="Bucharest Old Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q4699570" start="1341" end="1355" title="Ajaw B&amp;#x27;ot" label="Ajaw B&amp;#x27;ot"/>
<link wikidata="Q816446" start="1403" end="1410" title="Ben Bot" label="Ben Bot"/>
<link wikidata="Q97014746" start="1431" end="1440" title="G. W. Bot" label="G. W. Bot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463483" start="1504" end="1514" title="Jeanne Bot" label="Jeanne Bot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200828" start="1523" end="1539" title="supercentenarian" label="supercentenarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736008" start="1542" end="1550" title="Theo Bot" label="Theo Bot"/>
<link wikidata="Q706533" start="1599" end="1613" title="Bank of Taiwan" label="Bank of Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670842" start="1656" end="1672" title="Bank of Tanzania" label="Bank of Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q806706" start="1728" end="1744" title="Bank of Thailand" label="Bank of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q4929591" start="1777" end="1796" title="Blue Orange Theatre" label="Blue Orange Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q25245230" start="1846" end="1864" title="Bolt On Technology" label="Bolt On Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4670875" start="1909" end="1926" title="The Bank of Tokyo" label="The Bank of Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q937801" start="2049" end="2058" title="Alienware" label="Alienware"/>
<link wikidata="Q192796" start="2076" end="2092" title="Balance of trade" label="Balance of trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q831675" start="2157" end="2179" title="Build–operate–transfer" label="Build–operate–transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q241869" start="2223" end="2239" title="Bobby Orr Trophy" label="Bobby Orr Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q30639074" start="2322" end="2346" title="Brava Opening Tournament" label="Brava Opening Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q406896" start="2413" end="2425" title="Air Botswana" label="Air Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q974707" start="2440" end="2454" title="Bosset Airport" label="Bosset Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4980908" start="2498" end="2514" title="Bryn Oer Tramway" label="Bryn Oer Tramway"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2629" end="2645" title="List of The Transformers episodes#Season 2 (1985–86)" label="The Transformers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948390" start="2654" end="2663" title="Bot caste" label="Bot caste"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948757" start="2756" end="2767" title="Boto people" label="Boto people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897071" start="2837" end="2843" title="ubosot" label="ubosot"/>
<link wikidata="Q16838128" start="2906" end="2920" title="Barn Owl Trust" label="Barn Owl Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209940" start="2974" end="2985" title="Bon Om Touk" label="Bon Om Touk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294894" start="3034" end="3055" title="Bots (disambiguation)" label="Bots (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q54943608" start="3058" end="3079" title="Bott (disambiguation)" label="Bott (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959290" start="3082" end="3115" title="Break On Through (disambiguation)" label="Break On Through (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016885" start="3118" end="3152" title="Burr Oak Township (disambiguation)" label="Burr Oak Township (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q227688" start="3155" end="3177" title="Robot (disambiguation)" label="Robot (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="140275" wikidata="Q388127" url="?curid=140275" title="Báthory family">
<text>The House of Báthory () was an old and powerful Hungarian noble family of the Gutkeled clan. The family rose to significant influence in Central Europe during the Late Middle Ages, holding high military, administrative and ecclesiastical positions in the Kingdom of Hungary. In the early modern period, the family produced several Princes of Transylvania and one King of Poland and Grand Duke of Lithuania (Stephen Báthory).

==Origins==

The Báthory family belonged to the &quot;Gutkeled&quot;, a clan of Hungarian nobles, which traced its descent to the Swabian brothers &quot;Gut&quot; and &quot;Kelad&quot;, who immigrated into Hungary from the castle &quot;Stof&quot; (probably Staufen im Breisgau or Hohenstaufen in Württemberg) during the reign of King Peter (reigned 1038–1046), who himself was partly of Venetian descent.

In 1279, King Ladislaus IV rewarded Andrew&#x27;s brother Hodos
and Andrew&#x27;s sons George (d. 1307), Benedict (d. 1321) and Briccius (d. 1322) for their military services by granting them Bátor in the county of Szabolcs. Bátor had been the estate of Vajda son of Lángos, who had married a relative of Andrew but died without issue.

In 1310, Bátor came into the sole possession of Briccius when he reached an agreement with his nephew Michael and his cousin Vid to divide the joint possessions. After this, Briccius and his descendants named themselves &quot;Báthory&quot;, i.e. &quot;of Bátor&quot;.

==Branches==

The family divided into two major branches, which descended from the sons and grandsons of
Briccius:

The elder branch of the family, the Báthory of Somlyó were descended from John, Count of Szatmár, the first-born son of Briccius, through his eldest son Ladislaus (died 1373). Ladislaus, Count of Szabolcs, married Anna Meggyesi and received Somlyó as dowry. Ladislaus&#x27; younger brother George II is the ancestor of the Simolin family, later called Báthory of Simolin (see below). A further division occurred under the great-grandsons of Ladislaus (latter half of the 15th century): John and Stephen dropped the name Báthory and founded the Szaniszlófi family, while Nikolaus continued the Somlyó branch.

The younger branch of the family, the Báthory of Ecsed, were descended from Luke, the youngest son of Briccius. Luke possessed wide estates in Szatmár and was granted by King Charles Robert the lordship of Ecsed, where he built the castle called &quot;Hűség&quot; (loyalty).
This branch, since they retained the possession of Bátor, are sometimes called &quot;of Bátor&quot; or, as the younger branch, &quot;Nyírbátor&quot; (New Bathory).

==Legend and coats of arms==
A legendary account, placing the Báthorys&#x27; origin in the year 900 (preceding the advent of the Gutkeled clan), relates how a god-fearing warrior called Vitus (a namesake of a member of the first generation of the Gutkeled clan) set out to fight a dragon, which lurked in the swamps next to the castle of Ecsed (actually built only in the 14th century) and harassed the countryside. Vitus killed it with three thrusts of his lance and as a reward received the castle. The grateful people honoured him with the names &quot;Báthory&quot;, meaning &quot;good hero&quot;, and &quot;animus magnanimus&quot;. In Hungarian the word &quot;bátor&quot; means &quot;brave&quot;.

The Báthory coat of arms, granted in 1325 to the sons of Briccius, was styled in reference to this legend: three horizontally placed teeth surrounded by a dragon biting its own tail,
the surrounding dragon being the emblem of the Order of the Dragon.

==Further history==
The Ecsed branch first rises to prominence with the sons of Luke&#x27;s grandson John V. His eldest son Bartholomew I fell in 1432 fighting against the Hussites. The second son, Stephen III rose to become Palatine of Hungary and in 1444 fell in the Battle of Varna as flag-bearer of Władysław, King of Poland and Hungary. He had also received the castle Bujak from King Albert of Habsburg.

Of Stephen&#x27;s six sons, Ladislaus V (d. 1474) was supreme count of the counties Szatmár and Zaránd, the second Andrew III (d. 1495) was confirmed in his possession of Bujak. The third son, Stephen V (d. 1493) excelled as a military commander and was made Voivode of Transylvania, the first of a long line of Báthory rulers of that country.

The youngest son, Nicolaus III (d. 1506), bishop first of Syrmia and after 1474 of Vác, excelled as a renaissance scholar and served as counselor to King Matthias Corvinus.

Stephen VII first proved himself as Count of Temesvár and in 1519 was elected Palatine of Hungary, as which he had to contend with the opposition of the nobility. In 1526, he fought in the disastrous Battle of Mohács against the Ottomans, in which King Louis II fell.

After the harsh and fierce battle, Hungary was torn apart by the conflict between the rival royal claims. The two branches of the family positioned themselves on the opposing sides of the conflict. The Ecsed branch commonly sided with the Habsburgs: Stephen VII, who had escaped the battle, fled with Louis&#x27; widow to Pozsony (now Bratislava), where he organized the election of Ferdinand of Austria as King of Hungary. In the 1550s, when Ferdinand briefly gained control of Transylvania in 1551, he installed Stephen&#x27;s nephew Bonaventura as his lieutenant to govern the country.

The Somlyó branch, on the other hand, supported John Zápolya, whom the greater part of the Hungarian nobility had elected King. Zápolya appointed Stephen VIII Voivode of Transylvania, which he governed until his death in 1534. Later, the interest of the Zápolyas were represented at the Habsburg court by the Voivode&#x27;s son Stephen IX, who would go on to become Prince of Transylvania and King of Poland.

Impressed by Stephen, George VI Báthory, of the Ecsed branch, was persuaded to change his allegiance from the Habsburgs to Zápolya, for which the Habsburg king deprived him of his castle Bujak. George strengthened his alliance to Stephen by marrying his sister Anna, uniting the branches. Anna Báthory was the widow of the last descendant of the Dragfi family and George now seized the castles of the Dragfi. Since the Dragfi estates were legally due to the crown, the Habsburgs forced George to yield the castles and withdrew to Csitsva in Zemplén County.

George and Anna Báthory produced the most infamous member of the family, Elizabeth, a widow Countess who was eventually tried and found guilty in a show trial of murdering hundreds of young peasant girls over the course of twenty years. She was sentenced to life imprisonment in one of the Báthory castles. According to the opinions of a majority of historians, legends such as her bathing in the blood of the young women were based on later rumors; the charges themselves were most likely false, trumped up in order to steal her lands from her. Some scholars have suggested that she served as one of Bram Stoker&#x27;s influences for writing the novel &quot;Dracula&quot;, but the evidence to support this is slim.

===Notable members of the Somlyó branch===

*Stephen VIII Báthory (1477–1534), Voivode of Transylvania.
*Stephen IX Báthory (1533–1586), youngest son of Stephen VIII, Voivode (and later Prince) of Transylvania and King of Poland and Grand Duke of Lithuania.
*Christopher Báthory (1530–1581), son of Stephen Báthory of Somlyó and elder brother of the King of Poland, administered Transylvania as voivode during the absence of his brother.
*Sigismund Báthory (1572–1613), son of Christopher, Prince of Transylvania.
*Cardinal Andrew Báthory (1562/63–1599), cousin of Sigismund, Prince of Transylvania, Grand Master of the Order of the Dragon.
*Gabriel I Báthory (1589–1613), nephew of Andrew, Prince of Transylvania.
*Sophia Báthory (died 1680), niece of Gabriel Báthory, married to George II Rákóczi uniting the families of the Báthory and the Rákóczi, supported the Counter-Reformation.

===Notable members of the Ecsed branch===
*Stephen III Báthory (died 1444), Palatine of Hungary
*Stephen V Báthory (died 1493), Voivode of Transylvania
*Barbara Báthory, daughter of Andrew III, married Palatine Emericus de Perén
*George V Báthory, son of Andrew III, Agazonum regalium magister, supreme count of Sümegh
*Stephen VII Báthory (died 1530), son of Andrew III, Hungarian commander, Palatine of Hungary
*Andrew IV Báthory, son of Andrew III, Ban of Belgrad, supreme count of Szatmár, married Catherine of Rozgon, which brought him the castles of Csitsva, Cserép, Rozgon and Thora.
*Bonaventura Báthory (also called Andrew by his soldiers) (d. 1566), first-born son of Andrew IV, supreme count of Szatmár and Szabolcs, later &quot;tabernicorum regalium magister&quot; and royal judge. He married twice without having issue.
*Nicolaus VI Báthory (died 1585), son of Andrew IV, a royal judge, he is described as &quot;a man of rare honesty, powerful in possessions and influence east of the river Theiss&quot;, he died after falling from a chariot.
*George VI Báthory, son of Andrew IV, turned on the Habsburgs. Father of Elizabeth Báthory.
*Stephen XII Báthory (died 1605), son of George VI, royal judge in the counties Sümegh and Szatmár and supreme count of Szabolcs, opened the doors of his castle Ecsed to Stephen Bocskay in his rebellion against the Habsburg, dies shortly afterward.
*Gabriel Báthory, the younger brother of Stephen XII, was the last male member of the Ecsed line. It is unclear whether he died before or after his sisters Elizabeth and Sophia.
*Elizabeth Báthory (died 1614), daughter of George VI and through her mother, niece of the Polish King Stephen Báthory. Descendant of both the Ecsed and Somlyó branches of the Bathory family. Ferenc Nádasdy&#x27;s wife, and after his death, the wealth and properties were inherited by her.

==Báthory of Simolin==

Another branch of the family are the Báthory of Simolin family, which was named after their estate &quot;Simony&quot; (or &quot;Simolin&quot;). They descended from George II, the younger son of John I, through the George&#x27;s grandson Michael. In the 15th century, Michael&#x27;s brothers George and Ladislaus, who both died without issue, had sold their heritage to the then-head of the Somlyó branch, Nicolaus. The Simolin family possessed large estates in Prussia and Courland and members served the Russian Empresses Elizabeth and Catherine as diplomats. In the 19th century, long after the demise of the other branches, the family claimed name and title of &quot;Counts Báthory&quot;, since their ancestor Michael had never consented to the sale conducted by his brothers, and in 1852 the Russian government confirmed the legitimacy of their claims.

==See also==
*List of titled noble families in the Kingdom of Hungary
*Bakunin family

==Notes==
==Literature==
*Craft, Kimberly, &quot;Infamous Lady: The True Story of Countess Erzsébet Báthory.&quot; (2009). .
*Farin, Michael, &quot;Heroine des Grauens. Elisabeth Báthory&quot;. Munich: P. Kirchheim, 2003. .
*Wertner, Moritz, &quot;Urgeschlechter in Siebenbürgen.&quot;, in &quot;Archiv des Vereins für siebenbürgische Landeskunde&quot;. Neue Folge, Bd. 29, Heft 1 (1899), Hermannstadt 1899, pp. 156–235.

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q388127" start="4" end="20" title="Báthory family" label="House of Báthory"/>
<link wikidata="Q927915" start="48" end="70" title="Hungarian nobility" label="Hungarian noble family"/>
<link wikidata="Q722113" start="78" end="86" title="Gutkeled" label="Gutkeled"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="137" end="151" title="Central Europe" label="Central Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q212976" start="163" end="179" title="Late Middle Ages" label="Late Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q171150" start="255" end="273" title="Kingdom of Hungary" label="Kingdom of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308718" start="282" end="301" title="early modern period" label="early modern period"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244362" start="331" end="354" title="Prince of Transylvania" label="Princes of Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q193360" start="363" end="377" title="King of Poland" label="King of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2639920" start="382" end="405" title="Grand Duke of Lithuania" label="Grand Duke of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q54030" start="407" end="422" title="Stephen Báthory" label="Stephen Báthory"/>
<link wikidata="Q722113" start="480" end="488" title="Gutkeled" label="Gutkeled"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="506" end="515" title="Hungary" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812551" start="556" end="562" title="Swabia" label="Swabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q528062" start="683" end="702" title="Staufen, Germany" label="Staufen im Breisgau"/>
<link wikidata="Q130875" start="706" end="718" title="Hohenstaufen" label="Hohenstaufen"/>
<link wikidata="Q159626" start="722" end="733" title="Württemberg" label="Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q314218" start="755" end="765" title="Peter Urseolo of Hungary" label="King Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="813" end="821" title="Venice" label="Venetian"/>
<link wikidata="Q156147" start="846" end="858" title="Ladislaus IV of Hungary" label="Ladislaus IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q132531721" start="890" end="895" title="Hodos Gutkeled" label="Hodos"/>
<link wikidata="Q853772" start="960" end="968" title="Briccius Báthory" label="Briccius"/>
<link wikidata="Q755686" start="1024" end="1029" title="Nyírbátor" label="Bátor"/>
<link wikidata="Q226024" start="1047" end="1055" title="Szabolcs County" label="Szabolcs"/>
<link wikidata="Q853772" start="1543" end="1551" title="Briccius Báthory" label="Briccius"/>
<link wikidata="Q266623" start="1643" end="1650" title="Szatmár" label="Szatmár"/>
<link wikidata="Q226024" start="1750" end="1758" title="Szabolcs County" label="Szabolcs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4419685" start="1906" end="1924" title="Von Simolin" label="Báthory of Simolin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1930" end="1935" title="Báthory#B.C3.A1thory of Simolin" label="below"/>
<link wikidata="Q266623" start="2306" end="2313" title="Szatmár" label="Szatmár"/>
<link wikidata="Q213061" start="2338" end="2352" title="Charles I of Hungary" label="Charles Robert"/>
<link wikidata="Q610683" start="2369" end="2374" title="Ecsed" label="Ecsed"/>
<link wikidata="Q610683" start="2941" end="2946" title="Ecsed" label="Ecsed"/>
<link wikidata="Q9067" start="3242" end="3251" title="Hungarian language" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="3317" end="3329" title="coat of arms" label="coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q725095" start="3535" end="3554" title="Order of the Dragon" label="Order of the Dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q478301" start="3729" end="3737" title="Hussite Wars" label="Hussites"/>
<link wikidata="Q853634" start="3755" end="3766" title="Stephen III Báthory" label="Stephen III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077786" start="3782" end="3801" title="Palatine (Kingdom of Hungary)" label="Palatine of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q32832" start="3826" end="3841" title="Battle of Varna" label="Battle of Varna"/>
<link wikidata="Q54053" start="3860" end="3897" title="Władysław III of Poland" label="Władysław, King of Poland and Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q157112" start="3947" end="3965" title="Albert II of Germany" label="Albert of Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q266623" start="4052" end="4059" title="Szatmár" label="Szatmár"/>
<link wikidata="Q687184" start="4161" end="4170" title="Stephen V Báthory" label="Stephen V"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244362" start="4227" end="4250" title="Prince of Transylvania" label="Voivode of Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309492" start="4371" end="4377" title="Syrmia" label="Syrmia"/>
<link wikidata="Q207408" start="4396" end="4399" title="Vác" label="Vác"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="4415" end="4426" title="renaissance" label="renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q188634" start="4467" end="4484" title="Matthias Corvinus" label="Matthias Corvinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q725499" start="4487" end="4498" title="Stephen VII Báthory" label="Stephen VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077786" start="4565" end="4584" title="Palatine (Kingdom of Hungary)" label="Palatine of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q178510" start="4687" end="4703" title="Battle of Mohács" label="Battle of Mohács"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="4716" end="4724" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottomans"/>
<link wikidata="Q157092" start="4740" end="4748" title="Louis II of Hungary" label="Louis II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780" start="5091" end="5101" title="Bratislava" label="Bratislava"/>
<link wikidata="Q150611" start="5139" end="5159" title="Ferdinand I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Ferdinand of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5292" end="5303" title="Bonaventura Báthory" label="Bonaventura"/>
<link wikidata="Q32607" start="5394" end="5406" title="John Zápolya" label="John Zápolya"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244362" start="5505" end="5528" title="Prince of Transylvania" label="Voivode of Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q54030" start="5674" end="5684" title="Stephen Báthory" label="Stephen IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244362" start="5712" end="5734" title="Prince of Transylvania" label="Prince of Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q193360" start="5739" end="5753" title="King of Poland" label="King of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070534" start="6297" end="6311" title="Zemplén County" label="Zemplén County"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6314" end="6320" title="George Báthory" label="George"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6325" end="6337" title="Anna Báthory" label="Anna Báthory"/>
<link wikidata="Q170846" start="6387" end="6396" title="Elizabeth Báthory" label="Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q36184" start="6915" end="6926" title="Bram Stoker" label="Bram Stoker"/>
<link wikidata="Q41542" start="6973" end="6980" title="Dracula" label="Dracula"/>
<link wikidata="Q647430" start="7076" end="7096" title="Stephen VIII Báthory" label="Stephen VIII Báthory"/>
<link wikidata="Q54030" start="7136" end="7154" title="Stephen Báthory" label="Stephen IX Báthory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244362" start="7198" end="7240" title="Prince of Transylvania" label="Voivode (and later Prince) of Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q193360" start="7245" end="7259" title="List of Polish monarchs" label="King of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q692301" start="7264" end="7287" title="List of Lithuanian rulers" label="Grand Duke of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q532426" start="7290" end="7309" title="Christopher Báthory" label="Christopher Báthory"/>
<link wikidata="Q368154" start="7470" end="7487" title="Sigismund Báthory" label="Sigismund Báthory"/>
<link wikidata="Q472464" start="7546" end="7569" title="Andrew Báthory" label="Cardinal Andrew Báthory"/>
<link wikidata="Q725095" start="7651" end="7670" title="Order of the Dragon" label="Order of the Dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q591681" start="7673" end="7690" title="Gabriel Báthory" label="Gabriel I Báthory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7747" end="7761" title="Sophia Báthory" label="Sophia Báthory"/>
<link wikidata="Q591681" start="7784" end="7799" title="Gabriel Báthory" label="Gabriel Báthory"/>
<link wikidata="Q195625" start="7812" end="7829" title="George II Rákóczi" label="George II Rákóczi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064861" start="7874" end="7881" title="Rákóczi" label="Rákóczi"/>
<link wikidata="Q128168" start="7897" end="7916" title="Counter-Reformation" label="Counter-Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q853634" start="7962" end="7981" title="Stephen III Báthory" label="Stephen III Báthory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077786" start="7995" end="8014" title="Palatine (Kingdom of Hungary)" label="Palatine of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q687184" start="8016" end="8033" title="Stephen V Báthory" label="Stephen V Báthory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244362" start="8047" end="8070" title="Prince of Transylvania" label="Voivode of Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8072" end="8087" title="Barbara Báthory" label="Barbara Báthory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8149" end="8165" title="George V Báthory" label="George V Báthory"/>
<link wikidata="Q725499" start="8239" end="8258" title="Stephen VII Báthory" label="Stephen VII Báthory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077786" start="8312" end="8331" title="Palatine (Kingdom of Hungary)" label="Palatine of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8333" end="8350" title="Andrew IV Báthory" label="Andrew IV Báthory"/>
<link wikidata="Q266623" start="8404" end="8411" title="Szatmár" label="Szatmár"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8511" end="8530" title="Bonaventura Báthory" label="Bonaventura Báthory"/>
<link wikidata="Q266623" start="8625" end="8632" title="Szatmár" label="Szatmár"/>
<link wikidata="Q226024" start="8637" end="8645" title="Szabolcs County" label="Szabolcs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8753" end="8772" title="Nicolaus VI Báthory" label="Nicolaus VI Báthory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8976" end="8993" title="George VI Báthory" label="George VI Báthory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9002" end="9011" title="Andrew IV" label="Andrew IV"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9068" end="9087" title="Stephen XII Báthory" label="Stephen XII Báthory"/>
<link wikidata="Q316530" start="9237" end="9252" title="Stephen Bocskay" label="Stephen Bocskay"/>
<link wikidata="Q170846" start="9495" end="9512" title="Elizabeth Báthory" label="Elizabeth Báthory"/>
<link wikidata="Q964147" start="9686" end="9700" title="Ferenc Nádasdy" label="Ferenc Nádasdy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4419685" start="9857" end="9864" title="Von Simolin" label="Simolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q156038" start="10282" end="10290" title="Duchy of Courland" label="Courland"/>
<link wikidata="Q130752" start="10332" end="10341" title="Elizabeth of Russia" label="Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q36450" start="10346" end="10355" title="Catherine II of Russia" label="Catherine"/>
<link wikidata="Q48743555" start="10681" end="10736" title="List of titled noble families in the Kingdom of Hungary" label="List of titled noble families in the Kingdom of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4076122" start="10738" end="10752" title="Bakunin family" label="Bakunin family"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="140278" wikidata="Q683281" url="?curid=140278" title="Betfair">
<text>Betfair is a British gambling company founded in 2000. Its product offering also includes sports betting, online casino, online poker, and online bingo. Business operations are led from its headquarters in London, alongside satellite offices in Ceuta, Dublin, Leeds, and Malta. In February 2016, Betfair merged with Paddy Power to create Flutter Entertainment.

==History==
The company was founded in June 2000, by Andrew Black and Edward Wray. Softbank purchased 23% of Betfair in early April 2006, valuing the company at £1.5 billion. In December 2006, Betfair completed the purchase of the horseracing publishing company Timeform (which traded under the name Portway Press Ltd).

Betfair was the first betting company to sponsor an English football team, featuring on the kit of Fulham in the 2002–03 season before the Gambling Act 2005 prohibited the industry from advertising on television and radio.

In March 2007, Betfair launched its own Betfair Radio service, available via its website, on the telephone and elsewhere. This has now become Timeform Radio, broadcasting horse racing commentary and results. On 27 January 2009, Betfair announced the purchase of the TVG Network in the United States from Macrovision US$50 million as part of Macrovision&#x27;s dissolving of TV Guide&#x27;s assets.

In November 2009, Betfair announced a deal with the New York Racing Association that allows Betfair&#x27;s customers to start wagering immediately on Aqueduct&#x27;s thoroughbreeding races. Betfair floated on the London Stock Exchange with a stock symbol of BET on 22 October 2010 at £13, valuing the company at £1.4bn ($2.2bn).

In March 2011, the company moved some of its operations to Gibraltar to reduce the amount they paid in tax. In May 2012, Betfair launched a Sportsbook (fixed-odds betting) service to compete with traditional bookmakers.

In August 2014, Net Entertainment NE AB entered into a partnership with Betfair to expand its reach into the market in the United Kingdom. It was announced in September 2015 that Paddy Power and Betfair had agreed terms for a merger. The transaction was structured as an acquisition of Betfair by Paddy Power and the enlarged entity, named Paddy Power Betfair, is based in Dublin. The merger was completed on 2 February 2016.

==Operations==
As of 2013, Betfair had over 4 million customers (1.1 million active customers) and a turnover in excess of £50 million a week. The company employed 1,800 people worldwide.

Betfair claims on average 20 per cent better odds than those offered by a traditional bookmaker. Betfair charges a commission on all winning bets, the market base rate is set at between 5 and 7 percent of the net winnings for most markets, depending on the country you reside, although according to how much a client wagers on the site, it is possible to reduce the base rate by as much as 60%.

However, if a bettor on the website is efficiently profitable Betfair will require them to pay at least 20% and up to 60% of gross profits in total charges after they have participated in 250 markets. These charges are non-refundable if the bettor&#x27;s account subsequently goes or reverts to an unprofitable status.

In late autumn of 2005, Betfair finalised a deal that began in early summer, to purchase the online poker site &quot;PokerChamps.com&quot;, which the company will integrate into its network, replacing a poker arm that previously used gaming technology software from CryptoLogic Inc.

In a press release, the company&#x27;s then poker head, Ben Fried, stated: &quot;Having our own poker software puts us in command of our own destiny. It means we can react quickly to customer feedback and continue to develop an innovative, community focused product. We are confident that we are laying the foundations of a market leading poker room&quot;.

Cash 4 Clubs is a sports funding scheme set up and funded by Betfair. The scheme provides sports grants to local community sports clubs.

===Overseas business===
Betfair owns subsidiaries in the United States. The main company is FanDuel TV, which is dedicated to horse racing, broadcasting live races as well as race analysis, interviews, handicapping tips and features. It was acquired in 2009 for $50m. Betfair also has a subsidiary called BetfairCasino.com which is a New Jersey licensed provider of online gaming products.

In February 2014, Betfair were granted two online gambling licenses by the State Gambling Commission of Bulgaria.

On 7 April 2014, Betfair launched its betfair exchange in Italy. In May 2016, it launched a betting exchange in New Jersey, United States.

In March 2018, Betfair successfully trialled an auto-cash out feature with its live betting customers in the UK and Ireland. The features allow players to lock in their chosen profit.

In December 2021, Betfair announced the launch of their online casino overseas. Although already established within the online sports betting industry, the company launched its online casino available online to consumers residing in the UK, New Jersey, Argentina, Mexico, New Zealand, Australia, Iceland, Ireland and select states in the US.

====Australia====

In November 2005 the Tasmanian government announced a deal to license Betfair Australia in the state. It was the second licence awarded to Betfair outside the United Kingdom, the first being in Malta with subsequent licences following in Austria and Germany, and Tasmania now receives substantial tax revenues. However it infuriated the established monopolistic totalisators and bookmakers (due to loss of revenue) and governments (due to loss of taxes) in the other Australian states. A ban on the use of betting exchanges took effect in Western Australia on 29 January 2007, with Betfair successfully claiming this new law violated the Constitution of Australia.

In a unanimous verdict by the High Court of Australia on 27 March 2008, the two provisions of the legislation, purporting to ban Western Australians from using a betting exchange and prohibiting an unauthorised business from using Western Australian race lists, were declared invalid as they applied to Betfair. The provisions were characterised as imposing a burden on interstate trade that was protectionist in nature and therefore contravened section 92 of the constitution. The Court decision suggests, but leaves open, that a more narrowly drafted ban may have been allowed (e.g., banning people in Western Australia from laying &quot;lose bets&quot; on events held in Western Australia).

In the 2012 High Court case of &quot;Betfair Pty Limited v Racing New South Wales&quot;, Betfair&#x27;s appeal, against a newly enacted fee to access New South Welsh vital race field information, was rejected. The Court held that the relevant law would have no discriminatory or protectionist effect on interstate trade, thereby complying with section 92 of the Constitution of Australia, and that Betfair had not proven that the fee would cause significant economic damage (not to the extent of the appellants in &quot;Castlemaine Tooheys Ltd v South Australia&quot;).

In August 2014, Betfair completed the sale of their 50% stake in Betfair Australia to venture partner Crown Resorts, one of Australia&#x27;s largest gaming and entertainment groups.

==Chief executive officers==
In October 2005, chief executive Stephen Hill announced his resignation when the board decided not to proceed with plans for a stock market flotation, the investors holding out for a higher valuation. In January 2006, Chief Technology Officer David Yu was appointed Chief executive of Betfair. In December 2011, after overseeing the company&#x27;s 2010 Initial public offering Yu resigned his position. Breon Corcoran, who was formerly employed by Paddy Power, was appointed in August 2012.

==Sponsorship==
Betfair has sponsored many sporting events, teams and organisations, including Barcelona F.C. and Conmebol – South American football&#x27;s governing body. It is currently the main shirt sponsor of Cruzeiro Esporte Clube and CR Vasco da Gama.

==Controversies==

===Illegal dividends===
In its 2014 annual report, the betting firm admitted that its final dividend in 2011 and the interim and final dividends for 2012 and 2013 were paid erroneously because, by law, the &quot;company did not have sufficient distributable reserves to make those distributions and so they should not have been paid by the company to its shareholders&quot;. Betfair also admitted that the purchase of 6.5 million shares in April 2012 was executed when the &quot;company did not have sufficient distributable reserves&quot;.

===Data theft===
In September 2011, Betfair admitted that it had concealed the theft of confidential customer data from the company&#x27;s 2010 share prospectus. The theft included the payment card details of most of its customers, &quot;3.15m account usernames with encrypted security questions&quot;, &quot;2.9m usernames with one or more addresses&quot; and &quot;89,744 account usernames with bank account details&quot;. The company further stated that it had informed the Serious Organised Crime Agency of the incident which happened on 14 March 2010 but was not discovered by Betfair data security until 20 May that year.

===In play betting concerns===
Betfair offer in play betting on a variety of horseracing events. There has been some controversy over alleged broadcast delays of up to five seconds.

Among the bettors on Betfair&#x27;s exchange are companies that place high-speed automated bets using predictive models. Some of these companies use courtsiding data transmitted directly from agents located at the event, giving them an edge over recreational punters who do not receive the latest scores as quickly. The practice drew widespread scrutiny after one such agent, working for a company established by former Betfair employees, was arrested at the 2014 Australian Open; charges were later dropped.

===Advertising===
In September 2009, the Advertising Standards Authority (ASA) banned Betfair from running two billboard adverts which claimed that their Starting Price (SP) offered 40% better returns, on average than the industry SP. The ASA found that only 10% of the bets used by Betfair in their calculations yielded at least 40% better returns than the industry SP.

In February 2011, the ASA banned another Betfair advert, that stated &quot;On Betfair, you cut out the middle man, which means you could win bigger&quot;. The regulator said that the description &quot;cutting out the middleman&quot; was ambiguous and misleading, because the site takes a commission fee on winnings, which could be perceived as a middleman role.

===Premium charge===
In September 2008, Betfair introduced a &quot;Premium Charge&quot; for wagerers whose winnings are particularly high compared to the amount of commission they pay. Specifically, members whose commission charges amount to less than 20% of their gross profits, and have placed bets in at least 250 markets, are required to pay the additional charge to make up the difference.

Though Betfair stated that the charge would only affect less than 0.5% of its members, it attracted criticism on its member forum and from the broader exchange betting community. According to &quot;The Guardian&quot;, the charge significantly changed the relationship between Betfair and its customers, as Betfair can no longer claim to be a neutral betting exchange &quot;where winners are welcome&quot; (its mantra for many years).
In June 2011 Betfair raised its Premium Charge to 60% for some customers, a move which was met by outrage.

===Sports integrity===
Betfair has noted that they have signed numerous information sharing agreements with governing bodies around the world, with whom they cooperate on matters if the latter suspects corruption to have taken place. Betfair has agreements with some thirty sports bodies, such as the Lawn Tennis Association and the British Horseracing Association, and has been instrumental in several high-profile investigations into suspicious betting.

In June 2010, high-profile racehorse owner and professional gambler Harry Findlay was banned by the British Horseracing Authority for using Betfair to bet against his own horse, Gullible Gordon.

At the disciplinary hearing into Findlay&#x27;s betting against Gullible Gordon, it was revealed that Findlay had been in financial difficulty and that Betfair had allowed him to use the account of a friend, racehorse owner Eammon Wilmott. In a further twist, the bets were actually made by Findlay &quot;associate&quot; Glenn Gill.

Betfair themselves condemned the punishing of Findlay, saying the punishment was not &quot;proportionate or consistent with similar offences in the past.&quot; Findlay had previously called himself &quot;a walking advert for Betfair.&quot;

===Winning bets voided===
In August 2007, Betfair took the unprecedented step of voiding all bets following a tennis match between Martin Arguello and Nikolay Davydenko because of suspicious betting patterns.

In December 2011, Betfair voided all in running bets on a race at Leopardstown after an automated customer reportedly laid the winning horse Voler La Vedette at odds of 28–1, even as the mare crossed the finish line. The controversy was described as &quot;devastating&quot; by Betfair CEO Stephen Morana, and it affected at least 200 customers who were refused more than £23M in winnings. Some of these customers are believed to be pursuing their case with the independent adjudication body IBAS, as Betfair no longer falls under the jurisdiction of the Gambling Commission since its move to Gibraltar in 2011.

In September 2011 Betfair refused to honour winning bets made by their customers on The Tote Jackpot bet at Newmarket Racecourse. Although funds were removed from customer accounts before the bets had won, the company claimed that due to &quot;technical issues in transmitting bets into the Tote pools in the last 10 minutes before the pool closed&quot;, they would not pay any winnings. Reportedly some small gamblers were deprived of wins of up to £16,000 apiece.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q683281" start="0" end="7" title="Betfair" label="Betfair"/>
<link wikidata="Q11416" start="21" end="37" title="Gambling" label="gambling company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506462" start="90" end="104" title="sports betting" label="sports betting"/>
<link wikidata="Q770881" start="106" end="119" title="online casino" label="online casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050367" start="121" end="133" title="online poker" label="online poker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094063" start="139" end="151" title="online bingo" label="online bingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="206" end="212" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q5823" start="245" end="250" title="Ceuta" label="Ceuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="252" end="258" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q39121" start="260" end="265" title="Leeds" label="Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="271" end="276" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3888718" start="316" end="327" title="Paddy Power" label="Paddy Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q23022611" start="338" end="359" title="Flutter Entertainment" label="Flutter Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4756363" start="415" end="427" title="Andrew Black (gambling entrepreneur)" label="Andrew Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q201653" start="445" end="453" title="Softbank" label="Softbank"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="523" end="524" title="GBP" label="£"/>
<link wikidata="Q3528974" start="624" end="632" title="Timeform" label="Timeform"/>
<link wikidata="Q18708" start="782" end="788" title="Fulham F.C." label="Fulham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5519686" start="822" end="839" title="Gambling Act 2005" label="Gambling Act 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672185" start="1173" end="1184" title="TVG Network" label="TVG Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q917002" start="1211" end="1222" title="Macrovision" label="Macrovision"/>
<link wikidata="Q917002" start="1248" end="1259" title="Macrovision" label="Macrovision"/>
<link wikidata="Q849887" start="1281" end="1289" title="TV Guide (magazine)" label="TV Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013899" start="1358" end="1385" title="New York Racing Association" label="New York Racing Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q171240" start="1519" end="1540" title="London Stock Exchange" label="London Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548784" start="1548" end="1560" title="stock symbol" label="stock symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410" start="1695" end="1704" title="Gibraltar" label="Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742026" start="1788" end="1806" title="fixed-odds betting" label="fixed-odds betting"/>
<link wikidata="Q3888718" start="2036" end="2047" title="Paddy Power" label="Paddy Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q23022611" start="2197" end="2216" title="Flutter Entertainment" label="Paddy Power Betfair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509347" start="2588" end="2598" title="Commission (remuneration)" label="commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050367" start="3282" end="3294" title="online poker" label="online poker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397" start="3441" end="3449" title="software" label="software"/>
<link wikidata="Q5190791" start="3455" end="3470" title="CryptoLogic Inc" label="CryptoLogic Inc"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672185" start="4061" end="4071" title="FanDuel TV" label="FanDuel TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="4303" end="4313" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="4464" end="4472" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112571" start="5183" end="5203" title="Government of Tasmania" label="Tasmanian government"/>
<link wikidata="Q22906722" start="5232" end="5249" title="Betfair Australia" label="Betfair Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="5321" end="5335" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="5356" end="5361" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q17118760" start="5524" end="5535" title="totalisator" label="totalisator"/>
<link wikidata="Q178712" start="5629" end="5645" title="Australian state" label="Australian state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144614" start="5800" end="5825" title="Constitution of Australia" label="Constitution of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4897418" start="5843" end="5850" title="Betfair Pty Limited v Western Australia" label="verdict"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358798" start="5858" end="5881" title="High Court of Australia" label="High Court of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7444660" start="6867" end="6910" title="section 92 of the Constitution of Australia" label="section 92 of the Constitution of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5050538" start="7043" end="7084" title="Castlemaine Tooheys Ltd v South Australia" label="Castlemaine Tooheys Ltd v South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029724" start="7196" end="7209" title="Crown Resorts" label="Crown Resorts"/>
<link wikidata="Q475000" start="7433" end="7445" title="stock market" label="stock market"/>
<link wikidata="Q683281" start="7549" end="7557" title="David Yu" label="David Yu"/>
<link wikidata="Q185142" start="7659" end="7682" title="Initial public offering" label="Initial public offering"/>
<link wikidata="Q20195098" start="7709" end="7723" title="Breon Corcoran" label="Breon Corcoran"/>
<link wikidata="Q3888718" start="7754" end="7765" title="Paddy Power" label="Paddy Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156" start="7893" end="7907" title="Barcelona F.C." label="Barcelona F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q58733" start="7912" end="7920" title="Conmebol" label="Conmebol"/>
<link wikidata="Q188277" start="8012" end="8034" title="Cruzeiro Esporte Clube" label="Cruzeiro Esporte Clube"/>
<link wikidata="Q5014111" start="8039" end="8055" title="CR Vasco da Gama" label="CR Vasco da Gama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914751" start="9096" end="9126" title="Serious Organised Crime Agency" label="Serious Organised Crime Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817258" start="9390" end="9405" title="broadcast delay" label="broadcast delay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239673" start="9533" end="9550" title="predictive modelling" label="predictive models"/>
<link wikidata="Q17002490" start="9580" end="9591" title="courtsiding" label="courtsiding"/>
<link wikidata="Q12780091" start="9890" end="9910" title="2014 Australian Open" label="2014 Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686747" start="9982" end="10013" title="Advertising Standards Authority (United Kingdom)" label="Advertising Standards Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485448" start="11722" end="11738" title="sport governing bodies" label="governing bodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925730" start="12171" end="12200" title="British Horseracing Authority" label="British Horseracing Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q191736" start="12993" end="13010" title="Nikolay Davydenko" label="Nikolay Davydenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493170" start="13118" end="13130" title="Leopardstown" label="Leopardstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q17148363" start="13543" end="13547" title="Independent Betting Adjudication Service" label="IBAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410" start="13644" end="13653" title="Gibraltar" label="Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q17029655" start="13748" end="13756" title="The Tote" label="The Tote"/>
<link wikidata="Q16998889" start="13772" end="13792" title="Newmarket Racecourse" label="Newmarket Racecourse"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="140279" wikidata="Q648607" url="?curid=140279" title="Local government areas of New South Wales">
<text>This is a list of local government areas (LGAs) in New South Wales, sorted by region. there were 128 local government areas in New South Wales, there are 33 local government areas in Greater Sydney and 95 local government areas amongst 12 regions of Regional New South Wales. All councils are listed below in alphabetical order by region. There is also the Unincorporated Far West Region which is not part of any local government area, in the sparsely inhabited Far West, and Lord Howe Island, which is also unincorporated but self-governed by the Lord Howe Island Board.

Norfolk Island Regional Council is also subject to the state-level legislation of New South Wales.

Local elections are held in New South Wales every four years. The most recent elections were held in September 2024.

== Maps ==

==Metropolitan LGAs==
===Greater Sydney===

====Metropolitan Sydney====
====Outer Metropolitan Sydney====
==Regional LGAs==
===Regional and Rural areas===

====Central Coast====
====Mid North Coast====
====Murray====
====Riverina====
====Greater Newcastle and Hunter====
Source:

====Illawarra====
====Northern Rivers====
====South Coast and Southern Inland====
====New England====
====Central West====
====Orana====
====Far West====
== Lord Mayoralties ==
There are four councils in NSW which whose office of Mayor has been elevated to Lord Mayor. The process requires that the Premier of the day write to the reigning monarch to request the ascent. 
== Former local government areas in New South Wales ==
==See also==

* List of local government areas in New South Wales
* Local government in Australia
* NSW Regional Organisations of Councils

== References ==
== External links ==
* New South Wales Office of Local Government Directory
* Map of Local Government Areas in New South Wales PDF
* Clickable map of New South Wales LGAs (New South Wales Department of Local Government)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q18481123" start="18" end="40" title="local government in Australia" label="local government areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="51" end="66" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q130283188" start="183" end="197" title="Greater Sydney" label="Greater Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179144" start="357" end="387" title="Unincorporated Far West Region" label="Unincorporated Far West Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066749" start="462" end="470" title="Far West, New South Wales" label="Far West"/>
<link wikidata="Q104784" start="476" end="492" title="Lord Howe Island" label="Lord Howe Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q269528" start="508" end="522" title="unincorporated area" label="unincorporated"/>
<link wikidata="Q109313214" start="548" end="570" title="Lord Howe Island Board" label="Lord Howe Island Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q55625401" start="573" end="604" title="Norfolk Island Regional Council" label="Norfolk Island Regional Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q119840910" start="751" end="789" title="2024 New South Wales local elections" label="elections were held in September 2024."/>
<link wikidata="Q2944411" start="963" end="976" title="Central Coast (New South Wales)" label="Central Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083808" start="985" end="1000" title="Mid North Coast" label="Mid North Coast"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1009" end="1015" title="Murray (New South Wales)" label="Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155625" start="1024" end="1032" title="Riverina" label="Riverina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638164" start="1063" end="1069" title="Hunter Region" label="Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q825302" start="1087" end="1096" title="Illawarra" label="Illawarra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3010637" start="1105" end="1120" title="Northern Rivers" label="Northern Rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069056" start="1129" end="1140" title="South Coast (New South Wales)" label="South Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467315" start="1169" end="1180" title="New England (New South Wales)" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069118" start="1189" end="1201" title="Central West (New South Wales)" label="Central West"/>
<link wikidata="Q7099450" start="1210" end="1215" title="Orana (New South Wales)" label="Orana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066749" start="1224" end="1232" title="Far West (New South Wales)" label="Far West"/>
<link wikidata="Q24521732" start="1526" end="1575" title="List of local government areas in New South Wales" label="List of local government areas in New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q18481123" start="1578" end="1607" title="Local government in Australia" label="Local government in Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7011769" start="1610" end="1648" title="NSW Regional Organisations of Councils" label="NSW Regional Organisations of Councils"/>
<link wikidata="Q17011314" start="1839" end="1885" title="New South Wales Department of Local Government" label="New South Wales Department of Local Government"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="140281" wikidata="Q902410" url="?curid=140281" title="Deregulation">
<text>Deregulation is the process of removing or reducing state regulations, typically in the economic sphere. It is the repeal of governmental regulation of the economy. It became common in advanced industrial economies in the 1970s and 1980s, as a result of new trends in economic thinking about the inefficiencies of government regulation, and the risk that regulatory agencies would be controlled by the regulated industry to its benefit, and thereby hurt consumers and the wider economy. Economic regulations were promoted during the Gilded Age, in which progressive reforms were claimed as necessary to limit externalities like corporate abuse, unsafe child labor, monopolization, and pollution, and to mitigate boom and bust cycles. Around the late 1970s, such reforms were deemed burdensome on economic growth and many politicians espousing neoliberalism started promoting deregulation.

The stated rationale for deregulation is often that fewer and simpler regulations will lead to raised levels of competitiveness, therefore higher productivity, more efficiency and lower prices overall. Opposition to deregulation may involve apprehension regarding environmental pollution and environmental quality standards (such as the removal of regulations on hazardous materials), financial uncertainty, and constraining monopolies.

Regulatory reform is a parallel development alongside deregulation. Regulatory reform refers to organized and ongoing programs to review regulations with a view to minimizing, simplifying, and making them more cost effective. Such efforts, given impetus by the Regulatory Flexibility Act of 1980, are embodied in the United States Office of Management and Budget&#x27;s Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs, and the United Kingdom&#x27;s Better Regulation Commission. Cost–benefit analysis is frequently used in such reviews. In addition, there have been regulatory innovations, usually suggested by economists, such as emissions trading.

Deregulation can be distinguished from privatization, which transfers state-owned businesses to the private sector.

== By country ==
=== Argentina ===
Argentina underwent heavy economic deregulation, privatization, and had a fixed exchange rate during the Menem administration (1989–1999). In December 2001, Paul Krugman compared Enron with Argentina, claiming that both were experiencing economic collapse due to excessive deregulation. Two months later, Herbert Inhaber claimed that Krugman confused correlation with causation, and neither collapse was due to excessive deregulation.

=== Australia ===
Having announced a wide range of deregulatory policies, Labor Prime Minister Bob Hawke announced the policy of &quot;Minimum Effective Regulation&quot; in 1986. This introduced now-familiar requirements for &quot;regulatory impact statements&quot;, but compliance by governmental agencies took many years. The labor market under the Hawke/Keating governments operated under the Prices and Incomes Accord. In the mid-90s John Howard&#x27;s Liberal Party began deregulation of the labor market with the Workplace Relations Act 1996, going much further in 2005 through its WorkChoices policy. However, this was reversed under the following Rudd Labor government.

=== Brazil ===
After Dilma&#x27;s impeachment, Michel Temer introduced a labor reform, besides allowing up to 100% of foreign capital on Brazilian air companies and giving more protection to state-owned enterprises from political pressure.
Bolsonaro administration also promoted deregulations (even the expression &quot;Bolsonomics&quot; was created), such as Economic Freedom Law, Natural Gas Law, Basic Sanitation Legal Framework, besides allowing the direct sale of ethanol by fuel stations and opening rail transport industry to private investment. and deregulating the use of foreign currency.

=== Canada ===


Natural gas is deregulated in most of the country, with the exception of some Atlantic provinces and some pockets like Vancouver Island and Medicine Hat. Most of this deregulation happened in the mid-1980s. Comparison shopping websites operate in some of these jurisdictions, particularly Ontario, Alberta and British Columbia. The other provinces are small markets and have not attracted suppliers. Customers have the choice of purchasing from a local distribution company (LDC) or a deregulated supplier. In most provinces the LDC is not allowed to offer a term contract, just a variable price based on the spot market. LDC prices are changed either monthly or quarterly.

Ontario began deregulation of electricity supply in 2002, but pulled back temporarily due to voter and consumer backlash at the resulting price volatility. The government is still searching for a stable working regulatory framework.

The current status is a partially regulated structure in which consumers have received a capped price for a portion of the publicly owned generation. The remainder has been at market price and there are numerous competing energy contract providers. However, Ontario is installing Smart Meters in all homes and small businesses and is changing the pricing structure to Time of Use pricing. All small volume consumers were scheduled to shift to the new rate structure by the end of 2012.

Alberta has deregulated its electricity provision. Customers are free to choose which company they sign up with, but there are few companies to choose from and the consumer price of electricity has increased substantially as it has in all other Canadian provinces.. Consumers may choose to remain with the public utility at the Regulated Rate Option.

=== European Union ===
In 2003, there were amendments to EU directive on software patents.

Since 2006, the European Common Aviation Area has given carriers from one EU country the freedom of the air in most others.

==== Ireland ====
The taxi industry was deregulated in Ireland in 2000, and the price of a license dropped overnight to €5,000. The number of taxis increased dramatically.

However, some existing taxi drivers were unhappy with the change, as they had invested up to €100,000 to purchase licenses from existing holders, and regarded them as assets. In October 2013 they brought a test case in the High Court for damages. Their claim was dismissed two years later.

=== New Zealand ===
New Zealand Governments adopted policies of extensive deregulation from 1984 to 1995. Originally initiated by the Fourth Labour Government of New Zealand, the policies of deregulation were later continued by the Fourth National Government of New Zealand. The policies had the goal of liberalizing the economy and were notable for their very comprehensive coverage and innovations. Specific policies included: floating the exchange rate; establishing an independent reserve bank; performance contracts for senior civil servants; public sector finance reform based on accrual accounting; tax neutrality; subsidy-free agriculture; and industry-neutral competition regulation. Economic growth was resumed in 1991. New Zealand was changed from a somewhat closed and centrally controlled economy to one of the most open economies in the OECD. As a result, New Zealand, went from having a reputation as an almost socialist country to being considered one of the most business-friendly countries of the world, next to Singapore. However, critics charge that the deregulation has brought little benefit to some sections of society, and has caused much of New Zealand&#x27;s economy (including almost all of the banks) to become foreign-owned.

=== Russia ===
Russia went through wide-ranging deregulation (and concomitant privatization) efforts in the late 1990s under Boris Yeltsin, now partially reversed under Vladimir Putin. The main thrust of deregulation has been the electricity sector (see RAO UES), with railroads and communal utilities tied in second place. Deregulation of the natural gas sector (Gazprom) is one of the more frequent demands placed upon Russia by the United States and European Union.

=== United Kingdom ===
The Conservative government led by Margaret Thatcher started a programme of deregulation and privatization after the party&#x27;s victory at the 1979 general election. The Building Act 1984 reduced building regulations from 306 pages to 24, while compulsory competitive tendering required local government to compete with the private sector in delivering services. Other steps included express coach (Transport Act 1980), British Telecom (completed in 1984), privatization of London bus services (1984), local bus services (Transport Act 1985) and the railways (Railways Act 1993). The feature of all those privatizations was that their shares were offered to the general public. This continued under Thatcher&#x27;s successor John Major.

From 1997 to 2010, the Labour governments of Tony Blair and Gordon Brown developed a programme called &quot;better regulation&quot;. This required government departments to review, simplify or abolish existing regulations, and a &quot;one in, one out&quot; approach to new regulations. In 1997, Chancellor Brown announced the &quot;freeing&quot; of the Bank of England to set monetary policy, so the Bank was no longer under direct government control. In 2006, new primary legislation (the Legislative and Regulatory Reform Act 2006) was introduced to establish statutory principles and a code of practice and it permits ministers to make Regulatory Reform Orders (RROs) to deal with older laws which they deem to be out of date, obscure or irrelevant. This act has often been criticized and was described in Parliament by Lord (Patrick) Jenkin as the &quot;Abolition of Parliament Act&quot;.

New Labour privatized only a few services, such as Qinetiq. But a great deal of infrastructure and maintenance work previously carried out by government departments was contracted out (outsourced) to private enterprise under the public–private partnership, with competitive bidding for contracts within a regulatory framework. This included large projects such as building new hospitals for the NHS, building new state schools, and maintaining the London Underground. These were never privatized by public offer, but instead by tendering commercial interests.

=== United States ===

==== History of regulation ====

One problem that encouraged deregulation was the way in which regulated industries often come to control the government regulatory agencies in a process known as regulatory capture. Industries then use regulation to serve their own interests, at the expense of the consumer. A similar pattern has been seen with the deregulation process itself, often effectively controlled by regulated industries through lobbying. Such political forces, however, exist in many other forms for other lobby groups.

Examples of deregulated industries in the United States are banking, telecommunications, airlines, and natural resources.

During the Progressive Era (1890s–1920), Presidents Theodore Roosevelt, William Howard Taft, and Woodrow Wilson instituted regulation on parts of the American economy, most notably big business and industry. Some prominent reforms were trust-busting (the destruction and banning of monopolies), the creation of laws protecting the American consumer, the creation of a federal income tax (by the Sixteenth Amendment; the income tax used a progressive tax structure with especially high taxes on the wealthy), the establishment of the Federal Reserve, the institution of shorter working hours, higher wages, better living conditions, better rights and privileges to trade unions, protection of the rights of strikers, banning of unfair labor practices, and the delivery of more social services to the working classes and social safety nets to many unemployed workers, thus helping to create a welfare state.

During the Presidencies of Warren Harding (1921–23) and Calvin Coolidge (1923–29), the federal government generally pursued laissez-faire economic policies. After the onset of the Great Depression, President Franklin D. Roosevelt implemented many economic regulations, including the National Industrial Recovery Act (which was struck down by the Supreme Court), regulation of trucking, airlines and communications, the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, and the Glass–Steagall Act of 1933. These regulations stayed largely in place until Richard Nixon&#x27;s Administration. In supporting his competition-limiting regulatory initiatives President Roosevelt blamed the excesses of big business for causing an economic bubble. However, historians lack consensus in describing the causal relationship between various events and the role of government economic policy in causing or ameliorating the Depression.

==== 1970–2000 ====
Deregulation gained momentum in the 1970s, influenced by research by the Chicago school of economics and the theories of George Stigler, Alfred E. Kahn, and others. The new ideas were widely embraced by both liberals and conservatives. Two leading think tanks in Washington, the Brookings Institution and the American Enterprise Institute, were active in holding seminars and publishing studies advocating deregulatory initiatives throughout the 1970s and 1980s. Cornell economist Alfred E. Kahn played a central role in both theorizing and participating in the Carter Administration&#x27;s efforts to deregulate transportation.

==== Transportation ====

===== Nixon administration =====
The first comprehensive proposal to deregulate a major industry, transportation, originated in the Richard Nixon Administration and was forwarded to Congress in late 1971. This proposal was initiated and developed by an interagency group that included the Council of Economic Advisors (represented by Hendrik Houthakker and Thomas Gale Moore), White House Office of Consumer Affairs (represented by Jack Pearce), Department of Justice, Department of Transportation, Department of Labor, and other agencies.

The proposal addressed both rail and truck transportation, but not air carriage. (92d Congress, Senate Bill 2842) The developers of this legislation in this Administration sought to cultivate support from commercial buyers of transportation services, consumer organizations, economists, and environmental organization leaders. This &#x27;civil society&#x27; coalition became a template for coalitions influential in efforts to deregulate trucking and air transport later in the decade.

===== Ford administration =====
After Nixon left office, the Gerald Ford presidency, with the allied interests, secured passage of the first significant change in regulatory policy in a pro-competitive direction, in the Railroad Revitalization and Regulatory Reform Act of 1976.

===== Carter administration =====
President Jimmy Carter – aided by economic adviser Alfred E. Kahn – devoted substantial effort to transportation deregulation, and worked with Congressional and civil society leaders to pass the Airline Deregulation Act on October 24, 1978 – the first federal government regulatory regime, since the 1930s, to be completely dismantled.

Carter also worked with Congress to produce the Staggers Rail Act (signed October 14, 1980), and the Motor Carrier Act of 1980 (signed July 1, 1980).

===== 1970s deregulation effects =====
These were the major deregulation acts in transportation that set the general conceptual and legislative framework, which replaced the regulatory systems put in place between the 1880s and the 1930s. The dominant common theme of these Acts was to lessen barriers to entry in transport markets and promote more independent, competitive pricing among transport service providers, substituting the freed-up competitive market forces for detailed regulatory control of entry, exit, and price making in transport markets. Thus deregulation arose, though regulations to promote competition were put in place.

===== Reagan administration =====

U.S. President Ronald Reagan campaigned on the promise of rolling back environmental regulations. His devotion to the economic beliefs of Milton Friedman led him to promote the deregulation of finance, agriculture, and transportation. A series of substantial enactments were needed to work out the process of encouraging competition in transportation. Interstate buses were addressed in 1982, in the Bus Regulatory Reform Act of 1982. Freight forwarders (freight aggregators) got more freedoms in the Surface Freight Forwarder Deregulation Act of 1986. As many states continued to regulate the operations of motor carriers within their own state, the intrastate aspect of the trucking and bus industries was addressed in the Federal Aviation Administration Authorization Act of 1994, which provided that &quot;a State, political subdivision of a State, or political authority of two or more States may not enact or enforce a law, regulation, or other provision having the force and effect of law related to a price, route, or service of any motor carrier.&quot; (c)(1) (Supp. V 1999).

Ocean transportation was the last to be addressed. This was done in two acts, the Shipping Act of 1984 and the Ocean Shipping Reform Act of 1998. These acts were less thoroughgoing than the legislation dealing with U.S. domestic transportation, in that they left in place the &quot;conference&quot; system in international ocean liner shipping, which historically embodied cartel mechanisms. However, these acts permitted independent rate-making by conference participants, and the 1998 Act permitted secret contract rates, which tend to undercut collective carrier pricing. According to the United States Federal Maritime Commission, in an assessment in 2001, this appears to have opened up substantial competitive activity in ocean shipping, with beneficial economic results.

==== Energy ====
The Emergency Petroleum Allocation Act was a regulating law, consisting of a mix of regulations and deregulation, which passed in response to OPEC price hikes and domestic price controls which affected the 1973 oil crisis in the United States. After adoption of this federal legislation, numerous state legislation known as Natural Gas Choice programs have sprung up in several states, as well as the District of Columbia. Natural Gas Choice programs allow residential and small volume natural gas users to compare purchases from natural gas suppliers with traditional utility companies. There are currently hundreds of federally unregulated natural gas suppliers operating in the US. Regulation characteristics of Natural Gas Choice programs vary between the laws of the currently adoptive 21 states (as of 2008).

 Deregulation of the electricity sector in the U.S. began in 1992. The Energy Policy Act of 1992 eliminated obstacles for wholesale electricity competition, but deregulation has yet to be introduced in all states. As of April 2014, 16 U.S. states (Connecticut, Delaware, Illinois, Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan, Montana, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, Ohio, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, and Texas) and the District of Columbia have introduced deregulated electricity markets to consumers in some capacity. Additionally, seven states (Arizona, Arkansas, California, Nevada, New Mexico, Virginia, and Wyoming) began the process of electricity deregulation in some capacity but have since suspended deregulation efforts.

==== Communications ====
Deregulation was put into effect in the communications industry by the government at the start of the Multi-Channel Transition era. This deregulation put into place a division of labor between the studios and the networks. Communications in the United States (and internationally) are areas in which both technology and regulatory policy have been in flux. The rapid development of computer and communications technology – particularly the Internet – have increased the size and variety of communications offerings. Wireless, traditional landline telephone, and cable companies increasingly invade each other&#x27;s traditional markets and compete across a broad spectrum of activities. The Federal Communications Commission and Congress appear to be attempting to facilitate this evolution. In mainstream economic thinking, development of this competition would militate against detailed regulatory control of prices and service offerings, and hence favor deregulation of prices and entry into markets. On the other hand, there exists substantial concern about concentration of media ownership resulting from relaxation of historic controls on media ownership designed to safeguard diversity of viewpoint and open discussion in the society, and about what some perceive as high prices in cable company offerings at this point.

==== Finance ====
The financial sector in the U.S. has been considerably deregulated in recent decades, which has allowed for greater financial risktaking. The financial sector used its considerable political sway in Congress and in the political establishment and influenced the ideology of political institutions to press for more and more deregulation. Among the most important of the regulatory changes was the Depository Institutions Deregulation and Monetary Control Act of 1980, which repealed the parts of the Glass–Steagall Act regarding interest rate regulation via retail banking. The Financial Services Modernization Act of 1999 repealed part of the Glass–Steagall Act of 1933, removing barriers in the market that prohibited any one institution from acting as any combination of an investment bank, a commercial bank, and an insurance company.

Such deregulation of the financial sector in the United States fostered greater risktaking by finance sector firms through the creation of innovative financial instruments and practices, including securitization of loan obligations of various sorts and credit default swaps. This caused a series of financial crises, including the savings and loan crisis, the Long-Term Capital Management (LTCM) crisis, each of which necessitated major bailouts, and the derivatives scandals of 1994. These warning signs were ignored as financial deregulating continued, even in view of the inadequacy of industry self-regulation as shown by the financial collapses and bailout. The 1998 bailout of LTCM sent the signal to large &quot;too-big-to-fail&quot; financial firms that they would not have to suffer the consequences of the great risks they take. Thus, the greater risktaking allowed by deregulation and encouraged by the bailout paved the way for the financial crisis of 2007–08.

==== Related legislation ====
* 1976 – Hart-Scott-Rodino Antitrust Improvements Act PL 94-435
* 1977 – Emergency Natural Gas Act PL 95-2
* 1978 – Airline Deregulation Act PL 95-50
* 1978 – National Gas Policy Act PL 95-621
* 1980 – Depository Institutions Deregulation and Monetary Control Act PL 96-221
* 1980 – Motor Carrier Act PL 96-296
* 1980 – Regulatory Flexibility Act PL 96-354
* 1980 – Staggers Rail Act PL 96-448
* 1982 – Garn–St. Germain Depository Institutions Act PL 97-320
* 1982 – Bus Regulatory Reform Act PL 97-261
* 1989 – Natural Gas Wellhead Decontrol Act PL 101-60
* 1992 – National Energy Policy Act PL 102-486
* 1996 – Telecommunications Act PL 104-104
* 1999 – Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act PL 106-102

== Controversy ==


The deregulation movement of the late 20th century had substantial economic effects and engendered substantial controversy. The movement was based on intellectual perspectives which prescribed substantial scope for market forces, and opposing perspectives have been in play in national and international discourse.

The movement toward greater reliance on market forces has been closely related to the growth of economic and institutional globalization between about 1950 and 2010.

=== For deregulation ===
Many economists have concluded that a trend towards deregulation will increase economic welfare long-term and a sustainable free market system. Regarding the electricity market, contemporary academic Adam Thierer, &quot;The first step toward creating a free market in electricity is to repeal the federal statutes and regulations that hinder electricity competition and consumer choice.&quot; This viewpoint stretches back centuries. Classical economist Adam Smith argued the benefits of deregulation in his 1776 work, &quot;The Wealth of Nations&quot;:[Without trade restrictions] the obvious and simple system of natural liberty establishes itself of its own accord. Every man...is left perfectly free to pursue his own interest in his own way... The sovereign is completely discharged from a duty [for which] no human wisdom or knowledge could ever be sufficient; the duty of superintending the industry of private people, and of directing it towards the employments most suitable to the interest of the society.Scholars who theorize that deregulation is beneficial to society often cite what is known as the Iron Law of Regulation, which states that all regulation eventually leads to a net loss in social welfare.

=== Against deregulation ===
Critics of economic liberalization and deregulation cite the benefits of regulation, and believe that certain regulations do not distort markets and allow companies to continue to be competitive, or according to some, grow in competition. Much as the state plays an important role through issues such as property rights, appropriate regulation is argued by some to be &quot;crucial to realise the benefits of service liberalisation&quot;.

Critics of deregulation often cite the need of regulation in order to:

* create a level playing field and ensure competition (e.g., by ensuring new energy providers have competitive access to the national grid);
* maintain quality standards for services (e.g., by specifying qualification requirements for service providers);
* protect consumers (e.g. from fraud);
* ensure sufficient provision of information (e.g., about the features of competing services);
* prevent environmental degradation (e.g., arising from high levels of tourist development);
* guarantee wide access to services (e.g., ensuring poorer areas where profit margins are lower are also provided with electricity and health services); and,
* prevent financial instability and protect consumer savings from excessive risk-taking by financial institutions.

Sharon Beder, a writer with PR Watch, wrote &quot;Electricity deregulation was supposed to bring cheaper electricity prices and more choice of suppliers to householders. Instead it has brought wildly volatile wholesale prices and undermined the reliability of the electricity supply.&quot;

William K. Black says that inappropriate deregulation helped create a criminogenic environment in the savings and loan industry, which attracted opportunistic control frauds like Charles Keating, whose massive political campaign contributions were used successfully to further remove regulatory oversight. The combination substantially delayed effective governmental action, thereby substantially increasing the losses when the fraudulent Ponzi schemes finally collapsed and were exposed. After the collapse, regulators in the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) and the Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS) were finally allowed to file thousands of criminal complaints that led to over a thousand felony convictions of key Savings and Loan insiders. By contrast, between 2007 and 2010, the OCC and OTS combined made zero criminal referrals; Black concluded that elite financial fraud has effectively been decriminalized.

Economist Jayati Ghosh is of the opinion that deregulation is responsible for increasing price volatility on the commodity market. This particularly affects people and economies in developing countries. More and more homogenization of financial institution which may also be a result of deregulation turns out to be a major concern for small-scale producers in those countries.

== See also ==
*Corporatocracy
*Deregulated capitalism
*Ease of Doing Business Index
*Electricity provider switching
*Night-watchman state
*Political economy
*Public service company
*Regulatory reform
*Stranded costs

== References ==
* 
* 

=== Notes ===
== Further reading ==
* Baskin, J. and P. Miranti. &quot;A History of Corporate Finance&quot; (Cambridge UP, 1997), worldwide.
* , in United States
* Kahn, Alfred E. &quot;Deregulation: looking backward and looking forward.&quot; &quot;Yale Journal on Regulation&quot; 7 (1990): pp. 325+ online
* 
* 

== External links ==
*
*
*
*. This comprehensive study indicating, among other things, that transport deregulation reduced distribution costs in the United States from about 14% of gross domestic product to under 11% (If this measure is selected, current dollar savings can be calculated by multiplying current GDP by @3%).[Misplaced in article]</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q902410" start="0" end="12" title="Deregulation" label="Deregulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500849" start="138" end="163" title="Economic regulation" label="regulation of the economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753636" start="533" end="543" title="Gilded Age" label="Gilded Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635158" start="554" end="565" title="progressive era" label="progressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q275372" start="609" end="622" title="externalities" label="externalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q192571" start="652" end="663" title="child labor" label="child labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6901878" start="665" end="679" title="monopolization" label="monopolization"/>
<link wikidata="Q58734" start="685" end="694" title="pollution" label="pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q162719" start="843" end="856" title="neoliberalism" label="neoliberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111958" start="1036" end="1048" title="Productivity (economics)" label="productivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q58734" start="1154" end="1177" title="pollution" label="environmental pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q326498" start="1302" end="1325" title="Competition law" label="constraining monopolies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309700" start="1328" end="1345" title="Regulatory reform" label="Regulatory reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309685" start="1589" end="1615" title="Regulatory Flexibility Act" label="Regulatory Flexibility Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q16996934" start="1698" end="1742" title="Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs" label="Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4898523" start="1774" end="1802" title="Better Regulation Commission" label="Better Regulation Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q942582" start="1804" end="1825" title="Cost–benefit analysis" label="Cost–benefit analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8348417" start="1956" end="1973" title="emissions trading" label="emissions trading"/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="2015" end="2028" title="privatization" label="privatization"/>
<link wikidata="Q591763" start="2076" end="2090" title="private sector" label="private sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="2128" end="2137" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="2177" end="2190" title="privatization" label="privatization"/>
<link wikidata="Q66143" start="2202" end="2221" title="fixed exchange rate" label="fixed exchange rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q24944657" start="2233" end="2253" title="Presidency of Carlos Menem" label="Menem administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q131112" start="2285" end="2297" title="Paul Krugman" label="Paul Krugman"/>
<link wikidata="Q327646" start="2307" end="2312" title="Enron" label="Enron"/>
<link wikidata="Q310486" start="2470" end="2505" title="Correlation does not imply causation" label="confused correlation with causation"/>
<link wikidata="Q216082" start="2638" end="2643" title="Australian Labor Party" label="Labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q269372" start="2659" end="2668" title="Bob Hawke" label="Bob Hawke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242659" start="2960" end="2985" title="Prices and Incomes Accord" label="Prices and Incomes Accord"/>
<link wikidata="Q51330" start="3002" end="3013" title="John Howard" label="John Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q241149" start="3021" end="3034" title="Liberal Party of Australia" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035052" start="3083" end="3111" title="Workplace Relations Act 1996" label="Workplace Relations Act 1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q8034530" start="3152" end="3163" title="WorkChoices" label="WorkChoices"/>
<link wikidata="Q16840723" start="3219" end="3240" title="Rudd Government (2007–10)" label="Rudd Labor government"/>
<link wikidata="Q23712863" start="3264" end="3288" title="Impeachment of Dilma Rousseff" label="Dilma&amp;#x27;s impeachment"/>
<link wikidata="Q42895686" start="3316" end="3328" title="Brazil labor reform (2017)" label="labor reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q587992" start="4067" end="4094" title="Comparison shopping website" label="Comparison shopping website"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="4535" end="4542" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951" start="5256" end="5263" title="Alberta" label="Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q913351" start="5681" end="5696" title="software patent" label="software patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5412411" start="5716" end="5745" title="European Common Aviation Area" label="European Common Aviation Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454302" start="5789" end="5807" title="freedom of the air" label="freedom of the air"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="5880" end="5887" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5476119" start="6423" end="6462" title="Fourth Labour Government of New Zealand" label="Fourth Labour Government of New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q5476155" start="6521" end="6562" title="Fourth National Government of New Zealand" label="Fourth National Government of New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q294217" start="6837" end="6850" title="public sector" label="public sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q34453" start="7669" end="7682" title="Boris Yeltsin" label="Boris Yeltsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747" start="7713" end="7727" title="Vladimir Putin" label="Vladimir Putin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636892" start="7798" end="7805" title="RAO UES" label="RAO UES"/>
<link wikidata="Q102673" start="7908" end="7915" title="Gazprom" label="Gazprom"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="8041" end="8053" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="8072" end="8089" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="8130" end="8143" title="privatization" label="privatization"/>
<link wikidata="Q918450" start="8182" end="8203" title="1979 United Kingdom general election" label="1979 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4986462" start="8209" end="8226" title="Building Act 1984" label="Building Act 1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q4897049" start="8284" end="8316" title="compulsory competitive tendering" label="compulsory competitive tendering"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137608" start="8423" end="8436" title="Coach transport in the United Kingdom" label="express coach"/>
<link wikidata="Q212443" start="8438" end="8456" title="Transport Act 1980" label="Transport Act 1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q593786" start="8459" end="8474" title="BT Group" label="British Telecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246271" start="8496" end="8532" title="privatisation of London bus services" label="privatization of London bus services"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001216" start="8541" end="8559" title="bus deregulation in Great Britain" label="local bus services"/>
<link wikidata="Q284325" start="8561" end="8579" title="Transport Act 1985" label="Transport Act 1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404257" start="8585" end="8597" title="privatization of British Rail" label="the railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q2127685" start="8599" end="8616" title="Railways Act 1993" label="Railways Act 1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q9559" start="8764" end="8774" title="John Major" label="John Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="8800" end="8806" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="8822" end="8832" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q10648" start="8837" end="8849" title="Gordon Brown" label="Gordon Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q4898523" start="8885" end="8902" title="Better Regulation Commission" label="better regulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6518271" start="9267" end="9309" title="Legislative and Regulatory Reform Act 2006" label="Legislative and Regulatory Reform Act 2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309689" start="9416" end="9439" title="Regulatory Reform Order" label="Regulatory Reform Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q24082" start="9600" end="9621" title="Patrick Jenkin" label="Lord (Patrick) Jenkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6396591" start="9671" end="9681" title="New Labour" label="New Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759946" start="9722" end="9729" title="Qinetiq" label="Qinetiq"/>
<link wikidata="Q221096" start="9900" end="9926" title="public–private partnership" label="public–private partnership"/>
<link wikidata="Q918396" start="10066" end="10069" title="National Health Service" label="NHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q20075" start="10119" end="10137" title="London Underground" label="London Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q428148" start="10408" end="10427" title="regulation" label="regulatory agencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408462" start="10450" end="10468" title="regulatory capture" label="regulatory capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q187117" start="10772" end="10783" title="lobby group" label="lobby group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635158" start="10921" end="10936" title="Progressive Era" label="Progressive Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="10951" end="10961" title="POTUS" label="Presidents"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="10962" end="10980" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q35648" start="10982" end="11001" title="William Howard Taft" label="William Howard Taft"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="11007" end="11021" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q326498" start="11146" end="11159" title="trust-busting" label="trust-busting"/>
<link wikidata="Q194938" start="11305" end="11324" title="Sixteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Sixteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q509331" start="11348" end="11373" title="progressive tax" label="progressive tax structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q53536" start="11443" end="11458" title="Federal Reserve" label="Federal Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q260732" start="11487" end="11500" title="working hours" label="working hours"/>
<link wikidata="Q6821213" start="11509" end="11513" title="wage" label="wage"/>
<link wikidata="Q49776" start="11616" end="11624" title="Strike action" label="strikers"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002092" start="11686" end="11701" title="social welfare" label="social services"/>
<link wikidata="Q7551358" start="11729" end="11746" title="social safety net" label="social safety net"/>
<link wikidata="Q192451" start="11801" end="11814" title="welfare state" label="welfare state"/>
<link wikidata="Q35286" start="11844" end="11858" title="Warren Harding" label="Warren Harding"/>
<link wikidata="Q36023" start="11873" end="11888" title="Calvin Coolidge" label="Calvin Coolidge"/>
<link wikidata="Q171990" start="11941" end="11954" title="laissez-faire" label="laissez-faire"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="11997" end="12013" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="12025" end="12046" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141633" start="12100" end="12132" title="National Industrial Recovery Act" label="National Industrial Recovery Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999032" start="12236" end="12267" title="Securities Exchange Act of 1934" label="Securities Exchange Act of 1934"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410030" start="12277" end="12295" title="Glass–Steagall Act" label="Glass–Steagall Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="12353" end="12366" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q207781" start="12523" end="12538" title="economic bubble" label="economic bubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q847001" start="12816" end="12843" title="Chicago school of economics" label="Chicago school of economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q243534" start="12864" end="12878" title="George Stigler" label="George Stigler"/>
<link wikidata="Q4722582" start="12880" end="12894" title="Alfred E. Kahn" label="Alfred E. Kahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q929154" start="13022" end="13043" title="Brookings Institution" label="Brookings Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q464135" start="13052" end="13081" title="American Enterprise Institute" label="American Enterprise Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824547" start="13305" end="13326" title="Carter Administration" label="Carter Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="13531" end="13544" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q357900" start="13733" end="13751" title="Hendrik S. Houthakker" label="Hendrik Houthakker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329436" start="14191" end="14212" title="consumer organization" label="consumer organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q9582" start="14488" end="14499" title="Gerald Ford" label="Gerald Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q16983957" start="14647" end="14704" title="Railroad Revitalization and Regulatory Reform Act of 1976" label="Railroad Revitalization and Regulatory Reform Act of 1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="14751" end="14763" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q408772" start="14936" end="14960" title="Airline Deregulation Act" label="Airline Deregulation Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2328859" start="15126" end="15143" title="Staggers Rail Act" label="Staggers Rail Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551506" start="15179" end="15204" title="Motor Carrier Act of 1980" label="Motor Carrier Act of 1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163938" start="15522" end="15539" title="barriers to entry" label="barriers to entry"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="15922" end="15935" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q47426" start="16045" end="16060" title="Milton Friedman" label="Milton Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q55606209" start="16307" end="16332" title="Bus Regulatory Reform Act" label="Bus Regulatory Reform Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7645922" start="16408" end="16458" title="Surface Freight Forwarder Deregulation Act of 1986" label="Surface Freight Forwarder Deregulation Act of 1986"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16632" end="16689" title="Federal Aviation Administration Authorization Act of 1994" label="Federal Aviation Administration Authorization Act of 1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q21071030" start="17075" end="17095" title="Shipping Act of 1984" label="Shipping Act of 1984"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17104" end="17137" title="Ocean Shipping Reform Act of 1998" label="Ocean Shipping Reform Act of 1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440283" start="17585" end="17626" title="United States Federal Maritime Commission" label="United States Federal Maritime Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q5370626" start="17793" end="17827" title="Emergency Petroleum Allocation Act" label="Emergency Petroleum Allocation Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795" start="17931" end="17935" title="OPEC" label="OPEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q316817" start="17995" end="18010" title="1973 oil crisis" label="1973 oil crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6980493" start="18113" end="18131" title="Natural Gas Choice" label="Natural Gas Choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5376965" start="18676" end="18701" title="Energy Policy Act of 1992" label="Energy Policy Act of 1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="18853" end="18864" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393" start="18866" end="18874" title="Delaware" label="Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="18876" end="18884" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q724" start="18886" end="18891" title="Maine" label="Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="18893" end="18901" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="18903" end="18916" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="18918" end="18926" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212" start="18928" end="18935" title="Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q759" start="18937" end="18950" title="New Hampshire" label="New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="18952" end="18962" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="18964" end="18972" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="18974" end="18978" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q824" start="18980" end="18986" title="Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="18988" end="19000" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387" start="19002" end="19014" title="Rhode Island" label="Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="19020" end="19025" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="19035" end="19055" title="District of Columbia" label="District of Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q676081" start="19084" end="19102" title="electricity market" label="electricity market"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="19163" end="19170" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612" start="19172" end="19180" title="Arkansas" label="Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="19182" end="19192" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227" start="19194" end="19200" title="Nevada" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="19202" end="19212" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="19214" end="19222" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214" start="19228" end="19235" title="Wyoming" label="Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934434" start="19475" end="19499" title="Multi-Channel Transition" label="Multi-Channel Transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q128831" start="20064" end="20097" title="Federal Communications Commission" label="Federal Communications Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q837171" start="20724" end="20740" title="financial sector" label="financial sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337875" start="20836" end="20850" title="financial risk" label="financial risk"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="20919" end="20927" title="U.S. Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260790" start="21117" end="21178" title="Depository Institutions Deregulation and Monetary Control Act" label="Depository Institutions Deregulation and Monetary Control Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410030" start="21220" end="21238" title="Glass–Steagall Act" label="Glass–Steagall Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613233" start="21298" end="21334" title="Financial Services Modernization Act" label="Financial Services Modernization Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q3151423" start="21699" end="21719" title="financial innovation" label="innovative financial"/>
<link wikidata="Q247506" start="21720" end="21731" title="financial instrument" label="instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q852175" start="21757" end="21771" title="securitization" label="securitization"/>
<link wikidata="Q624028" start="21813" end="21832" title="credit default swap" label="credit default swap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326489" start="21891" end="21914" title="savings and loan crisis" label="savings and loan crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140654" start="21920" end="21948" title="Long-Term Capital Management" label="Long-Term Capital Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q7448168" start="22149" end="22173" title="industry self-regulation" label="industry self-regulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q677066" start="22279" end="22294" title="too-big-to-fail" label="too-big-to-fail"/>
<link wikidata="Q44454" start="22356" end="22387" title="moral hazard" label="consequences of the great risks"/>
<link wikidata="Q896666" start="22504" end="22531" title="financial crisis of 2007–08" label="financial crisis of 2007–08"/>
<link wikidata="Q5360239" start="22573" end="22617" title="Hart-Scott-Rodino Antitrust Improvements Act" label="Hart-Scott-Rodino Antitrust Improvements Act"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22637" end="22662" title="Emergency Natural Gas Act" label="Emergency Natural Gas Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q408772" start="22680" end="22704" title="Airline Deregulation Act" label="Airline Deregulation Act"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22723" end="22746" title="National Gas Policy Act" label="National Gas Policy Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260790" start="22766" end="22827" title="Depository Institutions Deregulation and Monetary Control Act" label="Depository Institutions Deregulation and Monetary Control Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551506" start="22847" end="22864" title="Motor Carrier Act of 1980" label="Motor Carrier Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309685" start="22884" end="22910" title="Regulatory Flexibility Act" label="Regulatory Flexibility Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2328859" start="22930" end="22947" title="Staggers Rail Act" label="Staggers Rail Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5523715" start="22967" end="23011" title="Garn–St. Germain Depository Institutions Act" label="Garn–St. Germain Depository Institutions Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q55606209" start="23031" end="23056" title="Bus Regulatory Reform Act" label="Bus Regulatory Reform Act"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23076" end="23110" title="Natural Gas Wellhead Decontrol Act" label="Natural Gas Wellhead Decontrol Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5376965" start="23130" end="23156" title="Energy Policy Act of 1992" label="National Energy Policy Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778694" start="23177" end="23199" title="Telecommunications Act of 1996" label="Telecommunications Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613233" start="23220" end="23242" title="Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act" label="Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181" start="23714" end="23727" title="globalization" label="globalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q833495" start="24153" end="24168" title="consumer choice" label="consumer choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q9381" start="24237" end="24247" title="Adam Smith" label="Adam Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q233562" start="24308" end="24329" title="The Wealth of Nations" label="The Wealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q645029" start="25043" end="25066" title="economic liberalization" label="economic liberalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q319676" start="25215" end="25226" title="Competition (economics)" label="competitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q11917765" start="25336" end="25351" title="property rights" label="property rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q326498" start="25586" end="25597" title="Competition law" label="competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q608513" start="25696" end="25726" title="Quality management system" label="quality standards for services"/>
<link wikidata="Q664183" start="25801" end="25818" title="Consumer protection" label="protect consumers"/>
<link wikidata="Q587992" start="25912" end="25930" title="Comparison shopping website" label="competing services"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334780" start="25943" end="25968" title="environmental degradation" label="environmental degradation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346517" start="26043" end="26061" title="Equity (economics)" label="access to services"/>
<link wikidata="Q114380" start="26194" end="26215" title="Financial crisis" label="financial instability"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568755" start="26591" end="26607" title="William K. Black" label="William K. Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091703" start="26693" end="26718" title="Savings and loan association" label="savings and loan industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165859" start="26750" end="26763" title="control fraud" label="control fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q5079691" start="26770" end="26785" title="Charles Keating" label="Charles Keating"/>
<link wikidata="Q219407" start="27030" end="27042" title="Ponzi scheme" label="Ponzi scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q6167693" start="27534" end="27546" title="Jayati Ghosh" label="Jayati Ghosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383947" start="27919" end="27933" title="Corporatocracy" label="Corporatocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q729119" start="27935" end="27957" title="Deregulated capitalism" label="Deregulated capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200749" start="27959" end="27987" title="Ease of Doing Business Index" label="Ease of Doing Business Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q5357825" start="27989" end="28019" title="Electricity provider switching" label="Electricity provider switching"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444611" start="28021" end="28041" title="Night-watchman state" label="Night-watchman state"/>
<link wikidata="Q47555" start="28043" end="28060" title="Political economy" label="Political economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257985" start="28062" end="28084" title="Public service company" label="Public service company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309700" start="28086" end="28103" title="Regulatory reform" label="Regulatory reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353432" start="28105" end="28119" title="Stranded costs" label="Stranded costs"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="140282" wikidata="Q9328551" url="?curid=140282" title="Space settlement">
<text>A space settlement (also called a space habitat, spacestead, space city or space colony) is a settlement in outer space, sustaining more extensively habitation facilities in space than a general space station or spacecraft. Possibly including closed ecological systems, its particular purpose is permanent habitation.

No space settlement has been constructed yet, but many design concepts, with varying degrees of realism, have been introduced in science-fiction or proposed for actual realization.

Space settlements include orbital settlements (also called orbital habitat, orbital stead, orbital city or orbital colony) around the Earth or any other celestial body, as well as cyclers and interstellar arks, as generation ships or &quot;world ships&quot;.

Space settlements are a form of extraterrestrial settlements, which more broadly includes habitats built on or within a body other than Earth, such as a settlement developed from a moonbase, a Mars habitat or an asteroid.

==Definition==
A space settlement is any large-scale habitation facility in outer space, or more particularly in an orbit.

The International Astronautical Federation has differentiated space settlements to space habitats and space infrastructure the following way:
While not automatically constituting a colonial entity, a space settlement can be an element of a space colony. The term &quot;space colony&quot; has been viewed critically, prompting Carl Sagan to propose the term &quot;space city.&quot;

==History==
The idea of space settlements either in fact or fiction goes back to the second half of the 19th century. &quot;The Brick Moon&quot;, a fictional story written in 1869 by Edward Everett Hale, is perhaps the first treatment of this idea in writing.

In 1903, space pioneer Konstantin Tsiolkovsky speculated about rotating cylindrical space settlements in &quot;Beyond Planet Earth&quot;. In 1929 John Desmond Bernal speculated about giant space settlements. Dandridge M. Cole in the late 1950s and 1960s speculated about hollowing out asteroids and then rotating the to use as settlements in various magazine articles and books, notably &quot;Islands In Space: The Challenge Of The Planetoids&quot;.

=== O&#x27;Neill – The High Frontier ===
Around 1970, near the end of Project Apollo (1961–1972), Gerard K. O&#x27;Neill, an experimental physicist at Princeton University, was looking for a topic to tempt his physics students, most of them freshmen in engineering. He hit upon the idea of assigning them feasibility calculations for large space-settlements. To his surprise, the habitats seemed feasible even in very large sizes: cylinders in diameter and long, even if made from ordinary materials such as steel and glass. Also, the students solved problems such as radiation protection from cosmic rays (almost free in the larger sizes), getting naturalistic Sun angles, provision of power, realistic pest-free farming and orbital attitude control without reaction motors. O&#x27;Neill published an article about these colony concepts in &quot;Physics Today&quot; in 1974. He expanded the article in his 1976 book &quot;The High Frontier: Human Colonies in Space&quot;.

====NASA Ames/Stanford 1975 Summer Study====

The result motivated NASA to sponsor a couple of summer workshops led by O&#x27;Neill. Several concepts were studied, with sizes ranging from 1,000 to 10,000,000 people, including versions of the Stanford torus. Three concepts were presented to NASA: the Bernal Sphere, the Toroidal Colony and the Cylindrical Colony.

O&#x27;Neill&#x27;s concepts had an example of a payback scheme: construction of solar power satellites from lunar materials. O&#x27;Neill did not emphasize the building of solar power satellites as such, but rather offered proof that orbital manufacturing from lunar materials could generate profits. He and other participants presumed that once such manufacturing facilities had started production, many profitable uses for them would be found, and the colony would become self-supporting and begin to build other colonies as well.

The concept studies generated a notable groundswell of public interest. One effect of this expansion was the founding of the L5 Society in the U.S., a group of enthusiasts that desired to build and live in such colonies. The group was named after the space-colony orbit which was then believed to be the most profitable, a kidney-shaped orbit around either of Earth&#x27;s lunar Lagrange points 5 or 4.

====Space Studies Institute====
In 1977 O&#x27;Neill founded the Space Studies Institute, which initially funded and constructed some prototypes of the new hardware needed for a space colonization effort, as well as producing a number of feasibility studies. One of the early projects, for instance, involved a series of functional prototypes of a mass driver, the essential technology for moving ores efficiently from the Moon to space colony orbits.

==Motivation==

There are a range of arguments for space settlements, including:
* As a base for crewed space exploration
* Relieving Earth of industry and population pressure
* Recreational habitation, either as visitors or residents at space (see space hotel)
* Economic growth, developing access to resources in space and a space economy, without destroying ecosystems and displacing peoples on Earth
* Space colonization, claiming extraterrestrial space for settler colonial independence
* For survival of human civilization and the biosphere, in case of a disaster on the Earth (natural or man-made)

==Advantages==
A number of arguments are made for space settlements having a number of advantages:

===Access to solar energy===
Space has an abundance of light produced from the Sun. In Earth orbit, this amounts to 1400 watts of power per square meter. This energy can be used to produce electricity from solar cells or heat engine based power stations, process ores, provide light for plants to grow and to warm space settlements.

===Outside gravity well===
Earth-to-space settlement trade would be easier than Earth-to-planetary habitat trade, as habitats orbiting Earth will not have a gravity well to overcome to export to Earth, and a smaller gravity well to overcome to import from Earth.

===In-situ resource utilization===
Space settlements may be supplied with resources from extraterrestrial places like Mars, asteroids, or the Moon (in-situ resource utilization [ISRU]; see Asteroid mining). One could produce breathing oxygen, drinking water, and rocket fuel with the help of ISRU. It may become possible to manufacture solar panels from lunar materials.

===Asteroids and other small bodies===
Most asteroids have a mixture of materials, that could be mined, and because these bodies do not have substantial gravity wells, it would require low delta-V to draw materials from them and haul them to a construction site.

There is estimated to be enough material in the main asteroid belt alone to build enough space settlements to equal the habitable surface area of 3,000 Earths.

===Population===
A 1974 estimate assumed that collection of all the material in the main asteroid belt would allow habitats to be constructed to give an immense total population capacity. Using the free-floating resources of the Solar System, this estimate extended into the trillions.

===Zero g recreation===
If a large area at the rotation axis is enclosed, various zero-g sports are possible, including swimming, hang gliding and the use of human-powered aircraft.

===Passenger compartment===

A space settlement can be the passenger compartment of a large spacecraft for colonizing asteroids, moons, and planets. It can also function as one for a generation ship for travel to other planets or distant stars (L. R. Shepherd described a generation starship in 1952 comparing it to a small planet with many people living in it.)

==Requirements==
The requirements for a space settlement are many. They would have to provide all the material needs for hundreds or thousands of humans, in an environment out in space that is very hostile to human life.

===Regulation===
The governance or regulation of space settlements is crucial for responsible habitation conditions. The physical as well as socio-political architecture of a space settlement, if poorly established, can lead to tyrannical and precarious conditions.

===Initial capital outlay===
Even the smallest of the settlement designs mentioned below are more massive than the total mass of all items that humans have ever launched into Earth orbit combined. Prerequisites to building settlements are either cheaper launch costs or a mining and manufacturing base on the Moon or other body having low delta-v from the desired habitat location.

===Location===
The optimal settlement orbits are still debated, and so orbital stationkeeping is probably a commercial issue. The lunar and orbits are now thought to be too far away from the Moon and Earth. A more modern proposal is to use a two-to-one resonance orbit that alternately has a close, low-energy (cheap) approach to the Moon, and then to the Earth. This provides quick, inexpensive access to both raw materials and the major market. Most settlement designs plan to use electromagnetic tether propulsion, or mass drivers used instead of rocket motors. The advantage of these is that they either use no reaction mass at all, or use cheap reaction mass.

===Protection from radiation===
If a space settlement is located at L4 or L5, then its orbit will take it outside of the protection of the Earth&#x27;s magnetosphere for approximately two-thirds of the time (as happens with the Moon), putting residents at risk of proton exposure from the solar wind (see &quot;Health threat from cosmic rays&quot;).

Protection can be attained through passive or active shielding. Passive shielding through the use of materials has been the method to shield current spacecrafts.

Water walls or ice walls can provide protection from solar and cosmic radiation, as 7 cm of water depth blocks approximately half of incident radiation. Alternatively, rock could be used as shielding; 4 metric tons per square meter of surface area could reduce radiation dosage to several mSv or less annually, below the rate of some populated high natural background areas on Earth.

Alternative concepts based on active shielding are untested yet and more complex than such passive mass shielding, but usage of magnetic and/or electric fields, like through spacecraft encapsulating wires, to deflect particles could potentially greatly reduce mass requirements.

===Atmosphere===

Air pressure, with normal partial pressures of oxygen (21%), carbon dioxide and nitrogen (78%), is a basic requirement of any space settlement. Basically, most space settlement designs concepts envision large, thin-walled pressure vessels. The required oxygen could be obtained from lunar rock. Nitrogen is most easily available from the Earth, but is also recycled nearly perfectly. Also, nitrogen in the form of ammonia () may be obtainable from comets and the moons of outer planets. Nitrogen may also be available in unknown quantities on certain other bodies in the outer Solar System. The air of a habitat could be recycled in a number of ways. One concept is to use photosynthetic gardens, possibly via hydroponics, or forest gardening. However, these do not remove certain industrial pollutants, such as volatile oils, and excess simple molecular gases. The standard method used on nuclear submarines, a similar form of closed environment, is to use a catalytic burner, which effectively decomposes most organics. Further protection might be provided by a small cryogenic distillation system which would gradually remove impurities such as mercury vapor, and noble gases that cannot be catalytically burned. 

===Food production===
Organic materials for food production would also need to be provided. At first, most of these would have to be imported from Earth. After that, feces recycling should reduce the need for imports. One proposed recycling method would start by burning the cryogenic distillate, plants, garbage and sewage with air in an electric arc, and distilling the result. The resulting carbon dioxide and water would be immediately usable in agriculture. The nitrates and salts in the ash could be dissolved in water and separated into pure minerals. Most of the nitrates, potassium and sodium salts would recycle as fertilizers. Other minerals containing iron, nickel, and silicon could be chemically purified in batches and reused industrially. The small fraction of remaining materials, well below 0.01% by weight, could be processed into pure elements with zero-gravity mass spectrometry, and added in appropriate amounts to the fertilizers and industrial stocks. It is likely that methods would be greatly refined as people began to actually live in space settlements.

===Artificial gravity===
Long-term on-orbit studies have proven that zero gravity weakens bones and muscles, and upsets calcium metabolism and immune systems. Most people have a continual stuffy nose or sinus problems, and a few people have dramatic, incurable motion sickness. Most habitat designs would rotate in order to use inertial forces to simulate gravity. NASA studies with chickens and plants have proven that this is an effective physiological substitute for gravity. Turning one&#x27;s head rapidly in such an environment causes a &quot;tilt&quot; to be sensed as one&#x27;s inner ears move at different rotational rates. Centrifuge studies show that people get motion-sick in habitats with a rotational radius of less than 100 metres, or with a rotation rate above 3 rotations per minute. However, the same studies and statistical inference indicate that almost all people should be able to live comfortably in habitats with a rotational radius larger than 500 meters and below 1 RPM. Experienced persons were not merely more resistant to motion sickness, but could also use the effect to determine &quot;spinward&quot; and &quot;antispinward&quot; directions in the centrifuges.

===Meteoroids and dust===
The habitat would need to withstand potential impacts from space debris, meteoroids, dust, etc. Most meteoroids that strike the earth vaporize in the atmosphere. Without a thick protective atmosphere meteoroid strikes would pose a much greater risk to a space settlement. Radar will sweep the space around each habitat mapping the trajectory of debris and other man-made objects and allowing corrective actions to be taken to protect the habitat.

In some designs (O&#x27;Neill/NASA Ames &quot;Stanford Torus&quot; and &quot;Crystal palace in a Hatbox&quot; habitat designs have a non-rotating cosmic ray shield of packed sand (~1.9 m thick) or even artificial aggregate rock (1.7 m ersatz concrete). Other proposals use the rock as structure and integral shielding (O&#x27;Neill, &quot;the High Frontier&quot;. Sheppard, &quot;Concrete Space Colonies&quot;; Spaceflight, journal of the B.I.S.) In any of these cases, strong meteoroid protection is implied by the external radiation shell ~4.5 tonnes of rock material, per square meter.

Note that Solar Power Satellites are proposed in the multi-GW ranges, and such energies and technologies would allow constant radar mapping of nearby 3D space out-to arbitrarily far away, limited only by effort expended to do so.

Proposals are available to move even kilometer-sized NEOs to high Earth orbits, and reaction engines for such purposes would move a space settlement and any arbitrarily large shield, but not in any timely or rapid manner, the thrust being very low compared to the huge mass.

===Heat rejection===
The habitat is in a vacuum, and therefore resembles a giant thermos bottle. Habitats also need a radiator to eliminate heat from absorbed sunlight. Very small habitats might have a central vane that rotates with the habitat. In this design, convection would raise hot air &quot;up&quot; (toward the center), and cool air would fall down into the outer habitat. Some other designs would distribute coolants, such as chilled water from a central radiator.

===Attitude control===
Most mirror geometries require something on the habitat to be aimed at the Sun and so attitude control is necessary. The original O&#x27;Neill design used the two cylinders as momentum wheels to roll the colony, and pushed the sunward pivots together or apart to use precession to change their angle.

==Concepts==
===Base concepts===
The two common original concepts are the Bernal sphere and the O&#x27;Neill cylinder.

====Dumbbell-shape assembly concept====

A dumbbell-like spacecraft or habitat, connected by a cable to a counterweight or other habitat. This design has been proposed as a Mars ship, initial construction shack for a space habitat, and orbital hotel. It has a comfortably long and slow rotational radius for a relatively small station mass. Also, if some of the equipment can form the counter-weight, the equipment dedicated to artificial gravity is just a cable, and thus has a much smaller mass-fraction than in other concepts. For a long-term habitation, however, radiation shielding must rotate with the habitat, and is extremely heavy, thus requiring a much stronger and heavier cable. This speculative design was also considered by the NASA studies. Small habitats would be mass-produced to standards that allow the habitats to interconnect. A single habitat can operate alone as a bola. However, further habitats can be attached, to grow into a &quot;dumbbell&quot; then a &quot;bow-tie&quot;, then a ring, then a cylinder of &quot;beads&quot;, and finally a framed array of cylinders. Each stage of growth shares more radiation shielding and capital equipment, increasing redundancy and safety while reducing the cost per person. This concept was originally proposed by a professional architect because it can grow much like Earth-bound cities, with incremental individual investments, unlike those that require large start-up investments. The main disadvantage is that the smaller versions use a large structure to support the radiation shielding, which rotates with them. In large sizes, the shielding becomes economical, because it grows roughly as the square of the colony radius. The number of people, their habitats, and the radiators to cool them grow roughly as the cube of the colony radius.

===Further concepts===

* Island One, a Bernal sphere settlement for about 10,000–20,000 people.
* Stanford torus: an alternative to Island One.
* Lewis One, a cylinder of radius 250 m with a non-rotating radiation shielding. The shielding protects the micro-gravity industrial space, too. The rotating part is 450m long and has several inner cylinders. Some of them are used for agriculture.
* Island Three or O&#x27;Neill cylinder, an even larger cylindrical design (3.2 or 4 km radius and 32 km long).
*McKendree cylinder, another concept that would use carbon nanotubes, a McKendree cylinder is paired cylinders in the same vein as the Island Three concept, but each 460 km in radius and 4600 km long (versus 3.2-4 km radius and 32 km long in the Island Three).
* Kalpana One, revised, a short cylinder with 250 m radius and 325 m length. The radiation shielding is 10 t/m2 and rotates. It has several inner cylinders for agriculture and recreation. It is sized for 3,000 residents.

*Bubbleworld or Inside/Outside concept, originated by Dandridge M. Cole in 1964, calls for drilling a tunnel through the longest axis of a large metallic asteroid and filling it with a volatile substance, possibly water. A very large solar reflector would be constructed nearby, focusing solar heat onto the asteroid, first to weld and seal the tunnel ends, then more diffusely to slowly heat the entire outer surface. As the metal softens, the water inside expands and inflates the mass, while rotational forces help shape it into a cylindrical form. Once expanded and allowed to cool, it can be spun to produce centrifugal pseudogravity, and the interior filled with soil, air and water. By creating a slight bulge in the middle of the cylinder, a ring-shaped lake can be made to form. Reflectors would allow sunlight to enter and to be directed where needed. This method would require a significant human and industrial presence in space to be at all feasible. The concept was popularized by science fiction author Larry Niven in his Known Space stories, describing such worlds as the primary habitats of the Belters, a civilization who had colonized the asteroid belt.
**&quot;Bubbleworld&quot; is also the name of a different concept of space settlement thought of by Dani Eder in 1995 (it is alternatively known as an Ederworld). This is a relatively thin, spherical shell surrounding a mass of gas great enough to be held together by gravity. If hydrogen is used as the gas, the shell would have a radius of about 240,000 km. The outside of the shell would have a living space 2,400 km thick (filled with breathable air) with an additional outer shell (possibly made of 500 m of steel) above it to hold in the air.
* Asteroid terrarium, a similar idea to the bubble world, in the 2012 novel &quot;2312&quot; by hard science fiction writer Kim Stanley Robinson.
*Bishop Ring, a speculative design using carbon nanotubes: a torus 1000 km in radius, 500 km in width, and with atmosphere retention walls 200 km in height. The habitat would be large enough that it could be &quot;roofless&quot;, open to outer space on the inner rim.
==Space station projects==
Space settlements are in principle space stations, developments in space station construction therefore share many elements. 
The following projects and proposals, while not truly space settlements, incorporate aspects of what they would have and may represent stepping stones towards eventually building of space settlements.

The Lunar Gateway is a planned lunar space station, the first outside of Low Earth Orbit, therefore being the first spacecraft designed in unshielded space.

The ISS Centrifuge Demo was proposed in 2011 as a demonstration project for an artificial gravity compartment, preparatory for a similar module of a Nautilus-X Multi-Mission Space Exploration Vehicle (MMSEV). The ISS module would have an outside diameter of with a ring interior cross-section diameter and would provide 0.08 to partial gravity. This test and evaluation centrifuge would have the capability to become a Sleep Module for ISS crew. The subsequent vehicle design would be a long-duration crewed space transport vehicle including the artificial gravity compartment intended to promote crew-health for a crew of up to six persons on missions of up to two years duration. The partial-g torus-ring centrifuge would utilize both standard metal-frame and inflatable spacecraft structures and would provide 0.11 to if built with the diameter option.

The Bigelow Commercial Space Station was announced in mid-2010. Bigelow has publicly shown space station design configurations with up to nine modules containing of habitable space. Bigelow began to publicly refer to the initial configuration as &quot;Space Complex Alpha&quot; in October 2010.

==In fiction==

Space settlements have been elements of different science-fiction stories, across different media, from books to movies like Elysium (2013) for a wheel shaped Stanford torus type and Interstellar (2014) for a cylindrical O&#x27;Neill type.

==See also==

* Arcology
* Bioastronautics
* Closed ecological system
* Domed city
* Dyson sphere
* Floating cities and islands in fiction
* Human outpost (artificially created controlled human habitat)
* Locomotion in space
* Megastructure
* Planetary chauvinism
* Space architecture
* Space stations and habitats in fiction
* Spaceflight
* Space station
* Spome
* Underground living
* Underground city
* Underwater habitat

==Notes==
==References==

*NASA&#x27;s table of contents for the studies See the &quot;online books&quot; about halfway down the page.
==External links==
*Gallery about space habitats, in Wikimedia Commons.
*Lifeboat Foundation Space Habitats, a space habitat advocacy group.
*&quot;Space Settlements: A Design Study&quot;, 1977 book by NASA about designing a space settlement
*
*NASA video about space habitats and space settlements construction as seen around 1970&quot;s (5 min).
* Video explaining rotating space habitats.
* Opening the High Frontier, a video about affordable spaceflight and building a spacefaring civilization.
*The 1975 space habitat video credited with inspiring Blue Origin (Jeff &quot;Amazon&quot; Bezos as a boy).
*Segits.com, a website that refers to Space habitats as Segits or Self-sufficient Extra-terrestrial Green-habitat Intentional Transparent self-replicating communities.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9328551" start="2" end="18" title="Space settlement" label="space settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q9328551" start="34" end="47" title="Space settlement" label="space habitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q9328551" start="49" end="59" title="Space settlement" label="spacestead"/>
<link wikidata="Q9328551" start="61" end="71" title="Space settlement" label="space city"/>
<link wikidata="Q9328551" start="75" end="87" title="Space settlement" label="space colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q486972" start="94" end="104" title="Human settlement" label="settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4169" start="108" end="119" title="outer space" label="outer space"/>
<link wikidata="Q104875186" start="149" end="179" title="Space habitat (facility)" label="habitation facilities in space"/>
<link wikidata="Q25956" start="195" end="208" title="space station" label="space station"/>
<link wikidata="Q40218" start="212" end="222" title="spacecraft" label="spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q3176324" start="243" end="267" title="closed ecological system" label="closed ecological system"/>
<link wikidata="Q9328551" start="527" end="546" title="Space settlement" label="orbital settlements"/>
<link wikidata="Q9328551" start="560" end="575" title="Space settlement" label="orbital habitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q9328551" start="577" end="590" title="Space settlement" label="orbital stead"/>
<link wikidata="Q9328551" start="592" end="604" title="Space settlement" label="orbital city"/>
<link wikidata="Q9328551" start="608" end="622" title="Space settlement" label="orbital colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q5198193" start="681" end="687" title="cycler" label="cycler"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355598" start="693" end="709" title="interstellar ark" label="interstellar ark"/>
<link wikidata="Q964131" start="715" end="731" title="Generation ship" label="generation ships"/>
<link wikidata="Q125924468" start="793" end="820" title="extraterrestrial settlement" label="extraterrestrial settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q104840906" start="942" end="950" title="moonbase" label="moonbase"/>
<link wikidata="Q22906738" start="954" end="966" title="Mars habitat" label="Mars habitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q104875186" start="1037" end="1059" title="space habitat (facility)" label="habitation facility in"/>
<link wikidata="Q4169" start="1060" end="1071" title="outer space" label="outer space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634011" start="1112" end="1150" title="International Astronautical Federation" label="International Astronautical Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q686876" start="1348" end="1360" title="space colonization" label="space colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q410" start="1434" end="1444" title="Carl Sagan" label="Carl Sagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2417179" start="1614" end="1628" title="The Brick Moon" label="The Brick Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q41239" start="1774" end="1796" title="Konstantin Tsiolkovsky" label="Konstantin Tsiolkovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q168362" start="1897" end="1916" title="John Desmond Bernal" label="John Desmond Bernal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16003809" start="1959" end="1976" title="Dandridge M. Cole" label="Dandridge M. Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q46611" start="2272" end="2286" title="Project Apollo" label="Project Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q538399" start="2300" end="2322" title="Gerard K. O&amp;#x27;Neill" label="Gerard K. O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="2353" end="2373" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q13883551" start="2443" end="2451" title="freshmen" label="freshmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088523" start="3049" end="3062" title="Physics Today" label="Physics Today"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3125" end="3167" title="The High Frontier: Human Colonies in Space" label="The High Frontier: Human Colonies in Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="3243" end="3247" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q564946" start="3418" end="3432" title="Stanford torus" label="Stanford torus"/>
<link wikidata="Q565368" start="3477" end="3490" title="Bernal sphere" label="Bernal Sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981843" start="3622" end="3643" title="solar power satellite" label="solar power satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3205870" start="4201" end="4211" title="L5 Society" label="L5 Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q190463" start="4455" end="4469" title="Lagrange point" label="Lagrange point"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492606" start="4545" end="4568" title="Space Studies Institute" label="Space Studies Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q686876" start="4658" end="4676" title="space colonization" label="space colonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q868705" start="4828" end="4839" title="mass driver" label="mass driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q102798" start="4877" end="4880" title="ore" label="ore"/>
<link wikidata="Q752783" start="5030" end="5036" title="human spaceflight" label="crewed"/>
<link wikidata="Q180046" start="5037" end="5054" title="space exploration" label="space exploration"/>
<link wikidata="Q16621799" start="5089" end="5108" title="population pressure" label="population pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q49390" start="5182" end="5193" title="space hotel" label="space hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356094" start="5260" end="5273" title="space economy" label="space economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q37813" start="5294" end="5303" title="ecosystem" label="ecosystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q103817" start="5320" end="5327" title="indigenous peoples" label="peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q686876" start="5339" end="5357" title="Space colonization" label="Space colonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572561" start="5427" end="5439" title="Space and survival" label="For survival"/>
<link wikidata="Q8432" start="5449" end="5461" title="civilization" label="civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q42762" start="5470" end="5479" title="biosphere" label="biosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q192127" start="5845" end="5856" title="Photovoltaics" label="solar cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q178185" start="5860" end="5871" title="heat engine" label="heat engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q928582" start="6130" end="6142" title="gravity well" label="gravity well"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="6355" end="6359" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q3863" start="6361" end="6369" title="asteroid" label="asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="6379" end="6383" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915971" start="6385" end="6413" title="in-situ resource utilization" label="in-situ resource utilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q748764" start="6426" end="6441" title="Asteroid mining" label="Asteroid mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q748764" start="6809" end="6833" title="Asteroid mining" label="draw materials from them"/>
<link wikidata="Q2179" start="7123" end="7136" title="asteroid belt" label="asteroid belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q208147" start="7451" end="7463" title="hang gliding" label="hang gliding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627572" start="7479" end="7501" title="human-powered aircraft" label="human-powered aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q3863" start="7622" end="7630" title="asteroid" label="asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q964131" start="7687" end="7702" title="generation ship" label="generation ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184955" start="8696" end="8703" title="delta-v" label="delta-v"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100095" start="8811" end="8833" title="orbital stationkeeping" label="orbital stationkeeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q503520" start="9223" end="9256" title="tether propulsion" label="electromagnetic tether propulsion"/>
<link wikidata="Q868705" start="9261" end="9272" title="mass driver" label="mass driver"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9474" end="9482" title="Lagrangian point#L4 and L5" label="L4 or L5"/>
<link wikidata="Q6915" start="9558" end="9571" title="magnetosphere" label="magnetosphere"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9670" end="9685" title="Proton#Human exposure" label="proton exposure"/>
<link wikidata="Q79833" start="9695" end="9705" title="solar wind" label="solar wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572686" start="9717" end="9747" title="Health threat from cosmic rays" label="Health threat from cosmic rays"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185086" start="10264" end="10293" title="background radiation" label="high natural background areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q39552" start="10607" end="10615" title="pressure" label="pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="10650" end="10656" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="10664" end="10678" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="10683" end="10691" title="nitrogen" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087" start="11026" end="11026" title="ammonia" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="11174" end="11192" title="outer Solar System" label="outer Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q11982" start="11276" end="11290" title="photosynthesis" label="photosynthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q124946" start="11291" end="11297" title="gardening" label="garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q191667" start="11313" end="11324" title="hydroponics" label="hydroponics"/>
<link wikidata="Q397350" start="11329" end="11345" title="forest gardening" label="forest gardening"/>
<link wikidata="Q757554" start="11493" end="11511" title="nuclear submarines" label="nuclear submarines"/>
<link wikidata="Q82264" start="11563" end="11572" title="catalytic" label="catalytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q925" start="11751" end="11758" title="mercury (element)" label="mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q11351" start="11843" end="11850" title="Organic chemistry" label="Organic"/>
<link wikidata="Q180809" start="12703" end="12720" title="mass spectrometry" label="mass spectrometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q122508" start="13232" end="13239" title="inertia" label="inertia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332690" start="13251" end="13267" title="Artificial gravity" label="simulate gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q275450" start="14183" end="14195" title="space debris" label="space debris"/>
<link wikidata="Q7012" start="14197" end="14206" title="meteoroid" label="meteoroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q47528" start="14396" end="14401" title="Radar" label="Radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572702" start="15787" end="15795" title="radiator" label="radiator"/>
<link wikidata="Q160329" start="15931" end="15941" title="convection" label="convection"/>
<link wikidata="Q83001" start="16254" end="16270" title="Spacecraft attitude control" label="attitude control"/>
<link wikidata="Q2457049" start="16344" end="16358" title="momentum wheel" label="momentum wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q104225" start="16435" end="16445" title="precession" label="precession"/>
<link wikidata="Q565368" start="16544" end="16557" title="Bernal sphere" label="Bernal sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043389" start="16566" end="16587" title="O&amp;#x27;Neill cylinder" label="O&amp;#x27;Neill cylinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q465453" start="16633" end="16641" title="dumbbell" label="dumbbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324102" start="16696" end="16709" title="counterweight" label="counterweight"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302416" start="16826" end="16839" title="transhab" label="orbital hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q465453" start="17548" end="17556" title="dumbbell" label="dumbbell"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18426" end="18436" title="Bernal sphere#Island One" label="Island One"/>
<link wikidata="Q564946" start="18499" end="18513" title="Stanford torus" label="Stanford torus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043389" start="18811" end="18832" title="O&amp;#x27;Neill cylinder" label="O&amp;#x27;Neill cylinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5769264" start="18906" end="18924" title="McKendree cylinder" label="McKendree cylinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q16003809" start="19442" end="19459" title="Dandridge MacFarlan Cole" label="Dandridge M. Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q908990" start="19573" end="19581" title="Volatility (chemistry)" label="volatile"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="20383" end="20398" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q316610" start="20406" end="20417" title="Larry Niven" label="Larry Niven"/>
<link wikidata="Q3122718" start="20425" end="20436" title="Known Space" label="Known Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q3375900" start="20500" end="20507" title="Belter (Niven)" label="Belters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618750" start="20532" end="20559" title="Colonization of the asteroids" label="colonized the asteroid belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4631472" start="21112" end="21130" title="Terrarium (space habitat)" label="Asteroid terrarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4631472" start="21192" end="21196" title="2312 (novel)" label="2312"/>
<link wikidata="Q725757" start="21206" end="21226" title="hard science fiction" label="hard science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q130779" start="21234" end="21254" title="Kim Stanley Robinson" label="Kim Stanley Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917693" start="21257" end="21268" title="Bishop Ring (habitat)" label="Bishop Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778729" start="21297" end="21312" title="carbon nanotube" label="carbon nanotube"/>
<link wikidata="Q29098442" start="21883" end="21896" title="Lunar Gateway" label="Lunar Gateway"/>
<link wikidata="Q663611" start="21952" end="21967" title="Low Earth Orbit" label="Low Earth Orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q25271" start="22041" end="22044" title="International Space Station" label="ISS"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22045" end="22060" title="Nautilus-X#ISS centrifuge demonstration" label="Centrifuge Demo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332690" start="22116" end="22134" title="artificial gravity" label="artificial gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325122" start="22186" end="22196" title="Nautilus-X" label="Nautilus-X"/>
<link wikidata="Q11412" start="22723" end="22732" title="gravity" label="partial-g"/>
<link wikidata="Q12510" start="22733" end="22743" title="torus" label="torus-ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q191134" start="22744" end="22754" title="centrifuge" label="centrifuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060742" start="22799" end="22809" title="Inflatable space habitat" label="inflatable"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088838" start="22898" end="22930" title="Bigelow Commercial Space Station" label="Bigelow Commercial Space Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q80959" start="23331" end="23338" title="Elysium (film)" label="Elysium"/>
<link wikidata="Q564946" start="23365" end="23379" title="Stanford torus" label="Stanford torus"/>
<link wikidata="Q13417189" start="23389" end="23401" title="Interstellar (film)" label="Interstellar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043389" start="23415" end="23444" title="O&amp;#x27;Neill cylinder" label="cylindrical O&amp;#x27;Neill type"/>
<link wikidata="Q673699" start="23463" end="23471" title="Arcology" label="Arcology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567622" start="23474" end="23489" title="Bioastronautics" label="Bioastronautics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3176324" start="23492" end="23516" title="Closed ecological system" label="Closed ecological system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360507" start="23519" end="23529" title="Domed city" label="Domed city"/>
<link wikidata="Q469" start="23532" end="23544" title="Dyson sphere" label="Dyson sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q5459907" start="23547" end="23585" title="Floating cities and islands in fiction" label="Floating cities and islands in fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q12721325" start="23588" end="23601" title="Human outpost" label="Human outpost"/>
<link wikidata="Q25245636" start="23652" end="23671" title="Locomotion in space" label="Locomotion in space"/>
<link wikidata="Q957798" start="23674" end="23687" title="Megastructure" label="Megastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201243" start="23690" end="23710" title="Planetary chauvinism" label="Planetary chauvinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572564" start="23713" end="23731" title="Space architecture" label="Space architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572627" start="23734" end="23772" title="Space stations and habitats in fiction" label="Space stations and habitats in fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916" start="23775" end="23786" title="Spaceflight" label="Spaceflight"/>
<link wikidata="Q25956" start="23789" end="23802" title="Space station" label="Space station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7578933" start="23805" end="23810" title="Spome" label="Spome"/>
<link wikidata="Q4463341" start="23813" end="23831" title="Underground living" label="Underground living"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348073" start="23834" end="23850" title="Underground city" label="Underground city"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970932" start="23853" end="23871" title="Underwater habitat" label="Underwater habitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q565" start="24061" end="24078" title="Wikimedia Commons" label="Wikimedia Commons"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="140283" wikidata="Q3279184" url="?curid=140283" title="Local government areas of Victoria">
<text>This is a list of local government areas (LGAs) in Victoria, sorted by region.

Also referred to as municipalities, the 79 Victorian LGAs are classified as cities (34), shires (38), rural cities (6) and boroughs (1). In general, an urban or suburban LGA is called a city and is governed by a city council, while a rural LGA covering a larger rural area is usually called a shire and is governed by a shire council. Local councils have the same administrative functions and similar political structures, regardless of their classification.

Local elections are held in Victoria every four years with the most recent elections held in 2024.

== Current local government areas ==
=== Greater Melbourne ===

=== Regional Victoria ===
==== Barwon South West ====
==== Grampians ====
==== Gippsland ====
==== Hume ====
==== Loddon Mallee ====

== Former local government areas ==
This is a list of former local government areas in Victoria. Many of these existed from the 19th century until the 1994 statewite local government amalgamations.
=== Greater Melbourne ===
This is a list of former Greater Melbourne local government areas. These local government areas were considered part of Greater Melbourne at the time of their dissolution.
=== Regional Victoria ===
This is a list of former regional local government areas around Geelong and surrounding the Greater Melbourne area. These local government areas were not considered part of Greater Melbourne at the time of their dissolution.
== See also ==

*Government of Australia
*Australian Local Government Association
*Municipal Association of Victoria

== References ==
== External links ==
*Victorian Local Governance Association</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3279184" start="10" end="59" title="Local government areas of Victoria" label="list of local government areas (LGAs) in Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q119873825" start="599" end="624" title="2024 Victorian local elections" label="the most recent elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="681" end="698" title="Melbourne" label="Greater Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q17984901" start="735" end="752" title="Barwon South West" label="Barwon South West"/>
<link wikidata="Q17984902" start="763" end="772" title="Grampians (region)" label="Grampians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1526531" start="783" end="792" title="Gippsland" label="Gippsland"/>
<link wikidata="Q17007284" start="803" end="807" title="Hume (region)" label="Hume"/>
<link wikidata="Q27895111" start="818" end="831" title="Loddon Mallee (region)" label="Loddon Mallee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426035" start="1004" end="1034" title="Local government in Victoria" label="local government amalgamations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="1040" end="1057" title="Melbourne" label="Greater Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991162" start="1502" end="1525" title="Government of Australia" label="Government of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824402" start="1527" end="1566" title="Australian Local Government Association" label="Australian Local Government Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q39052554" start="1568" end="1601" title="Municipal Association of Victoria" label="Municipal Association of Victoria"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="140284" wikidata="Q2034630" url="?curid=140284" title="Space Colony (video game)">
<text>Space Colony is a real-time strategy video game developed by Firefly Studios and published by Gathering in 2003. Aspyr Media released a Mac OS X port in 2004. The game was re-released as digital HD version on November 8, 2012.

==Gameplay==
The basic premise is similar to &quot;The Sims&quot; in that the player has to care for the needs of several individuals - here each with a unique predefined personality and different abilities. However the game is mission orientated and involves setting up a futuristic base and carrying out missions which involve mining minerals, developing relationships, harvesting resources to prevent running out of oxygen and power, collecting food, and fighting back alien attacks.

A bonus campaign was released in 2004. It has 5 missions and takes place on the planet Cobash.

===Characters===
There are 20 main characters in this game. All the characters&#x27; attitudes are determined by their happiness. It is necessary to meet the characters&#x27; needs and demands so their work levels don&#x27;t drop. Therefore, they need enough oxygen, power and food or entertaining with bars, clubs, saunas and over other 100 buildings available. Mental health is also an issue in a small colony in space, so meditation spaces, psychotherapy and even detention pods can be of use.

==Development==
===Mini game===
A 2D action-oriented mini-game called &quot;Alien Horde&quot; was created to promote &quot;Space Colony&quot;. Players assume the role of &quot;Space Colony&quot;″s leading lady Venus. She has to fight back alien attacks and try to rescue &quot;Space Colony&quot;″s hard-working Scandinavian biker Stig, plus she has to prevent running out of oxygen. &quot;Alien Horde&quot; is open-ended, and the gameplay becomes more intense with each level. Beside the same setting the gameplay of the minigame has not much in common with the more strategic-oriented gameplay of &quot;Space Colony&quot;.

===Music===
&quot;Space Colony&quot;″s theme song &quot;You&#x27;re So Gangsta&quot; was contributed by the band Chromeo.

===HD version===
&quot;Space Colony HD&quot; was released on November 8, 2012. The new version of the game features high-definition graphics and a wider field of view, with support for resolutions up to 2560x1600. The re-release includes 8 new official bonus campaigns and the previously released Cobash bonus campaign plus 6 user-created campaigns from SpaceColonyFans.net. The game is compatible with Windows 2000/XP/7/8/10. Purchases from GOG.com include the Alien Horde mini-game, HD wallpaper, a digital manual and the soundtrack of the game. A separate HD patch for owners of the previous version was released on November 12, 2012.

===Steam Edition===
&quot;Space Colony: Steam Edition&quot; was released on April 30, 2015. This version includes a number of exclusive Steam features such as achievements, trading cards, and Steam Cloud for saved games. Also supported are high resolution graphics settings of the previous HD version, allowing players to view their entire colony while playing on a single screen. The game is compatible with Windows XP through 10.

==Reception==

On Metacritic, a review aggregator, &quot;Space Colony&quot; has a score of 75/100 based on 21 reviews. Dan Adams of IGN rated it 7.5/10 and wrote that it is &quot;&quot;almost&quot; great&quot; but has too many annoyances, such as the characters&#x27; irritatingly quirky personalities. In his review for GameSpot, Andrew Park called it &quot;an interesting game but not a truly compelling one&quot;. In rating it 6.7/10, Park criticized the lack of variety in gameplay, as each problem can be solved in very similar ways, and there are few spontaneous interactions between the colonists. Eurogamer&#x27;s Martin Taylor rated the game 6/10 and recommended it only to fans of &quot;The Sims&quot;, who might not mind the requirement of constant supervision. &quot;GamePro&quot; rated it 4.5/5 stars and called it &quot;a tough, funny, and very charismatic hybrid&quot; of &quot;The Sims&quot; and strategy games. Joel Durham Jr. of GameSpy rated it 4/5 stars and wrote, &quot;More than just Sims in Space, &quot;Space Colony&quot; mixes city-building, real-time strategy, and offbeat humor to produce an enjoyable and unique strategy title.&quot; &quot;Space Colony: Steam Edition&quot; has a score of 74/100 based on 10 reviews on Metacritic.

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q208189" start="18" end="36" title="real-time strategy" label="real-time strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q980729" start="61" end="76" title="Firefly Studios" label="Firefly Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495819" start="94" end="103" title="Gathering of Developers" label="Gathering"/>
<link wikidata="Q738135" start="113" end="124" title="Aspyr Media" label="Aspyr Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="136" end="144" title="Mac OS X" label="Mac OS X"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="195" end="197" title="High-definition video#HD in video gaming" label="HD"/>
<link wikidata="Q4897444" start="279" end="287" title="The Sims" label="The Sims"/>
<link wikidata="Q317309" start="1175" end="1188" title="Mental health" label="Mental health"/>
<link wikidata="Q686876" start="1217" end="1232" title="Space colonization" label="colony in space"/>
<link wikidata="Q108458" start="1237" end="1247" title="meditation" label="meditation"/>
<link wikidata="Q183257" start="1256" end="1269" title="psychotherapy" label="psychotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087706" start="2048" end="2055" title="Chromeo" label="Chromeo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2174" end="2189" title="High-definition video#HD in video gaming" label="high-definition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486288" start="2500" end="2507" title="GOG.com" label="GOG.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q150248" start="3148" end="3158" title="Metacritic" label="Metacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491832" start="3162" end="3179" title="review aggregator" label="review aggregator"/>
<link wikidata="Q207708" start="3262" end="3265" title="IGN" label="IGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q45836" start="3451" end="3459" title="GameSpot" label="GameSpot"/>
<link wikidata="Q281243" start="3735" end="3744" title="Eurogamer" label="Eurogamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4897444" start="3827" end="3835" title="The Sims" label="The Sims"/>
<link wikidata="Q315718" start="3909" end="3916" title="GamePro" label="GamePro"/>
<link wikidata="Q281239" start="4077" end="4084" title="GameSpy" label="GameSpy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="140287" wikidata="Q1772834" url="?curid=140287" title="Local government areas of Queensland">
<text>This is a list of local government areas (LGAs) in Queensland, Australia, sorted by region. For the history and responsibilities of local government in that state, see Local government in Queensland. For former local government areas in Queensland, see List of former local government areas of Queensland.

==LGAs sorted by region==
==See also==

* List of former local government areas of Queensland
* List of places in Queensland by population

== References ==
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q18481123" start="18" end="40" title="Local government in Australia" label="local government areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="51" end="61" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243680" start="168" end="198" title="Local government in Queensland" label="Local government in Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q259491" start="253" end="304" title="List of former local government areas of Queensland" label="List of former local government areas of Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q259491" start="349" end="400" title="List of former local government areas of Queensland" label="List of former local government areas of Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q17032966" start="403" end="445" title="List of places in Queensland by population" label="List of places in Queensland by population"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="140288" wikidata="Q252861" url="?curid=140288" title="Local government areas of South Australia">
<text>[[Local government in Australia|Local government]] in the Australian state of [[South Australia]] describes the organisations and processes by which towns and districts can manage their own affairs to the extent permitted by section 64A of &quot;Constitution Act 1934 (SA)&quot;.

==LGAs sorted by region==

The organisations, often called local government areas (LGAs) are constituted and managed in accordance with the &quot;Local Government Act 1999&quot; (South Australia). They are grouped below by region, as defined by the Local Government Association of South Australia. Maralinga Tjarutja and Anangu Pitjantjatjara Yankunytjatjara aboriginal councils both located in the remote north of the state are by far the largest South Australian LGAs, both exceeding 100,000 km2. Coorong District Council and Loxton Waikerie are the next largest LGAs. The smallest LGAs are Walkerville and then Prospect, both occupying less than 10 km2 each.

The area with the largest population growth was Playford in Adealide&#x27;s northern suburbs with a net increase of 2,847 people from June 2021 to June 2022. Port Pirie had the largest net reduction in population of 106. The fastest growth of an LGA in South Australia was in Adelaide Plains at 4.9 percent. Coober Pedy was the fastest shrinking LGA, at -3.0 percent.

===Metropolitan Adelaide===

This group of areas are found around Metropolitan Adelaide along a 70 km stretch of the Gulf St Vincent coast and up to 50 km inland.
===Regional South Australia===
====Eyre Peninsula====
====Central region====
====Southern and Hills region====
====Murray Mallee region====
====Southeast region====
====Outback====
==Maps==
==See also==

*&quot;District Councils Act 1887&quot;
*List of cities and towns in South Australia

==References==
==Further reading==

==External links==
* Local Government Association of South Australia
* Local Government Regions of SA – clickable maps</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q252861" start="0" end="97" title="Local government areas of South Australia" label="[[Local government in Australia|Local government]] in the Australian state of [[South Australia]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164232" start="246" end="272" title="Constitution of South Australia" label="Constitution Act 1934 (SA)"/>
<link wikidata="Q431586" start="579" end="597" title="Maralinga Tjarutja" label="Maralinga Tjarutja"/>
<link wikidata="Q485826" start="602" end="639" title="Anangu Pitjantjatjara Yankunytjatjara" label="Anangu Pitjantjatjara Yankunytjatjara"/>
<link wikidata="Q145862" start="780" end="804" title="Coorong District Council" label="Coorong District Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q911495" start="809" end="824" title="District Council of Loxton Waikerie" label="Loxton Waikerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521840" start="874" end="885" title="Town of Walkerville" label="Walkerville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537228" start="895" end="903" title="City of Prospect" label="Prospect"/>
<link wikidata="Q976355" start="992" end="1000" title="City of Playford" label="Playford"/>
<link wikidata="Q14966" start="1102" end="1112" title="Port Pirie" label="Port Pirie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538150" start="1220" end="1235" title="Adelaide Plains Council" label="Adelaide Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q779188" start="1252" end="1263" title="Coober Pedy" label="Coober Pedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112" start="1379" end="1400" title="Adelaide" label="Metropolitan Adelaide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323629" start="1430" end="1445" title="Gulf St Vincent" label="Gulf St Vincent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385889" start="1511" end="1525" title="Eyre Peninsula" label="Eyre Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q24190307" start="1687" end="1713" title="District Councils Act 1887" label="District Councils Act 1887"/>
<link wikidata="Q4673887" start="1721" end="1764" title="List of cities and towns in South Australia" label="List of cities and towns in South Australia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="140289" wikidata="Q16353" url="?curid=140289" title="Aerobraking">
<text>Aerobraking is a spaceflight maneuver that reduces the high point of an elliptical orbit (apoapsis) by flying the vehicle through the atmosphere at the low point of the orbit (periapsis). The resulting drag slows the spacecraft. Aerobraking is used when a spacecraft requires a low orbit after arriving at a body with an atmosphere, as it requires less fuel than using propulsion to slow down.

==Method==
When an interplanetary vehicle arrives at its destination, it must reduce its velocity to achieve orbit or to land. To reach a low, near-circular orbit around a body with substantial gravity (as is required for many scientific studies), the required velocity changes can be on the order of kilometers per second. Using propulsion, the rocket equation dictates that a large fraction of the spacecraft mass must consist of fuel. This reduces the science payload and/or requires a large and expensive rocket. Provided the target body has an atmosphere, aerobraking can be used to reduce fuel requirements. The use of a relatively small burn allows the spacecraft to enter an elongated elliptic orbit. Aerobraking then shortens the orbit into a circle. If the atmosphere is thick enough, a single pass can be sufficient to adjust the orbit. However, aerobraking typically requires multiple orbits higher in the atmosphere. This reduces the effects of frictional heating, unpredictable turbulence effects, atmospheric composition, and temperature.

Aerobraking done this way allows sufficient time after each pass to measure the velocity change and make corrections for the next pass. Achieving the final orbit may take over six months for Mars, and may require hundreds of passes through the atmosphere. After the last pass, if the spacecraft shall stay in orbit, it must be given more kinetic energy via rocket engines in order to raise the periapsis above the atmosphere. If the craft shall land, it must lose kinetic energy, also via rocket engines.

The kinetic energy dissipated by aerobraking is converted to heat, meaning that spacecraft must dissipate this heat. The spacecraft must have sufficient surface area and structural strength to produce and survive the required drag, The temperatures and pressures associated with aerobraking are not as severe as those of atmospheric reentry or aerocapture. Simulations of the &quot;Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter&quot; aerobraking use a force limit of 0.35 N per square meter with a spacecraft cross section of about 37 m2, equate to a maximum drag force of about 7.4 N, and a maximum expected temperature as 170 °C. The force density (i.e. pressure), roughly 0.2 N per square meter, that was exerted on the &quot;Mars Observer&quot; during aerobraking is comparable to the aerodynamic resistance of moving at 0.6 m/s (2.16 km/h) at sea level on Earth, approximately the amount experienced when walking slowly.

Regarding spacecraft navigation, Moriba Jah was the first to demonstrate the ability to process Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU) data collected on board the spacecraft, during aerobraking, using an unscented Kalman Filter to statistically infer the spacecraft&#x27;s trajectory independent of ground-based measurement data. Jah did this using actual IMU data from &quot;Mars Odyssey&quot; and &quot;Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter&quot;. Moreover, this was the first use of an unscented Kalman Filter to determine the orbit of an anthropogenic space object about another planet. This method, which could be used to automate aerobraking navigation, is called Inertial Measurements for Aeroassisted Navigation (IMAN) and Jah won a NASA Space Act Award for this work.

Many spacecraft use solar panels to power their operations. The panels can be used to refine aerobraking to reduce the number of required orbits. The panels rotate according to an AI-powered algorithm to increase/reduce drag and can reduce arrival times from months to weeks.

==Related methods==
Aerocapture is a related but more extreme method in which no initial orbit-injection burn is performed. Instead, the spacecraft plunges deeply into the atmosphere without an initial insertion burn, and emerges from this single pass in the atmosphere with an apoapsis near that of the desired orbit. Several small correction burns are then used to raise the periapsis and perform final adjustments.

This method was originally planned for the &quot;Mars Odyssey&quot; orbiter, but the significant design impacts proved too costly.

Another related technique is that of aerogravity assist, in which the spacecraft flies through the upper atmosphere and uses aerodynamic lift instead of drag at the point of closest approach. If correctly oriented, this can increase the deflection angle above that of a pure gravity assist, resulting in a larger delta-v.

==Spacecraft missions==
Although the theory of aerobraking is well developed, using the technique is difficult because a very detailed knowledge of the character of the target planet&#x27;s atmosphere is needed in order to plan the maneuver correctly. Currently, the deceleration is monitored during each maneuver and plans are modified accordingly. Since no spacecraft can yet aerobrake safely on its own, this requires constant attention from both human controllers and the Deep Space Network. This is particularly true near the end of the process, when the drag passes are relatively close together (only about 2 hours apart for Mars). NASA has used aerobraking four times to modify a spacecraft&#x27;s orbit to one with lower energy, reduced apoapsis altitude, and smaller orbit.

On 19 March 1991, aerobraking was demonstrated by the Hiten spacecraft. This was the first aerobraking maneuver by a deep space probe. Hiten (a.k.a. MUSES-A) was launched by the Institute of Space and Astronautical Science (ISAS) of Japan. Hiten flew by the Earth at an altitude of 125.5 km over the Pacific at 11.0 km/s. Atmospheric drag lowered the velocity by 1.712 m/s and the apogee altitude by 8665 km. Another aerobraking maneuver was conducted on 30 March.

In May 1993, aerobraking was used during the extended Venusian mission of the &quot;Magellan&quot; spacecraft. It was used to circularize the orbit of the spacecraft in order to increase the precision of the measurement of the gravity field. The entire gravity field was mapped from the circular orbit during a 243-day cycle of the extended mission. During the termination phase of the mission, a &quot;windmill experiment&quot; was performed: Atmospheric molecular pressure exerts a torque via the windmill-sail-like oriented solar cell wings, the necessary counter-torque to keep the probe from spinning is measured.

In 1997, the &quot;Mars Global Surveyor&quot; (MGS) orbiter was the first spacecraft to use aerobraking as the main planned technique of orbit adjustment. The MGS used the data gathered from the &quot;Magellan&quot; mission to Venus to plan its aerobraking technique. The spacecraft used its solar panels as &quot;wings&quot; to control its passage through the tenuous upper atmosphere of Mars and lower the apoapsis of its orbit over the course of many months. Unfortunately, a structural failure shortly after launch severely damaged one of the MGS&#x27;s solar panels and necessitated a higher aerobraking altitude (and hence one third the force) than originally planned, significantly extending the time required to attain the desired orbit. More recently, aerobraking was used by the &quot;Mars Odyssey&quot; and &quot;Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter&quot; spacecraft, in both cases without incident.

In 2014, an aerobraking experiment was successfully performed on a test basis near the end of the mission of the ESA probe &quot;Venus Express&quot;.

In 2017–2018, the ESA ExoMars Trace Gas Orbiter performed aerobraking at Mars to reduce the apocentre of the orbit, being the first operational aerobraking for a European mission.

Mars Orbiter Mission 2 is a future mission by ISRO, which is proposed to use aerobraking to reduce its apoapsis.

==Aerobraking in fiction==

In Robert A. Heinlein&#x27;s 1948 novel &quot;Space Cadet&quot;, aerobraking is used to save fuel while slowing the spacecraft &quot;Aes Triplex&quot; for an unplanned extended mission and landing on Venus, during a transit from the Asteroid Belt to Earth.

The spacecraft &quot;Cosmonaut Alexei Leonov&quot; in Arthur C. Clarke&#x27;s 1982 novel &quot;2010: Odyssey Two&quot; and its 1984 film adaptation uses aerobraking in the upper layers of Jupiter&#x27;s atmosphere to establish itself at the Lagrangian point of the Jupiter – Io system.

In the 2004 TV series &quot;Space Odyssey: Voyage to the Planets&quot; the crew of the international spacecraft Pegasus perform an aerobraking manoeuvre in Jupiter&#x27;s upper atmosphere to slow them down enough to enter Jovian orbit.

In the fourth episode of &quot;Stargate Universe&quot;, the Ancient ship &quot;Destiny&quot; suffers an almost complete loss of power and must use aerobraking to change course. The 2009 episode ends in a cliffhanger with &quot;Destiny&quot; headed directly toward a star.

In the space simulation sandbox game &quot;Kerbal Space Program&quot;, this is a common method of reducing a craft&#x27;s orbital speed. It is sometimes humorously referred to as &quot;aerobreaking&quot;, because the high drag sometimes causes large crafts to split in several parts.

In Kim Stanley Robinson&#x27;s Mars trilogy, the &quot;Ares&quot; spaceship carrying the first hundred humans to arrive on Mars uses aerobraking to enter into orbit around the planet. Later in the books, as an effort to thicken the atmosphere, scientists bring an asteroid into aerobraking in order to vaporize it and release its contents into the atmosphere.

In the 2014 film &quot;Interstellar&quot;, astronaut pilot Cooper uses aerobraking to save fuel and slow the spacecraft Ranger upon exiting the wormhole to arrive in orbit above the first planet.

==Aerodynamic braking==

Aerodynamic braking is a method used in landing aircraft to assist the wheel brakes in stopping the plane. It is often used for short runway landings or when conditions are wet, icy or slippery. Aerodynamic braking is performed immediately after the rear wheels (main mounts) touch down, but before the nose wheel drops. The pilot begins to pull back on the stick, applying elevator pressure to hold the nose high. The nose-high attitude exposes more of the craft&#x27;s surface-area to the flow of air, which produces greater drag, helping to slow the plane. The raised elevators also cause air to push down on the rear of the craft, forcing the rear wheels harder against the ground, which aids the wheel brakes by helping to prevent skidding. The pilot will usually continue to hold back on the stick even after the elevators lose their authority, and the nose wheel drops, to keep added pressure on the rear wheels.

Aerodynamic braking is a common braking technique during landing, which can also help to protect the wheel brakes and tires from excess wear, or from locking up and sending the craft sliding out of control. It is often used by private pilots, commercial planes, fighter aircraft, and was used by the Space Shuttles during landings.

==See also==

* Aerocapture
* Boost-glide
* Lithobraking


==References==
==Further reading==
* JPL aerobraking report for MGS
* An Explanation of How Aerobraking Works (PDF)
* Hoffman, S. (August 20–22, 1984). A comparison of aerobraking and aerocapture vehicles for interplanetary missions. AIAA and AAS, Astrodynamics Conference. Seattle, Washington: American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics. pp. 25 p.. Retrieved 2007-07-31.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16353" start="0" end="11" title="Aerobraking" label="Aerobraking"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916" start="17" end="28" title="spaceflight" label="spaceflight"/>
<link wikidata="Q801780" start="29" end="37" title="orbital maneuver" label="maneuver"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268240" start="72" end="88" title="elliptical orbit" label="elliptical orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="90" end="98" title="apoapsis" label="apoapsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8104" start="134" end="144" title="atmosphere" label="atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="176" end="185" title="periapsis" label="periapsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q206621" start="202" end="206" title="Drag (physics)" label="drag"/>
<link wikidata="Q40218" start="217" end="227" title="spacecraft" label="spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q609089" start="369" end="379" title="spacecraft propulsion" label="propulsion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11465" start="484" end="492" title="velocity" label="velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261398" start="543" end="557" title="circular orbit" label="circular orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q11412" start="589" end="596" title="gravity" label="gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q834199" start="741" end="756" title="Tsiolkovsky rocket equation" label="rocket equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268240" start="1088" end="1102" title="elliptic orbit" label="elliptic orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q82580" start="1353" end="1361" title="friction" label="friction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151" start="1630" end="1635" title="month" label="month"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="1641" end="1645" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q46276" start="1788" end="1802" title="kinetic energy" label="kinetic energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="1844" end="1853" title="periapsis" label="periapsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q898440" start="1975" end="1985" title="dissipated" label="dissipated"/>
<link wikidata="Q44432" start="2017" end="2021" title="heat" label="heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q531716" start="2277" end="2296" title="atmospheric reentry" label="atmospheric reentry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1746607" start="2300" end="2311" title="aerocapture" label="aerocapture"/>
<link wikidata="Q183160" start="2338" end="2365" title="Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter" label="Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q11402" start="2390" end="2395" title="force" label="force"/>
<link wikidata="Q12438" start="2410" end="2411" title="Newton (unit)" label="N"/>
<link wikidata="Q11466" start="2547" end="2558" title="temperature" label="temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q634772" start="2667" end="2680" title="Mars Observer" label="Mars Observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q58468214" start="2898" end="2908" title="Moriba Jah" label="Moriba Jah"/>
<link wikidata="Q846780" start="3072" end="3085" title="Kalman Filter" label="Kalman Filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q207164" start="3234" end="3246" title="Mars Odyssey" label="Mars Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q183160" start="3263" end="3290" title="Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter" label="Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q846780" start="3347" end="3360" title="Kalman Filter" label="Kalman Filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="3589" end="3593" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1746607" start="3923" end="3934" title="Aerocapture" label="Aerocapture"/>
<link wikidata="Q207164" start="4371" end="4383" title="Mars Odyssey" label="Mars Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4688280" start="4491" end="4509" title="aerogravity assist" label="aerogravity assist"/>
<link wikidata="Q194433" start="4579" end="4595" title="lift (force)" label="aerodynamic lift"/>
<link wikidata="Q223776" start="4729" end="4743" title="gravity assist" label="gravity assist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184955" start="4767" end="4774" title="delta-v" label="delta-v"/>
<link wikidata="Q835696" start="5253" end="5271" title="Deep Space Network" label="Deep Space Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q935149" start="5616" end="5621" title="Hiten (spacecraft)" label="Hiten"/>
<link wikidata="Q935149" start="5697" end="5702" title="Hiten (spacecraft)" label="Hiten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207946" start="5740" end="5784" title="Institute of Space and Astronautical Science" label="Institute of Space and Astronautical Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q313" start="6082" end="6087" title="Venus" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q466932" start="6106" end="6137" title="Magellan spacecraft" label="&amp;quot;Magellan&amp;quot; spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q558066" start="6255" end="6268" title="gravity field" label="gravity field"/>
<link wikidata="Q206300" start="6667" end="6687" title="Mars Global Surveyor" label="Mars Global Surveyor"/>
<link wikidata="Q774583" start="6940" end="6951" title="solar panel" label="solar panel"/>
<link wikidata="Q161358" start="6962" end="6966" title="wing" label="wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="7056" end="7064" title="apoapsis" label="apoapsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q207164" start="7443" end="7455" title="Mars Odyssey" label="Mars Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q183160" start="7472" end="7499" title="Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter" label="Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q210889" start="7680" end="7693" title="Venus Express" label="Venus Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090722" start="7732" end="7749" title="Trace Gas Orbiter" label="Trace Gas Orbiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q21027956" start="7883" end="7905" title="Mars Orbiter Mission 2" label="Mars Orbiter Mission 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q229058" start="7929" end="7933" title="ISRO" label="ISRO"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="7986" end="7994" title="apoapsis" label="apoapsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q123078" start="8028" end="8046" title="Robert A. Heinlein" label="Robert A. Heinlein"/>
<link wikidata="Q81783" start="8071" end="8082" title="Space Cadet" label="Space Cadet"/>
<link wikidata="Q47087" start="8337" end="8353" title="Arthur C. Clarke" label="Arthur C. Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8378" end="8395" title="2010: Odyssey Two" label="2010: Odyssey Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q211784" start="8410" end="8430" title="2010 (film)" label="1984 film adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q319" start="8471" end="8478" title="Jupiter" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q190463" start="8524" end="8540" title="Lagrangian point" label="Lagrangian point"/>
<link wikidata="Q3123" start="8558" end="8560" title="Io (moon)" label="Io"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8598" end="8634" title="Space Odyssey: Voyage to the Planets" label="Space Odyssey: Voyage to the Planets"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045" start="8726" end="8757" title="Atmosphere of Jupiter" label="Jupiter&amp;#x27;s upper atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187039" start="8814" end="8828" title="Darkness (Stargate Universe)" label="fourth episode"/>
<link wikidata="Q194213" start="8838" end="8855" title="Stargate Universe" label="Stargate Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437072" start="8867" end="8874" title="Ancient (Stargate)" label="Ancient"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471545" start="9123" end="9143" title="Kerbal Space Program" label="Kerbal Space Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q200924" start="9202" end="9215" title="orbital speed" label="orbital speed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309431" start="9269" end="9277" title="Structural integrity and failure" label="breaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q130779" start="9368" end="9388" title="Kim Stanley Robinson" label="Kim Stanley Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q13417189" start="9749" end="9761" title="Interstellar (film)" label="Interstellar"/>
<link wikidata="Q206621" start="10475" end="10479" title="drag (physics)" label="drag"/>
<link wikidata="Q48806" start="11169" end="11182" title="Space Shuttle" label="Space Shuttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1746607" start="11218" end="11229" title="Aerocapture" label="Aerocapture"/>
<link wikidata="Q16917817" start="11232" end="11243" title="Boost-glide" label="Boost-glide"/>
<link wikidata="Q636469" start="11246" end="11258" title="Lithobraking" label="Lithobraking"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="140290" wikidata="Q1219552" url="?curid=140290" title="Local government areas of Western Australia">
<text>There are 137 local government areas (LGAs) in Western Australia, which comprise 27 cities, 102 shires, and 8 towns that manage their own affairs to the extent permitted by the &quot;Local Government Act 1995&quot;. The &quot;Local Government Act 1995&quot; also makes provision for regional local governments (referred to as &quot;regional councils&quot;, established by two or more local governments for a particular purpose.

There are three classifications of local government in Western Australia:

* City predominantly urban, plus seven significant regional centres
* Shire predominantly rural or outer suburban areas, plus the Shire of Peppermint Grove
* Town predominantly inner urban, plus the Town of Port Hedland

The Shire of Christmas Island and the Shire of Cocos (Keeling) Islands are federal external territories and covered by the &quot;Indian Ocean Territories Administration of Laws Act&quot;, which allows the Western Australian &quot;Local Government Act&quot; to apply &quot;on-island&quot; as though it were a Commonwealth act. Nonetheless, Christmas Island and the Cocos (Keeling) Islands are not parts of Western Australia.

The most recent local government elections were held in 2023.

== History ==
Land was originally granted in the Swan River Colony under regulations which allowed for land commissioners to assess a tax on private allotments to fund the construction and maintenance of &quot;roads, paths and plantations&quot;. As the Colony began to develop, the first form of local government was established in some areas under the &quot;Towns Improvement Act&quot; of 1838. These trusts were empowered to elect ratepayers as Trustees and assess and collect a property tax for the construction of roads. Many of these town trusts, including the Perth Town Trust, experienced severe administrative and financial difficulties, and in some cases barely functioned at all. The Guildford Town Trust lasted only a couple of years before ceasing to function until it was reconstituted in 1863.

The &quot;District Roads Act&quot; and &quot;Municipal Institutions Act&quot;, both of 1871 improved matters by allowing for the establishment of Roads Boards and Municipal Corporations. Municipal Corporations had the capacity to levy property taxes, pass municipal by-laws and undertake various local regulatory services previously carried out by colonial officials and other central bodies. Corporations could also establish civic institutions and facilities with the governors&#x27; consent, including libraries and botanical gardens. Road Boards where strictly limited to the construction of roads, could not levy property taxes and depended on colonial government grants for any expenditures.

Women were permitted to be elected to Road Boards from 1911 and to Municipal Corporations from 1919. The influence of town clerk W.E. Bold and the Greater Perth Movement around this time led to the amalgamation of inner city local governments to create a greatly expanded City of Perth until 1993, when the City was broken up once again.

The first local government department was established by the state in 1949 to guide local government authorities. Following the war local governments increasingly expanded their services from property, health and local infrastructure (roads, drainage) to community and social services. This was termed the “New Order” at the time, and encompassed the development of community centres, infant health clinics and sporting facilities.

Only a few cities Fremantle, Nedlands, Perth, South Perth, and Subiaco existed prior to 1961. On 1 July 1961, all road districts became shires, and all municipalities became towns or cities. This structure has continued till the present day.

In the 1970s, the scope of local government services expanded to encompass the provision of nursing homes and other forms of aged care.

During the late 1980s, and early 1990s a bi-partisan reform process led to the &quot;Local Government Act 1995&quot;, which amongst other changes, established for the first time a clear separation of responsibility between elected councillors and local government administration. Other key changes included a significant reduction in the number of decisions requiring ministerial approval which allowed for streamlined decision-making and greater local government autonomy.

Although successive state governments have periodically promoted municipal amalgamation, only a small number of local governments have merged over the course of Western Australia&#x27;s history. Historically most local governments have strongly resisted forced amalgamations and the total number of authorities has declined only marginally over the last century. The most recent state government led effort to encourage the voluntary amalgamation of 30 metropolitan local governments into 16 was abandoned by the Barnett government in 2014.

In 2017, the McGowan government initiated a review process to reform the Local Government Act 1995.

== Metropolitan LGAs ==
The 30 metropolitan local government areas (LGAs) comprise 20 cities, 3 shires, and 7 towns.

== Non-metropolitan LGAs ==
The 107 non-metropolitan local government areas (LGAs) comprise 7 cities, 99 shires, and 1 town.

The Shire of Christmas Island and the Shire of Cocos (Keeling) Islands are also included for comparison purposes.

== Regional councils ==
Currently, Western Australia has ten regional councils. Each regional council comprises two or more local government areas (LGAs).

=== Metropolitan regional councils ===
* Eastern Metropolitan Regional Council – 6 LGAs (4 cities, 1 shire, and 1 town)
** City of Bayswater
** City of Belmont
** City of Kalamunda
** City of Swan
** Shire of Mundaring
** Town of Bassendean
* Mindarie Regional Council – 7 LGAs (5 cities and 2 towns)
** City of Joondalup
** City of Perth
** City of Stirling
** City of Vincent
** City of Wanneroo
** Town of Cambridge
** Town of Victoria Park
* Rivers Regional Council – 6 LGAs (4 cities and 2 shires)
** City of Armadale
** City of Gosnells
** City of Mandurah
** City of South Perth
** Shire of Murray
** Shire of Serpentine-Jarrahdale
* Southern Metropolitan Regional Council – 5 LGAs (4 cities and 1 town)
** City of Cockburn
** City of Fremantle
** City of Kwinana
** City of Melville
** Town of East Fremantle
* Tamala Park Regional Council – 7 LGAs (5 cities and 2 towns)
** City of Joondalup
** City of Perth
** City of Stirling
** City of Vincent
** City of Wanneroo
** Town of Cambridge
** Town of Victoria Park
* Western Metropolitan Regional Council – 5 LGAs (1 city, 1 shire, and 3 towns)
** City of Subiaco
** Shire of Peppermint Grove
** Town of Claremont
** Town of Cottesloe
** Town of Mosman Park

=== Non-metropolitan regional councils ===
* Bunbury Harvey Regional Council – 2 LGAs (1 city and 1 shire)
** City of Bunbury
** Shire of Harvey
* Murchison Regional Vermin Council – 5 LGAs (5 shires)
** Shire of Cue
** Shire of Meekatharra
** Shire of Mount Magnet
** Shire of Sandstone
** Shire of Yalgoo
* Pilbara Regional Council – 4 LGAs (1 city, 2 shires, and 1 town)
** City of Karratha
** Shire of Ashburton
** Shire of East Pilbara
** Town of Port Hedland
* Warren Blackwood Alliance of Councils – 5 LGAs (5 shires)
** Shire of Boyup Brook
** Shire of Bridgetown–Greenbushes
** Shire of Donnybrook–Balingup
** Shire of Manjimup
** Shire of Nannup

== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q18481123" start="14" end="36" title="local government in Australia" label="local government areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3206" start="47" end="64" title="Western Australia" label="Western Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664070" start="183" end="208" title="Local Government Act 1995" label="Local Government Act 1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q207820" start="506" end="510" title="List of cities in Australia" label="City"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="574" end="579" title="Shire#Shires in Australia" label="Shire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469756" start="634" end="659" title="Shire of Peppermint Grove" label="Shire of Peppermint Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643771" start="662" end="666" title="List of towns in Western Australia" label="Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854731" start="703" end="723" title="Town of Port Hedland" label="Town of Port Hedland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084186" start="729" end="754" title="Shire of Christmas Island" label="Shire of Christmas Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105471" start="763" end="795" title="Shire of Cocos (Keeling) Islands" label="Shire of Cocos (Keeling) Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824275" start="854" end="878" title="Australian Indian Ocean Territories" label="Indian Ocean Territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="1033" end="1045" title="Australia" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q31063" start="1064" end="1080" title="Christmas Island" label="Christmas Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q36004" start="1089" end="1112" title="Cocos (Keeling) Islands" label="Cocos (Keeling) Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q123280933" start="1166" end="1192" title="2023 Western Australian local elections" label="local government elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q123280933" start="1206" end="1210" title="2023 Western Australian local elections" label="2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162123" start="1262" end="1279" title="Swan River Colony" label="Swan River Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855330" start="1779" end="1795" title="City of Perth" label="Perth Town Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q107172869" start="1907" end="1927" title="Municipality of Guildford" label="Guildford Town Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q8005679" start="2850" end="2859" title="William Bold" label="W.E. Bold"/>
<link wikidata="Q85850700" start="2868" end="2890" title="Greater Perth Movement" label="Greater Perth Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855330" start="2993" end="3006" title="City of Perth" label="City of Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q17984989" start="3070" end="3097" title="Minister for Local Government (Western Australia)" label="local government department"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455046" start="3511" end="3520" title="City of Fremantle" label="Fremantle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490452" start="3522" end="3530" title="City of Nedlands" label="Nedlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855330" start="3532" end="3537" title="City of Perth" label="Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671784" start="3539" end="3550" title="City of South Perth" label="South Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857834" start="3556" end="3563" title="City of Subiaco" label="Subiaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664070" start="3958" end="3983" title="Local Government Act 1995" label="Local Government Act 1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q4861637" start="4861" end="4879" title="Barnett ministry" label="Barnett government"/>
<link wikidata="Q28943024" start="4903" end="4921" title="First McGowan ministry" label="McGowan government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854731" start="5226" end="5232" title="Town of Port Hedland" label="1 town"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084186" start="5239" end="5264" title="Shire of Christmas Island" label="Shire of Christmas Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105471" start="5273" end="5305" title="Shire of Cocos (Keeling) Islands" label="Shire of Cocos (Keeling) Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3206" start="5385" end="5402" title="Western Australia" label="Western Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q82794" start="5411" end="5417" title="region" label="region"/>
<link wikidata="Q18481123" start="5474" end="5496" title="local government in Australia" label="local government areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330292" start="5547" end="5584" title="Eastern Metropolitan Regional Council" label="Eastern Metropolitan Regional Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261226" start="5605" end="5612" title="Shire of Mundaring" label="1 shire"/>
<link wikidata="Q604332" start="5618" end="5624" title="Town of Bassendean" label="1 town"/>
<link wikidata="Q606312" start="5629" end="5646" title="City of Bayswater" label="City of Bayswater"/>
<link wikidata="Q606246" start="5650" end="5665" title="City of Belmont" label="City of Belmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721949" start="5669" end="5686" title="City of Kalamunda" label="City of Kalamunda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506748" start="5690" end="5702" title="City of Swan" label="City of Swan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261226" start="5706" end="5724" title="Shire of Mundaring" label="Shire of Mundaring"/>
<link wikidata="Q604332" start="5728" end="5746" title="Town of Bassendean" label="Town of Bassendean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703523" start="5810" end="5827" title="City of Joondalup" label="City of Joondalup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855330" start="5831" end="5844" title="City of Perth" label="City of Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q606236" start="5848" end="5864" title="City of Stirling" label="City of Stirling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573718" start="5868" end="5883" title="City of Vincent" label="City of Vincent"/>
<link wikidata="Q543262" start="5887" end="5903" title="City of Wanneroo" label="City of Wanneroo"/>
<link wikidata="Q736170" start="5907" end="5924" title="Town of Cambridge" label="Town of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q604307" start="5928" end="5949" title="Town of Victoria Park" label="Town of Victoria Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q606256" start="6012" end="6028" title="City of Armadale" label="City of Armadale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538602" start="6032" end="6048" title="City of Gosnells" label="City of Gosnells"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664472" start="6052" end="6068" title="City of Mandurah" label="City of Mandurah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671784" start="6072" end="6091" title="City of South Perth" label="City of South Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647630" start="6095" end="6110" title="Shire of Murray" label="Shire of Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094463" start="6114" end="6144" title="Shire of Serpentine-Jarrahdale" label="Shire of Serpentine-Jarrahdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q604376" start="6209" end="6215" title="Town of East Fremantle" label="1 town"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105257" start="6220" end="6236" title="City of Cockburn" label="City of Cockburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455046" start="6240" end="6257" title="City of Fremantle" label="City of Fremantle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794961" start="6261" end="6276" title="City of Kwinana" label="City of Kwinana"/>
<link wikidata="Q549764" start="6280" end="6296" title="City of Melville" label="City of Melville"/>
<link wikidata="Q604376" start="6300" end="6322" title="Town of East Fremantle" label="Town of East Fremantle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703523" start="6389" end="6406" title="City of Joondalup" label="City of Joondalup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855330" start="6410" end="6423" title="City of Perth" label="City of Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q606236" start="6427" end="6443" title="City of Stirling" label="City of Stirling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573718" start="6447" end="6462" title="City of Vincent" label="City of Vincent"/>
<link wikidata="Q543262" start="6466" end="6482" title="City of Wanneroo" label="City of Wanneroo"/>
<link wikidata="Q736170" start="6486" end="6503" title="Town of Cambridge" label="Town of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q604307" start="6507" end="6528" title="Town of Victoria Park" label="Town of Victoria Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857834" start="6579" end="6585" title="City of Subiaco" label="1 city"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469756" start="6587" end="6594" title="Shire of Peppermint Grove" label="1 shire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857834" start="6612" end="6627" title="City of Subiaco" label="City of Subiaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469756" start="6631" end="6656" title="Shire of Peppermint Grove" label="Shire of Peppermint Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q543331" start="6660" end="6677" title="Town of Claremont" label="Town of Claremont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136726" start="6681" end="6698" title="Town of Cottesloe" label="Town of Cottesloe"/>
<link wikidata="Q476922" start="6702" end="6721" title="Town of Mosman Park" label="Town of Mosman Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q971890" start="6810" end="6816" title="City of Bunbury" label="1 city"/>
<link wikidata="Q968490" start="6821" end="6828" title="Shire of Harvey" label="1 shire"/>
<link wikidata="Q971890" start="6833" end="6848" title="City of Bunbury" label="City of Bunbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q968490" start="6852" end="6867" title="Shire of Harvey" label="Shire of Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143152" start="6927" end="6939" title="Shire of Cue" label="Shire of Cue"/>
<link wikidata="Q934817" start="6943" end="6963" title="Shire of Meekatharra" label="Shire of Meekatharra"/>
<link wikidata="Q677256" start="6967" end="6988" title="Shire of Mount Magnet" label="Shire of Mount Magnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347321" start="6992" end="7010" title="Shire of Sandstone" label="Shire of Sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q289258" start="7014" end="7029" title="Shire of Yalgoo" label="Shire of Yalgoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q669605" start="7067" end="7073" title="City of Karratha" label="1 city"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854731" start="7089" end="7095" title="Town of Port Hedland" label="1 town"/>
<link wikidata="Q669605" start="7100" end="7116" title="City of Karratha" label="City of Karratha"/>
<link wikidata="Q724939" start="7120" end="7138" title="Shire of Ashburton" label="Shire of Ashburton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277976" start="7142" end="7163" title="Shire of East Pilbara" label="Shire of East Pilbara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854731" start="7167" end="7187" title="Town of Port Hedland" label="Town of Port Hedland"/>
<link wikidata="Q896081" start="7251" end="7271" title="Shire of Boyup Brook" label="Shire of Boyup Brook"/>
<link wikidata="Q507081" start="7275" end="7306" title="Shire of Bridgetown–Greenbushes" label="Shire of Bridgetown–Greenbushes"/>
<link wikidata="Q612302" start="7310" end="7338" title="Shire of Donnybrook–Balingup" label="Shire of Donnybrook–Balingup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516885" start="7342" end="7359" title="Shire of Manjimup" label="Shire of Manjimup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854235" start="7363" end="7378" title="Shire of Nannup" label="Shire of Nannup"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="140297" wikidata="Q1317103" url="?curid=140297" title="Local government areas of Tasmania">
<text>Councils of Tasmania are the 29 administrative districts of the Australian state of Tasmania. Local government areas (LGAs), more generally known as councils, are the tier of government responsible for the management of local duties such as road maintenance, town planning and waste management.

==Local government areas==
There are 29 local government areas of Tasmania:

==Towns and suburbs of local government areas==

The local government areas include the following towns and suburbs, with some towns and suburbs some spanning multiple local government areas:

===Break O&#x27;Day Council===
===Brighton Council===
===Central Coast Council===
===Central Highlands Council===
===Circular Head Council===
===City of Burnie===
===City of Clarence===
===City of Devonport===
===City of Glenorchy===
===City of Hobart===
===City of Launceston===
===Derwent Valley Council===
===Dorset Council===
===Flinders Council===
===George Town Council===
===Glamorgan Spring Bay Council===
===Huon Valley Council===
===Kentish Council===
===King Island Council===
===Kingborough Council===
===Latrobe Council===
===Meander Valley Council===
===Municipality of Tasman===
===Northern Midlands Council===
===Sorell Council===
===Southern Midlands Council===
===Waratah-Wynyard Council===
===West Coast Council===
===West Tamar Council===
==Former local government areas==
Tasmania has had a number of former local government areas. In 1907, the 149 road trusts or town boards (LGAs) of Tasmania were reduced by mergers and amalgamations to 53 LGAs. By the time of a large scale overhaul in 1993, 46 LGAs were reduced to the present-day 29.

==See also==

* List of localities in Tasmania
* Government of Tasmania

== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1317103" start="0" end="20" title="Local government areas of Tasmania" label="Councils of Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q178712" start="75" end="80" title="States and territories of Australia" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q34366" start="84" end="92" title="Tasmania" label="Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q18481123" start="94" end="116" title="Local government in Australia" label="Local government areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q69883" start="259" end="272" title="Urban planning" label="town planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q6626659" start="1644" end="1674" title="List of localities in Tasmania" label="List of localities in Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112571" start="1677" end="1699" title="Government of Tasmania" label="Government of Tasmania"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="140299" wikidata="Q1459673" url="?curid=140299" title="Local government areas of the Northern Territory">
<text>The Northern Territory is a federal Australian territory in north-central Australia. It is the third largest Australian federal division with an area of but the least populous with inhabitants as at June 2019. The Northern Territory is divided administratively into 17 Local government areas (LGAs) generally known as Councils who are responsible for providing local government services.

==Area types==

As of 1 July 2008, there were two classifications of local government in the Northern Territory:
# Municipalities (predominantly inner-city suburban areas and smaller rural towns), of which there were five; and
# Shires or Regions (predominantly rural or outer suburban areas), of which there were eleven shire councils.

The Northern Territory was unusual as a comparatively large share of the territory&#x27;s population lived in unincorporated areas. In 2006, prior to the reorganisation of local government areas in the territory, 92 percent of the land area ( out of ) with 16 percent of the population (30,523 out of 192,898), was unincorporated. This anomaly is due to the territory&#x27;s very low population density, just 0.16 people per km2 (0.099 people per sq mi).

Most of the unincorporated areas disappeared as a result of local government reform in 2008. The area remaining unincorporated is , 1.47 percent of the total, and contains 3.0 percent of the population in June 2019.

By comparison, in the only other states or territories in Australia with unincorporated areas, only 0.02% of the population of New South Wales, 0.002% of Victoria&#x27;s population and 0.6% of the population of South Australia, live in unincorporated areas.

==Current local government areas==
==Former local government areas==
Prior to 1 July 2008, local government areas in the Northern Territory were classified as either :
*Community Government Councils of which 51 existed,
*Incorporated Associations (Commonwealth) of which three existed,
*Municipalities of which six existed and 
*Special Purpose Towns of which there is only one example.

===Towns===
* Town of Jabiru (special purpose town)
* Town of Tennant Creek

===Community Government Councils===
* Alpurrurulam CGC
* Angurugu CGC
* Anmatjere CGC
* Arltarlpilta CGC
* Belyuen CGC (now Belyuen Shire)
* Binjari CGC
* Borroloola CGC
* Coomalie CGC (now Coomalie Shire)
* Cox Peninsula CGC (now Wagait Shire)
* Daguragu CGC
* Elliott District CGC
* Jilkminggan CGC
* Kunbarllanjnja CGC
* Lajamanu CGC
* Ltyentye Apurte CGC
* Marngarr CGC
* Mataranka CGC
* Nauiyu Nambiyu CGC
* Numbulwar Numburindi CGC
* Nyirranggulung Mardrulk Ngadberre Regional Council
* Pine Creek CGC
* Tapatjatjaka CGC
* Thamarrurr Regional Council
* Timber Creek CGC
* Tiwi Islands CGC (now Tiwi Islands Region)
* Walangeri Ngumpinku CGC
* Wallace Rockhole CGC
* Watiyawanu CGC
* Yuendumu CGC
* Yugul Mangi CGC

===Incorporated Communities===
* Aherrenge Community
* Ali Curung Community
* Amoonguna Community
* Aputula Community
* Areyonga Community
* Galiwin&#x27;ku Community
* Gapuwiyak Community
* Ikuntji Community
* Imanpa Community
* Kaltukatjara Community
* Maningrida Community
* Milingimbi Community
* Milyakburra Community
* Minjilang Community
* Mutitjulu Community
* Nganmarriyanga Community
* Ntaria Community (Hermannsburg)
* Nyirrpi Community
* Papunya Community
* Peppimenarti Community
* Ramingining Community
* Umbakumba Community
* Urapuntja Aboriginal Corporation
* Walungurru Community
* Warruwi Community
* Yuelamu Community

===Unincorporated Area===
* Unincorporated Area: A contiguous 92 percent of the area did not belong to any local government area. The LGAs were enclaves within unincorporated territory.

==See also==
* Local government in Australia
* List of places in the Northern Territory by population

==References==
==Sources==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3235" start="4" end="22" title="Northern Territory" label="Northern Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q178712" start="36" end="56" title="states and territories of Australia" label="Australian territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="74" end="83" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18481123" start="269" end="291" title="Local government in Australia" label="Local government areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="1527" end="1542" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q36687" start="1554" end="1562" title="Victoria (state)" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q35715" start="1611" end="1626" title="South Australia" label="South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830064" start="2061" end="2075" title="Town of Jabiru" label="Town of Jabiru"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830076" start="2101" end="2122" title="Town of Tennant Creek" label="Town of Tennant Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q17904" start="2162" end="2178" title="Alpurrurulam, Northern Territory" label="Alpurrurulam CGC"/>
<link wikidata="Q17906" start="2181" end="2193" title="Angurugu, Northern Territory" label="Angurugu CGC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4766148" start="2196" end="2209" title="Anmatjere Community" label="Anmatjere CGC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792441" start="2212" end="2228" title="Arltarlpilta Community" label="Arltarlpilta CGC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3687976" start="2231" end="2242" title="Belyuen Shire" label="Belyuen CGC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4914400" start="2265" end="2276" title="Binjari" label="Binjari CGC"/>
<link wikidata="Q17925" start="2279" end="2293" title="Borroloola" label="Borroloola CGC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3688109" start="2296" end="2308" title="Coomalie Shire" label="Coomalie CGC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1840051" start="2332" end="2349" title="Wagait Shire" label="Cox Peninsula CGC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5208683" start="2371" end="2383" title="Daguragu Community" label="Daguragu CGC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5365645" start="2386" end="2406" title="Elliott District Community Government Council" label="Elliott District CGC"/>
<link wikidata="Q30400626" start="2409" end="2424" title="Jilkminggan" label="Jilkminggan CGC"/>
<link wikidata="Q18002" start="2427" end="2445" title="Oenpelli, Northern Territory" label="Kunbarllanjnja CGC"/>
<link wikidata="Q17984" start="2448" end="2460" title="Lajamanu, Northern Territory" label="Lajamanu CGC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6694766" start="2463" end="2482" title="Ltyentye Apurte Community" label="Ltyentye Apurte CGC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2485" end="2497" title="Marngarr" label="Marngarr CGC"/>
<link wikidata="Q17989" start="2500" end="2513" title="Mataranka, Northern Territory" label="Mataranka CGC"/>
<link wikidata="Q31206426" start="2516" end="2534" title="Nauiyu Nambiyu Community" label="Nauiyu Nambiyu CGC"/>
<link wikidata="Q17997" start="2537" end="2561" title="Numbulwar" label="Numbulwar Numburindi CGC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2564" end="2614" title="Nyirranggulung Mardrulk Ngadberre Regional Council" label="Nyirranggulung Mardrulk Ngadberre Regional Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q18007" start="2617" end="2631" title="Pine Creek, Northern Territory" label="Pine Creek CGC"/>
<link wikidata="Q18023" start="2634" end="2650" title="Titjikala, Northern Territory" label="Tapatjatjaka CGC"/>
<link wikidata="Q18028" start="2653" end="2680" title="Wadeye" label="Thamarrurr Regional Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q18020" start="2683" end="2699" title="Timber Creek, Northern Territory" label="Timber Creek CGC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3687906" start="2702" end="2718" title="Tiwi Islands Region" label="Tiwi Islands CGC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7961278" start="2747" end="2770" title="Walangeri Ngumpinku" label="Walangeri Ngumpinku CGC"/>
<link wikidata="Q29600833" start="2773" end="2793" title="Wallace Rockhole" label="Wallace Rockhole CGC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2796" end="2810" title="Watiyawanu" label="Watiyawanu CGC"/>
<link wikidata="Q18038" start="2813" end="2825" title="Yuendumu" label="Yuendumu CGC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2828" end="2843" title="Yugul Mangi" label="Yugul Mangi CGC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2878" end="2897" title="Aherrenge Community" label="Aherrenge Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q68321125" start="2900" end="2920" title="Ali Curung Community" label="Ali Curung Community"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2923" end="2942" title="Amoonguna Community" label="Amoonguna Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q17908" start="2945" end="2962" title="Aputula" label="Aputula Community"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2965" end="2983" title="Areyonga Community" label="Areyonga Community"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2986" end="3011" title="Galiwin&amp;#x27;ku Community" label="Galiwin&amp;#x27;ku Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q5521801" start="3014" end="3033" title="Gapuwiyak, Northern Territory" label="Gapuwiyak Community"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3036" end="3053" title="Ikuntji Community" label="Ikuntji Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q17968" start="3056" end="3072" title="Imanpa, Northern Territory" label="Imanpa Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q17976" start="3075" end="3097" title="Kaltukatjara" label="Kaltukatjara Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q17988" start="3100" end="3120" title="Maningrida, Northern Territory" label="Maningrida Community"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3123" end="3143" title="Milingimbi, Northern Territory" label="Milingimbi Community"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3146" end="3167" title="Milyakburra Community" label="Milyakburra Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q17991" start="3170" end="3189" title="Minjilang, Northern Territory" label="Minjilang Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q17992" start="3192" end="3211" title="Mutitjulu" label="Mutitjulu Community"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3214" end="3238" title="Nganmarriyanga Community" label="Nganmarriyanga Community"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3241" end="3257" title="Ntaria Community" label="Ntaria Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q17964" start="3259" end="3271" title="Hermannsburg, Northern Territory" label="Hermannsburg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3275" end="3292" title="Nyirrpi Community" label="Nyirrpi Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q18003" start="3295" end="3312" title="Papunya" label="Papunya Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q18006" start="3315" end="3337" title="Peppimenarti, Northern Territory" label="Peppimenarti Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553182" start="3340" end="3361" title="Ramingining, Northern Territory" label="Ramingining Community"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3364" end="3383" title="Umbakumba Community" label="Umbakumba Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503419" start="3386" end="3418" title="Utopia, Northern Territory" label="Urapuntja Aboriginal Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17981" start="3421" end="3441" title="Kintore, Northern Territory" label="Walungurru Community"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3444" end="3461" title="Warruwi Community" label="Warruwi Community"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3464" end="3481" title="Yuelamu Community" label="Yuelamu Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q269528" start="3511" end="3530" title="Unincorporated Area" label="Unincorporated Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621274" start="3627" end="3634" title="enclave" label="enclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q18481123" start="3685" end="3714" title="Local government in Australia" label="Local government in Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q115766103" start="3717" end="3771" title="List of places in the Northern Territory by population" label="List of places in the Northern Territory by population"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="140302" wikidata="Q2915181" url="?curid=140302" title="Hammerstone">
<text>In archaeology, a hammerstone is a hard cobble
used to strike off lithic flakes from a lump of tool stone during the process of lithic reduction. The hammerstone is a rather universal stone tool which appeared early in most regions of the world including Europe, India and North America. This technology was of major importance to prehistoric cultures before the development of metalworking.

==Materials==
A hammerstone is made of a material such as sandstone, limestone or quartzite, is often ovoid in shape (to fit the human hand better), and develops telltale battering marks on one or both ends. In archaeological recovery, hammerstones are often found in association with other stone tool artifacts, debitage and/or objects of the hammer such as ore. The modern use of hammerstones is now mostly limited to flintknappers and others who wish to develop a better understanding of how stone tools were made.

==Usage==
Hammerstones are or were used to produce flakes and hand axes as well as more specialist tools from materials such as flint and chert. They were applied to the edges of such stones so that the impact forces caused brittle fractures, and loss of flakes for example. They were also widely used to reduce the bulk of other hard stones such as jade, jadeite and hornstone to make polished stone tools. A good example is the hornstone found in the English Lake District used to make polished axes during the early Neolithic period, and known as the Langdale axe industry.

Hammerstones were used widely in crushing mineral ores such as malachite during the Chalcolithic period, the earliest part of the Bronze Age, and cassiterite prior to smelting of tin. Iron ores would have been crushed to powder in a similar way during the Iron Age. Such crushing was needed to hasten and encourage reduction in the furnaces where charcoal was the main reducing agent.

Other examples of their use include reducing minerals like haematite to powder, for pigment, and crushing of hard nuts, such as hazel nuts, to extract the edible kernels.

== Types of hammerstone ==
Throughout the period of time in which humans have made stone tools (not only during Prehistory), different techniques and different types of hammerstone have been used. The following are the basic types; Certain sophisticated procedures (such as the use of Conchoidal fractures) requires more specialized tools.

=== Direct percussion ===
==== Sleeping (passive) hammer ====
A large stone set in the ground or firmly mounted. The stone being worked is hit against this anvil, resulting in large flakes that are further processed into tools. This technique is not well known, though there is evidence of it being used during the Lower Paleolithic. The problem with the anvil stone is that the user handles large stones, which can be difficult to control with precision.

Another way of using the sleeping hammer as an anvil is more typical of advanced periods (from the Upper Paleolithic). Although it is based on the use of an anchored stone, the technical concept is completely different: it is about resting stone chips or sheets on the anvil and carrying out an abrupt retouching due to impact on one side (back) or extremity (truncated) thus obtaining retouched orthogonal fractures (this is what is called abrupt retouch). It is also possible to retouch stone tools on the anvil by means of pressure flaking, thus obtaining a regular and monofacial retouched edge.

==== Active hard hammer ====
A simple stone with a worked edge held directly in the hand as a hammer. The hard hammer is and has been the most used throughout human history, because although other types of hammer are used as main tools for carving, stone hammers are the tools that prepared the way for the more advanced techniques. Hard percussion is the first to appear and the only one known for at least two million years (until the soft hammer is incorporated); it was used to manufacture tools throughout the entire operational sequence until lithic technology improved. Then, the hard hammer was relegated to the first stages of making an artifact: the initial roughing, the primary workmanship (the creation of preforms, which would later be refined with a soft or pressure hammer), the attack of percussion planes inaccessible to the soft hammer, the preparation of percussion platforms in certain nuclei, etc.

Despite indirect evidence of its long persistence, archeology has revealed very few hammers. Among the oldest are those cited by Jean and Nicole Chavaillon in both Gomboré 1B, Melka Kunturé and even Olduvai (layers I and II): Active hard hammers are distinguished by their oblong shape with one or two active edges with numerous shock marks and often small flakes (chipping), as well as some cracks. These are recognized by the numerous traces of blows they have (microstars, percussion cones, fissures, random flakes, etc...).

It is possible that in the old and unsystematic excavations they went unnoticed, but it has also been said that the good stone hammers were so appreciated that the craftsman only abandoned them when they were useless. Semenov speaks of a deposit rich in hammering (in Polivanov, Russia), but, like the rest of the sites, they are almost all from the Neolithic period onwards. The size of hard hammers depends on their function: there are very large ones for roughing, medium ones are used for the main work, small ones are auxiliary tools to prepare percussion platforms, or retouch flakes. As for the shape, there are circular, oval, rectangular, etc... In fact, the shape depends a lot on the style of the craftsman (at least for prehistorians who experiment with flint carving who acquire styles, different positions, and tastes).

Despite the fact that stone hammers are more typical of the manufacture of wide and short flakes, used with mastery they can achieve very precise control of rock chipping. In fact, cases of blades manufacture with a hard hammer have been witnessed, mainly in the Middle European Paleolithic (almost always Levallois blades), but also in the Upper and Epipaleolithic. While the extraction of blades is more effective with other techniques, there are enough indications to affirm that it can also be done with a hard hammer. There are even exceptional cases of obsidian blade of more than 30 centimeters manufactured in pre-Columbian Mexico and ancient Ethiopia and greater examples in excess of 70 centimeters found in present-day California. Modern experimental carvers have not been able to recreate these methods.

==== Soft hammer ====
A soft hammer is a fragment of deer antler or hardwood that is used to hit the rock and extract flakes. Soft hammers are usually about 30 or 40 cm long and the ideal size to hold in the hand. The material from which they are made is very varied, since throughout their history humans have hunted many species of deer throughout the globe, but experimental carvers particularly appreciate those of reindeer or caribou (although those of deer are the most common and affordable). The bovine horn is not as suitable as the cervid antler, as it has an external keratin coating separate from the bone core, however they can be used as retouchers. In the case of wood, only especially hard species serve, such as boxwood, holly, and perhaps oak. In any case, the soft hammer wears out with its use relatively quickly. Each blow eats a little from the hammer. Wood hammers wear down especially fast. The antler hammers last a little longer, but in the end they break due to fatigue. Observation with the naked eye reveals that the flint (or whatever the carved rock) leaves small splinters and stone chips embedded in the hammer.

In archaeological excavations, soft hammers are even rarer than hard ones, as they are organic and therefore perishable. François Bordes and Denise de Sonneville-Bordes exhumed one from the most recent Solutrean strata in the Laugerie-Haute cave (Dordogne). The piece was broken into several fragments and incomplete, but retained the functional end, where the marks of the blows could be seen and microscopic embedded flint bits were visible. The petrological analysis additionally determined that it was the same type of flint as the carved pieces extracted from the same archaeological layer.

Despite this brittleness, soft hammers have a series of advantages derived from their elasticity and resistance to stress-deformation. The soft hammer has a lower yield than the rock, that would make a layman think that it is impossible to carve flint or quartzite with a piece of wood or antler. However, its elastic limit is much higher, which makes it bear more tension and it is the rock that breaks, instead of the hammer. This does not happen, however, with the bone. Bone strikers are often unsuitable for carving, in fact bone is more of a carved raw material than rocks.

During the percussion itself, which lasts thousandths of a second, the soft hammer, being a non-isotropic linear elastic, varies its tension state and increases its internal energy in the form of elastic potential energy. The moment the rock reaches its elastic limit and breaks, the potential energy is released and the hammer returns to its original shape. Also due to its elasticity, the contact surface between hammer and rock is greater, since the hammer adapts to the percussion plane. The percussive area is larger, so the fracture is more diffuse than if one were to use a hard hammer, so the &quot;conchoid&quot; is also less pronounced. It is a process so fast that it is invisible to the human eye, but its consequences have been exploited for more than a million years. In practice, these elements give the craftsman greater control over carving, in easier-to-direct results, and in more precise and defined varnishing; in short, the carving is more efficient and its results more effective: Artifacts carved with a soft hammer have a much finer finish than those where only the hard hammer has been used.

The soft hammer appeared during the Lower Paleolithic, specifically in the Acheulean (it is very visible in certain bifaces), 700,000 years ago in Africa and half a million years ago in Eurasia. However, the soft hammer does not replace the hard hammer, on the contrary, it complements it. Typically, the roughing or preparation of the piece is done with a hard hammer, and the finish with a soft hammer. Carved objects have scars from both types of hammer. Often the finished and used tools were recycled, re-sharpened, possibly with hard hammer, so there would be several alternate phases of hard and soft hammer. Other times, in the case of the cores, although the extraction of flakes or sheets was done with a soft or pressure hammer (see below), the hard hammer was necessary to prepare the percussion platform and eliminate protrusions that could disrupt the operation.

The carving experiments of Professor Luis Benito del Rey, tenured professor of Prehistory at the University of Salamanca, serve to distinguish, with a certain degree of acceptable precision (since there is never complete certainty), carving scars by direct percussion with a hard hammer. and those of the soft hammer compared to each other.

The direct soft hammer was used throughout the Upper Paleolithic of Eurasia to obtain blades and flakes, by means of a specific preparation. Prehistoric carvers were able to obtain blades of over half a meter in length. Although the experiments have been able to recreate the methods used, they are still poorly known and the results are often subject to size accidents and fortuitous behavior of the material.

=== Precision and indirect percussion ===
Both percussion with an intermediate piece and pressure carving share common technical points, among them the difficulty of distinguishing the scars left by one and the other. The remaining nuclei of both are, on the other hand, completely different. In the case of pressure, the tool is no longer a hammer in the strict sense of the word, since the compressors, that is, the tools used, do not hit; they only press so hard that they exceed the elastic limit of the rocks, breaking them according to the conchoidal fracture model. For this reason, it is difficult not to associate the compressors with the hammers.

==== Hammer with intermediate piece (pointer) ====
Carving with an intermediate piece is a specialized technique for obtaining lithic blades. It is one of the steps of a laminar extraction method, which means that by itself it has no value, since it requires a previous preparation of the core and continuous maintenance gestures of the same (done this way, the work is very similar to that of a stonemason with his mallet and his chisel). If we consider the core to be ready, there are two known ways to use the pointer or intermediate piece:
* The first is to hold the core between the knees, with the percussion platform up and the extraction face out. The end of the pointer is placed where we want to extract the blade and hit it decisively with a shaft that acts like a mallet. This method yields good products: long, medium-sized and highly standardized blades or sheets, but with a strong general curvature.
* The second is to hold the core underfoot. This results in much straighter blades, but smaller ones. If one tries to increase their size carving accidents are more likely to occur.
It is thought that indirect percussion with a pointer appears in the Upper Palaeolithic, and it coexists with direct percussion. In any case, the scars of these techniques are impossible to distinguish, except in exceptional cases. In fact, it is difficult to identify the bone pointers in the excavations, since they hardly have characteristic marks, that is, different from a percussion with any other purpose. Proposed examples are that of the Fageolet cave (Dordogne), dated in the &quot;Gravettian&quot;, those of Villevallier and Armeau (Yonne), both Neolithic, and those of Spiennes (Belgium), from the same period.

==== Compressor ====
Unlike the technique of indirect percussion with a pointer, pressure carving with compressors is not only used for the extraction of flaked products (specifically stone blades), it is also used for retouching tools. In fact, pressure carving to obtain blades includes a vast repertoire of methods, not all of which are known to researchers. All of these methods require a certain level of specialization, as demonstrated by carving experiences. Because of its complexity and the fact that we do not discuss a striker, this section is brief.

There is a method of pressure retouching, called subparallel covering retouching (due to its morphological aspect), which was rediscovered by the American archaeologist and experimenter Donald E. Crabtree in the 70s, and expanded by this same archaeologist with the collaboration of Butler, Tixier and others. They have also developed many others, but this type of retouching is quite well known (In fact, many enthusiasts manufacture and sell highly accurate replicas in memory of the Native American heritage of certain regions) and the interest from researchers, experimental prehistorians, has gone to the extraction of blades by pressure. To carry out this technique, the piece must be held firmly on the palm of the left hand (holding the lithic artifact firmly is one of the most difficult techniques to learn). The compressor is held with the right or it is levered while holding the left hand between the thumb and the rest of the fingers, pressing as hard as possible. The compressor can be made of horn or ivory (sometimes with a flint embedded in the tip), but in Chalcolithic, which must be considered the golden age of this type of retouching due to the masterpieces obtained, the compressor could have a copper tip. If the technique is done well, the touches are usually very regular, parallel, and very flat over all.

On the other hand, if there is a Silver Age of pressure retouching, it must be the Solutrean, in the Upper Paleolithic (the most emblematic case being that of the Laurel blades); Although the technique was known before, it was hardly used. It disappeared for a time and reappeared in the Neolithic, lasting for a long time in foliaceous pieces of various sizes (from the tip of a stone arrow, to the Aztec ceremonial daggers, through the tips of the Clovis Culture or knives Egyptian Predynastics).

There are many techniques for pressure knapping, too many to describe in detail aside from a basic list:
*&quot;Extraction of blades in hand with the help of a simple cervid horn compressor:&quot; If the flint is of good quality, blades of up to four cm in length and 7 mm in width are obtained, but the difficulty of holding the core firmly increases as the extraction progresses and the core becomes smaller, so carving accidents often occur.
*&quot;Extraction of blades with a compressor and with a core fixation system in hand (a piece with a slot where the core is placed and which can be made of wood, bone or horn)&quot;: The results are not significantly better, but they are more homogeneous, avoiding most carving accidents.
*&quot;Extraction of blades with a system of fixation of the nucleus at hand and the help of a cane-compressor supported in the armpit&quot;: a method already experimented by Crabtree, allows to increase the force with which the nucleus is pressed, thus obtaining slightly larger blades and minimizing carving accidents.
*&quot;Extraction of blades holding the nucleus in the ground by means of wooden fixing mechanisms and using walking sticks (crutches) resting on the chest or abdomen.&quot; The worker&#x27;s posture can be standing (using weight to press) or sitting (less strength, but more control). The blades obtained approach fifteen centimeters long. In addition, they are more standardized, more homogeneous, and the nucleus can be exploited much more until it is completely exhausted.
*&quot;Extraction of blades holding the nucleus in the ground by means of wooden fixing mechanisms and using walking sticks (crutches) supported on the abdomen.&quot; The position of the standing craftsperson allows the weight to be used to press; but the real trick is a recess in the cane, so that it can bend, making it more flexible. That is, adding to the weight of the body the potential energy of the warped cane.
*&quot;Extraction of leaves holding the nucleus in the ground by means of wooden fixing mechanisms and using stick-compressors with a lever resting on the abdomen.&quot; The craftsperson&#x27;s posture is sitting and grasping the cane at the opposite end, pulling it up. Thus, the lever attacks the core with a force greater than 300 kg. With this system, still under investigation, blades of more than 25 centimeters have been obtained.
Extraction of blades by pressure has the advantage, over indirect percussion with pointer, of producing much more rectilinear pieces, as was the case with the other method.
The extraction of leaves began, from the end of the Paleolithic, to be an increasingly complex and sophisticated method in which, as we see, the strikers are only one of the instruments used. As the extraction of blades was perfected, accessories were added: first the intermediate piece or pointer for indirect carving, then the abrasive pebbles to prepare percussion platforms, then the compressors with handles, later the core fixing systems (the former were used to hold them in the hand, then the feet, and finally autonomous, but increasingly complex), the latter attached to the crutches or walking sticks (at first they rested on the shoulder, then on the abdomen and finally on the chest), to which was added a bone, antler or copper tip, a lever mechanism and a recess to increase its elasticity and potential energy. All this points to an increasingly specialized industry, probably focused on trade; at least since the Chalcolithic. There may have been specialized workshops that supplied more or less wide areas from the source of origin of the raw material. A good example of the latter are the very long flint blades from Varna (Bulgaria), which could reach 44 centimeters in length, were made of imported flint and only appeared in the richest tombs dated to the 4th millennium BC.

The opposite case is that of the Valladolid reservoir of &quot;Los Cercados&quot; (municipality of Mucientes). There, a series of Copper Age finds appeared, basically wells filled with archaeological remains. One of them produced a series of utensils typical of an artisan, specialized in the carving of indigenous flint: carving waste, roughing products, flakes, discarded tools, and above all stone hammers and what have been called bone retouchers (this type of pieces are rarely preserved, that&#x27;s why they are so important). Apparently in this site they specialized in foliaceous pieces, for example arrowheads, and sickle teeth; that is, it was a regional production destined for domestic use.

=== Modern metallic hammerstones ===
Stone carving, as is known, is one of the human forms of artistic manifestation and is used both in sculpture and in architecture. Currently, flint and other conchoidal fracture rocks are used as construction materials, either as ashlars or as an aesthetic coating. However, this phenomenon does not concern this article. On the other hand, the carving of flint or other rocks, in the prehistoric way, has persisted for use on agricultural instruments (sickles, threshing ...), spark stones (tinder lighters, flint firearms ...) and even manufacturers of semi-precious gemstones in India and other countries. The difference is usually that hammers with modern metal alloys are used.

==== England ====
To the north of the English region of Suffolk, there is a rich tradition of flint carving centered around the town of Brandon where prehistoric, probably Neolithic, flint mines called &quot;Grimes Graves&quot; are preserved. Apparently, from the historical origins of the town in the 14th century, flint was used as a construction material (including the bridge over the river that gave it strategic relevance). After the appearance of gunpowder, many of the Brandon&#x27;s artisans dedicated themselves to making spark stones for firearms. Although advances in military technology ended this activity in the middle of the 20th century, there are still some master carvers who use various metal hammers.

==== Spain ====
Until a few decades ago, in Spanish towns such as Cantalejo (Segovia), flint was carved for the manufacture of agricultural threshing machines. The flint carving technique was very simple and standardized, aimed at obtaining wide and short but resistant chips of about three centimeters. For this, different hammers were used. The hammer used in the final phase, that of the flake itself, was a long and narrow-handled wooden peg, with a small, almost tiny, metal head with two thin and prominent ends. The metal mass of this type of hammer is very small compared to its long and flexible handle, which, in addition to increasing the speed of the blow, combines the potential energy of the wooden handle with the hardness of the small metal pick. Thus, a direct hard percussion is obtained, with a soft, elastic impact.

==== India ====
In the Gujarat region (India) there are still artisans who make thick chalcedony necklace beads by knapping. This activity is concentrated in the city of Cambay (or Khambhat) and has certain peculiarities; It uses the kickback technique between a pointed metal passive hammer and an active water buffalo horn hammer. The craftsmen shape the beads, holding them against the metal hammer and hitting them with the horn, causing little pieces to fly off little by little. The result is a very efficient method. Although the technique persists today, it is suspected that it must have appeared in very ancient times, perhaps with the first brass instruments, in the Chalcolithic.

==See also==
*Chopper
*Lithic technology
*Stone Age
*Whetstone

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="3" end="14" title="archaeology" label="archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915181" start="18" end="29" title="Hammerstone" label="hammerstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915181" start="40" end="46" title="Hammerstone" label="cobble"/>
<link wikidata="Q332028" start="66" end="78" title="lithic flake" label="lithic flake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7824054" start="95" end="105" title="tool stone" label="tool stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142470" start="128" end="144" title="lithic reduction" label="lithic reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="255" end="261" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="263" end="268" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="273" end="286" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q11756" start="331" end="342" title="prehistoric" label="prehistoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q11042" start="343" end="350" title="culture" label="culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q13085" start="451" end="460" title="sandstone" label="sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="462" end="471" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q237883" start="475" end="484" title="quartzite" label="quartzite"/>
<link wikidata="Q193410" start="495" end="500" title="ovoid" label="ovoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115667" start="564" end="573" title="Impact (mechanics)" label="battering"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042374" start="706" end="714" title="debitage" label="debitage"/>
<link wikidata="Q102798" start="752" end="755" title="ore" label="ore"/>
<link wikidata="Q13645339" start="813" end="825" title="flintknapper" label="flintknapper"/>
<link wikidata="Q479257" start="888" end="898" title="stone tool" label="stone tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q479448" start="974" end="982" title="hand axe" label="hand axe"/>
<link wikidata="Q83087" start="1040" end="1045" title="flint" label="flint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070438" start="1050" end="1055" title="chert" label="chert"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115667" start="1115" end="1127" title="impact force" label="impact force"/>
<link wikidata="Q175089" start="1262" end="1266" title="jade" label="jade"/>
<link wikidata="Q422173" start="1268" end="1275" title="jadeite" label="jadeite"/>
<link wikidata="Q847702" start="1280" end="1289" title="hornstone" label="hornstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q479257" start="1307" end="1317" title="stone tool" label="stone tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q211778" start="1365" end="1386" title="English Lake District" label="English Lake District"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="1431" end="1447" title="Neolithic period" label="Neolithic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q4271276" start="1466" end="1487" title="Langdale axe industry" label="Langdale axe industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q164411" start="1553" end="1562" title="malachite" label="malachite"/>
<link wikidata="Q130253" start="1574" end="1586" title="Chalcolithic" label="Chalcolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="1620" end="1630" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q191222" start="1636" end="1647" title="cassiterite" label="cassiterite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096" start="1669" end="1672" title="tin" label="tin"/>
<link wikidata="Q191552" start="1674" end="1683" title="Iron ores" label="Iron ores"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="1746" end="1754" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q177463" start="1837" end="1845" title="charcoal" label="charcoal"/>
<link wikidata="Q216830" start="1859" end="1873" title="reducing agent" label="reducing agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q103223" start="1935" end="1944" title="haematite" label="haematite"/>
<link wikidata="Q161179" start="1960" end="1967" title="pigment" label="pigment"/>
<link wikidata="Q578307" start="2004" end="2013" title="hazel nut" label="hazel nut"/>
<link wikidata="Q11756" start="2160" end="2170" title="Prehistory" label="Prehistory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747476" start="2333" end="2352" title="Conchoidal fracture" label="Conchoidal fracture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7463501" start="2704" end="2721" title="Lower Paleolithic" label="Lower Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q479505" start="2945" end="2962" title="Upper Paleolithic" label="Upper Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q127233" start="3148" end="3158" title="Retouch (lithics)" label="retouching"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142470" start="3372" end="3388" title="pressure flaking" label="pressure flaking"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3498" end="3509" title="worked edge" label="worked edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q25294" start="3541" end="3547" title="hammer" label="hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218452" start="3969" end="3989" title="Chaîne opératoire" label="operational sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="4419" end="4429" title="archeology" label="archeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q217043" start="4567" end="4574" title="Olduvai Gorge" label="Olduvai"/>
<link wikidata="Q21507135" start="5165" end="5174" title="Polivanov" label="Polivanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="5176" end="5182" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="5247" end="5256" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q332028" start="5822" end="5828" title="Lithic flake" label="flakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045036" start="5922" end="5928" title="Blade (archaeology)" label="blades"/>
<link wikidata="Q259118" start="5995" end="6022" title="Mousterian" label="Middle European Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q841321" start="6038" end="6047" title="Levallois technique" label="Levallois"/>
<link wikidata="Q479505" start="6073" end="6078" title="Upper Paleolithic" label="Upper"/>
<link wikidata="Q829005" start="6083" end="6097" title="Epipaleolithic" label="Epipaleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q53754" start="6291" end="6299" title="obsidian" label="obsidian"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="6364" end="6370" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="6383" end="6391" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23390" start="6602" end="6606" title="deer" label="deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q834007" start="6607" end="6613" title="antler" label="antler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266509" start="6617" end="6625" title="hardwood" label="hardwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q4979192" start="7053" end="7059" title="bovine" label="bovine"/>
<link wikidata="Q65284752" start="7060" end="7064" title="Horn (anatomy)" label="horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q23390" start="7091" end="7097" title="cervid" label="cervid"/>
<link wikidata="Q189474" start="7128" end="7135" title="keratin" label="keratin"/>
<link wikidata="Q158703" start="7278" end="7285" title="boxwood" label="boxwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q117085" start="7287" end="7292" title="holly" label="holly"/>
<link wikidata="Q12004" start="7306" end="7309" title="oak" label="oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q507234" start="7538" end="7545" title="Fatigue (material)" label="fatigue"/>
<link wikidata="Q83087" start="7595" end="7600" title="flint" label="flint"/>
<link wikidata="Q666795" start="7816" end="7831" title="François Bordes" label="François Bordes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121344" start="7897" end="7906" title="Solutrean" label="Solutrean"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7921" end="7940" title="Laugerie-Haute cave" label="Laugerie-Haute cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q3357" start="7942" end="7950" title="Dordogne" label="Dordogne"/>
<link wikidata="Q163082" start="8143" end="8155" title="Petrology" label="petrological"/>
<link wikidata="Q62932" start="8378" end="8388" title="Elasticity (physics)" label="elasticity"/>
<link wikidata="Q193514" start="8407" end="8425" title="Deformation (mechanics)" label="stress-deformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q899301" start="8455" end="8460" title="Yield (engineering)" label="yield"/>
<link wikidata="Q237883" start="8547" end="8556" title="quartzite" label="quartzite"/>
<link wikidata="Q899301" start="8602" end="8615" title="elastic limit" label="elastic limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q543242" start="9480" end="9488" title="Conchoid (mathematics)" label="conchoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7463501" start="10028" end="10045" title="Lower Paleolithic" label="Lower Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q210774" start="10067" end="10076" title="Acheulean" label="Acheulean"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="10139" end="10145" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401" start="10178" end="10185" title="Eurasia" label="Eurasia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10907" end="10926" title="Luis Benito del Rey" label="Luis Benito del Rey"/>
<link wikidata="Q308963" start="10967" end="10990" title="University of Salamanca" label="University of Salamanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q479505" start="11259" end="11276" title="Upper Paleolithic" label="Upper Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q19794820" start="12678" end="12688" title="stonemason" label="stonemason"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13827" end="13840" title="Fageolet cave" label="Fageolet cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q3357" start="13842" end="13850" title="Dordogne" label="Dordogne"/>
<link wikidata="Q756905" start="13872" end="13882" title="Gravettian" label="Gravettian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434053" start="13899" end="13911" title="Villevallier" label="Villevallier"/>
<link wikidata="Q220540" start="13916" end="13922" title="Armeau" label="Armeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q12816" start="13924" end="13929" title="Yonne" label="Yonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q913623" start="13961" end="13969" title="Spiennes" label="Spiennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="13971" end="13978" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q82001" start="15584" end="15589" title="ivory" label="ivory"/>
<link wikidata="Q130253" start="15643" end="15655" title="Chalcolithic" label="Chalcolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="15786" end="15792" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121344" start="15985" end="15994" title="Solutrean" label="Solutrean"/>
<link wikidata="Q45922" start="16288" end="16293" title="arrow" label="arrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q12542" start="16302" end="16307" title="Aztec" label="Aztec"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16308" end="16325" title="ceremonial dagger" label="ceremonial dagger"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485378" start="16352" end="16366" title="Clovis culture" label="Clovis Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q208520" start="16377" end="16398" title="Predynastic Egypt" label="Egyptian Predynastics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347864" start="19565" end="19578" title="walking stick" label="walking stick"/>
<link wikidata="Q155640" start="19777" end="19793" title="potential energy" label="potential energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q130253" start="19898" end="19910" title="Chalcolithic" label="Chalcolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6506" start="20104" end="20109" title="Varna, Bulgaria" label="Varna"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="20111" end="20119" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q115439" start="20246" end="20263" title="4th millennium BC" label="4th millennium BC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20299" end="20319" title="Valladolid reservoir" label="Valladolid reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1919532" start="20365" end="20374" title="Mucientes" label="Mucientes"/>
<link wikidata="Q255848" start="21008" end="21021" title="Stone carving" label="Stone carving"/>
<link wikidata="Q11634" start="21108" end="21117" title="sculpture" label="sculpture"/>
<link wikidata="Q12271" start="21125" end="21137" title="architecture" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122603" start="21238" end="21244" title="ashlar" label="ashlar"/>
<link wikidata="Q83437" start="21577" end="21586" title="gemstones" label="gemstones"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="21590" end="21595" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q23111" start="21748" end="21755" title="Suffolk" label="Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q12861" start="22146" end="22155" title="gunpowder" label="gunpowder"/>
<link wikidata="Q12796" start="22241" end="22249" title="firearms" label="firearms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650171" start="22481" end="22490" title="Cantalejo" label="Cantalejo"/>
<link wikidata="Q15684" start="22492" end="22499" title="Segovia" label="Segovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369140" start="22555" end="22564" title="threshing" label="threshing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061" start="23275" end="23282" title="Gujarat" label="Gujarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="23291" end="23296" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q170448" start="23338" end="23348" title="chalcedony" label="chalcedony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740527" start="23433" end="23441" title="Khambhat" label="Khambhat"/>
<link wikidata="Q42710" start="23558" end="23571" title="water buffalo" label="water buffalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q39782" start="23904" end="23909" title="brass" label="brass"/>
<link wikidata="Q11728731" start="23959" end="23966" title="Chopper (archaeology)" label="Chopper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5088700" start="23968" end="23985" title="Lithic technology" label="Lithic technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q11759" start="23987" end="23996" title="Stone Age" label="Stone Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q507559" start="23998" end="24007" title="sharpening stone" label="Whetstone"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="140305" wikidata="Q1142470" url="?curid=140305" title="Lithic reduction">
<text>In archaeology, in particular of the Stone Age, lithic reduction is the process of fashioning stones or rocks from their natural state into tools or weapons by removing some parts. It has been intensely studied and many archaeological industries are identified almost entirely by the lithic analysis of the precise style of their tools and the chaîne opératoire of the reduction techniques they used. 

Normally the starting point is the selection of a piece of tool stone that has been detached by natural geological processes, and is an appropriate size and shape. In some cases solid rock or larger boulders may be quarried and broken into suitable smaller pieces, and in others the starting point may be a piece of the debitage, a flake removed from a previous operation to make a larger tool. The selected piece is called the lithic core (also known as the &quot;objective piece&quot;). A basic distinction is that between flaked or knapped stone, the main subject here, and ground stone objects made by grinding. Flaked stone reduction involves the use of a hard hammer percussor, such as a hammerstone, a soft hammer fabricator (made of wood, bone or antler), or a wood or antler punch to detach lithic flakes from the lithic core. As flakes are detached in sequence, the original mass of stone is reduced; hence the term for this process. Lithic reduction may be performed in order to obtain sharp flakes, of which a variety of tools can be made, or to rough out a blank for later refinement into a projectile point, knife, or other object. Flakes of regular size that are at least twice as long as they are broad are called blades. Lithic tools produced this way may be bifacial (exhibiting flaking on both sides) or unifacial (exhibiting flaking on one side only).
Cryptocrystalline or amorphous stone such as chert, flint, obsidian, and chalcedony, as well as other fine-grained stone material, such as rhyolite, felsite, and quartzite, were used as a source material for producing stone tools. As these materials lack natural planes of separation, conchoidal fractures occur when they are struck with sufficient force; for these stones this process is called knapping. The propagation of force through the material takes the form of a Hertzian cone that originates from the point of impact and results in the separation of material from the objective piece, usually in the form of a partial cone, commonly known as a lithic flake. This process is predictable, and allows the flintknapper to control and direct the application of force so as to shape the material being worked. Controlled experiments may be performed using glass cores and consistent applied force in order to determine how varying factors affect core reduction.

It has been shown that stages in the lithic reduction sequence may be misleading and that a better way to assess the data is by looking at it as a continuum. The assumptions that archaeologists sometimes make regarding the reduction sequence based on the placement of a flake into a stage can be unfounded. For example, a significant amount of cortex can be present on a flake taken off near the very end of the reduction sequence. Removed flakes exhibit features characteristic of conchoidal fracturing, including striking platforms, bulbs of force, and occasionally eraillures (small secondary flakes detached from the flake&#x27;s bulb of force). Flakes are often quite sharp, with distal edges only a few molecules thick when they have a feather termination. These flakes can be used directly as tools or modified into other utilitarian implements, such as spokeshaves and scrapers.

==Reduction index==
By understanding the complex processes of lithic reduction, archaeologists recognize that the pattern and amount of reduction contribute tremendous effect to lithic assemblage compositions. One of the measurements is the geometric index of reduction. There are two elements in this index: &#x27;t&#x27; and &#x27;T&#x27;. The &#x27;T&#x27; is the &#x27;height&#x27; of maximum blank thickness and the &#x27;t&#x27; is the height of retouched scar from the ventral surface. The ratio between t and T is the geometric index of reduction. In theory this ratio shall range between 0 and 1. The bigger the number is the larger amount of lost weight from lithic flake. By using a logarithmic scale, a linear relationship between the geometric index and the percentage of original flake weight lost through retouch is confirmed. In choosing a reduction index, it is important to understand the strengths and weaknesses of each method, and how they fit to the intended research question, as different indices provide different levels of information. For example, Kuhn&#x27;s geometric index of unifacial reduction (GIUR), which describes the ratio of scar height relative to the flake thickness, is highly influenced by the morphology of the flake blank which limits the applicability of this reduction index.

==Techniques==
===Heating===
Alongside the various percussion and manipulation techniques described below, there is evidence that heat was at least sometimes used. Experimental archaeology has demonstrated that heated stones are sometimes much easier to flake, with larger flakes being produced in flint, for example. In some cases the heating changes the colour of the stone.
===Percussion reduction===
Percussion reduction, or percussion flaking, refers to removal of flakes by impact.

The methods used are:
* Hitting hand-held core with a hammer or percussor
* Bipolar percussion or bipolar technique, using anvil and striking implement
* Projectile percussion: the objective stone is thrown at an anvil
* Indirect percussion: flake struck from core by using a punch

====Hand-held core====
Generally, a core or other objective piece, such as a partially formed tool, is held in one hand, and struck with a hammer or percussor. Percussors are traditionally either a stone cobble or pebble, often referred to as a hammerstone, or a billet made of bone, antler, or wood.

====Bipolar percussion====
When the objective piece is placed on a stationary anvil-stone and the flake is detached by using a striking implement, the method is known as bipolar percussion or bipolar technique. The resulting flake presents a double bulb of percussion, one at each end; alternatively, especially in the case of a quartz flake, there would be crushing at each end.

In bipolar percussion the objective piece of toolstone is placed on an anvil stone, and then the percussion force is applied to the tool stone. Like projectile percussion, the tool stone is likely to shatter, rather than producing a single flake. Unlike projectile percussion, the technique has some degree of control to it. Bipolar percussion is not popular with hobbyists, but there is evidence that bipolar percussion was the preferred way of dealing with certain problems. Bipolar percussion has the benefit of producing many sharp flakes, and triangular pieces of stone which can be useful as drills. Bipolar percussion also does not require the manufacturer to locate a platform before setting to work, and bipolar percussion can produce sharp flakes almost the size of the original piece of tool stone. The lack of control makes bipolar percussion undesirable in many situations, but the benefits mean that it often has a use, especially if workable material is rare. Bipolar percussion is often used to break open small cobbles, or to have a second chance with spent lithic cores, broken bifaces, and tools that have been reworked so much that it is impossible to make further useful tools using traditional lithic reduction. The end result of bipolar percussion is often a big mess, with only a few pieces that can be useful as cores or flakes for further working, but if other methods would result in a total dead-end, bipolar percussion may be desirable.

An alternative view of the bipolar reduction technique is offered by Jan Willem Van der Drift which contradicts the suggestion that there is little control over fracturing. The characteristics of bipolar reduction are different from that occurring in conchoidal fracture and are therefore often misinterpreted by archaeologists and lithic experts.

====Hard-hammer percussion====
Hard hammer techniques are generally used to remove large flakes of stone. Early flintknappers and hobbyists replicating their methods often use cobbles of very hard stone, such as quartzite. This technique can be used by flintknappers to remove broad flakes that can be made into smaller tools. This method of manufacture is believed to have been used to make some of the earliest stone tools ever found, some of which date from over 2 million years ago.

It is the use of hard-hammer percussion that most often results in the formation of the typical features of conchoidal fracture on the detached flake, such as the bulb of percussion and compression rings.

====Soft-hammer percussion====
Soft-hammer percussion involves the use of a billet, usually made of wood, bone or antler as the percussor. These softer materials are easier to shape than stone hammers, and therefore can be made into more precise tools. Soft hammers also deform around the sharp edges of worked stone, rather than shattering through them, making it desirable for working tool stone that already has been worked to some degree before. Soft hammers of course also do not have as much force behind them as hard hammers do. Flakes produced by soft hammers are generally smaller and thinner than those produced by hard-hammer flaking; thus, soft-hammer flaking is often used after hard-hammer flaking in a lithic reduction sequence to do finer work. As well as this, soft-hammers can produce longer flakes which aid in the conservation of materials because they produce a longer cutting edge per unit of mass lost.

In most cases, the amount of pressure applied to the objective piece in soft-hammer percussion is not enough for the formation of a typical conchoidal fracture. Rather, soft-hammer flakes are most often produced by what is referred to as a bending fracture, so-called because the flake is quite literally bent or &quot;peeled&quot; from the objective piece. A bending fracture can be produced with a hard hammer. Flakes removed in this manner lack a bulb of percussion, and are distinguished instead by the presence of a small lip where the flake&#x27;s striking platform has separated from the objective piece.

====Projectile percussion====
Percussion can also be done by throwing the objective piece at an anvil stone. This is sometimes called projectile percussion.

Projectile percussion is so basic as to not be considered a technique. It involves throwing the toolstone at a stationary anvil stone. This method provides virtually no control over how the toolstone will fragment, and therefore produces a great deal of shatter, and few flakes. It is difficult to be sure whether or not this method of lithic reduction was ever a commonplace practice, although noting sharp edges on a broken rock might have led early humans to first recognize the value of lithic reduction.

====Indirect percussion====
Often, flakes are struck from a core using a punch, in which case the percussor never actually makes contact with the objective piece. This technique is referred to as indirect percussion.

Indirect percussion involves the use of a punch and hammer. The punch and hammer make it possible to apply large force to very small areas of a stone tool. Indirect percussion is therefore often used to achieve detail work on smaller tools. Some modern hobbyists make use of indirect percussion almost exclusively, with little or no pressure flaking to finish their work.

Since indirect percussion can be so precisely placed, the platform is often much smaller on flakes produced in this way than in other methods of flake removal. Of course, indirect percussion requires two hands to hold the percussing tool set. One holds the hammer, and one holds the punch. Therefore, modern hobbyists must use a third object in order to hold the targeted piece of tool stone while they strike it. Often, some sort of clamp or vise is used. No evidence for such devices has yet been found in the archaeological record, but this is partly because they would normally be made of perishable materials, and partly because they can have great variation in design.

===Pressure flaking===
 Pressure flaking is a method of trimming the edge of a stone tool by removing small lithic flakes by pressing on the stone with a sharp instrument rather than striking it with a percussor. This method, which often uses punches made from bone or antler tines (or, among modern hobbyists, copper punches or even nails), provides a greater means of controlling the direction and quantity of the applied force than when using even the most careful percussive flaking. Copper retoucheurs to facilitate this process were widely employed in the Early Bronze Age – and may therefore be associated with Beaker Culture in northwestern Europe.

Usually, the objective piece is held clasped in the flintknapper&#x27;s hand, with a durable piece of fabric or leather protecting the flintknapper&#x27;s palm from the sharpness of the flakes removed. The tip of the flaking tool is placed against the edge of the stone tool and pressed hard, removing a small linear or lunate flake from the opposite side. The process also involves frequent preparation of the edge to form better platforms for pressing off flakes. This is usually accomplished with abraiders made from a coarse-grained stone such as basalt or quartzite. Great care must be taken during pressure flaking so that perverse fractures that break the entire tool do not occur. Occasionally, &quot;outrepasse&quot; breaks occur when the force propagates across and through the tool in such a way that the entire opposite margin is removed.

The use of pressure flaking facilitated the early production of sharper and more finely detailed tools. Pressure flaking also gave toolmakers the ability to create notches where the objective piece could be bound more securely to the shaft of the weapon or tool and increasing the object&#x27;s utility.

An archaeological discovery in 2010 in Blombos Cave, South Africa, places the use of pressure flaking by early humans to make stone tools back to 73,000 BCE, 55,000 years earlier than previously accepted. The previously accepted date, &quot;no more than 20,000 years ago&quot;, was based upon the earliest evidence previously available, which derived from findings of the Upper Paleolithic Solutrean culture in France and Spain.

==Blanks and preforms ==
A blank is a stone of suitable size and shape to be worked into a stone tool. Blanks are the starting point of a lithic reduction process, and during prehistoric times were often transported or traded for later refinement at another location. Blanks might be stones or cobbles, just as natural processes have left them, or might be quarried pieces, or flakes that are debitage from making another piece. Whatever their origin, on most definitions no further steps have yet been taken to shape them, or they become a preform.

The next stage creates a preform, or roughly shaped piece of stone, that probably reveals the final form of the tool, but is not complete. Preforms might also be transported or traded. Typically, a preform is the shaped remnant of a lithic core. Larger and thicker than the intended tool, it lacks the final trimming and refinement that is present in the completed artifact. Sometimes basic features such as stems and notches have been initiated. In most cases, the term refers to an incomplete projectile point.

==See also==
* Eccentric flint (archaeology)
* Lithic technology
* Tranchet axe

==Notes==
==References==
* 
*

==Further reading==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="3" end="14" title="archaeology" label="archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q11759" start="37" end="46" title="Stone Age" label="Stone Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142470" start="48" end="64" title="Lithic reduction" label="lithic reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q479257" start="140" end="145" title="Stone tool" label="tools"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="149" end="156" title="History of weapons#Prehistory_and_the_ancient_world" label="weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q645143" start="220" end="245" title="archaeological industries" label="archaeological industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q6647905" start="284" end="299" title="lithic analysis" label="lithic analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218452" start="344" end="361" title="chaîne opératoire" label="chaîne opératoire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7824054" start="462" end="472" title="tool stone" label="tool stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042374" start="723" end="731" title="debitage" label="debitage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669978" start="831" end="842" title="lithic core" label="lithic core"/>
<link wikidata="Q850776" start="980" end="992" title="ground stone" label="ground stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915181" start="1097" end="1108" title="hammerstone" label="hammerstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q287" start="1144" end="1148" title="wood" label="wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q265868" start="1150" end="1154" title="bone" label="bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q834007" start="1158" end="1164" title="antler" label="antler"/>
<link wikidata="Q916207" start="1187" end="1192" title="Punch (engineering)" label="punch"/>
<link wikidata="Q332028" start="1203" end="1215" title="lithic flake" label="lithic flake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308299" start="1507" end="1523" title="projectile point" label="projectile point"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045036" start="1633" end="1638" title="blade (archaeology)" label="blade"/>
<link wikidata="Q479448" start="1679" end="1687" title="biface" label="bifacial"/>
<link wikidata="Q7884879" start="1726" end="1735" title="uniface" label="unifacial"/>
<link wikidata="Q3351908" start="1775" end="1792" title="Cryptocrystalline" label="Cryptocrystalline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070438" start="1820" end="1825" title="chert" label="chert"/>
<link wikidata="Q83087" start="1827" end="1832" title="flint" label="flint"/>
<link wikidata="Q53754" start="1834" end="1842" title="obsidian" label="obsidian"/>
<link wikidata="Q170448" start="1848" end="1858" title="chalcedony" label="chalcedony"/>
<link wikidata="Q190727" start="1914" end="1922" title="rhyolite" label="rhyolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662981" start="1924" end="1931" title="felsite" label="felsite"/>
<link wikidata="Q237883" start="1937" end="1946" title="quartzite" label="quartzite"/>
<link wikidata="Q107400" start="2038" end="2058" title="Cleavage (crystal)" label="planes of separation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747476" start="2060" end="2079" title="conchoidal fracture" label="conchoidal fracture"/>
<link wikidata="Q13645339" start="2171" end="2179" title="knapping" label="knapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q5744920" start="2247" end="2260" title="Hertzian cone" label="Hertzian cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q332028" start="2429" end="2441" title="lithic flake" label="lithic flake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623888" start="3257" end="3274" title="striking platform" label="striking platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384824" start="3310" end="3319" title="eraillure" label="eraillure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2238074" start="3376" end="3389" title="bulb of force" label="bulb of force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304176" start="3603" end="3613" title="spokeshave" label="spokeshave"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605626" start="3619" end="3626" title="Scraper (archaeology)" label="scraper"/>
<link wikidata="Q636066" start="5117" end="5141" title="Experimental archaeology" label="Experimental archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669978" start="5761" end="5765" title="lithic core" label="core"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915181" start="5970" end="5981" title="hammerstone" label="hammerstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q104363" start="6105" end="6110" title="anvil" label="anvil"/>
<link wikidata="Q237883" start="8436" end="8445" title="quartzite" label="quartzite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747476" start="8820" end="8839" title="conchoidal fracture" label="conchoidal fracture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2238074" start="8875" end="8893" title="bulb of percussion" label="bulb of percussion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2238074" start="10295" end="10313" title="bulb of percussion" label="bulb of percussion"/>
<link wikidata="Q916207" start="11199" end="11204" title="punch (tool)" label="punch"/>
<link wikidata="Q479257" start="12472" end="12482" title="stone tool" label="stone tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q332028" start="12501" end="12513" title="lithic flake" label="lithic flake"/>
<link wikidata="Q130253" start="12955" end="12971" title="Chalcolithic" label="Early Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q470867" start="13011" end="13025" title="Beaker culture" label="Beaker Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6703864" start="13371" end="13377" title="lunate" label="lunate"/>
<link wikidata="Q43338" start="13602" end="13608" title="basalt" label="basalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q237883" start="13612" end="13621" title="quartzite" label="quartzite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7702800" start="13680" end="13698" title="Termination type" label="perverse fractures"/>
<link wikidata="Q7702800" start="13760" end="13770" title="Termination type" label="outrepasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q728" start="14150" end="14156" title="weapon" label="weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q39546" start="14160" end="14164" title="tool" label="tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q884971" start="14247" end="14259" title="Blombos Cave" label="Blombos Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="14261" end="14273" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q479505" start="14580" end="14597" title="Upper Paleolithic" label="Upper Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121344" start="14598" end="14607" title="Solutrean" label="Solutrean"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="14619" end="14625" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="14630" end="14635" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q479257" start="14729" end="14739" title="stone tool" label="stone tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q188040" start="14995" end="15003" title="quarry" label="quarried"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669978" start="15422" end="15433" title="lithic core" label="lithic core"/>
<link wikidata="Q220659" start="15554" end="15562" title="Artifact (archaeology)" label="artifact"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308299" start="15684" end="15700" title="projectile point" label="projectile point"/>
<link wikidata="Q3061821" start="15718" end="15747" title="Eccentric flint (archaeology)" label="Eccentric flint (archaeology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5088700" start="15750" end="15767" title="Lithic technology" label="Lithic technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2232541" start="15770" end="15782" title="Tranchet axe" label="Tranchet axe"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="140308" wikidata="Q332032" url="?curid=140308" title="Alice Cooper">
<text>Alice Cooper (born Vincent Damon Furnier; February 4, 1948) is an American rock singer and songwriter whose career spans sixty years. With a raspy voice and a stage show that features numerous props and stage illusions, Cooper is considered by music journalists and peers to be &quot;The Godfather of Shock Rock&quot;. He has drawn from horror films, vaudeville, and garage rock to pioneer a macabre and theatrical brand of rock designed to shock audiences.

Originating in Phoenix, Arizona, in 1964, Alice Cooper was originally a band consisting of Furnier, guitarists Glen Buxton and Michael Bruce, bassist Dennis Dunaway, and drummer Neal Smith. The band released seven albums from 1969 to 1973 and broke up in 1975. Having legally changed his name to Alice Cooper, Furnier began a solo career that year with the concept album &quot;Welcome to My Nightmare&quot;. During his career he has sold over 50 million records.

Cooper has experimented with various musical styles, mainly hard rock, glam rock, heavy metal, and glam metal, as well as new wave, art rock, and industrial rock. He helped shape the sound and look of heavy metal, and has been described as the artist who &quot;first introduced horror imagery to rock&#x27;n&#x27;roll, and whose stagecraft and showmanship have permanently transformed the genre&quot;. He is also known for his wit offstage, with &quot;The Rolling Stone Album Guide&quot; calling him the world&#x27;s most &quot;beloved heavy metal entertainer&quot;. Aside from music, Cooper is a film actor, a golfing celebrity, a restaurateur, and, since 2004, a radio disc jockey (DJ) with his classic rock show &quot;Alice&#x27;s Attic&quot;.

==Early life==
Vincent Damon Furnier was born on February 4, 1948, in Detroit, Michigan, the son of Ether Moroni Furnier (1924–1987) and his wife Ella Mae (&quot;née&quot; McCart; 1925–2022). He was named after his uncle, Vincent Collier Furnier, and the short-story writer Damon Runyon. His father was an evangelist in The Church of Jesus Christ, and his paternal grandfather Thurman Sylvester Furnier was a leader and later president (1963–1965) of that church organization.

The Furnier family resided in East Detroit on Lincoln Ave near Kelly Road, a few blocks from Eastland Mall. Cooper attended Kantner Elementary School, recalled watching horror movies at the Eastown Theatre (where he would later perform), and local neighborhood trick-or-treating on Halloween, the &quot;biggest night of the year&quot;, which he took &quot;very seriously&quot;. Cooper was active in his church at ages 11 to 12. Following a series of childhood illnesses, he moved with his family to Phoenix, Arizona, where he attended Cortez High School. In his high school yearbook, his ambition was to be &quot;A million record seller&quot;.

==Career==
===1960s===
====The Spiders and Nazz====
In 1964, 16-year-old Furnier was eager to participate in Cortez High School&#x27;s annual Letterman&#x27;s talent show, so he gathered four fellow cross country teammates to form a group for the show: Glen Buxton, Dennis Dunaway, John Tatum, and John Speer. They named themselves the Earwigs. They dressed up in costumes and wigs to resemble the Beatles, and performed several parodies of Beatles songs, with the lyrics modified to refer to the track team: in their rendition of &quot;Please Please Me&quot;, for example, the line &quot;Last night I said these words to my girl&quot; was replaced with &quot;Last night I ran four laps for my coach&quot;. Of the group, only Buxton knew how to play an instrument—the guitar—so Buxton played guitar while the rest mimed on their instruments. The group got an overwhelming response from the audience and won the talent show. As a result of their positive experience, the group decided to try to turn into a real band. They acquired musical instruments from a local pawn shop, and proceeded to learn how to play them, with Buxton doing most of the teaching, as well as much of the early songwriting. They soon renamed themselves the Spiders, featuring Furnier on lead vocals, Buxton on lead guitar, Tatum on rhythm guitar, Dunaway on bass guitar, and Speer on drums.

In 1966, the Spiders graduated from Cortez High School, and after North High School football player Michael Bruce replaced John Tatum on rhythm guitar, the band released their second single, &quot;Don&#x27;t Blow Your Mind&quot;, an original composition which became a local hit, backed by &quot;No Price Tag&quot;.

By 1967, the band had begun to make regular road trips to Los Angeles to play shows. They soon renamed themselves Nazz and released the single &quot;Wonder Who&#x27;s Lovin&#x27; Her Now&quot;, backed with future Alice Cooper track &quot;Lay Down and Die, Goodbye&quot;. Around this time, drummer John Speer was replaced by Neal Smith. By the end of the year, the band relocated to Los Angeles.

====Name change to Alice Cooper====
In 1968, the band learned that Todd Rundgren also had a band called Nazz, which was signed to a major label, and found themselves in need of another stage name. Furnier also believed that the group needed a gimmick to succeed, and that other bands were not exploiting the showmanship potential of the stage. They chose the name &quot;Alice Cooper&quot; largely because it sounded innocuous and wholesome, in humorous contrast to the band&#x27;s image and music. In his 2007 book &quot;Alice Cooper, Golf Monster&quot;, Cooper stated that his look was inspired in part by films. One of the band&#x27;s all-time favorite movies was &quot;What Ever Happened to Baby Jane?&quot; (1962) starring Bette Davis: &quot;In the movie, Bette wears disgusting caked makeup smeared on her face and underneath her eyes, with deep, dark, black eyeliner.&quot; Another movie the band watched over and over was &quot;Barbarella&quot; (1968): &quot;When I saw Anita Pallenberg playing the Great Tyrant in that movie in 1968, wearing long black leather gloves with switchblades coming out of them, I thought, &#x27;That&#x27;s what Alice should look like.&#x27; That, and a little bit of Emma Peel from &quot;The Avengers&quot;.&quot;

The classic Alice Cooper group lineup consisted of Furnier, lead guitarist Glen Buxton, rhythm guitarist Michael Bruce, bassist Dennis Dunaway, and drummer Neal Smith. With the exception of Smith, who graduated from Camelback High School (which is referred to in the song &quot;Alma Mater&quot; on the band&#x27;s fifth studio album &quot;School&#x27;s Out&quot;), all of the band members were on the Cortez High School cross-country team. Cooper, Buxton, and Dunaway were also art students, and their admiration for the works of surrealist artists such as Salvador Dalí would further inspire their future stage antics.

One night after an unsuccessful gig at the Cheetah club in Venice, Los Angeles, where the band emptied the entire room of patrons after playing just ten minutes, they were approached and enlisted by music manager Shep Gordon, who saw the band&#x27;s negative impact that night as a force that could be turned in a more productive direction. Shep then arranged an audition for the band with composer and renowned record producer Frank Zappa, who was looking to sign bizarre music acts to his new record label, Straight Records. For the audition Zappa told them to come to his house &quot;at 7 o&#x27;clock.&quot; The band mistakenly assumed he meant 7 o&#x27;clock in the morning. Being woken up by a band willing to play that particular brand of psychedelic rock at seven in the morning impressed Zappa enough for him to sign them to a three-album deal. Another Zappa-signed act, the all-female GTOs, who liked to &quot;dress the Cooper boys up like full size Barbie dolls,&quot; played a major role in developing the band&#x27;s early onstage look.

Cooper&#x27;s debut studio album, &quot;Pretties for You&quot; (1969), was eclectic and featured an experimental presentation of their songs in a psychedelic context.

Alice Cooper&#x27;s &quot;shock rock&quot; reputation apparently developed almost by accident at first. An unrehearsed stage routine involving Cooper, a feather pillow, and a live chicken garnered attention from the press; the band decided to capitalize on the tabloid sensationalism, creating in the process a new subgenre, shock rock. Cooper claims that the infamous &quot;Chicken Incident&quot; at the Toronto Rock and Roll Revival concert in September 1969 was an accident. A chicken somehow made its way onto the stage into the feathers of a feather pillow they would open during Cooper&#x27;s performance, and not having any experience with farm animals, Cooper presumed that, because the chicken had wings, it would be able to fly. He picked it up and threw it out over the crowd, expecting it to fly away. The chicken instead plummeted into the first few rows occupied by wheelchair users, who reportedly proceeded to tear the bird to pieces. The next day the incident made the front page of national newspapers, and Zappa phoned Cooper and asked if the story, which reported that he had bitten off the chicken&#x27;s head and drunk its blood on stage, was true. Cooper denied the rumor, whereupon Zappa told him, &quot;Well, whatever you do, don&#x27;t tell anyone you didn&#x27;t do it.&quot;

The band later claimed that this period was highly influenced by Pink Floyd, especially their debut studio album &quot;The Piper at the Gates of Dawn&quot; (1967), the only Pink Floyd album made under the leadership of founding member Syd Barrett (lead vocals and guitar). Glen Buxton said he could listen to Barrett&#x27;s guitar for hours at a time.

===Alice Cooper band in 1970s: 1970–1975===

Despite the publicity from the chicken incident, the band&#x27;s second studio album, &quot;Easy Action&quot;, produced by David Briggs and released in June 1970, fared even worse than its predecessor, entirely failing to chart within the &quot;Billboard&quot; Top 200. Around this time, fed up with Californians&#x27; indifference to their act, they relocated to Pontiac, Michigan, where their bizarre stage act was much better received by Midwestern crowds accustomed to the proto-punk styles of local bands such as the Stooges and the MC5. Despite this, Cooper still managed to receive a cream pie in the face when performing at the Cincinnati Pop Festival. Michigan would remain their steady home base until 1972. &quot;L.A. just didn&#x27;t get it,&quot; Cooper stated. &quot;They were all on the wrong drug for us. They were on acid and we were basically drinking beer. We fit much more in Detroit than we did anywhere else.&quot;

Alice Cooper appeared at the Woodstock-esque Strawberry Fields Festival near Toronto, Ontario, in August 1970. The band&#x27;s mix of glam and increasingly violent stage theatrics stood out in stark contrast to the bearded, denim-clad hippie bands of the time. As Cooper himself stated: &quot;We were into fun, sex, death and money when everybody was into peace and love. We wanted to see what was next. It turned out we were next, and we drove a stake through the heart of the Love Generation&quot;.

In autumn 1970, the Alice Cooper group teamed with producer Bob Ezrin for the recording of their third studio album, &quot;Love It to Death&quot;. This was the final album in their Straight Records contract and the band&#x27;s last chance to create a hit. That first success came with the single &quot;I&#x27;m Eighteen&quot;, released in November 1970, which reached number 21 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 in early 1971. Not long after the album&#x27;s release in January 1971, Warner Bros. Records purchased Alice Cooper&#x27;s contract from Straight and re-issued the album, giving the group a higher level of promotion.

&quot;Love It to Death&quot; proved to be their breakthrough studio album, reaching number 35 on the U.S. &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 album charts. It would be the first of 11 Alice Cooper group and solo albums produced by Ezrin, who is widely seen as being pivotal in helping to create and develop the band&#x27;s definitive sound.

The group&#x27;s 1971 tour featured a stage show involving mock fights and gothic torture modes being imposed on Cooper, climaxing in a staged execution by electric chair, with the band sporting tight, sequined, color-contrasting glam rock-style costumes made by prominent rock-fashion designer Cindy Dunaway (sister of band member Neal Smith, and wife of band member Dennis Dunaway). Cooper&#x27;s androgynous stage role had developed to present a villainous side, portraying a potential threat to modern society. The success of the band&#x27;s single and album, and their tour of 1971, which included their first tour of Europe (audience members reportedly included Elton John and a pre-Ziggy Stardust David Bowie), provided enough encouragement for Warner Bros. to offer the band a new multi-album contract.

Their follow-up studio album &quot;Killer&quot;, released in November 1971, continued the commercial success of &quot;Love It to Death&quot; and included further single success with &quot;Under My Wheels&quot;, &quot;Be My Lover&quot; in early 1972, and &quot;Halo of Flies&quot;, which became a Top 10 hit in the Netherlands in 1973. Thematically, &quot;Killer&quot; expanded on the villainous side of Cooper&#x27;s androgynous stage role, with its music becoming the soundtrack to the group&#x27;s morality-based stage show, which by then featured a boa constrictor hugging Cooper on stage, the murderous axe chopping of bloodied baby dolls, and execution by hanging at the gallows. In January 1972, Cooper was again asked about his peculiar name, and told talk show hostess Dinah Shore that he took the name from a &quot;Mayberry RFD&quot; character.

The summer of 1972 saw the release of the single &quot;School&#x27;s Out&quot;. It went Top 10 in the U.S. and to number 1 in the UK, and remains a staple on classic rock radio to this day. The studio album &quot;School&#x27;s Out&quot; reached No. 2 on the US charts and sold over a million copies. The band relocated to their new mansion in Greenwich, Connecticut. With Cooper&#x27;s on stage androgynous persona completely replaced with brattiness and machismo, the band solidified their success with subsequent tours in the United States and Europe, and won over devoted fans in droves while at the same time horrifying parents and outraging the social establishment. In the United Kingdom, Mary Whitehouse, a Christian morality campaigner, persuaded the BBC to ban the video for &quot;School&#x27;s Out&quot;, although Whitehouse&#x27;s campaign did not prevent the single also reaching number one in the UK. Cooper sent her a bunch of flowers in gratitude for the publicity. Meanwhile, British Labour Member of Parliament Leo Abse petitioned Home Secretary Reginald Maudling to have the group banned altogether from performing in the country.
In February 1973, &quot;Billion Dollar Babies&quot; was released worldwide and became the band&#x27;s most commercially successful studio album, reaching No. 1 in both the US and UK. &quot;Elected&quot;, a late-1972 Top 10 UK hit from the album, which inspired one of the first MTV-style story-line promo videos ever made for a song (three years before Queen&#x27;s promotional video for &quot;Bohemian Rhapsody&quot;), was followed by two more UK Top 10 singles, &quot;Hello Hooray&quot; and &quot;No More Mr. Nice Guy&quot;, the latter of which was the last UK single from the album; it reached No. 25 in the US. The title track, featuring guest vocals by Donovan, was also a US hit single. Around this time Glen Buxton left Alice Cooper briefly because of waning health.

With a string of successful concept albums and several hit singles, the band continued their grueling schedule and toured the United States again. Continued attempts by politicians and pressure groups to ban their shocking act only served to fuel the legend of Alice Cooper further and generate even greater public interest. Their 1973 US tour broke box office records previously set by the Rolling Stones and raised rock theatrics to new heights; the multi-level stage show by then featured numerous special effects, including Billion Dollar Bills, decapitated baby dolls and mannequins, a dental psychosis scene complete with dancing teeth, and the ultimate execution prop and highlight of the show: the guillotine. The guillotine and other stage effects were designed for the band by magician James Randi, who appeared on stage during some of the shows as executioner. In 2012 at Dragon Con, Randi and Cooper discussed their working relationship during this period. The Alice Cooper group had now reached its peak and it was among the most visible and successful acts in the industry. Beneath the surface, however, the repetitive schedule of recording and touring had begun to take its toll on the band.

&quot;Muscle of Love&quot;, released at the end of 1973, was to be the last studio album from the classic lineup, and marked Alice Cooper&#x27;s last UK Top 20 single of the 1970s with &quot;Teenage Lament &#x27;74&quot;. An unsolicited theme song was recorded for the James Bond spy film &quot;The Man with the Golden Gun&quot; (1974), but a different song of the same name by Lulu was chosen instead. By 1974, the &quot;Muscle of Love&quot; album still had not matched the top-charting success of its predecessor, and the band began to have constant disagreements. For various reasons, the members agreed to take what was expected to be a temporary hiatus. &quot;Everyone decided they needed a rest from one another&quot;, said manager Shep Gordon at the time. &quot;A lot of pressure had built up, but it&#x27;s nothing that can&#x27;t be dealt with. Everybody still gets together and talks.&quot; Journalist Bob Greene spent several weeks on the road with the band during the Muscle of Love Christmas Tour in 1973. His book &quot;Billion Dollar Baby&quot;, released in November 1974, painted a less-than-flattering picture of the band, showing a group in total disharmony. Cooper later wrote an autobiography with Steven Gaines called &quot;Me, Alice&quot; (1976) which gave Cooper&#x27;s version of that era of his career, among other things.
During this time, Cooper relocated back to Los Angeles and started appearing regularly on television shows such as &quot;The Hollywood Squares&quot;, and Warner Bros. released the &quot;Greatest Hits&quot; compilation album. It featured classic-style artwork and reached the US Top 10, performing better than &quot;Muscle of Love&quot;. However, the band&#x27;s 1974 feature film &quot;Good to See You Again, Alice Cooper&quot; (consisting mainly of 1973 concert footage with &#x27;comedic&#x27; sketches woven throughout to a faint storyline), released on a minor cinematic run mostly to drive-in theaters, saw little box office success. On March 5, 1974, Cooper appeared on episode 3 of &quot;The Snoop Sisters&quot; playing a Satanic cult singer. The final shows by Alice Cooper as a group were in Brazil in March and April 1974, including the record indoor attendance estimated as high as 158,000 fans in São Paulo on March 30, at the Anhembi Exposition Hall at the start of the first ever South American rock tour.

===Alice Cooper solo: 1975–1980===
In 1975, Alice Cooper returned as a solo artist with the release of &quot;Welcome to My Nightmare&quot;. To avoid legal complications over ownership of the group name, &quot;Alice Cooper&quot; had by then become Furnier&#x27;s new legal name. Speaking on the subject of Alice Cooper continuing as a solo project as opposed to the band it once was, Cooper stated in 1975, &quot;It got very basically down to the fact that we had drawn as much as we could out of each other. After ten years, we got pretty dry together.&quot; Manager Gordon added, &quot;What had started in a sense as a pipe-dream became an overwhelming burden.&quot; The success of &quot;Welcome to My Nightmare&quot; marked the final breakup of the original members of the band, with Cooper collaborating with their producer Bob Ezrin, who recruited Lou Reed&#x27;s backing band, including guitarists Dick Wagner and Steve Hunter, to play on the album. Spearheaded by the US Top 20 hit ballad &quot;Only Women Bleed&quot;, the album was released by Atlantic Records in March of that year and became a Top 10 hit for Cooper. It was a concept album that was based on the nightmare of a child named Steven, featuring narration by classic horror movie film star Vincent Price, and serving as the soundtrack to Cooper&#x27;s new stage show, which now showcased more theatrics than ever, including an furry Cyclops which Cooper decapitated and killed.

Accompanying the album and stage show was the television special &quot;The Nightmare&quot;, starring Cooper and Vincent Price, which aired on US prime-time TV in April 1975. &quot;The Nightmare&quot; (which was later released on home video in 1983 and gained a Grammy Award nomination for Best Long Form Music Video) was regarded as another groundbreaking moment in rock history. Adding to it all, a concert film, &quot;Welcome to My Nightmare&quot;, produced, directed, and choreographed by &quot;West Side Story&quot; cast member David Winters and filmed live at London&#x27;s Wembley Arena in September 1975, was released to theaters in 1976. The film was released in a special edition DVD in 2017.

Such was the immense success of Cooper&#x27;s solo project that he decided to continue as a solo artist, and the original band became officially defunct. Bruce, Dunaway, and Smith would go on to form the short-lived band Billion Dollar Babies, producing one studio album—&quot;Battle Axe&quot;—in 1977. While occasionally performing with one another and Glen Buxton, they would not reunite with Alice until October 23, 1999, at the second Glen Buxton Memorial Weekend for a show at CoopersTown in Phoenix. They reunited for another show, with Steve Hunter on guitar, on December 16, 2010, at the Dodge Theatre in Phoenix. This lineup would perform together again (televised) on March 14, 2011, at the induction of the original Alice Cooper group into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, as well as on May 11, 2011, at London&#x27;s Battersea Power Station at the Jägermeister Ice Cold 4D event (webcast). In 2011, Bruce, Dunaway, and Smith appeared on three tracks they co-wrote on Alice&#x27;s solo studio album &quot;Welcome 2 My Nightmare&quot;. In 2017, they appeared on two tracks they co-wrote on Alice&#x27;s solo studio album &quot;Paranormal&quot;, released in July, and in November they joined his current live band for five tour dates in the United Kingdom.
Following the 1976 US No. 12 ballad hit &quot;I Never Cry&quot;; two studio albums, &quot;Alice Cooper Goes to Hell&quot; and &quot;Lace and Whiskey&quot;; and the 1977 US No. 9 ballad hit &quot;You and Me&quot;, it became clear during his 1977 US tour that Cooper was in dire need of help with his alcoholism (at his alcoholic peak it was rumored that he was consuming up to two cases of Budweiser beer and a bottle of Seagram&#x27;s Seven Crown whiskey a day). Following the tour, Cooper had himself hospitalized in a sanitarium for treatment, during which time the live album &quot;The Alice Cooper Show&quot; was released.

In 1978, a sobered Cooper used his experience in the sanitarium as the inspiration for his semi-autobiographical studio album &quot;From the Inside&quot;, which he co-wrote with Bernie Taupin, known for his work with Elton John; it spawned yet another US Top 20 hit ballad, &quot;How You Gonna See Me Now&quot;. The subsequent tour&#x27;s stage show was based inside an asylum, and was filmed for Cooper&#x27;s first home-video release, &quot;The Strange Case of Alice Cooper&quot;, in 1979. Around this time, Cooper performed &quot;Welcome to My Nightmare&quot;, &quot;You and Me&quot;, and &quot;School&#x27;s Out&quot; on &quot;The Muppet Show&quot; (episode #307) on March 28, 1978 (he played one of the devil&#x27;s henchmen trying to dupe Kermit, Gonzo and Miss Piggy into selling their souls). He also appeared in an against-typecasting role as a piano-playing disco waiter in Mae West&#x27;s final film, &quot;Sextette&quot;, and as a villain in the film &quot;Sgt. Pepper&#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band&quot;. Cooper also led celebrities in raising money to remodel the famous Hollywood Sign in Los Angeles, California. Cooper himself contributed over $27,000 to the project, buying an O in the sign in memory of close friend and comedian Groucho Marx. In 1979, Cooper also guest starred on good friend Soupy Sales&#x27; show, &quot;Lunch with Soupy Sales&quot; and was hit in the face with a pie, as part of the show. When asked about the experience, Cooper had this to say about his friend: &quot;Being from Detroit, I came home every day and watched Soupy at lunch (Lunch with Soupy Sales). One of the greatest moments of my life was getting pie-faced by Soupy. He was one of my all time heroes.&quot;

===1980s===
Cooper&#x27;s studio albums from the beginning of the 1980s have been referred to by Cooper as his &quot;blackout albums&quot; because he cannot remember recording them, owing to the influence of his new, and increasing, cocaine addiction. &quot;Flush the Fashion&quot; (1980), &quot;Special Forces&quot; (1981), &quot;Zipper Catches Skin&quot; (1982) and &quot;DaDa&quot; (1983) saw a gradual commercial decline, with the last two not charting within the &quot;Billboard&quot; Top 200. &quot;Flush the Fashion&quot;, produced by Roy Thomas Baker, known for his work with Queen and the Cars, had a thick, edgy new wave musical sound that baffled even longtime fans, though it still yielded the US Top 40 hit &quot;Clones (We&#x27;re All)&quot;. The track also surprisingly charted on the US Disco Top 100 chart. &quot;Special Forces&quot; featured a more aggressive but consistent new wave style, and included a new version of &quot;Generation Landslide&quot; from &quot;Billion Dollar Babies&quot; (1973). His tour for &quot;Special Forces&quot; marked Cooper&#x27;s last time on the road for nearly five years; it was not until 1986, for &quot;Constrictor&quot;, that he toured again. 1982&#x27;s &quot;Zipper Catches Skin&quot; was a more pop punk-oriented recording, containing many quirky high-energy guitar-driven songs along with his most unusual collection of subject matters for lyrics, and Patty Donahue of the Waitresses provided guest vocals and &quot;sarcasm&quot; on the track &quot;I Like Girls&quot;. 1983 marked the return collaboration of producer Bob Ezrin and guitarist Dick Wagner for the haunting epic &quot;DaDa&quot;, the final studio album in his Warner Bros. contract.

In mid-1983, after the recording of &quot;DaDa&quot; was completed, Cooper was hospitalized for alcoholism again, and cirrhosis of the liver. Cooper was finally stable and sober (and has remained sober since that time) by the time &quot;DaDa&quot; and &quot;The Nightmare&quot; home video (of his 1975 TV Special) were released in the fall of that year; however, both releases performed below expectations. Even with &quot;The Nightmare&quot; scoring a nomination for 1984&#x27;s Grammy Award for Best Long Form Music Video (he lost to Duran Duran), it was not enough for Warner Bros. to keep Cooper on their books. By February 1984, Cooper became a &quot;free agent&quot; for the first time in his career.

Cooper spent a lengthy period away from the music business dealing with personal problems. His divorce from Sheryl Cooper was heard at Maricopa County Superior Court, Arizona, on January 30, 1984, but a decision was made by the couple not to move forward with the divorce. The following month he guested at the 26th Annual Grammy Awards alongside co-presenter Grace Jones. Behind the scenes Cooper kept busy musically, working on new material in collaboration with Aerosmith guitarist Joe Perry. The spring of 1984 was taken up with filming, Cooper acting in the B-grade horror movie &quot;Monster Dog&quot;, filmed in Torrelodones, Spain. Shortly thereafter he reconciled with Sheryl; the couple relocated to Chicago. The year closed with more writing sessions, this time in New York during November with Hanoi Rocks guitarist Andy McCoy. In 1985, he met and began writing songs with guitarist Kane Roberts. Cooper was subsequently signed to MCA Records, and appeared as guest vocalist on Twisted Sister&#x27;s song &quot;Be Chrool to Your Scuel&quot;. A music video was made for the song, featuring actor Luke Perry and Cooper donning his black snake-eyes makeup for the first time since 1979, but neither the song nor the video drew public interest.

In 1986, Alice Cooper officially returned to the music industry with the studio album &quot;Constrictor&quot;. The album spawned the hits &quot;He&#x27;s Back (The Man Behind the Mask)&quot; (the theme song for the movie &quot;Friday the 13th Part VI: Jason Lives&quot;; in the video for the song Cooper was given a cameo role as a deranged psychiatrist) and the fan favorite &quot;Teenage Frankenstein&quot;. The &quot;Constrictor&quot; album was a catalyst for Cooper to make a triumphant return to the road for the first time since the 1981 &quot;Special Forces&quot; project, on a tour titled The Nightmare Returns. The Detroit leg of this tour, which took place at the end of October 1986 during Halloween, was captured on film as &quot;The Nightmare Returns&quot; (1987), and is viewed by some as being the definitive Alice Cooper concert film. It was released on DVD in 2006. The concert, which received rave reviews in the rock music press, was also described by &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; magazine as bringing &quot;Cooper&#x27;s violent, twisted onstage fantasies to a new generation&quot;. The &quot;Constrictor&quot; album was followed by &quot;Raise Your Fist and Yell&quot; in 1987, which had an even rougher sound than its predecessor, as well as the Cooper classic &quot;Freedom&quot;. The subsequent tour of &quot;Raise Your Fist and Yell&quot;, which was heavily inspired by the slasher horror movies of the time such as the &quot;Friday the 13th&quot; series and &quot;A Nightmare on Elm Street&quot;, served up a shocking spectacle similar to its predecessor, and courted the kind of controversy, especially in Europe, that recalled the public outrage caused by Cooper&#x27;s public performances in America in the early 1970s.

In Britain, Labour MP David Blunkett called for the show to be banned, saying &quot;I&#x27;m horrified by his behaviour – it goes beyond the bounds of entertainment.&quot; The controversy spilled over into the German segment of the tour, with the German government actually succeeding in having some of the gorier segments of the performance removed. It was also during the London leg of the tour that Cooper met with a near fatal accident during rehearsal of the hanging execution sequence that occurs at the end of the show.

&quot;Constrictor&quot; (1986) and &quot;Raise Your Fist and Yell&quot; (1987) were recorded with lead guitarist Kane Roberts and bassist Kip Winger, both of whom would leave the band by the end of 1988 (although Kane Roberts played guitar on &quot;Bed of Nails&quot; on Cooper&#x27;s 1989 studio album &quot;Trash&quot;).

In 1987, Cooper made a brief appearance as a vagrant in the supernatural horror film &quot;Prince of Darkness&quot;, directed by John Carpenter. His role had no lines and consisted of generally menacing the protagonists before eventually impaling one of them with a bicycle frame.

Also in 1987, Cooper appeared at WrestleMania III, escorting wrestler Jake &quot;The Snake&quot; Roberts to the ring for his match against The Honky Tonk Man. After the match, which Roberts lost, ended, Cooper got involved and threw Jake&#x27;s snake Damien at Honky&#x27;s manager Jimmy Hart. Roberts considered the involvement of Cooper to be an honor, as he had idolized Cooper in his youth and was still a huge fan. WrestleMania III, which attracted a WWF record 93,173 fans, was held in the Pontiac Silverdome near Cooper&#x27;s home town of Detroit.

Cooper recorded a music video for the &quot;Poison&quot; B-side &quot;I Got a Line on You&quot; after the song was featured on the soundtrack to &quot;Iron Eagle II&quot; (1988).

On April 7, 1988, Cooper nearly died of asphyxiation after a safety rope broke during a rehearsal concert wherein he pretended to hang himself, a stunt he would often perform during live concerts.

In 1988, Cooper&#x27;s contract with MCA Records expired and he signed with Epic Records. Then in 1989 his career finally experienced a legitimate revival with the Desmond Child produced and Grammy-nominated studio album &quot;Trash&quot;, which spawned a hit single &quot;Poison&quot;, which reached No. 2 in the UK and No. 7 in the US, and a worldwide arena tour.

===1990s===
In 1991, Cooper released his nineteenth studio album &quot;Hey Stoopid&quot; featuring several notable rock musicians guesting on the record. Released as glam metal&#x27;s popularity was on the wane, and just before the explosion of grunge, it failed to have the same commercial impact as its predecessor. The same year also saw the release of the video &quot;Alice Cooper: Prime Cuts&quot; which chronicled his entire career using in depth interviews with Cooper himself, Bob Ezrin, and Shep Gordon. One critic has noted that &quot;Prime Cuts&quot; demonstrates how Cooper had used (in contrast to similar artists who succeeded him) themes of satire and moralization to such good effect throughout his career. It was in the &quot;Prime Cuts&quot; video that Bob Ezrin delivered his own summation of the Alice Cooper persona: &quot;He is the psycho killer in all of us. He&#x27;s the axe murderer, he&#x27;s the spoiled child, he&#x27;s the abuser, he&#x27;s the abused; he&#x27;s the perpetrator, he&#x27;s the victim, he&#x27;s the gun slinger, and he&#x27;s the guy lying dead in the middle of the street&quot;.

During the early 1990s, Cooper guested on records by the most successful bands of the time, such as the Guns N&#x27; Roses third studio album &quot;Use Your Illusion I&quot;, on which he shared vocal duties with Axl Rose on the track &quot;The Garden&quot;. He also had a brief appearance as the abusive stepfather of Freddy Krueger in the &quot;A Nightmare on Elm Street&quot; slasher film &quot;Freddy&#x27;s Dead: The Final Nightmare&quot; (1991).

Cooper made a cameo appearance in the 1992 comedy film &quot;Wayne&#x27;s World&quot;. Cooper and his band first appear on stage performing &quot;Feed My Frankenstein&quot; from their studio album &quot;Hey Stoopid&quot;. Afterwards at a backstage party, the movie&#x27;s main characters Wayne Cambell and Garth Algar discover that when offstage, Cooper is a calm, articulate intellectual as he and his band discuss the history of Milwaukee in depth. Wayne and Garth respond to an invitation to hang out with Cooper by kneeling and bowing reverently before him while chanting &quot;We&#x27;re not worthy! We&#x27;re not worthy!&quot;

In 1994, Cooper released &quot;The Last Temptation&quot;, his first concept album since &quot;DaDa&quot; (1983). The album deals with issues of faith, temptation, alienation and the frustrations of modern life, and has been described as &quot;a young man&#x27;s struggle to see the truth through the distractions of the &#x27;Sideshow&#x27; of the modern world&quot;. Concurrent with the release of &quot;The Last Temptation&quot; was a three-part comic book series written by Neil Gaiman, fleshing out the album&#x27;s story. This was to be Cooper&#x27;s last album with Epic Records since according to Brian &#x27;Renfield&#x27; Nelson, Cooper&#x27;s personal assistant, &quot;Alice was interested in going to Hollywood Records even before &#x27;The Last Temptation&#x27; was released because Bob Pfeifer, who originally signed Alice to Epic, was now the President of Hollywood Records. After &#x27;The Last Temptation&#x27; was finished, Alice requested that Sony/Epic let him go so that he could make the switch to Hollywood. He just wanted to go where his friends are.&quot; and was his last studio release for six years, though during this period the live album &quot;A Fistful of Alice&quot; (1997) was released, and in 1997 he lent his voice to the intro track of Insane Clown Posse&#x27;s &quot;The Great Milenko&quot;.

During his absence from the recording studio, Cooper toured extensively every year throughout the latter part of the 1990s, including, in 1996, South America, which he had not visited since 1974. Also in 1996, Cooper sang the role of Herod on the London cast recording of the musical &quot;Jesus Christ Superstar&quot;.

In 1999, the four-disc box set &quot;The Life and Crimes of Alice Cooper&quot; appeared, which contained the authorized biography of Cooper, &quot;Alcohol and Razor Blades, Poison and Needles: The Glorious Wretched Excess of Alice Cooper, All-American&quot;, written by &quot;Creem&quot; magazine editor Jeffrey Morgan.

===2000s===

The first decade of the 21st century saw a sustained period of activity from Alice Cooper, the decade in which he would turn 60. He toured extensively releasing a steady stream of studio albums to favorable critical acclaim. Beginning in 2000 with &quot;Brutal Planet&quot;, a return to horror-filled heavy metal, industrial rock, set in a dystopian post-apocalyptic future. The album was produced by Bob Marlette, with longtime Cooper production collaborator Bob Ezrin returning as executive producer. The accompanying world tour, which included Cooper&#x27;s first concert in Russia, also resulted in &quot;Brutally Live&quot; (2000), a DVD of a concert, recorded in London, England, on July 19, 2000.

Cooper made a guest appearance in 2001 on a third-season episode of &quot;That &#x27;70s Show&quot; titled &quot;Radio Daze&quot;, in which he partook in a game of &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot;.

&quot;Brutal Planet&quot; was succeeded by the sonically similar and acclaimed sequel &quot;Dragontown&quot; (2001), which saw Bob Ezrin back as producer. The album has been described as leading the listener down &quot;a nightmarish path into the mind of rock&#x27;s original conceptual storyteller&quot; and by Cooper himself as being &quot;the worst town on Brutal Planet&quot;. Like &quot;The Last Temptation&quot;, both &quot;Brutal Planet&quot; and &quot;Dragontown&quot; are albums which explore Cooper&#x27;s born-again Christianity. It is often cited in the music media that &quot;Dragontown&quot; forms the third chapter in a trilogy begun with &quot;The Last Temptation&quot;; however, Cooper has indicated that this in fact is not the case.

Cooper again adopted a leaner, cleaner sound for his critically acclaimed 2003 release &quot;The Eyes of Alice Cooper&quot;. Recognizing that many contemporary bands were having great success with his former sounds and styles, Cooper worked with a somewhat younger group of road and studio musicians who were familiar with his oeuvre of old. The resulting Bare Bones tour adopted a less-orchestrated performance style that had fewer theatrical flourishes and a greater emphasis on musicality.

Cooper&#x27;s radio show &quot;Nights with Alice Cooper&quot; began airing on January 26, 2004, in several US cities. The program showcases classic rock, Cooper&#x27;s personal stories about his life as a rock icon and interviews with prominent rock artists. The show is broadcast on nearly 100 stations in the US and Canada, and has been broadcast internationally.

A continuation of the songwriting approach adopted on &quot;The Eyes of Alice Cooper&quot; was again adopted by Cooper for his seventeenth solo studio album &quot;Dirty Diamonds&quot;, released in 2005. &quot;Dirty Diamonds&quot; became Cooper&#x27;s highest-charting album since 1994&#x27;s &quot;The Last Temptation&quot; at the time. The Dirty Diamonds tour launched in America in August 2005 after several European concerts, including a performance at the Montreux Jazz Festival in Switzerland on July 12. Cooper and his band, including Kiss drummer Eric Singer, were filmed for a DVD released as &quot;Alice Cooper: Live at Montreux 2005&quot; (2006). One critic, in a review of the Montreux release, commented that Cooper was to be applauded for &quot;still mining pretty much the same territory of teenage angst and rebellion&quot; as he had done more than 30 years previously.

In December 2006, the original Alice Cooper band reunited to perform six classic Alice Cooper songs at Cooper&#x27;s annual charity event in Phoenix, entitled &quot;Christmas Pudding&quot;.

On July 1, 2007, Cooper performed a duet with Marilyn Manson at the B&#x27;Estival event in Bucharest, Romania. The performance represented a reconciliation between the two artists; Cooper had previously taken issue with Manson over his overtly anti-Christian on stage antics and had sarcastically made reference to the originality of Manson&#x27;s choosing a female name and dressing in women&#x27;s clothing. Cooper and Manson have been the subject of an academic paper on the significance of adolescent antiheroes.

In January 2008, Cooper was one of the guest singers on Avantasia&#x27;s third studio album &quot;The Scarecrow&quot;, singing the seventh track &quot;The Toy Master&quot;. In July 2008, after lengthy delays, Cooper released &quot;Along Came a Spider&quot;, his eighteenth solo studio album. It was Cooper&#x27;s highest-charting album since 1991&#x27;s &quot;Hey Stoopid&quot;, reaching No. 53 in the US and No. 31 in the UK. The album, visiting similar territory explored in 1987&#x27;s &quot;Raise Your Fist and Yell&quot;, deals with the nefarious antics of a deranged serial killer named &quot;Spider&quot; who is on a quest to use the limbs of his victims to create a human spider. The album generally received positive reviews from music critics, though &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; magazine opined that the music on the record sorely missed Bob Ezrin&#x27;s production values. The resulting Theatre of Death tour of the album (during which Cooper is executed on four separate occasions) was described in a long November 2009 article about Cooper in &quot;The Times&quot; as &quot;epic&quot; and featuring &quot;enough fake blood to remake &quot;Saving Private Ryan&quot;&quot;.

During this period Cooper was also recognized and awarded in various ways: given a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in 2003; in May 2004 he received an honorary doctoral degree from Grand Canyon University. In June 2005, he was inducted into the Michigan Rock and Roll Legends Hall of Fame. In May 2006 he was given the key to the city of Alice, North Dakota. He won the living legend award at the 2006 Classic Rock Roll of Honour Awards event; and he won the 2007 &quot;Mojo&quot; music magazine Hero Award. He received a Rock Immortal award at the 2007 Scream Awards.

Cooper appeared on the British TV series Room 101 where a balloon model of him was featured.

===2010s===

In January 2010, it was announced that Cooper would be touring with Rob Zombie on The Gruesome Twosome Tour. In May 2010, Cooper made an appearance during the beginning of the season finale of the singing competition show &quot;American Idol&quot;, in which he sang &quot;School&#x27;s Out&quot;.
With his daughter, and former band member Dick Wagner, Cooper scored the music for the indie horror flick &quot;Silas Gore&quot; (2010).

During 2010, Cooper began working on a new studio album, dubbed &quot;Welcome 2 My Nightmare&quot;, a sequel to the original &quot;Welcome to My Nightmare&quot; (1975). In a Radio Metal interview, he said that &quot;We&#x27;ll put some of the original people on it and add some new people ... I&#x27;m very happy with working with Bob (Ezrin) again.&quot;

On December 15, 2010, it was announced Cooper and his former band would be inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. The induction ceremony took place on March 14, 2011, where Cooper was inducted by fellow horror-rocker Rob Zombie. Original members Bruce, Cooper, Dunaway, and Smith all made brief acceptance speeches and performed &quot;I&#x27;m Eighteen&quot; and &quot;School&#x27;s Out&quot; live together, with Steve Hunter filling in for the late Glen Buxton. Cooper showed up for the event wearing a (presumably fake) blood-splattered shirt and had a live albino Burmese python wrapped around his neck. Cooper told &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; magazine that he was &quot;elated&quot; by the news and that the nomination had been made for the original band, as &quot;We all did go to the same high school together, and we were all on the track team, and it was pretty cool that guys that knew each other before the band ended up going that far&quot;.

On March 10, 2011, Jackson Browne, David Crosby, Graham Nash, Cooper, Jennifer Warnes, and others performed at a benefit concert in Tucson, Arizona, benefiting The Fund for Civility, Respect and Understanding, a foundation that raises awareness about and provides medical prevention and treatment services to people with mental disorders. In June 2011, Cooper took his place as the Star in a Reasonably-Priced Car at the BBC motoring show &quot;Top Gear&quot;.

On June 9, 2011, Cooper was awarded the &quot;Kerrang! Icon Award&quot; at &quot;Kerrang!&quot; magazine&#x27;s annual awards show. Cooper used the opportunity to hit out at the &quot;anaemic&quot; rock music that dominates the charts, and said he has no intention of retiring from the industry.

Cooper supported Iron Maiden on their Maiden England World Tour from June to July 21, 2012, and then headlined Bloodstock Open Air on Sunday August 12. On September 16, 2012, Cooper appeared at the Sunflower Jam charity concert at the Royal Albert Hall, London, performing alongside Brian May lead guitarist of Queen, bassist John Paul Jones of Led Zeppelin, drummer Ian Paice of Deep Purple, and Iron Maiden lead vocalist Bruce Dickinson.

Cooper cameos as himself in the 2012 Tim Burton adaptation of &quot;Dark Shadows&quot; that starred Johnny Depp, Michelle Pfeiffer and Helena Bonham Carter. Assuming his name to be that of a woman, Depp&#x27;s character in the film Barnabas Collins describes Alice as the ugliest woman he has ever seen.

In 2013, Cooper announced that he had finished recording a covers album, based on songs by his rock star drinking buddies in the 1970s who had since died from excess, and that it was scheduled for a spring 2014 release. Later he announced that the album would likely be released in 2015.

On January 28, 2014, it was officially revealed that Alice Cooper would be the opening act for Mötley Crüe&#x27;s final tour, which would span throughout 2014 and 2015. Cooper was featured on the song &quot;Savages&quot; on Theory of a Deadman&#x27;s fifth studio album.

Cooper was the subject of &quot;Super Duper Alice Cooper&quot;, a biographical documentary film by Canadian directors Sam Dunn, Scot McFadyen and Reginald Harkema. The film won a Canadian Screen Award for Best Feature Length Documentary at the 3rd Canadian Screen Awards in 2015. In October, Cooper released the live album and video &quot;Raise the Dead: Live from Wacken&quot;, which was recorded at Germany&#x27;s Wacken heavy metal festival the previous year.

In 2015, Cooper premiered Hollywood Vampires, a supergroup featuring Johnny Depp and Joe Perry with a new studio album of rock covers, featuring many guest artists including Paul McCartney, and live dates at L.A.&#x27;s Roxy Theatre and at Brazil&#x27;s Rock in Rio festival in September. In 2016, Cooper made headlines again as he resumed his running gag of campaigning for the US presidency. Cooper featured as a co-headliner with Deep Purple and Edgar Winter for several tour dates from August to early September 2017.

Cooper released his twentieth solo studio album &quot;Paranormal&quot; in July 2017. It featured contributions from drummer Larry Mullen Jr. of U2, Billy Gibbons of ZZ Top on guitar and Roger Glover from Deep Purple on bass guitar. Guitarists Tommy Denander and Tommy Henriksen contributed most of the guitars.
On Easter Sunday, 2018, Cooper performed as Herod in NBC&#x27;s live performance of Andrew Lloyd Webber&#x27;s &quot;Jesus Christ Superstar Live in Concert&quot;. Reviews were positive, with &quot;The New York Times&quot;″ critic Noel Murray praising &quot;Alice Cooper&#x27;s magnificently scenery-chewing performance&quot; as a &quot;startling moment of clarity,&quot; and Lorraine Ali of the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; describing his performance as, &quot;Weird? Yes, but also perfect in a campy, dramatic and evil &#x27;Billion Dollar Babies&#x27; kind of way. Cooper&#x27;s part was small but indelible.&quot; Cooper had previously recorded the song (though not performed it live) in 2000, with the 1996 London revival cast.

===2020s===
Cooper released his twenty-first solo studio album, &quot;Detroit Stories&quot;, on February 26, 2021. In May, he announced a fall tour to promote the album, supported by Ace Frehley, which began in September 2021.

Cooper wrote the afterword to Jeffrey Morgan&#x27;s autobiography &quot;Rock Critic Confidential&quot; which was published by New Haven on June 28, 2021.

Cooper participated as a judge on the music competition television show &quot;No Cover&quot; season 1 that started to be aired in the Sumerian Records YouTube Channel in April 2022.

On July 11, 2022, touring guitarist Nita Strauss announced she had departed the band. A few days later, it was announced Kane Roberts had rejoined the band, replacing Strauss. On March 6, 2023, it was announced Strauss had rejoined the band.

Cooper&#x27;s twenty-second studio album &quot;Road&quot; was released on August 25, 2023.

In the fall of 2023, Cooper co-headlined the Freaks on Parade tour with Rob Zombie, with Filter and Ministry acting as the opening acts. The tour spanned one month, lasting from August 24, 2023 until September 24, 2023, visiting 19 venues across the United States and Canada.

Cooper presents a show five weekdays on the UK&#x27;s Planet Rock.

Cooper recorded the album &quot;Solid Rock Revival&quot; with different, child-friendly lyrics for his songs and those of other artists. &quot;School&#x27;s Out&quot; became &quot;School&#x27;s In&quot;, &quot;No More Mr. Nice Guy&quot; became &quot;Now, I&#x27;m Mr. Nice Guy&quot; and &quot;I&#x27;m Eighteen&quot; became &quot;I&#x27;m Thirteen&quot;. With Rob Halford he recorded &quot;Pleasant Dreams&quot;, and with Darryl McDaniels he recorded a hip hop version of &quot;In the Midnight Hour&quot; called &quot;Midday Hour&quot;. Proceeds go to Norelli Family Foundation and Cooper’s Solid Rock Foundation.

==Style and influences==
During an interview for the program &quot;Entertainment USA&quot; in 1986, Cooper told interviewer Jonathan King that the Yardbirds were his favorite band of all time. Cooper had as far back as 1969 said that it was music from the mid-sixties, and particularly from British bands the Beatles, the Who, and the Rolling Stones, as well as the Yardbirds, that had the greatest influence on him. Cooper would later pay homage to the Who by singing &quot;I&#x27;m a Boy&quot; for &quot;A Celebration: The Music of Pete Townshend and The Who&quot; in 1994 at Carnegie Hall in New York, and performing a cover version of &quot;My Generation&quot; on the &quot;Brutal Planet&quot; tour of 2000. During an interview with Ozzy Osbourne from radio program &quot;Nights with Alice Cooper&quot; on May 22, 2007, Cooper again affirmed his debt of gratitude to these bands, and to the Beatles in particular. During their discussion, Cooper and Osbourne bemoaned the often inferior quality of songwriting coming from contemporary rock artists. Cooper stated that in his opinion the cause of the problem was that certain modern bands &quot;had forgotten to listen to the Beatles&quot;.
On seeing shock rock pioneer Arthur Brown performing his US number two hit &quot;Fire&quot; in 1968, Cooper states, &quot;Can you imagine the young Alice Cooper watching that with all his make-up and hellish performance? It was like all my Halloweens came at once!&quot; A 2014 article on Alice Cooper in &quot;The Guardian&quot; mentioned Arthur Brown and his flaming helmet, &quot;British rock always was more theatrical than its US counterpart. Often this involved destruction or macabre gimmickry&quot;, with Cooper responding, &quot;That&#x27;s why most people thought we were British at first.&quot;

Evidence of Cooper&#x27;s eclectic tastes in classic and contemporary rock music can be seen in the track listings of his radio show; in addition, when he appeared on the BBC Radio 2 program &quot;Tracks of My Years&quot; in September 2007, he listed his favorite tracks of all time as being: &quot;19th Nervous Breakdown&quot; (1966) by the Rolling Stones; &quot;Turning Japanese&quot; (1980) by the Vapors; &quot;My Sharona&quot; (1979) by the Knack; &quot;Beds Are Burning&quot; (1987) by Midnight Oil; &quot;My Generation&quot; (1965) by the Who; &quot;Welcome to the Jungle&quot; (1987) by Guns N&#x27; Roses; &quot;Rebel Rebel&quot; (1974) by David Bowie; &quot;Over Under Sideways Down&quot; (1966) by the Yardbirds; &quot;Are You Gonna Be My Girl&quot; (2003) by Jet; and &quot;A Hard Day&#x27;s Night&quot; (1964) by the Beatles, and when he appeared on Desert Island Discs in 2010 he chose the songs &quot;Happenings Ten Years Time Ago&quot; by the Yardbirds; &quot;I Get Around&quot; by the Beach Boys; &quot;I&#x27;m a Boy&quot; by the Who; &quot;Timer&quot; by Laura Nyro; &quot;21st Century Schizoid Man&quot; by King Crimson; &quot;Been Caught Stealing&quot; by Jane&#x27;s Addiction; &quot;Work Song&quot; by the Paul Butterfield Blues Band; and &quot;Ballad of a Thin Man&quot; by Bob Dylan.

Rob Zombie, former lead vocalist of White Zombie, claims his first &quot;metal moment&quot; was seeing Alice Cooper on &quot;Don Kirshner&#x27;s Rock Concert&quot;. Zombie has also claimed to have been heavily influenced by Cooper&#x27;s costumes. In a 1978 interview with &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;, Bob Dylan stated, &quot;I think Alice Cooper is an overlooked songwriter.&quot;

In the foreword to Alice Cooper&#x27;s CD retrospective box set &quot;The Life and Crimes of Alice Cooper&quot;, John Lydon of the Sex Pistols pronounced &quot;Killer&quot; (1971) as the greatest rock album of all time, and in 2002 Lydon presented his own tribute program to Cooper on BBC radio. Lydon told the BBC that &quot;I know the words to every Alice Cooper song. The fact is, if you can call what I have a musical career, it all started with me miming to &#x27;I&#x27;m Eighteen&#x27; on a jukebox.&quot;

The Flaming Lips are longtime Alice Cooper fans and used the bassline from &quot;Levity Ball&quot; (an early song from the 1969 release &quot;Pretties for You&quot;) for their song &quot;The Ceiling Is Bending&quot;. They also covered &quot;Sun Arise&quot; for an Alice Cooper tribute album. (Cooper&#x27;s version, which closes the album &quot;Love It to Death&quot;, was itself a cover of a Rolf Harris song.)

In 1999, Cleopatra Records released &quot;Humanary Stew: A Tribute to Alice Cooper&quot; featuring a number of contributions from rock and metal all-star collaborations, including Dave Mustaine of Megadeth, Roger Daltrey of the Who, Ronnie James Dio, Slash of Guns N&#x27; Roses, Bruce Dickinson of Iron Maiden, and Steve Jones of Sex Pistols. Sonic.net described it as &quot;intriguing combinations of artists and material&quot; while AllMusic noted &quot;the novel approach will definitely hold interested listeners&#x27; attention&quot;.

A song by alternative rock group They Might Be Giants from their fifth studio album &quot;John Henry&quot; (1994) titled &quot;Why Must I Be Sad?&quot; mentions 13 Cooper songs, and has been described as being &quot;from the perspective of a kid who hears all of his unspoken sadness given voice in the music of Alice Cooper; Alice says everything the kid has been wishing he could say about his alienated, frustrated, teenage world.&quot;

Unlikely non-musician fans of Cooper have included comedian Groucho Marx and actress Mae West, who both reportedly saw the early shows as a form of vaudeville revue, and artist Salvador Dalí, who on attending a show in 1973 described it as being surreal, and made a hologram, &quot;First Cylindric Chromo-Hologram Portrait of Alice Cooper&#x27;s Brain&quot;.

==Personal life==
In the early 1970s, a story was widely reported that &quot;Leave It to Beaver&quot; actor Ken Osmond had become &quot;rock star Alice Cooper&quot;. According to Cooper, the rumor began when a college newspaper editor asked him what kind of child he was, to which Cooper replied, &quot;I was obnoxious, disgusting, a real Eddie Haskell,&quot; referring to the fictional character Osmond portrayed. However, the editor ended up reporting that Cooper was the real Haskell. Cooper later told the &quot;New Times&quot;: &quot;It was the biggest rumor that ever came out about me. Finally, I got a T-shirt that said, &#x27;No, I am not Eddie Haskell.&#x27; But people still believed it.&quot;

On June 20, 2005, ahead of his June–July 2005 tour, Cooper had a wide-ranging interview with interviewer of celebrities Andrew Denton for the Australian ABC TV&#x27;s &quot;Enough Rope&quot;. Cooper discussed various issues during the talk, including the horrors of acute alcoholism and his subsequent cure, being a Christian, and his social and work relationship with his family. During the interview, Cooper remarked &quot;I look at Mick Jagger and he&#x27;s on an 18-month tour and he&#x27;s six years older than me, so I figure, when he retires, I have six more years. I will not let him beat me when it comes to longevity.&quot;

Cooper frequently refers to himself in the third person as &quot;Alice&quot; as a way to distance himself from his stage persona.

===Marriage and relationships===
In the period when the Alice Cooper group was signed to Frank Zappa&#x27;s Straight label, Miss Christine of the GTOs became Cooper&#x27;s girlfriend. Miss Christine (real name Christine Frka), who had recommended Zappa to the group, died on November 5, 1972, of an overdose. Another long-time girlfriend of Cooper&#x27;s was Cindy Lang, with whom he lived for several years.

After his separation from Lang, Cooper was briefly linked with actress Raquel Welch, although according to Dick Wagner, Cooper rejected Welch&#x27;s advances. Cooper ended up marrying ballerina instructor and choreographer Sheryl Goddard, who performed in the Alice Cooper show from 1975 to 1982. They married on March 20, 1976. In November 1983, at the height of Cooper&#x27;s alcoholism, Goddard filed for divorce, but by mid-1984, she and Cooper had reconciled. They have three children: daughters Sonora and Calico, and son Dashiell.

Cooper and his wife started Solid Rock foundation in 1995. The first of several teen centers opened in Phoenix, Arizona in 2012. Another opened in Mesa, Arizona in 2021. The centers offer vocational and arts training.

In a 2002 television interview, Cooper stated that he had never cheated on his wife the entire time they had been together. In the same interview, he also said that the secret to a lasting and successful relationship is to continue going out on dates with one&#x27;s partner.

In a 2019 interview, Cooper said that he and his wife Sheryl have a death pact, wherein they will die at the same time, sparking a flurry of headlines. But Cooper clarified his comments, telling &quot;USA Today&quot;, &quot;What I was meaning was that because we&#x27;re almost always together, at home and on the road, that if something did happen to either of us, we&#x27;d most likely be together at the time. But neither of us has a suicide pact. We have a life pact.&quot;

===Use of alcohol and other drugs===
Since overcoming his own addiction to alcohol in the mid-1980s, Cooper has continued to help and counsel other rock musicians with addiction problems. &quot;I&#x27;ve made myself very available to friends of mine – they&#x27;re people who would call me late at night and say, &#x27;Between you and me, I&#x27;ve got a problem.&#x27;&quot; In 1986, thrash metal band Megadeth opened for Cooper on his US &quot;Constrictor&quot; tour. After noticing how Megadeth&#x27;s band members abused alcohol and other drugs, Cooper personally approached the band to try to help them get clean. He has stayed close to lead vocalist Dave Mustaine, who considers Cooper to be his &quot;godfather&quot;. In recognition of the work he has done in helping other addicts in the recovery process, Cooper received in 2008 the Stevie Ray Vaughan Award at the fourth annual MusiCares MAP Fund benefit concert in Los Angeles.

===Religion===
During an interview with Johnnie Walker on BBC Radio 2 in September 2007, Cooper said that he was not a Christian when he gave up drinking, but stated that he thanks God for &quot;taking it away&quot;, saying, &quot;I mean if He [God] can part the Red Sea and create the universe, He can certainly take alcoholism away from somebody.&quot; Although he originally did not speak publicly about his religious beliefs, Cooper was later vocal about his faith as a born-again Christian.

===Politics===
Throughout his career, Cooper&#x27;s philosophy regarding politics is that politics should not be mixed with rock music. Cooper has usually kept his political views to himself, and in 2010 said, &quot;I am extremely non-political. I go out of my way to be non-political. I&#x27;m probably the biggest moderate you know. When John Lennon and Harry Nilsson used to argue politics, I was sitting right in the middle of them, and I was the guy who was going &#x27;I don&#x27;t care.&#x27; When my parents would start talking politics, I would go in my room and put on the Rolling Stones or the Who as long as I could avoid politics. And I still feel that way.&quot;

On occasion, Cooper has spoken out against musicians who promote or opine on politics; for example, in the build-up to the 2004 presidential election, he told The Canadian Press that the rock stars campaigning for and touring on behalf of Democratic candidate John Kerry were committing &quot;treason against rock n&#x27; roll&quot;. He added, upon seeing a list of musicians who supported Kerry, &quot;If I wasn&#x27;t already a Bush supporter, I would have immediately switched. Linda Ronstadt? Don Henley? Geez, that&#x27;s a good reason right there to vote for Bush.&quot; In December 2018, Cooper predicted that the next U.S. president would be &quot;worse&quot; than Donald Trump, while arguing that musicians talking politics to their fans was an &quot;abuse of power&quot;.

Every four years since releasing his single &quot;Elected&quot; in 1972, Cooper has satirically run for president.

===Sports===
Cooper is a fan of both the NHL&#x27;s Detroit Red Wings and Arizona Coyotes. On February 18, 2012, the Coyotes gave away his bobblehead in a promotion for the first 10,000 fans for a game with the Dallas Stars. Cooper is a longtime baseball fan, supporting the Arizona Diamondbacks and Detroit Tigers. As a child, he dreamed of playing left field in the Tigers outfield alongside Tigers Hall of Famer Al Kaline. He has coached Little League baseball teams since his son played in the early 1990s. Cooper is also a fan of NBA basketball, supporting both the Detroit Pistons and the Phoenix Suns.

Cooper is an avid golfer and says that the sport played a major role in him overcoming his addiction to alcohol, and has even gone so far as to say that when he took up golf, it was a case of replacing one addiction with another. The importance that the game has had in his life is also reflected in the title to his 2007 autobiography, &quot;Alice Cooper, Golf Monster&quot;. Cooper, who has participated in a number of pro–am competitions, plays the game six days a week, off a handicap of four. He also, through golf, enjoyed an unlikely friendship with country guitarist and singer Glen Campbell after they became neighbors, playing together &#x27;nearly every other day&#x27;

Cooper has also appeared in commercials for Callaway Golf equipment and was a guest of veteran British player and broadcaster Peter Alliss on &quot;A Golfer&#x27;s Travels&quot;. He wrote the foreword to the Gary McCord book &quot;Ryder Cup&quot; and participated in the second &quot;All-Star Cup&quot; in Newport, Wales.

===In popular culture===
Cooper, a fan of &quot;The Simpsons&quot;, was asked to contribute a storyline for the September 2004 edition of Bongo Comics&#x27;s &quot;Bart Simpson&#x27;s Treehouse of Horror&quot;, a special &quot;Monsters of Rock&quot; issue that also included stories plotted by Gene Simmons, Rob Zombie and Pat Boone.

In October 1979, Cooper was featured in the Marvel comic book &quot;Marvel Premiere&quot;, Volume 1, Number 50 loosely adapting his &quot;From the Inside&quot; studio album.

Cooper is also the subject of the &quot;We&#x27;re not worthy&quot; meme, which was popularized during his cameo in &quot;Wayne&#x27;s World&quot; with Mike Myers and Dana Carvey in 1992.

Cooper contributed his likeness and over 700 voice lines to Alice Cooper&#x27;s Nightmare Castle, a pinball machine released in 2018 by Spooky Pinball that also features ten songs performed by Cooper. Only 500 machines were made.

At the Musical Instrument Museum of Phoenix, Cooper is honored with a dedicated exhibit showcasing props and instruments from his career, including one of the dummy heads used during the infamous guillotine stunt.

==Band members==


Current members
* Alice Cooper – lead vocals, harmonica, guitars, percussion, synthesizer (1974–present)
* Ryan Roxie – guitars, backing vocals (1996–2006, 2012–present)
* Chuck Garric – bass, backing vocals (2002–present)
* Tommy Henriksen – guitars, backing vocals (2011–present)
* Glen Sobel – drums, percussion (2011–present)
* Nita Strauss – guitars, backing vocals (2014–2022, 2023–present)

==Discography==

Band studio albums
* &quot;Pretties for You&quot; (1969)
* &quot;Easy Action&quot; (1970)
* &quot;Love It to Death&quot; (1971)
* &quot;Killer&quot; (1971)
* &quot;School&#x27;s Out&quot; (1972)
* &quot;Billion Dollar Babies&quot; (1973)
* &quot;Muscle of Love&quot; (1973)

Solo studio albums

* &quot;Welcome to My Nightmare&quot; (1975)
* &quot;Alice Cooper Goes to Hell&quot; (1976)
* &quot;Lace and Whiskey&quot; (1977)
* &quot;From the Inside&quot; (1978)
* &quot;Flush the Fashion&quot; (1980)
* &quot;Special Forces&quot; (1981)
* &quot;Zipper Catches Skin&quot; (1982)
* &quot;DaDa&quot; (1983)
* &quot;Constrictor&quot; (1986)
* &quot;Raise Your Fist and Yell&quot; (1987)
* &quot;Trash&quot; (1989)
* &quot;Hey Stoopid&quot; (1991)
* &quot;The Last Temptation&quot; (1994)
* &quot;Brutal Planet&quot; (2000)
* &quot;Dragontown&quot; (2001)
* &quot;The Eyes of Alice Cooper&quot; (2003)
* &quot;Dirty Diamonds&quot; (2005)
* &quot;Along Came a Spider&quot; (2008)
* &quot;Welcome 2 My Nightmare&quot; (2011)
* &quot;Paranormal&quot; (2017)
* &quot;Detroit Stories&quot; (2021)
* &quot;Road&quot; (2023)
==Tours==

* Pretties for You Tour (1968–1970)
* Easy Action Tour (1970–1971)
* Love It to Death Tour (1971)
* Killer Tour (1971–1972)
* School&#x27;s Out for Summer &#x27;72 Tour (1972)
* Billion Dollar Babies Tour (1973–1974)
* Welcome to My Nightmare Tour (1975–1977)
* King of the Silver Screen Tour (1977)
* School&#x27;s Out for Summer &#x27;78 Tour (1978–1979)
* Madhouse Rocks Tour (1979)
* Flush the Fashion Tour (1980)
* Special Forces Tour (1981–1982)
* The Nightmare Returns Tour (1986–1987)
* Live in the Flesh Tour (1987–1988)
* Trash Tour (1989–1990)
* Operation Rock &amp; Roll (1991)
* Nightmare on Your Street Tour (1991)
* Hey Stoopid Tour (1991)
* South America &#x27;95 Tour (1995)
* School&#x27;s Out for Summer &#x27;96 Tour (1996)
* School&#x27;s Out for Summer &#x27;97 Tour (1997)
* Rock N&#x27; Roll Carnival Tour (1997–1998)
* New Year&#x27;s Rotten Eve Tour &#x27;98 (1998)
* Life and Crimes of Alice Cooper Tour (1999)
* Brutal Planet Tour (2000–2001)
* British Rock Symphony Tour (2000)
* Descent into Dragontown Tour (2001–2002)
* Bare Bones Tour (2003)
* The Eyes of Alice Cooper Tour (2003–2004)
* Dirty Diamonds Tour (2005–2006)
* Psychodrama Tour (2007–2009)
* Theatre of Death Tour (2009–2010)
* No More Mr. Nice Guy Tour (2011–2012)
* Raise the Dead Tour (2012–2015)
* Spend the Night with Alice Cooper Tour (2016–2017)
* A Paranormal Evening with Alice Cooper Live Tour (2018)
* Ol&#x27; Black Eyes Is Back (2019–2020)
* Detroit Muscle Tour (2021–2022)
* Freaks on Parade (2023–2025)
* Too Close For Comfort (2023–2025)
==Filmography==
==Accolades==
===Awards and nominations===

===Others===
==See also==
* List of Alice Cooper solo band members
* List of glam metal bands and artists

==Explanatory footnotes==
==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
* 
* Official &quot;Nights with Alice Cooper&quot; website 
* High-quality photos of Alice Cooper
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q332032" start="0" end="12" title="Alice Cooper" label="Alice Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q332032" start="19" end="40" title="Alice Cooper" label="Vincent Damon Furnier"/>
<link wikidata="Q942297" start="193" end="197" title="prop" label="prop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7596819" start="203" end="217" title="stage illusion" label="stage illusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045695" start="301" end="311" title="Shock rock" label="Shock Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q186286" start="351" end="361" title="vaudeville" label="vaudeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q211573" start="367" end="378" title="garage rock" label="garage rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q16556" start="474" end="490" title="Phoenix, Arizona" label="Phoenix, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821277" start="501" end="513" title="Alice Cooper (band)" label="Alice Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313011" start="570" end="581" title="Glen Buxton" label="Glen Buxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720155" start="586" end="599" title="Michael Bruce (musician)" label="Michael Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q665549" start="609" end="623" title="Dennis Dunaway" label="Dennis Dunaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q427302" start="637" end="647" title="Neal Smith (drummer)" label="Neal Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415672" start="836" end="859" title="Welcome to My Nightmare" label="Welcome to My Nightmare"/>
<link wikidata="Q83270" start="983" end="992" title="hard rock" label="hard rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q76092" start="994" end="1003" title="glam rock" label="glam rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="1005" end="1016" title="Heavy metal music" label="heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q188539" start="1022" end="1032" title="glam metal" label="glam metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q187760" start="1045" end="1053" title="New wave music" label="new wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q217467" start="1055" end="1063" title="art rock" label="art rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q968730" start="1069" end="1084" title="industrial rock" label="industrial rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q751678" start="1375" end="1404" title="The Rolling Stone Album Guide" label="The Rolling Stone Album Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q130857" start="1594" end="1605" title="disc jockey" label="disc jockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="1741" end="1748" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="1750" end="1758" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q714880" start="1945" end="1957" title="Damon Runyon" label="Damon Runyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304090" start="1991" end="2017" title="the Church of Jesus Christ (Bickertonite)" label="The Church of Jesus Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272869" start="2080" end="2086" title="Quorum of Twelve Apostles (Bickertonite)" label="leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022748" start="2179" end="2191" title="Eastpointe, Michigan" label="East Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330722" start="2242" end="2255" title="Eastland Center (Michigan)" label="Eastland Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330881" start="2339" end="2354" title="Eastown Theatre" label="Eastown Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q16556" start="2648" end="2664" title="Phoenix, Arizona" label="Phoenix, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q5173249" start="2684" end="2702" title="Cortez High School" label="Cortez High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6533680" start="2936" end="2952" title="Letterman (sports)" label="Letterman&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q500050" start="2993" end="3006" title="Cross country running" label="cross country"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313011" start="3047" end="3058" title="Glen Buxton" label="Glen Buxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q665549" start="3060" end="3074" title="Dennis Dunaway" label="Dennis Dunaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="3188" end="3199" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q736799" start="3331" end="3347" title="Please Please Me (song)" label="Please Please Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q176637" start="3858" end="3867" title="Pawnbroker" label="pawn shop"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821277" start="4021" end="4032" title="The Spiders (American rock band)" label="the Spiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055609" start="4226" end="4243" title="North High School (Phoenix, Arizona)" label="North High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720155" start="4260" end="4273" title="Michael Bruce (musician)" label="Michael Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q427302" start="4801" end="4811" title="Neal Smith (drummer)" label="Neal Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q364875" start="4940" end="4953" title="Todd Rundgren" label="Todd Rundgren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346522" start="4977" end="4981" title="Nazz" label="Nazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q26644" start="5545" end="5577" title="What Ever Happened to Baby Jane? (film)" label="What Ever Happened to Baby Jane?"/>
<link wikidata="Q71206" start="5600" end="5611" title="Bette Davis" label="Bette Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q41132" start="5808" end="5818" title="Barbarella (film)" label="Barbarella"/>
<link wikidata="Q60306" start="5850" end="5866" title="Anita Pallenberg" label="Anita Pallenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138314" start="5923" end="5948" title="evening glove" label="long black leather gloves"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248019" start="6077" end="6086" title="Emma Peel" label="Emma Peel"/>
<link wikidata="Q113700" start="6098" end="6110" title="The Avengers (TV series)" label="The Avengers"/>
<link wikidata="Q262947" start="6464" end="6481" title="School&amp;#x27;s Out (album)" label="School&amp;#x27;s Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q39427" start="6655" end="6665" title="Surrealism" label="surrealist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5577" start="6682" end="6695" title="Salvador Dalí" label="Salvador Dalí"/>
<link wikidata="Q773853" start="6805" end="6824" title="Venice, Los Angeles" label="Venice, Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q17279326" start="6959" end="6970" title="Shep Gordon" label="Shep Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q127330" start="7174" end="7185" title="Frank Zappa" label="Frank Zappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1712125" start="7255" end="7271" title="Straight Records" label="Straight Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q505253" start="7641" end="7645" title="The GTOs" label="GTOs"/>
<link wikidata="Q167447" start="7706" end="7712" title="Barbie" label="Barbie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164827" start="7837" end="7853" title="Pretties for You" label="Pretties for You"/>
<link wikidata="Q427532" start="8234" end="8248" title="sensationalism" label="sensationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045695" start="8290" end="8300" title="shock rock" label="shock rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532386" start="8370" end="8399" title="Toronto Rock and Roll Revival" label="Toronto Rock and Roll Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306" start="9334" end="9344" title="Pink Floyd" label="Pink Floyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q202714" start="9388" end="9418" title="The Piper at the Gates of Dawn" label="The Piper at the Gates of Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q173061" start="9504" end="9515" title="Syd Barrett" label="Syd Barrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754799" start="9759" end="9770" title="Easy Action" label="Easy Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017561" start="9790" end="9802" title="David Briggs (record producer)" label="David Briggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="9912" end="9921" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q847596" start="10031" end="10048" title="Pontiac, Michigan" label="Pontiac, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="10108" end="10118" title="Midwestern United States" label="Midwestern"/>
<link wikidata="Q27190" start="10144" end="10154" title="proto-punk" label="proto-punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q208767" start="10185" end="10196" title="the Stooges" label="the Stooges"/>
<link wikidata="Q830316" start="10201" end="10208" title="the MC5" label="the MC5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670875" start="10264" end="10279" title="pieing" label="pie in the face"/>
<link wikidata="Q6843048" start="10303" end="10326" title="Midsummer Rock" label="Cincinnati Pop Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q164815" start="10634" end="10643" title="Woodstock" label="Woodstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622424" start="10650" end="10676" title="Strawberry Fields (Canadian festival)" label="Strawberry Fields Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="10682" end="10689" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q316850" start="11167" end="11176" title="Bob Ezrin" label="Bob Ezrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754828" start="11230" end="11246" title="Love It to Death" label="Love It to Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476526" start="11409" end="11426" title="I&amp;#x27;m Eighteen" label="I&amp;#x27;m Eighteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="11492" end="11521" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q67030918" start="11594" end="11614" title="Warner Records" label="Warner Bros. Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="11846" end="11871" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q185639" start="12228" end="12242" title="electric chair" label="electric chair"/>
<link wikidata="Q76092" start="12302" end="12311" title="glam rock" label="glam rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q290691" start="12521" end="12528" title="villain" label="villain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2808" start="12740" end="12750" title="Elton John" label="Elton John"/>
<link wikidata="Q682846" start="12761" end="12775" title="The Rise and Fall of Ziggy Stardust and the Spiders from Mars" label="Ziggy Stardust"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383" start="12776" end="12787" title="David Bowie" label="David Bowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931937" start="12919" end="12925" title="Killer (Alice Cooper album)" label="Killer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261229" start="13072" end="13087" title="Under My Wheels" label="Under My Wheels"/>
<link wikidata="Q113961684" start="13101" end="13112" title="Be My Lover (Alice Cooper song)" label="Be My Lover"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424050" start="13144" end="13157" title="Halo of Flies (song)" label="Halo of Flies"/>
<link wikidata="Q215388" start="13436" end="13451" title="boa constrictor" label="boa constrictor"/>
<link wikidata="Q243778" start="13560" end="13567" title="gallows" label="gallows"/>
<link wikidata="Q466502" start="13661" end="13672" title="Dinah Shore" label="Dinah Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249404" start="13708" end="13720" title="Mayberry R.F.D." label="Mayberry RFD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513101" start="13794" end="13811" title="School&amp;#x27;s Out (song)" label="School&amp;#x27;s Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096120" start="13897" end="13909" title="classic rock" label="classic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q262947" start="13952" end="13969" title="School&amp;#x27;s Out (album)" label="School&amp;#x27;s Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q49202" start="14082" end="14104" title="Greenwich, Connecticut" label="Greenwich, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q842254" start="14194" end="14202" title="machismo" label="machismo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2397931" start="14434" end="14449" title="Mary Whitehouse" label="Mary Whitehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="14498" end="14501" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="14731" end="14745" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="British Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q333876" start="14767" end="14775" title="Leo Abse" label="Leo Abse"/>
<link wikidata="Q333275" start="14802" end="14819" title="Reginald Maudling" label="Reginald Maudling"/>
<link wikidata="Q803756" start="14912" end="14933" title="Billion Dollar Babies" label="Billion Dollar Babies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360296" start="15077" end="15084" title="Elected (song)" label="Elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="15166" end="15169" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q15862" start="15241" end="15246" title="Queen (band)" label="Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q187745" start="15282" end="15299" title="Bohemian Rhapsody" label="Bohemian Rhapsody"/>
<link wikidata="Q16842298" start="15358" end="15370" title="Hello Hooray" label="Hello Hooray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972314" start="15387" end="15407" title="No More Mr. Nice Guy (song)" label="No More Mr. Nice Guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q317427" start="15546" end="15553" title="Donovan" label="Donovan"/>
<link wikidata="Q207393" start="15691" end="15704" title="concept album" label="concept album"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036" start="16050" end="16068" title="the Rolling Stones" label="the Rolling Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q128015" start="16369" end="16379" title="guillotine" label="guillotine"/>
<link wikidata="Q294918" start="16459" end="16470" title="James Randi" label="James Randi"/>
<link wikidata="Q207651" start="16522" end="16533" title="executioner" label="executioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5305076" start="16546" end="16556" title="Dragon Con" label="Dragon Con"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930919" start="16877" end="16891" title="Muscle of Love" label="Muscle of Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q13582532" start="17062" end="17085" title="Teenage Lament &amp;#x27;74" label="Teenage Lament &amp;#x27;74"/>
<link wikidata="Q151472" start="17140" end="17150" title="James Bond (film series)" label="James Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q309289" start="17166" end="17193" title="The Man with the Golden Gun (film)" label="The Man with the Golden Gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q229716" start="17249" end="17253" title="Lulu (singer)" label="Lulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7614732" start="18089" end="18102" title="Steven Gaines" label="Steven Gaines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2572270" start="18340" end="18361" title="Hollywood Squares" label="The Hollywood Squares"/>
<link wikidata="Q331910" start="18405" end="18418" title="Greatest Hits (Alice Cooper album)" label="Greatest Hits"/>
<link wikidata="Q10507549" start="18605" end="18640" title="Good to See You Again, Alice Cooper" label="Good to See You Again, Alice Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q41253" start="18784" end="18793" title="Movie theater" label="cinematic"/>
<link wikidata="Q786922" start="18808" end="18824" title="drive-in theater" label="drive-in theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q3829084" start="18914" end="18931" title="The Snoop Sisters" label="The Snoop Sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q133363" start="18948" end="18955" title="Satanism" label="Satanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415672" start="19349" end="19372" title="Welcome to My Nightmare" label="Welcome to My Nightmare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415672" start="19929" end="19952" title="Welcome to My Nightmare" label="Welcome to My Nightmare"/>
<link wikidata="Q189080" start="20092" end="20100" title="Lou Reed" label="Lou Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2779052" start="20143" end="20154" title="Dick Wagner" label="Dick Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2779077" start="20159" end="20171" title="Steve Hunter" label="Steve Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3033326" start="20241" end="20257" title="Only Women Bleed" label="Only Women Bleed"/>
<link wikidata="Q202440" start="20291" end="20307" title="Atlantic Records" label="Atlantic Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q219640" start="20500" end="20513" title="Vincent Price" label="Vincent Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q128430" start="20643" end="20650" title="Cyclopes" label="Cyclops"/>
<link wikidata="Q219640" start="20801" end="20814" title="Vincent Price" label="Vincent Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="20950" end="20962" title="Grammy Awards" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q4992254" start="20978" end="21004" title="Grammy Award for Best Music Film" label="Best Long Form Music Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q7980720" start="21109" end="21132" title="Welcome to My Nightmare (film)" label="Welcome to My Nightmare"/>
<link wikidata="Q669010" start="21187" end="21202" title="West Side Story" label="West Side Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436141" start="21221" end="21234" title="David Winters (choreographer)" label="David Winters"/>
<link wikidata="Q815571" start="21268" end="21281" title="Wembley Arena" label="Wembley Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313011" start="21746" end="21757" title="Glen Buxton" label="Glen Buxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2779077" start="21935" end="21947" title="Steve Hunter" label="Steve Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151539" start="21988" end="22001" title="Arizona Financial Theatre" label="Dodge Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q179191" start="22147" end="22173" title="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame" label="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q810953" start="22220" end="22243" title="Battersea Power Station" label="Battersea Power Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q661871" start="22251" end="22263" title="Jägermeister" label="Jägermeister"/>
<link wikidata="Q249624" start="22407" end="22429" title="Welcome 2 My Nightmare" label="Welcome 2 My Nightmare"/>
<link wikidata="Q29982109" start="22528" end="22538" title="Paranormal (Alice Cooper album)" label="Paranormal"/>
<link wikidata="Q12715627" start="22703" end="22714" title="I Never Cry" label="I Never Cry"/>
<link wikidata="Q332254" start="22747" end="22772" title="Alice Cooper Goes to Hell" label="Alice Cooper Goes to Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930996" start="22789" end="22805" title="Lace and Whiskey" label="Lace and Whiskey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024791" start="22852" end="22862" title="You and Me (Alice Cooper song)" label="You and Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q610672" start="23046" end="23055" title="Budweiser" label="Budweiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440441" start="23077" end="23103" title="Seagram&amp;#x27;s Seven Crown" label="Seagram&amp;#x27;s Seven Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720161" start="23242" end="23263" title="The Alice Cooper Show" label="The Alice Cooper Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1791388" start="23296" end="23303" title="sobriety" label="sobered"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931058" start="23417" end="23432" title="From the Inside (Alice Cooper album)" label="From the Inside"/>
<link wikidata="Q353788" start="23463" end="23476" title="Bernie Taupin" label="Bernie Taupin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16386144" start="23565" end="23589" title="How You Gonna See Me Now" label="How You Gonna See Me Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q7766892" start="23728" end="23760" title="The Strange Case of Alice Cooper" label="The Strange Case of Alice Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120540" start="23916" end="23931" title="The Muppet Show" label="The Muppet Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q6674" start="23993" end="23998" title="devil" label="devil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107971" start="24030" end="24036" title="Kermit the Frog" label="Kermit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2731177" start="24038" end="24043" title="Gonzo (Muppet)" label="Gonzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267970" start="24048" end="24058" title="Miss Piggy" label="Miss Piggy"/>
<link wikidata="Q202878" start="24169" end="24177" title="Mae West" label="Mae West"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756919" start="24203" end="24211" title="Sextette" label="Sextette"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532586" start="24254" end="24296" title="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band (film)" label="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q180376" start="24371" end="24385" title="Hollywood Sign" label="Hollywood Sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q103846" start="24533" end="24545" title="Groucho Marx" label="Groucho Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915318" start="24597" end="24608" title="Soupy Sales" label="Soupy Sales"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24627" end="24649" title="Soupy Sales#Lunch with Soupy Sales" label="Lunch with Soupy Sales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434282" start="25258" end="25275" title="Flush the Fashion" label="Flush the Fashion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754780" start="25296" end="25310" title="Special Forces (Alice Cooper album)" label="Special Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q767902" start="25331" end="25350" title="Zipper Catches Skin" label="Zipper Catches Skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q677287" start="25374" end="25378" title="DaDa" label="DaDa"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="25474" end="25483" title="Billboard magazine" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q556032" start="25542" end="25558" title="Roy Thomas Baker" label="Roy Thomas Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q15862" start="25584" end="25589" title="Queen (band)" label="Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q858388" start="25594" end="25602" title="the Cars" label="the Cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q187760" start="25622" end="25630" title="New wave music" label="new wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q5135003" start="25726" end="25749" title="Clones (We&amp;#x27;re All)" label="Clones (We&amp;#x27;re All)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638075" start="25803" end="25816" title="Dance Club Songs" label="Disco Top 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q868902" start="26158" end="26169" title="Constrictor (album)" label="Constrictor"/>
<link wikidata="Q487914" start="26254" end="26262" title="pop punk" label="pop punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7148704" start="26412" end="26425" title="Patty Donahue" label="Patty Donahue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481279" start="26429" end="26443" title="the Waitresses" label="the Waitresses"/>
<link wikidata="Q316850" start="26578" end="26587" title="Bob Ezrin" label="Bob Ezrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2779052" start="26602" end="26613" title="Dick Wagner" label="Dick Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q147778" start="26826" end="26835" title="cirrhosis" label="cirrhosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4992254" start="27188" end="27231" title="Grammy Award for Best Music Film" label="Grammy Award for Best Long Form Music Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q58381" start="27244" end="27255" title="Duran Duran" label="Duran Duran"/>
<link wikidata="Q99472479" start="27524" end="27537" title="Sheryl Cooper" label="Sheryl Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q289597" start="27727" end="27752" title="26th Annual Grammy Awards" label="26th Annual Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q450429" start="27776" end="27787" title="Grace Jones" label="Grace Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q126826" start="27881" end="27890" title="Aerosmith" label="Aerosmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q313378" start="27901" end="27910" title="Joe Perry (musician)" label="Joe Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q223770" start="27979" end="27986" title="B movie" label="B-grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3861013" start="28006" end="28017" title="Monster Dog" label="Monster Dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q542958" start="28035" end="28047" title="Torrelodones" label="Torrelodones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428813" start="28222" end="28233" title="Hanoi Rocks" label="Hanoi Rocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1705347" start="28244" end="28254" title="Andy McCoy" label="Andy McCoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524938" start="28311" end="28323" title="Kane Roberts" label="Kane Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338889" start="28359" end="28370" title="MCA Records" label="MCA Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q272239" start="28406" end="28420" title="Twisted Sister" label="Twisted Sister"/>
<link wikidata="Q318165" start="28523" end="28533" title="Luke Perry" label="Luke Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q868902" start="28762" end="28773" title="Constrictor (album)" label="Constrictor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034628" start="28814" end="28854" title="He&amp;#x27;s Back (The Man Behind the Mask)" label="He&amp;#x27;s Back (The Man Behind the Mask)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="28897" end="28933" title="Friday the 13th Part VI: Jason Lives" label="Friday the 13th Part VI: Jason Lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q3517115" start="29052" end="29072" title="Teenage Frankenstein" label="Teenage Frankenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q251868" start="29371" end="29380" title="Halloween" label="Halloween"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754186" start="29412" end="29433" title="The Nightmare Returns" label="The Nightmare Returns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930763" start="29826" end="29850" title="Raise Your Fist and Yell" label="Raise Your Fist and Yell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048004" start="29956" end="29963" title="Freedom (Alice Cooper song)" label="Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138878" start="30118" end="30133" title="Friday the 13th (franchise)" label="Friday the 13th"/>
<link wikidata="Q329434" start="30157" end="30182" title="A Nightmare on Elm Street" label="A Nightmare on Elm Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q264196" start="30439" end="30453" title="David Blunkett" label="David Blunkett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524938" start="31058" end="31070" title="Kane Roberts" label="Kane Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334522" start="31083" end="31093" title="Kip Winger" label="Kip Winger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893523" start="31194" end="31206" title="Bed of Nails (song)" label="Bed of Nails"/>
<link wikidata="Q775182" start="31254" end="31259" title="Trash (Alice Cooper album)" label="Trash"/>
<link wikidata="Q601013" start="31360" end="31378" title="Prince of Darkness (film)" label="Prince of Darkness"/>
<link wikidata="Q95008" start="31398" end="31412" title="John Carpenter" label="John Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q50817" start="31584" end="31600" title="WrestleMania III" label="WrestleMania III"/>
<link wikidata="Q919492" start="31621" end="31655" title="Jake Roberts" label="Jake &amp;quot;The Snake&amp;quot; Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q953428" start="31690" end="31708" title="The Honky Tonk Man" label="The Honky Tonk Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q529443" start="31833" end="31843" title="Jimmy Hart" label="Jimmy Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q35339" start="32007" end="32010" title="WWE" label="WWF"/>
<link wikidata="Q211662" start="32047" end="32065" title="Pontiac Silverdome" label="Pontiac Silverdome"/>
<link wikidata="Q22043086" start="32178" end="32197" title="I Got a Line on You" label="I Got a Line on You"/>
<link wikidata="Q39960" start="32259" end="32272" title="Iron Eagle II" label="Iron Eagle II"/>
<link wikidata="Q216364" start="32562" end="32574" title="Epic Records" label="Epic Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q453987" start="32650" end="32663" title="Desmond Child" label="Desmond Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="32677" end="32683" title="Grammy Awards" label="Grammy"/>
<link wikidata="Q775182" start="32713" end="32718" title="Trash (Alice Cooper album)" label="Trash"/>
<link wikidata="Q508899" start="32759" end="32765" title="Poison (Alice Cooper song)" label="Poison"/>
<link wikidata="Q182832" start="32840" end="32850" title="concert" label="arena tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q430340" start="32924" end="32935" title="Hey Stoopid" label="Hey Stoopid"/>
<link wikidata="Q188539" start="33019" end="33029" title="glam metal" label="glam metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11365" start="33098" end="33104" title="grunge" label="grunge"/>
<link wikidata="Q11895" start="34085" end="34103" title="Guns N&amp;#x27; Roses" label="Guns N&amp;#x27; Roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q826486" start="34129" end="34148" title="Use Your Illusion I" label="Use Your Illusion I"/>
<link wikidata="Q11885" start="34193" end="34201" title="Axl Rose" label="Axl Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q841930" start="34221" end="34231" title="The Garden (Guns N&amp;#x27; Roses song)" label="The Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q329466" start="34299" end="34313" title="Freddy Krueger" label="Freddy Krueger"/>
<link wikidata="Q617871" start="34327" end="34352" title="A Nightmare on Elm Street (franchise)" label="A Nightmare on Elm Street"/>
<link wikidata="" start="34378" end="34417" title="Freddy&amp;#x27;s Dead: The Final Nightmare" label="Freddy&amp;#x27;s Dead: The Final Nightmare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146194" start="34494" end="34512" title="Wayne&amp;#x27;s World (film)" label="Wayne&amp;#x27;s World"/>
<link wikidata="Q37836" start="34864" end="34873" title="Milwaukee" label="Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930977" start="35099" end="35118" title="The Last Temptation (Alice Cooper album)" label="The Last Temptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q210059" start="35545" end="35556" title="Neil Gaiman" label="Neil Gaiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q387539" start="35780" end="35797" title="Hollywood Records" label="Hollywood Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q56760250" start="36030" end="36034" title="Sony Music" label="Sony"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714740" start="36242" end="36260" title="A Fistful of Alice" label="A Fistful of Alice"/>
<link wikidata="Q929731" start="36340" end="36358" title="Insane Clown Posse" label="Insane Clown Posse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951368" start="36372" end="36389" title="The Great Milenko" label="The Great Milenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q192950" start="36632" end="36637" title="Herod Antipas" label="Herod"/>
<link wikidata="Q6188106" start="36688" end="36710" title="Jesus Christ Superstar (1996 London Cast)" label="Jesus Christ Superstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933733" start="36756" end="36791" title="The Life and Crimes of Alice Cooper" label="The Life and Crimes of Alice Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q869645" start="36995" end="37000" title="Creem" label="Creem"/>
<link wikidata="Q6176179" start="37023" end="37037" title="Jeffrey Morgan (writer)" label="Jeffrey Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q944261" start="37307" end="37320" title="Brutal Planet" label="Brutal Planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q968730" start="37367" end="37382" title="industrial rock" label="industrial rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q180774" start="37393" end="37401" title="dystopia" label="dystopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4933254" start="37454" end="37466" title="Bob Marlette" label="Bob Marlette"/>
<link wikidata="Q316850" start="37513" end="37522" title="Bob Ezrin" label="Bob Ezrin"/>
<link wikidata="" start="37662" end="37675" title="Alice Cooper: Brutally Live" label="Brutally Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q208072" start="37832" end="37851" title="That &amp;#x27;70s Show" label="That &amp;#x27;70s Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375" start="37928" end="37950" title="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons" label="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930938" start="38051" end="38061" title="Dragontown" label="Dragontown"/>
<link wikidata="Q316850" start="38086" end="38095" title="Bob Ezrin" label="Bob Ezrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930865" start="38805" end="38829" title="The Eyes of Alice Cooper" label="The Eyes of Alice Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7034033" start="39237" end="39261" title="Nights with Alice Cooper" label="Nights with Alice Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930970" start="39736" end="39750" title="Dirty Diamonds" label="Dirty Diamonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q669118" start="40033" end="40055" title="Montreux Jazz Festival" label="Montreux Jazz Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q124179" start="40114" end="40118" title="Kiss (band)" label="Kiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q313854" start="40127" end="40138" title="Eric Singer" label="Eric Singer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4177063" start="40180" end="40215" title="Live at Montreux (Alice Cooper album)" label="Alice Cooper: Live at Montreux 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q186327" start="40696" end="40710" title="Marilyn Manson" label="Marilyn Manson"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="40742" end="40751" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q564862" start="40895" end="40909" title="Anti-Christian sentiment" label="anti-Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q110910" start="41156" end="41164" title="antihero" label="antihero"/>
<link wikidata="Q158641" start="41225" end="41234" title="Avantasia" label="Avantasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754765" start="41267" end="41280" title="The Scarecrow (album)" label="The Scarecrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q659128" start="41400" end="41419" title="Along Came a Spider (album)" label="Along Came a Spider"/>
<link wikidata="Q484188" start="41742" end="41755" title="serial killer" label="serial killer"/>
<link wikidata="Q165817" start="42319" end="42338" title="Saving Private Ryan" label="Saving Private Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q71719" start="42448" end="42470" title="Hollywood Walk of Fame" label="Hollywood Walk of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q4570025" start="42537" end="42560" title="Grand Canyon University" label="Grand Canyon University"/>
<link wikidata="Q99864" start="42675" end="42690" title="key to the city" label="key to the city"/>
<link wikidata="Q28121" start="42694" end="42713" title="Alice, North Dakota" label="Alice, North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q4036267" start="42758" end="42792" title="Classic Rock Roll of Honour Awards" label="Classic Rock Roll of Honour Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q261633" start="42826" end="42830" title="Mojo (magazine)" label="Mojo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065767" start="42910" end="42923" title="Scream Awards" label="Scream Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q298255" start="43101" end="43111" title="Rob Zombie" label="Rob Zombie"/>
<link wikidata="Q201052" start="43261" end="43274" title="American Idol" label="American Idol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513101" start="43305" end="43322" title="School&amp;#x27;s Out (song)" label="School&amp;#x27;s Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q2779052" start="43372" end="43383" title="Dick Wagner" label="Dick Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q249624" start="43538" end="43560" title="Welcome 2 My Nightmare" label="Welcome 2 My Nightmare"/>
<link wikidata="Q179191" start="43918" end="43944" title="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame" label="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2716137" start="44399" end="44413" title="Burmese python" label="Burmese python"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="44457" end="44470" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q355009" start="44803" end="44817" title="Jackson Browne" label="Jackson Browne"/>
<link wikidata="Q370560" start="44819" end="44831" title="David Crosby" label="David Crosby"/>
<link wikidata="Q357211" start="44833" end="44844" title="Graham Nash" label="Graham Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q238410" start="44854" end="44869" title="Jennifer Warnes" label="Jennifer Warnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q18575" start="44916" end="44931" title="Tucson, Arizona" label="Tucson, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630372" start="45166" end="45197" title="Star in a Reasonably-Priced Car" label="Star in a Reasonably-Priced Car"/>
<link wikidata="Q33162" start="45229" end="45237" title="Top Gear (2002 TV series)" label="Top Gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509860" start="45286" end="45317" title="Kerrang! Awards" label="&amp;quot;Kerrang! Icon Award&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q43281" start="45327" end="45335" title="Kerrang!" label="Kerrang!"/>
<link wikidata="Q42482" start="45560" end="45571" title="Iron Maiden" label="Iron Maiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q133681" start="45581" end="45606" title="Maiden England World Tour" label="Maiden England World Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q670546" start="45654" end="45673" title="Bloodstock Open Air" label="Bloodstock Open Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q7726770" start="45741" end="45754" title="The College of Medicine" label="Sunflower Jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q193639" start="45778" end="45795" title="Royal Albert Hall" label="Royal Albert Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q15873" start="45826" end="45835" title="Brian May" label="Brian May"/>
<link wikidata="Q15862" start="45854" end="45859" title="Queen (band)" label="Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q190243" start="45869" end="45884" title="John Paul Jones (musician)" label="John Paul Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331" start="45888" end="45900" title="Led Zeppelin" label="Led Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q213609" start="45910" end="45919" title="Ian Paice" label="Ian Paice"/>
<link wikidata="Q101505" start="45923" end="45934" title="Deep Purple" label="Deep Purple"/>
<link wikidata="Q190151" start="45966" end="45981" title="Bruce Dickinson" label="Bruce Dickinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q56008" start="46021" end="46031" title="Tim Burton" label="Tim Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q323318" start="46032" end="46042" title="Dark Shadows (film)" label="adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166225" start="46052" end="46064" title="Dark Shadows" label="Dark Shadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q37175" start="46084" end="46095" title="Johnny Depp" label="Johnny Depp"/>
<link wikidata="Q159778" start="46097" end="46114" title="Michelle Pfeiffer" label="Michelle Pfeiffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q170428" start="46119" end="46139" title="Helena Bonham Carter" label="Helena Bonham Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315431" start="46216" end="46232" title="Barnabas Collins" label="Barnabas Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q486688" start="46673" end="46684" title="Mötley Crüe" label="Mötley Crüe"/>
<link wikidata="Q17478862" start="46785" end="46792" title="Savages (Theory of a Deadman album)" label="Savages"/>
<link wikidata="Q744242" start="46802" end="46821" title="Theory of a Deadman" label="Theory of a Deadman"/>
<link wikidata="Q19961394" start="46882" end="46906" title="Super Duper Alice Cooper" label="Super Duper Alice Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096083" start="46968" end="46976" title="Sam Dunn" label="Sam Dunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435474" start="46978" end="46991" title="Scot McFadyen" label="Scot McFadyen"/>
<link wikidata="Q19665442" start="46996" end="47012" title="Reginald Harkema" label="Reginald Harkema"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459735" start="47029" end="47050" title="Canadian Screen Awards" label="Canadian Screen Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q18786518" start="47094" end="47120" title="3rd Canadian Screen Awards" label="3rd Canadian Screen Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q157845" start="47266" end="47272" title="Wacken Open Air" label="Wacken"/>
<link wikidata="Q21158994" start="47340" end="47358" title="Hollywood Vampires (band)" label="Hollywood Vampires"/>
<link wikidata="Q215048" start="47362" end="47372" title="Supergroup (music)" label="supergroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q37175" start="47383" end="47394" title="Johnny Depp" label="Johnny Depp"/>
<link wikidata="Q313378" start="47399" end="47408" title="Joe Perry (musician)" label="Joe Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="47488" end="47502" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565972" start="47534" end="47546" title="Roxy Theatre (West Hollywood)" label="Roxy Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133749" start="47568" end="47579" title="Rock in Rio" label="Rock in Rio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469546" start="47658" end="47669" title="running gag" label="running gag"/>
<link wikidata="Q101505" start="47747" end="47758" title="Deep Purple" label="Deep Purple"/>
<link wikidata="Q559349" start="47763" end="47775" title="Edgar Winter" label="Edgar Winter"/>
<link wikidata="Q29982109" start="47891" end="47901" title="Paranormal (Alice Cooper album)" label="Paranormal"/>
<link wikidata="Q814065" start="47961" end="47977" title="Larry Mullen Jr." label="Larry Mullen Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q396" start="47981" end="47983" title="U2" label="U2"/>
<link wikidata="Q369898" start="47985" end="47998" title="Billy Gibbons" label="Billy Gibbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q136591" start="48002" end="48008" title="ZZ Top" label="ZZ Top"/>
<link wikidata="Q216700" start="48023" end="48035" title="Roger Glover" label="Roger Glover"/>
<link wikidata="Q2440968" start="48080" end="48094" title="Tommy Denander" label="Tommy Denander"/>
<link wikidata="Q7819516" start="48099" end="48114" title="Tommy Henriksen" label="Tommy Henriksen"/>
<link wikidata="Q192950" start="48192" end="48197" title="Herod Antipas" label="Herod"/>
<link wikidata="Q43401515" start="48201" end="48228" title="Jesus Christ Superstar Live in Concert" label="NBC&amp;#x27;s live performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q180975" start="48232" end="48251" title="Andrew Lloyd Webber" label="Andrew Lloyd Webber"/>
<link wikidata="Q43401515" start="48265" end="48303" title="Jesus Christ Superstar Live in Concert" label="Jesus Christ Superstar Live in Concert"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="48345" end="48363" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="48549" end="48566" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q104620309" start="48952" end="48967" title="Detroit Stories" label="Detroit Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q319610" start="49065" end="49076" title="Ace Frehley" label="Ace Frehley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6176179" start="49140" end="49154" title="Jeffrey Morgan (writer)" label="Jeffrey Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q113480469" start="49343" end="49351" title="Hit Parader&amp;#x27;s No Cover" label="No Cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117925" start="49399" end="49415" title="Sumerian Records" label="Sumerian Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q16231562" start="49484" end="49496" title="Nita Strauss" label="Nita Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524938" start="49569" end="49581" title="Kane Roberts" label="Kane Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q119950211" start="49738" end="49742" title="Road (Alice Cooper album)" label="Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q298255" start="49855" end="49865" title="Rob Zombie" label="Rob Zombie"/>
<link wikidata="Q750954" start="49872" end="49878" title="Filter (band)" label="Filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q425772" start="49883" end="49891" title="Ministry (band)" label="Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201164" start="50114" end="50125" title="Planet Rock (radio station)" label="Planet Rock"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50160" end="50178" title="Solid Rock Revival" label="Solid Rock Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513101" start="50271" end="50288" title="School&amp;#x27;s Out (song)" label="School&amp;#x27;s Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972314" start="50338" end="50358" title="No More Mr. Nice Guy (song)" label="No More Mr. Nice Guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476526" start="50421" end="50438" title="I&amp;#x27;m Eighteen" label="I&amp;#x27;m Eighteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q271576" start="50488" end="50499" title="Rob Halford" label="Rob Halford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255350" start="50550" end="50566" title="Darryl McDaniels" label="Darryl McDaniels"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="50581" end="50588" title="hip hop" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q6012528" start="50606" end="50626" title="In the Midnight Hour" label="In the Midnight Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q16991798" start="50810" end="50827" title="Entertainment USA" label="Entertainment USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q248747" start="50867" end="50880" title="Jonathan King" label="Jonathan King"/>
<link wikidata="Q192725" start="50886" end="50899" title="the Yardbirds" label="the Yardbirds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="51048" end="51059" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q93346" start="51061" end="51068" title="the Who" label="the Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036" start="51074" end="51092" title="the Rolling Stones" label="the Rolling Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q3102128" start="51218" end="51232" title="I&amp;#x27;m a Boy" label="I&amp;#x27;m a Boy"/>
<link wikidata="" start="51249" end="51303" title="A Celebration: The Music of Pete Townshend and The Who" label="A Celebration: The Music of Pete Townshend and The Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q200959" start="51321" end="51334" title="Carnegie Hall" label="Carnegie Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q8353114" start="51388" end="51401" title="My Generation" label="My Generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q133151" start="51480" end="51493" title="Ozzy Osbourne" label="Ozzy Osbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q708782" start="51966" end="51978" title="Arthur Brown (musician)" label="Arthur Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451295" start="52018" end="52022" title="Fire (Arthur Brown song)" label="Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="52248" end="52260" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q795578" start="52715" end="52726" title="BBC Radio 2" label="BBC Radio 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q478658" start="52843" end="52865" title="19th Nervous Breakdown" label="19th Nervous Breakdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7856016" start="52908" end="52924" title="Turning Japanese" label="Turning Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504687" start="52941" end="52951" title="the Vapors" label="the Vapors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2322896" start="52959" end="52969" title="My Sharona" label="My Sharona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427240" start="52986" end="52995" title="the Knack" label="the Knack"/>
<link wikidata="Q813954" start="53003" end="53019" title="Beds Are Burning" label="Beds Are Burning"/>
<link wikidata="Q48284" start="53036" end="53048" title="Midnight Oil" label="Midnight Oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q8353114" start="53056" end="53069" title="My Generation" label="My Generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q943552" start="53101" end="53122" title="Welcome to the Jungle" label="Welcome to the Jungle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2190364" start="53165" end="53176" title="Rebel Rebel" label="Rebel Rebel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7113433" start="53212" end="53236" title="Over Under Sideways Down" label="Over Under Sideways Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q604059" start="53274" end="53298" title="Are You Gonna Be My Girl" label="Are You Gonna Be My Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q750460" start="53315" end="53318" title="Jet (band)" label="Jet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786521" start="53330" end="53353" title="A Hard Day&amp;#x27;s Night (song)" label="A Hard Day&amp;#x27;s Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200587" start="53407" end="53426" title="Desert Island Discs" label="Desert Island Discs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5652234" start="53460" end="53489" title="Happenings Ten Years Time Ago" label="Happenings Ten Years Time Ago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060895" start="53520" end="53532" title="I Get Around" label="I Get Around"/>
<link wikidata="Q183048" start="53542" end="53556" title="the Beach Boys" label="the Beach Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q3102128" start="53564" end="53578" title="I&amp;#x27;m a Boy" label="I&amp;#x27;m a Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q234861" start="53618" end="53628" title="Laura Nyro" label="Laura Nyro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2568095" start="53636" end="53661" title="21st Century Schizoid Man" label="21st Century Schizoid Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q189382" start="53671" end="53683" title="King Crimson" label="King Crimson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4879872" start="53691" end="53711" title="Been Caught Stealing" label="Been Caught Stealing"/>
<link wikidata="Q622947" start="53721" end="53742" title="Jane&amp;#x27;s Addiction" label="Jane&amp;#x27;s Addiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q918576" start="53769" end="53800" title="Paul Butterfield" label="the Paul Butterfield Blues Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725231" start="53812" end="53832" title="Ballad of a Thin Man" label="Ballad of a Thin Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="53842" end="53851" title="Bob Dylan" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q298255" start="53854" end="53864" title="Rob Zombie" label="Rob Zombie"/>
<link wikidata="Q740623" start="53890" end="53902" title="White Zombie (band)" label="White Zombie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292926" start="53979" end="54011" title="Don Kirshner&amp;#x27;s Rock Concert" label="Don Kirshner&amp;#x27;s Rock Concert"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="54133" end="54146" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933733" start="54305" end="54340" title="The Life and Crimes of Alice Cooper" label="The Life and Crimes of Alice Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q106662" start="54348" end="54358" title="John Lydon" label="John Lydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q82545" start="54362" end="54377" title="the Sex Pistols" label="the Sex Pistols"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931937" start="54395" end="54401" title="Killer (Alice Cooper album)" label="Killer"/>
<link wikidata="Q523184" start="54749" end="54765" title="The Flaming Lips" label="The Flaming Lips"/>
<link wikidata="Q12718765" start="54990" end="54999" title="Sun Arise" label="Sun Arise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975172" start="55142" end="55153" title="Rolf Harris" label="Rolf Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397901" start="55171" end="55188" title="Cleopatra Records" label="Cleopatra Records"/>
<link wikidata="" start="55204" end="55244" title="Humanary Stew: A Tribute to Alice Cooper" label="Humanary Stew: A Tribute to Alice Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q187165" start="55342" end="55355" title="Dave Mustaine" label="Dave Mustaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q83431" start="55359" end="55367" title="Megadeth" label="Megadeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q311672" start="55369" end="55382" title="Roger Daltrey" label="Roger Daltrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q185151" start="55395" end="55411" title="Ronnie James Dio" label="Ronnie James Dio"/>
<link wikidata="Q34166" start="55413" end="55418" title="Slash (musician)" label="Slash"/>
<link wikidata="Q190151" start="55442" end="55457" title="Bruce Dickinson" label="Bruce Dickinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q347986" start="55478" end="55489" title="Steve Jones (musician)" label="Steve Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q420880" start="55737" end="55757" title="They Might Be Giants" label="They Might Be Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181731" start="55794" end="55804" title="John Henry (album)" label="John Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q103846" start="56205" end="56217" title="Groucho Marx" label="Groucho Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q202878" start="56230" end="56238" title="Mae West" label="Mae West"/>
<link wikidata="Q5577" start="56322" end="56335" title="Salvador Dalí" label="Salvador Dalí"/>
<link wikidata="Q527628" start="56411" end="56419" title="Holography" label="hologram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247688" start="56582" end="56600" title="Leave It to Beaver" label="Leave It to Beaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195077" start="56613" end="56623" title="Ken Osmond" label="Ken Osmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q5336110" start="56844" end="56857" title="Eddie Haskell" label="Eddie Haskell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7012105" start="57021" end="57030" title="New Times (magazine)" label="New Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q4756792" start="57331" end="57344" title="Andrew Denton" label="Andrew Denton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3600480" start="57364" end="57370" title="ABC TV (Australian TV channel)" label="ABC TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q5379464" start="57384" end="57395" title="Enough Rope" label="Enough Rope"/>
<link wikidata="Q128121" start="57646" end="57657" title="Mick Jagger" label="Mick Jagger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658762" start="57864" end="57922" title="Illeism" label="refers to himself in the third person as &amp;quot;Alice&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q127330" start="58066" end="58077" title="Frank Zappa" label="Frank Zappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1712125" start="58085" end="58099" title="Straight Records" label="Straight label"/>
<link wikidata="Q505253" start="58119" end="58127" title="the GTOs" label="the GTOs"/>
<link wikidata="Q229545" start="58458" end="58470" title="Raquel Welch" label="Raquel Welch"/>
<link wikidata="Q805221" start="58571" end="58580" title="ballerina" label="ballerina"/>
<link wikidata="Q99472479" start="58610" end="58624" title="Sheryl Goddard" label="Sheryl Goddard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943399" start="58899" end="58905" title="Calico Cooper" label="Calico"/>
<link wikidata="Q16556" start="59029" end="59045" title="Phoenix, Arizona" label="Phoenix, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q49261" start="59073" end="59086" title="Mesa, Arizona" label="Mesa, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q39681" start="59623" end="59632" title="USA Today" label="USA Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305388" start="59859" end="59871" title="suicide pact" label="suicide pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q483352" start="60286" end="60298" title="thrash metal" label="thrash metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q83431" start="60304" end="60312" title="Megadeth" label="Megadeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q187165" start="60557" end="60570" title="Dave Mustaine" label="Dave Mustaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q202937" start="60743" end="60761" title="Stevie Ray Vaughan" label="Stevie Ray Vaughan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6941372" start="60789" end="60838" title="MusiCares" label="MusiCares MAP Fund benefit concert in Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q939019" start="60881" end="60895" title="Johnnie Walker (DJ)" label="Johnnie Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q795578" start="60899" end="60910" title="BBC Radio 2" label="BBC Radio 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233823" start="61095" end="61103" title="Crossing the Red Sea" label="part the"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="61104" end="61111" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q613015" start="61315" end="61335" title="Born again" label="born-again Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="61678" end="61689" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q281034" start="61694" end="61707" title="Harry Nilsson" label="Harry Nilsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036" start="61917" end="61935" title="the Rolling Stones" label="the Rolling Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q93346" start="61939" end="61946" title="the Who" label="the Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q464075" start="62139" end="62165" title="2004 United States presidential election" label="2004 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410130" start="62175" end="62193" title="The Canadian Press" label="The Canadian Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="62255" end="62265" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q22316" start="62276" end="62286" title="John Kerry" label="John Kerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="62446" end="62450" title="George W. Bush" label="Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q229375" start="62497" end="62511" title="Linda Ronstadt" label="Linda Ronstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q316454" start="62513" end="62523" title="Don Henley" label="Don Henley"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="62689" end="62701" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="62956" end="62959" title="National Hockey League" label="NHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q194116" start="62967" end="62984" title="Detroit Red Wings" label="Detroit Red Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q206312" start="62989" end="63004" title="Arizona Coyotes" label="Arizona Coyotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q359678" start="63054" end="63064" title="bobblehead" label="bobblehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q208652" start="63126" end="63138" title="Dallas Stars" label="Dallas Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q670376" start="63190" end="63210" title="Arizona Diamondbacks" label="Arizona Diamondbacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q650855" start="63215" end="63229" title="Detroit Tigers" label="Detroit Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q202323" start="63330" end="63339" title="Al Kaline" label="Al Kaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="63450" end="63453" title="National Basketball Association" label="NBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q169661" start="63486" end="63501" title="Detroit Pistons" label="Detroit Pistons"/>
<link wikidata="Q164177" start="63510" end="63522" title="Phoenix Suns" label="Phoenix Suns"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252932" start="63946" end="63952" title="pro–am" label="pro–am"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575043" start="64005" end="64013" title="Handicap (golf)" label="handicap"/>
<link wikidata="Q162667" start="64111" end="64124" title="Glen Campbell" label="Glen Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027181" start="64251" end="64264" title="Callaway Golf Company" label="Callaway Golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626334" start="64333" end="64345" title="Peter Alliss" label="Peter Alliss"/>
<link wikidata="Q5525555" start="64415" end="64426" title="Gary McCord" label="Gary McCord"/>
<link wikidata="Q4727761" start="64491" end="64503" title="All-Star Cup" label="All-Star Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q101254" start="64513" end="64520" title="Newport, Wales" label="Newport"/>
<link wikidata="Q886" start="64578" end="64590" title="The Simpsons" label="The Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q892419" start="64668" end="64680" title="Bongo Comics" label="Bongo Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q207197" start="64824" end="64836" title="Gene Simmons" label="Gene Simmons"/>
<link wikidata="Q298255" start="64838" end="64848" title="Rob Zombie" label="Rob Zombie"/>
<link wikidata="Q342778" start="64853" end="64862" title="Pat Boone" label="Pat Boone"/>
<link wikidata="Q173496" start="64909" end="64915" title="Marvel Comics" label="Marvel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3850391" start="64933" end="64948" title="Marvel Premiere" label="Marvel Premiere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931058" start="65003" end="65018" title="From the Inside (Alice Cooper album)" label="From the Inside"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146194" start="65162" end="65180" title="Wayne&amp;#x27;s World (film)" label="Wayne&amp;#x27;s World"/>
<link wikidata="Q185724" start="65192" end="65202" title="Mike Myers" label="Mike Myers"/>
<link wikidata="Q545924" start="65207" end="65218" title="Dana Carvey" label="Dana Carvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q653928" start="65329" end="65336" title="pinball" label="pinball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1946710" start="65467" end="65492" title="Musical Instrument Museum (Phoenix)" label="Musical Instrument Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q16556" start="65496" end="65503" title="Phoenix, Arizona" label="Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713847" start="65801" end="65811" title="Ryan Roxie" label="Ryan Roxie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2400604" start="65866" end="65878" title="Chuck Garric" label="Chuck Garric"/>
<link wikidata="Q7819516" start="65919" end="65934" title="Tommy Henriksen" label="Tommy Henriksen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5568044" start="65978" end="65988" title="Glen Sobel" label="Glen Sobel"/>
<link wikidata="Q16231562" start="66026" end="66038" title="Nita Strauss" label="Nita Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164827" start="66136" end="66152" title="Pretties for You" label="Pretties for You"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754799" start="66174" end="66185" title="Easy Action" label="Easy Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754828" start="66207" end="66223" title="Love It to Death" label="Love It to Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931937" start="66245" end="66251" title="Killer (Alice Cooper album)" label="Killer"/>
<link wikidata="Q262947" start="66273" end="66290" title="School&amp;#x27;s Out (album)" label="School&amp;#x27;s Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q803756" start="66312" end="66333" title="Billion Dollar Babies" label="Billion Dollar Babies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930919" start="66355" end="66369" title="Muscle of Love" label="Muscle of Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415672" start="66412" end="66435" title="Welcome to My Nightmare" label="Welcome to My Nightmare"/>
<link wikidata="Q332254" start="66457" end="66482" title="Alice Cooper Goes to Hell" label="Alice Cooper Goes to Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930996" start="66504" end="66520" title="Lace and Whiskey" label="Lace and Whiskey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931058" start="66542" end="66557" title="From the Inside (Alice Cooper album)" label="From the Inside"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434282" start="66579" end="66596" title="Flush the Fashion" label="Flush the Fashion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754780" start="66618" end="66632" title="Special Forces (Alice Cooper album)" label="Special Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q767902" start="66654" end="66673" title="Zipper Catches Skin" label="Zipper Catches Skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q677287" start="66695" end="66699" title="DaDa" label="DaDa"/>
<link wikidata="Q868902" start="66721" end="66732" title="Constrictor (album)" label="Constrictor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930763" start="66754" end="66778" title="Raise Your Fist and Yell" label="Raise Your Fist and Yell"/>
<link wikidata="Q775182" start="66800" end="66805" title="Trash (Alice Cooper album)" label="Trash"/>
<link wikidata="Q430340" start="66827" end="66838" title="Hey Stoopid" label="Hey Stoopid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930977" start="66860" end="66879" title="The Last Temptation (Alice Cooper album)" label="The Last Temptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q944261" start="66901" end="66914" title="Brutal Planet" label="Brutal Planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930938" start="66936" end="66946" title="Dragontown" label="Dragontown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930865" start="66968" end="66992" title="The Eyes of Alice Cooper" label="The Eyes of Alice Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930970" start="67014" end="67028" title="Dirty Diamonds" label="Dirty Diamonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q659128" start="67050" end="67069" title="Along Came a Spider (album)" label="Along Came a Spider"/>
<link wikidata="Q249624" start="67091" end="67113" title="Welcome 2 My Nightmare" label="Welcome 2 My Nightmare"/>
<link wikidata="Q29982109" start="67135" end="67145" title="Paranormal (Alice Cooper album)" label="Paranormal"/>
<link wikidata="Q104620309" start="67167" end="67182" title="Detroit Stories" label="Detroit Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q119950211" start="67204" end="67208" title="Road (Alice Cooper album)" label="Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q28405900" start="67790" end="67815" title="Operation Rock &amp;amp; Roll" label="Operation Rock &amp;amp; Roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q3251690" start="68869" end="68907" title="List of Alice Cooper solo band members" label="List of Alice Cooper solo band members"/>
<link wikidata="Q4434105" start="68910" end="68946" title="List of glam metal bands and artists" label="List of glam metal bands and artists"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="140309" wikidata="Q3216152" url="?curid=140309" title="Lagardère News">
<text>Lagardère News, formerly known as Lagardère Active, is the media activities arm of the French Lagardère Group. It owns the radio stations Europe 1, Europe 2, and RFM, the newspapers Le Journal du Dimanche and the magazine Paris Match.

Its subsidiaries include Lagardère&#x27;s radio operations, television networks, and book and magazine publishers.

==History==
In October 2000, the Lagardère Group announced that they&#x27;re bringing together its media division with all of its audiovisual and new media activities Europe 1 Communication (radio, advertising and audiovisual management) and Lagardère Net (formerly Grolier interactive ) under one single brand named Lagardère Active which will be divided into two companies named Lagardere Active Broadcast and Lagardere Active Broadband.

In December 2006, Lagardère announced that they had merged Lagardére Active with Hachette Filipacchi Médias to form the new worldwide media division under the Lagardère Active name. Their advertising agencies Lagardère Active Publicite and Interdeco had been merged into France&#x27;s most largest advertising company named Lagardère Publicité known internationally outside France as Lagardère Global Advertising. One day later, Lagardère Active had announced they signed an agreement to acquire Newshub to increase their fast-growing media activities.

In January 2011, it was announced that Lagardère Active had sold their international magazine business including their British titles Inside Soap to New York-based American multinational newspaper and magazine company and the owner of Cosmopolitan magazine Hearst Communications.

In January 2013, Lagardère Active announced that they had acquired online ticket service BilletRèduc.com

In 2018, Arnaud Lagardère announced that Lagardère would be disposing of its media assets, which they carried out throughout the year. This included their stake in Marie Claire, their radio businesses in Eastern Europe and Africa, and their press titles in France, including Elle.

==Activities==
Lagardère News&#x27; businesses are radio broadcasting, programming, television production, grouped in the Lagardère News structure, magazine publishing and an advertising management activity. They used to have a film distribution until 2020 when they sold their film, television and entertainment division to Mediawan.

===Internet===
* Newsweb (100%)
** Europe 1 Sports
** LeJdd.fr
** Parismatch.fr
** Europe1.fr
* Selma (100%)
** Mood.fr

==Former activities==
===Television channels===
It was announced that M6 Group had made a deal with Lagardère Active to buy the latter&#x27;s channels.

===Lagardère Studios===
Lagardère Studios (formerly known as Largardère Entertainment) was a French entertainment production arm of Lagardère Active that specialises in television programming.

In March 2009, Lagardère Entertainment announced that they brought a 51% majority stake in French unscripted entertainment company Electron Libre Productions.

In September 2012, Lagardère Entertainment announced that their rebranding their distribution subsidiary Europe Images International to Lagardere Entertainment Rights to reflect their parent company&#x27;s ties between their production and distribution activities.

In October 2013 after dropping out of their bid to acquire Sweden&#x27;s Nice Entertainment, Lagardère Entertainment had announced that their exiting the animation industry and ceasing their animation production by selling their animation subsidiary Genao Productions to OuiDo! Entertainment founders and Genao managers Sandrine Nguyen and Boris Hertzog and rebranding Genao as OuiDo! Productions with Lagardère Entertainment&#x27;s distribution arm Lagardère Entertainment Rights retained Genao Productions&#x27;s back catalogue.

In February 2015, Lagardère Entertainment under their own distribution company Lagardère Entertainment Rights announced that they had acquired international distribution company The Box Distribution and was interrogated into their own distribution arm.

In May 2015, Lagardère Entertainment announced that their parent company Lagarde Active had brought a 82% majority stake in Spanish-based entertainment and drama production company Grupo Boomerang TV and placing it under Lagardère Entertainment becoming Lagardère Entertainment&#x27;s first international acquisition outside of France and their first expansion into the international television market along with their expansion of their operations into Spain.

In September 2015, Lagardère Active and its president and CEO Denis Olivennes had announced that they are rebranding their entertainment group by renaming their entertainment television arm Lagardère Entertainment to Lagardère Studios to focus on international development with the rebranded entertainment arm being reorganised into four major division groups.

In October 2017, Lagardère Studios announced that they had entered the Finnish television industry by acquiring a majority stake in Finnish-based factual and unscripted entertainment production company Alto Media Group thrust expanding their operations to Finland and the first time the company&#x27;s second international acquisition with Alto Media Group&#x27;s catalog now being distributed by Lagardère Studios&#x27; distribution arm.

In March 2018, Lagardère Studios announced that they&#x27;ve expanded their global footprint into the Netherlands with the acquisition of a majority stake in Dutch-based factual format production company Skyhigh TV thrust growing Lagardère&#x27;s television division and strengthen their international TV production.

In October 2019, Lagardère Studios announced that they&#x27;ve launched a production label dedicated to international programming named Cameron&#x27;s with Jean-Charles Felli and Christophe Tomas the founders of Save Ferris Studio became co-CEOs of the production label.

In June 2020 when Lagardère Studios&#x27; parent company Lagadère Group announced that it was restructuring its operations, it was also announced that Lagardère Group was selling their entertainment production and distribution division Lagardère Studios along with its production subsidiaries to European-based French audiovisual and international production group Mediawan for €100 million in order for Lagardère Group to focus on their publishing and travel retail operations. The deal could also expand Mediawan&#x27;s production portfolio and its international operations into other countries. Five months later in November of that same year, Lagardère Studios and their parent company Lagardère Group announced that they&#x27;ve completed their sellout of Lagardère&#x27;s entertainment production and distribution division Largardère Studios along with its production subsidiaries and its distribution arm to European-based French audiovisial and international production company Mediawan with Lagardère Studios being folded into the latter company thrust turning Mediawan into a European production powerhouse.

==See also==
* 

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3216152" start="0" end="14" title="Lagardère News" label="Lagardère News"/>
<link wikidata="Q3216152" start="34" end="50" title="Lagardère News" label="Lagardère Active"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490400" start="94" end="109" title="Lagardère Group" label="Lagardère Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q314407" start="138" end="146" title="Europe 1" label="Europe 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560647" start="148" end="156" title="Europe 2" label="Europe 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q3415172" start="162" end="165" title="RFM (French radio station)" label="RFM"/>
<link wikidata="Q501461" start="182" end="204" title="Le Journal du Dimanche" label="Le Journal du Dimanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q678095" start="222" end="233" title="Paris Match" label="Paris Match"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888471" start="874" end="900" title="Hachette Filipacchi Médias" label="Hachette Filipacchi Médias"/>
<link wikidata="Q333644" start="1582" end="1594" title="Cosmopolitan (magazine)" label="Cosmopolitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065024" start="1604" end="1625" title="Hearst Communications" label="Hearst Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q691440" start="1743" end="1759" title="Arnaud Lagardère" label="Arnaud Lagardère"/>
<link wikidata="Q154020" start="2009" end="2013" title="Elle (magazine)" label="Elle"/>
<link wikidata="Q25389507" start="6251" end="6259" title="Mediawan" label="Mediawan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="140311" wikidata="Q1888471" url="?curid=140311" title="Hachette Filipacchi Médias">
<text>Hachette Filipacchi Médias, S.A. (HFM) is a magazine publisher. It is a wholly owned subsidiary of Lagardère Active, a division of the media conglomerate Lagardère Group of France.

== History ==
&quot;Hachette&quot; was founded by Louis Hachette (French pronunciation: [a.ʃɛt]) &quot;Brédif&quot;in 1826 when he purchased the &quot;Librairie Brédif&quot;; the company later became L. Hachette et Compagnie.

Hachette was purchased by Matra in 1980, a firm associated with Ténot &amp; Filipacchi. Hachette Filipacchi was nationalised in 1981 but remained a publicly traded firm. It is a subsidiary of Lagardère Media, acquired in 2004.

== Publications ==
Hachette Filipacchi Media publishes &quot;Parents&quot;, and &quot;Le Journal du Dimanche&quot;. It also published &quot;Paris Match&quot; until October 2024, when it was sold by Lagardère to LVMH. 

From 1985 the company also publishes various titles abroad. Hachette sold its international titles to Hearst in 2011.

==References==
==Further reading==
*Madjar, Robert (1997). Daniel Filipacchi. Editions Michel Lafon

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1888471" start="0" end="32" title="Hachette Filipacchi Médias" label="Hachette Filipacchi Médias, S.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q1888471" start="34" end="37" title="Hachette Filipacchi Médias" label="HFM"/>
<link wikidata="Q41298" start="44" end="52" title="magazine" label="magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3972943" start="53" end="62" title="publisher" label="publisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q3216152" start="99" end="115" title="Lagardère Active" label="Lagardère Active"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490400" start="154" end="169" title="Lagardère Group" label="Lagardère Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q349566" start="202" end="210" title="Hachette (publisher)" label="Hachette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368272" start="232" end="246" title="Louis Hachette" label="Louis Hachette"/>
<link wikidata="Q35982" start="435" end="440" title="Matra" label="Matra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444335" start="473" end="478" title="Franck Ténot" label="Ténot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160659" start="485" end="495" title="Daniel Filipacchi" label="Filipacchi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="698" end="705" title="Parents (French magazine)" label="Parents"/>
<link wikidata="Q501461" start="723" end="745" title="Le Journal du Dimanche" label="Le Journal du Dimanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q678095" start="777" end="788" title="Paris Match" label="Paris Match"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490400" start="835" end="844" title="Lagardère Group" label="Lagardère"/>
<link wikidata="Q504998" start="848" end="852" title="LVMH" label="LVMH"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065024" start="958" end="964" title="Hearst Communications" label="Hearst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160659" start="1034" end="1051" title="Daniel Filipacchi" label="Daniel Filipacchi"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="140312" wikidata="Q376082" url="?curid=140312" title="HFM">
<text>HFM may refer to:

* Hachette Filipacchi Médias, a magazine publisher
* Harborough FM, a radio station covering Market Harborough and South Leicestershire in the United Kingdom
* Harvest Fund Management, a Chinese asset management company
* Hemifacial microsomia
* Hand, Foot and Mouth disease, a human disease
* Henry Ford Museum, in Dearborn, Michigan, United States
* Hereditary folate malabsorption
* Hi Fly Malta, a Maltese airline
* Hiroshima FM, a radio station in the Hiroshima area
* His or Her Most Faithful Majesty
* Hollow fiber membrane
* &quot;The Hunger for More&quot;, a 2004 album by rapper Lloyd Banks</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1888471" start="21" end="47" title="Hachette Filipacchi Médias" label="Hachette Filipacchi Médias"/>
<link wikidata="Q5654736" start="72" end="85" title="Harborough FM" label="Harborough FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q10923995" start="179" end="202" title="Harvest Fund Management" label="Harvest Fund Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q5711576" start="241" end="262" title="Hemifacial microsomia" label="Hemifacial microsomia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="265" end="293" title="Hand%2C foot%2C and mouth disease" label="Hand, Foot and Mouth disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521242" start="313" end="330" title="Henry Ford Museum" label="Henry Ford Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1609733" start="371" end="402" title="Hereditary folate malabsorption" label="Hereditary folate malabsorption"/>
<link wikidata="Q14628877" start="405" end="417" title="Hi Fly Malta" label="Hi Fly Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3082119" start="439" end="451" title="Hiroshima FM" label="Hiroshima FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420014" start="493" end="525" title="Faithful Majesty" label="His or Her Most Faithful Majesty"/>
<link wikidata="Q25325287" start="528" end="549" title="Hollow fiber membrane" label="Hollow fiber membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q784869" start="558" end="577" title="The Hunger for More" label="The Hunger for More"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="140313" wikidata="Q2791139" url="?curid=140313" title="Hachette Filipacchi Media U.S.">
<text>Hachette Filipacchi Media U.S., Inc. (HFM U.S.), originally known as CBS Publications, was a subsidiary of Hachette Filipacchi Médias (one of the world&#x27;s largest magazine publishers), and was based in New York City.

==History==
It was formed in 1972 as CBS Publications. CBS expanded its magazine group by acquiring Fawcett Publications in 1977, and the majority of the Ziff Davis magazines in 1984. CBS Publications in 1982 sold Fawcett Publications to Ballantine Books while Popular Library was sold to Warner Communications.

Executive Peter Diamandis acquired the division in 1987. Hachette purchased Diamandis Communications in 1988.

In May 2009, the company sold &quot;American Photo&quot;, &quot;Flying&quot;, &quot;Boating&quot;, &quot;Sound &amp; Vision&quot;, and &quot;Popular Photography&quot; to the Bonnier Group.

Hearst Magazines acquired Hachette Filipacchi Media U.S. magazines along with most of Hachette Filipacchi&#x27;s international magazines in May 2011.

==List of publications==

*&quot;Car and Driver&quot;
*&quot;Cycle World&quot;
*&quot;Elle&quot;
*&quot;Elle Decor&quot;
*&quot;Elle Girl&quot; (print edition closed in July 2006)
*&quot;Premiere.com&quot; (print edition closed in April 2007)
*&quot;Road &amp; Track&quot;
*&quot;Woman&#x27;s Day&quot;
*&quot;Family Life&quot;, sold to Time Warner in 1999
*&quot;Trump Style&quot;

From 1995 to 2001, the company also published the magazine &quot;George&quot; which was founded by John F. Kennedy Jr.

==Other businesses==
*Hachette Filipacchi Custom Publishing, integrated marketing, database, market research
*Hachette Enterprises
*Filipacchi Books

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2791139" start="0" end="36" title="Hachette Filipacchi Media U.S." label="Hachette Filipacchi Media U.S., Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q2791139" start="38" end="46" title="Hachette Filipacchi Media U.S." label="HFM U.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q2791139" start="69" end="85" title="Hachette Filipacchi Media U.S." label="CBS Publications"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888471" start="107" end="133" title="Hachette Filipacchi Médias" label="Hachette Filipacchi Médias"/>
<link wikidata="Q41298" start="167" end="175" title="magazine" label="magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3972943" start="176" end="186" title="publishers" label="publishers"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="206" end="219" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="259" end="262" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067653" start="322" end="342" title="Fawcett Publications" label="Fawcett Publications"/>
<link wikidata="Q199296" start="376" end="386" title="Ziff Davis" label="Ziff Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067653" start="436" end="456" title="Fawcett Publications" label="Fawcett Publications"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881141" start="460" end="476" title="Ballantine Books" label="Ballantine Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q7229707" start="483" end="498" title="Popular Library" label="Popular Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q191715" start="511" end="532" title="Warner Communications" label="Warner Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q4577908" start="710" end="716" title="Flying (magazine)" label="Flying"/>
<link wikidata="Q4931525" start="730" end="737" title="Boating (magazine)" label="Boating"/>
<link wikidata="Q610609" start="751" end="769" title="Sound &amp;amp; Vision (magazine)" label="Sound &amp;amp; Vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398016" start="787" end="806" title="Popular Photography" label="Popular Photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q892825" start="820" end="833" title="Bonnier Group" label="Bonnier Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q119846136" start="836" end="852" title="Hearst Magazines" label="Hearst Magazines"/>
<link wikidata="Q858319" start="1020" end="1034" title="Car and Driver" label="Car and Driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q5198151" start="1048" end="1059" title="Cycle World" label="Cycle World"/>
<link wikidata="Q154020" start="1073" end="1077" title="Elle (magazine)" label="Elle"/>
<link wikidata="Q154020" start="1091" end="1101" title="Elle Decor" label="Elle Decor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5364660" start="1115" end="1124" title="Elle Girl" label="Elle Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q130706" start="1174" end="1186" title="Premiere (magazine)" label="Premiere.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q3781030" start="1237" end="1253" title="Road &amp;amp; Track" label="Road &amp;amp; Track"/>
<link wikidata="Q4020711" start="1267" end="1283" title="Woman&amp;#x27;s Day" label="Woman&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q29261467" start="1297" end="1308" title="Family Life (Wenner Media magazine)" label="Family Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q191715" start="1324" end="1335" title="Time Warner" label="Time Warner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101362" start="1435" end="1441" title="George (magazine)" label="George"/>
<link wikidata="Q316064" start="1469" end="1488" title="John F. Kennedy Jr." label="John F. Kennedy Jr."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="140320" wikidata="Q7660236" url="?curid=140320" title="Sydney gang rapes">
<text>The Sydney gang rapes were a series of gang rape attacks committed by a group of up to 14 youths led by Bilal Skaf against Australian women and teenage girls (2 with Italian parents, 1 with Greek parents and one Aboriginal Australian girl), as young as 14, in Sydney, New South Wales, Australia across several days in 2000. The crimes, described as ethnically motivated hate crimes by one columnist, were covered extensively by the news media, and prompted the passing of new laws. In 2002, the nine men convicted of the gang rapes were sentenced to a total of more than 240 years in jail. According to court transcripts, Judge Michael Finnane described the rapes as events that &quot;you hear about or read about only in the context of wartime atrocities&quot;.

== Attacks ==
==Further attempted attacks==
A further series of gang rapes were said to have been attempted but thwarted. Four of the attackers were also convicted for an attack on Friday 4 August 2000 when they approached a fourteen-year-old girl on a train where she was threatened with violence, punched twice, slapped, and told that she would be forced to perform fellatio on several men and that she was going to be raped.

==Attackers==

*Bilal Skaf led and orchestrated the three August 2000 attacks. He was initially sentenced to a total of 55 years&#x27; imprisonment but had his sentence for these attacks reduced by the New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal to 28 years, with no parole for the first 22 years. However, on 28 July 2006, Acting Justice Jane Mathews added another ten years to his sentence for his role in the 12 August rape. His original conviction over this attack had been quashed in 2004 and a retrial ordered after it was revealed that two jurors had conducted their own investigations at Gosling Park. Bilal Skaf is eligible for release on parole from 11 February 2033. In March 2003, Skaf was charged with sending mail containing white powder to a corrections department official from prison in an apparent hoax terrorist act. In April 2015, he was attacked by two other inmates in jail and sustained &quot;serious facial injuries&quot;.
*Mohammed Skaf, younger brother of Bilal Skaf, was one of the gang rapists. He was sentenced to 32 years for his role in the gang rapes, but also had his sentence reduced on appeal, to 19 years with a non-parole period of 11 years. However, on 28 July 2006, he received an additional 15 years, with a minimum of seven and a half years over the Gosling Park attack. He was then eligible for release on parole from 1 July 2019. Skaf showed no remorse for his crimes, making sexually inappropriate remarks to female staff at the Kariong Juvenile Justice Centre where he was incarcerated and continued to blame his victims for initially agreeing to go with him because &quot;they came out with us as soon as I asked them.&quot; His parole was denied in February 2020, with The State Parole Authority mentioning that &quot;it appears that he still blames the victims for his offending, has no victim empathy and refuses to take responsibility for his actions&quot; His parole was denied again in November 2020. Mohammed Skaf was released under &quot;strict parole&quot; conditions on 6 October 2021. The release on parole means Skaf can be under &quot;heavy surveillance&quot; for 26 months. He will be monitored electronically for 24 hours-a-day, and has also been banned from some areas in Western Sydney.
*Belal Hajeid, then 20, was another gang rapist who was convicted and imprisoned for 23 years with a non-parole period of 15 years. Hajeid later had his sentence reduced on appeal.
*Mohammed Sanoussi, then 18, gang rapist who was sentenced to 21 years with a non-parole period of 12 years for the 10 and 30 August rapes. Sanoussi later had his sentence reduced to 16 years on appeal. Shortly after Sanoussi&#x27;s conviction, his brother and cousin were banned from visiting him in prison for three months after a rowdy clash with staff at the Kariong Juvenile Justice Centre where he was incarcerated. Shouting broke out when staff removed the visitors after they had tried to pass newspaper clippings to the brothers about their sentencing the previous day. Sanoussi remained behind bars when denied parole for a second time in October 2011. Parole applications were rejected on three occasions. He has been on weekend leave since October 2012 and day leave since April 2013. On 5 September 2013, Sanoussi was granted parole with strict conditions but was not immediately released. The next day, his parole was revoked. Upon release, Sanoussi was to live at his family&#x27;s home. However, late on 5 September it became known that his two brothers, who also lived there and are linked to the &quot;Brothers for Life&quot; gang, had been charged, with two others, with a violent assault. The State Parole Authority met and decided that &quot;... the previously approved accommodation was not suitable in light of the new information.&quot; On appeal, Judge Terence Christie conceded that his brother&#x27;s crimes had nothing to do with Sanoussi and that he should be released. Sanoussi was paroled on 10 October 2013. Among other conditions, he is not to have contact with his two brothers without permission.
*Mahmoud Sanoussi, brother of Mohammed Sanoussi, then 17, was sentenced to 11 years and three months&#x27; imprisonment with parole available after six-and-a-half years. He unsuccessfully appealed against his sentence in 2005. He was released on parole in May 2009 but had his parole revoked in March 2010 for his drug use.
*Mahmoud Chami, then 20, was sentenced to 18 years with a non-parole period of ten years. Chami unsuccessfully appealed against his sentence in 2004. He was released to parole in April 2013.
*&quot;H&quot; (Identity sealed: H has had his name suppressed under court order because of his &quot;intellectual and mental disabilities&quot;), then 19, was sentenced to 25 years with a non-parole period of 15 years. &#x27;H&#x27; later had his sentence reduced on appeal. A parole hearing was held in October 2013, and he was released in February 2014 under strict parole conditions.
*Tayyab Sheikh, then 16, was initially sentenced to 15 years&#x27; imprisonment with a non-parole period of nine years for his role in the 30 August rape. He was retried and sentenced to eight years and six months&#x27; imprisonment, with a non-parole period of four years and six months. He was released from prison in late June 2007.
*Mohammed Ghanem, then 19, was the final person to be sentenced and was imprisoned for 40 years with a non-parole period of 26 years for two counts of rape. Ghanem, like his co-offenders Bilal Skaf and Mohammed Skaf showed no remorse for his actions, effectively opting to &quot;tough it out&quot; at the Kariong Juvenile Justice Centre, where he was detained while awaiting trial.

There was evidence to convict only nine men of the fourteen suspects. The sentences totalled 240 years in prison.

==Racial controversy==
The conservative commentator Miranda Devine said the crimes were racially motivated hate crimes. She also asserted that much of the media had attempted to &quot;airbrush&quot; the racial element out of reporting on the crime spree; she quoted a victim that all mention of the overtly racist statements made by the perpetrators had been &quot;censored&quot; from their official statements by prosecutors to avoid complicating attempts to negotiate guilty pleas with the accused. 

&quot;The Sydney Morning Herald&quot; reported that the rapists had stated to a victim during the attack, &quot;You deserve it because you&#x27;re an Australian&quot; and &quot;I&#x27;m going to fuck you Leb-style&quot;.

==New laws==
The gang rapes led to the passage of new legislation through the Parliament of New South Wales, increasing the sentences for gang rapists by creating a new category of crime known as &quot;aggravated sexual assault in company&quot;.

Also, in the course of one of the trials, the defendants refused counsel as they believed that &quot;all lawyers were against Muslims&quot;. This led to the contentious prospect of the defendants being able to cross-examine the witnesses, including the victims, a situation that was averted by further legislation being put through the state parliament.

Actions taken by government ministers, including Premier of New South Wales Bob Carr, who publicly identified the perpetrators&#x27; background, led to controversy. Ethnic community group leaders, including Keysar Trad of the Lebanese Muslim Association, complained that Carr was smearing the entire Lebanese Muslim community with the crimes of a few of its members and that his public comments would stir up ethnic hatred.

The first court case heard under the new sentencing regime concerned the Ashfield gang rapes of girls by Pakistani and Nepalese immigrants in Ashfield on 28 July 2002.

==Role of technology in coordination of the attacks==
The attackers used SMS and mobile phones to orchestrate the attack and to phone ahead to other attackers to co-ordinate transport of rape gang members to the locations where women were being held. Authorities later released some of this material, recovered from the rapists&#x27; mobile phones.

The attackers texted violent anti-Christian messages, such as, &quot;When you are feeling down... bash a Christian or Catholic and lift up&quot;. And as well as sexually degrading texts like, &quot;I&#x27;ve got a slut with me bro, come to Punchbowl&quot;.

==Skaf gang rape psychologist==
In July 2019, it was revealed that Joanne Natalie Senior, a former prison psychologist who was fired for having a relationship with a Skaf gang rapist and who married another member of the notorious child rape gang, was working with children as a school counsellor at Malek Fahd Islamic School.

==See also==
* Ashfield gang rapes

==References==
==External links==
*&quot;Sentence Slashed: &quot;Gang rapes not &#x27;Worst Category&#x27;
*The Guardian: Racially Motivated Crime and Punishment
* ABC TV&#x27;s Four Corners: &quot;...For being Lebanese&quot;
* ABC TV: Sentencing hearing of Bilal Skaf
*&quot;The &#x27;Young Muslim Man&#x27; in Australian Public Discourse&quot; by Kiran Grewal, &quot;Transforming Cultures eJournal&quot;, Vol.2, No.1, November 2007</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7660236" start="4" end="21" title="Sydney gang rapes" label="Sydney gang rapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8192354" start="39" end="48" title="gang rape" label="gang rape"/>
<link wikidata="Q4907538" start="104" end="114" title="Bilal Skaf" label="Bilal Skaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318423" start="123" end="133" title="Australians" label="Australian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="260" end="266" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="268" end="283" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="285" end="294" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q459409" start="370" end="381" title="hate crimes" label="hate crimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4907538" start="1209" end="1219" title="Bilal Skaf" label="Bilal Skaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644956" start="1395" end="1435" title="Supreme Court of New South Wales" label="New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283" start="2011" end="2020" title="terrorist" label="terrorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q58201413" start="2663" end="2694" title="Kariong Juvenile Justice Centre" label="Kariong Juvenile Justice Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q55606020" start="4741" end="4758" title="Brothers for Life" label="Brothers for Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q6872802" start="7042" end="7056" title="Miranda Devine" label="Miranda Devine"/>
<link wikidata="Q459409" start="7097" end="7107" title="hate crime" label="hate crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q131160" start="7174" end="7182" title="political correctness" label="airbrush"/>
<link wikidata="Q390216" start="7499" end="7524" title="The Sydney Morning Herald" label="The Sydney Morning Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365521" start="7793" end="7822" title="Parliament of New South Wales" label="Parliament of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="8088" end="8094" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q13527950" start="8366" end="8392" title="Premier of New South Wales" label="Premier of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q541217" start="8393" end="8401" title="Bob Carr" label="Bob Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q6398395" start="8524" end="8535" title="Keysar Trad" label="Keysar Trad"/>
<link wikidata="Q6510910" start="8543" end="8570" title="Lebanese Muslim Association" label="Lebanese Muslim Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308225" start="8726" end="8739" title="ethnic hatred" label="ethnic hatred"/>
<link wikidata="Q4804975" start="8815" end="8834" title="Ashfield gang rapes" label="Ashfield gang rapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310017" start="8847" end="8856" title="Pakistani people" label="Pakistani"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="8861" end="8866" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157505" start="8884" end="8892" title="Ashfield, New South Wales" label="Ashfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q43024" start="8984" end="8987" title="short message service" label="SMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="8992" end="9004" title="mobile phone" label="mobile phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q554482" start="9290" end="9304" title="Persecution of Christians" label="anti-Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2540524" start="9359" end="9375" title="Religious violence" label="bash a Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="9379" end="9387" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530195" start="9422" end="9440" title="Sexual objectification" label="sexually degrading"/>
<link wikidata="Q998653" start="9475" end="9479" title="slut" label="slut"/>
<link wikidata="Q6271175" start="9501" end="9510" title="Punchbowl, New South Wales" label="Punchbowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q6743016" start="9819" end="9844" title="Malek Fahd Islamic School" label="Malek Fahd Islamic School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4804975" start="9862" end="9881" title="Ashfield gang rapes" label="Ashfield gang rapes"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="140321" wikidata="Q6510834" url="?curid=140321" title="Lebanese">
<text>Lebanese may refer to:

* Something of, from, or related to Lebanon
* Lebanese people, people from Lebanon or of Lebanese descent
* Lebanese Arabic, the variety of Levantine Arabic spoken in Lebanon
* Lebanese culture
* Lebanese cuisine

== See also ==
* List of Lebanese people</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6510834" start="0" end="8" title="Lebanese" label="Lebanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="60" end="67" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2606511" start="70" end="85" title="Lebanese people" label="Lebanese people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516642" start="132" end="147" title="Lebanese Arabic" label="Lebanese Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007350" start="201" end="217" title="Lebanese culture" label="Lebanese culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q929239" start="220" end="236" title="Lebanese cuisine" label="Lebanese cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275755" start="255" end="278" title="List of Lebanese people" label="List of Lebanese people"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="140325" wikidata="Q1886295" url="?curid=140325" title="Savoy Palace">
<text>The Savoy Palace, considered the grandest nobleman&#x27;s townhouse of medieval London, was the residence of prince John of Gaunt until it was destroyed during rioting in the Peasants&#x27; Revolt of 1381. The palace was on the site of an estate given to Peter II, Count of Savoy, in the mid-13th century, which in the following century came to be controlled by Gaunt&#x27;s family and then the monarch by right of the Duchy of Lancaster. `It was situated between the Strand and the River Thames. French monarch John II of France died here during his &quot;honourable captivity&quot;, after an illness. In the locality of the palace, the administration of law was by a special jurisdiction, separate from the rest of the county of Middlesex, known as the Liberty of the Savoy.

The Tudor-era Savoy Chapel is located on the site of the former palace and has carried on the name. The name is also carried on by the Savoy Theatre and Savoy Hotel also located on the former estate.

==Savoy Palace==
In the Middle Ages, although there were many noble palaces within the walls of the City of London, the most desirable location for housing the nobility was the Strand, which was the greatest part of the ceremonial route between the City and the Palace of Westminster, where the business of Parliament and the royal court was transacted. Other advantages of the Strand were that a house could have a water frontage on the Thames, the great water highway, and be free of the stink, smoke, and social tumult of the City of London downstream and generally downwind to the east, and its constant threat of fires.

In 1246 King Henry III granted the land between the Strand and the Thames, on which the palace was soon built, to an uncle of Queen Eleanor, Peter, Count of Savoy, whom he created Feudal Baron of the Honour of Richmond. The house the Count of Savoy built there later became the home of Edmund, Earl of Lancaster, and his descendants, the Dukes of Lancaster, lived there throughout the next century. In the 14th century, when the Strand was paved as far as the Savoy, it was the vast riverside London residence of John of Gaunt, a younger son of King Edward III who had inherited by marriage the title and lands of the Dukes of Lancaster. He was the nation&#x27;s power broker and in his time was the richest man in the kingdom second to the king. The Savoy was the most magnificent nobleman&#x27;s house in England. It was famous for its owner&#x27;s magnificent collection of tapestries, jewels, and other ornaments. Geoffrey Chaucer began writing &quot;The Canterbury Tales&quot; while working at the Savoy Palace as a clerk.

===Destruction===
During the Peasants&#x27; Revolt led by Wat Tyler in 1381, the rioters, who blamed John of Gaunt for the introduction of the poll tax that had precipitated the revolt, systematically demolished the Savoy and everything in it. What could not be smashed or burned was thrown into the river. Jewellery was pulverised with hammers, and it was said that one rioter found by his fellows to have kept a silver goblet for himself was killed for doing so. Despite this, the name Savoy was retained by the site.

==Savoy Hospital==

It was here that Henry VII founded the Savoy Hospital for poor, needy people, endowing it with land and leaving instructions for it in his will. In 1512, letters patent issued by Henry&#x27;s successor, Henry VIII, established the hospital as a body corporate consisting of a master and four chaplains, enabling it to acquire the land and begin building; the first office-holders appear to have been appointed in 1517. The grand structure (&#x27;dedicated to the honour of the Blessed Jesus, the Virgin Mary, and St. John the Baptist&#x27;) was the most impressive hospital of its time in the country and the first to benefit from permanent medical staff. It consisted of a large cruciform arrangement of dormitories, around which were placed the chapel, separate lodgings for the master and other officials, domestic ranges and a tower, which served among other things as a secure treasury and archive. Statutes published in 1523 stipulated a distinct role for each chaplain (namely seneschal, sacristan, confessor and hospitaller) and listed several other officials, including a matron, who was assisted by twelve other women. Each evening, an hour before sunset, the hospitaller, vice-matrons and others opened the gates and admitted the poor, who went first to the chapel to pray for the founder, then to the dormitory where they were allotted a bed for the night; the matron&#x27;s staff were also to see that the men were bathed and their clothing washed. In the morning they departed (though the sick were allowed to remain and were attended to).

From early in its existence the hospital appears to have been prone to mismanagement. An inquiry into its administration was held in 1535. In 1553 the foundation was suppressed by King Edward VI, only to be refounded three years later by Queen Mary. In 1570 the master, Thomas Thurland, was removed for abuse of office, after removing the hospital&#x27;s treasures, selling its beds, burdening it with a private debt (of £2,500), and engaging in sexual relations with the staff. Thereafter the hospital&#x27;s fortunes waned. Buildings in the precincts were converted into houses for the nobility (and in the course of the 17th century several were given over to tradesmen). During the Civil War it was requisitioned to serve as a military hospital. When Charles II came to the throne, he re-established the hospital under its former statutes; however, in 1670 some of the buildings were again taken over by the military (for the use of men wounded in the Dutch Wars), and in 1679 the Great Dormitory and the Sisters&#x27; Lodgings were converted into barracks for the Foot Guards. By this time the nobility had vacated their houses within the precincts, and a number of tradespeople had moved in, including glove-makers, printers and leather-sellers. In 1695 a military prison was built on part of the site by Sir Christopher Wren.

The Savoy Conference had been held here in 1661 between Anglican bishops and leading nonconformists, which had led indirectly to the establishment within the precincts of a variety of chapels for different nonconformist congregations. French Protestants were given use of the &#x27;Little Chapel&#x27; at that time (it was rebuilt for them by Wren in 1685); the German Lutherans were given the former Sisters&#x27; Hall to serve as a church in 1694. A German Calvinist Chapel and a Quaker Meeting House were also provided on the site.

A commission appointed by King William III reported that the hospital&#x27;s main function, relief of the poor, was being utterly neglected; it made recommendations, but these were not enacted. In 1702, the office of master being vacant, Sir Nathan Wright, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, dismissed the remaining chaplains and formally declared the hospital foundation dissolved.

===List of masters of the Savoy Hospital===


The masters of the Savoy were:

*1517 William Hogill 
*1551 Robert Bowes
*1553 Ralph Jackson 
* Thomas Thurland 
* William Mount 
*1602 Richard Neile
*1608 George Montaigne 
*1618 Walter Balcanquhall 
*1618 Marco Antonio de Dominis 
*1621 Walter Balcanquhall 
*1629 John Wilson
*1645 John Bond
*1658 William Hooke
*1660 Gilbert Sheldon 
*1663 Henry Killigrew 
*1700–1702 &quot;Vacant&quot;

==Savoy Barracks==

The Hospital complex remained in use as barracks for most of the 18th century. In 1776 much of the structure was destroyed in a fire; at the time it housed a military infirmary, prison and recruiting station. As early as 1775 Sir William Chambers (who was already responsible for rebuilding the adjacent riverside property, Somerset House, to serve as government offices) was asked to draw up plans to replace the Hospital buildings with an entirely new Barracks for the Foot Guards (to accommodate 3,000 men). He drew up plans for a three-sided quadrangle of six-storey buildings, open towards the river, behind an elevated river terrace (akin to that built as Somerset House): details included pyramid roofs on the four corner pavilions, a large double-domed structure in the centre of the north wing (which would have served as a chapel) and a subterranean gallery where prisoners would exercise, beneath the main parade ground. He was paid for his design in 1795 but the scheme never went ahead, being finally dropped in 1804. In 1816–20 almost all the remaining hospital buildings were demolished to make way for the approach road to the new Waterloo Bridge.

==Savoy Chapel==
The only hospital building to survive the 19th-century demolition was its hospital chapel, dedicated to St John the Baptist. It once hosted a German Lutheran congregation, and is now again in Church of England use as the church for the Duchy of Lancaster and Royal Victorian Order. Before taking up folk music, the young Martin Carthy was a chorister here.

==Modern London==
The Savoy Palace and Hospital are remembered in the names of the Savoy Hotel and the Savoy Theatre which now stand on the site. Many of the nearby streets are also named for the Savoy: Savoy Buildings, Court, Hill, Place, Row, Street and Way. Savoy Place is the London headquarters of the Institution of Engineering and Technology.

The Savoy Estate is owned by the Duchy of Lancaster, held in trust for the Sovereign in His or Her role as Duke of Lancaster.

==See also==
* List of demolished buildings and structures in London
* List of Jesuit sites

==References==
==Further reading==

* Cowie, L. W. &quot;The Savoy – Palace and Hospital&quot; &quot;History Today&quot; (March 1974), Vol. 24 Issue 3, pp 173–179 online. 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1886295" start="4" end="16" title="Savoy Palace" label="Savoy Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q15979581" start="42" end="67" title="Townhouse (Great Britain)" label="nobleman&amp;#x27;s townhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q13560020" start="71" end="86" title="Norman and Medieval London" label="medieval London"/>
<link wikidata="Q193752" start="116" end="129" title="John of Gaunt" label="John of Gaunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q498871" start="175" end="196" title="Peasants&amp;#x27; Revolt" label="Peasants&amp;#x27; Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q723562" start="255" end="279" title="Peter II, Count of Savoy" label="Peter II, Count of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914544" start="419" end="437" title="Duchy of Lancaster" label="Duchy of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q756819" start="468" end="474" title="Strand, London" label="Strand"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="483" end="495" title="River Thames" label="River Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q169992" start="512" end="529" title="John II of France" label="John II of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q19186" start="731" end="740" title="Middlesex" label="Middlesex"/>
<link wikidata="Q6542204" start="755" end="775" title="Liberty of the Savoy" label="Liberty of the Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q64636" start="792" end="804" title="Savoy Chapel" label="Savoy Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165797" start="913" end="926" title="Savoy Theatre" label="Savoy Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q746639" start="931" end="942" title="Savoy Hotel" label="Savoy Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="1003" end="1014" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="1079" end="1093" title="City of London" label="City of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q756819" start="1156" end="1162" title="Strand, London" label="Strand"/>
<link wikidata="Q62408" start="1241" end="1262" title="Palace of Westminster" label="Palace of Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="1417" end="1423" title="River Thames" label="Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q160311" start="1613" end="1627" title="Henry III of England" label="King Henry III"/>
<link wikidata="Q228885" start="1731" end="1744" title="Eleanor of Provence" label="Queen Eleanor"/>
<link wikidata="Q723562" start="1746" end="1767" title="Peter II, Count of Savoy" label="Peter, Count of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q447802" start="1891" end="1916" title="Edmund Crouchback, 1st Earl of Lancaster" label="Edmund, Earl of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346992" start="1943" end="1961" title="Duke of Lancaster" label="Dukes of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q193752" start="2118" end="2131" title="John of Gaunt" label="John of Gaunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="2412" end="2419" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q5683" start="2523" end="2539" title="Geoffrey Chaucer" label="Geoffrey Chaucer"/>
<link wikidata="Q191663" start="2560" end="2580" title="The Canterbury Tales" label="The Canterbury Tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q498871" start="2663" end="2684" title="Peasants&amp;#x27; Revolt" label="Peasants&amp;#x27; Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q311820" start="2692" end="2701" title="Wat Tyler" label="Wat Tyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q193752" start="2735" end="2748" title="John of Gaunt" label="John of Gaunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q721368" start="2777" end="2785" title="Tax per head" label="poll tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q675493" start="3192" end="3201" title="Henry VII of England" label="Henry VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511010" start="3329" end="3343" title="letters patent" label="letters patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="3378" end="3388" title="Henry VIII" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778211" start="3420" end="3434" title="body corporate" label="body corporate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189819" start="3855" end="3864" title="cruciform" label="cruciform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138622" start="4159" end="4168" title="seneschal" label="seneschal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365552" start="4170" end="4179" title="sacristan" label="sacristan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16827718" start="4181" end="4190" title="confessor" label="confessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396008" start="4256" end="4262" title="matron" label="matron"/>
<link wikidata="Q83229" start="4915" end="4924" title="Edward VI" label="Edward VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q82674" start="4974" end="4978" title="Mary I" label="Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q117190872" start="5000" end="5015" title="Thomas Thurland" label="Thomas Thurland"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="5416" end="5425" title="English Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="5485" end="5495" title="Charles II of England" label="Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q755170" start="5686" end="5696" title="Dutch Wars" label="Dutch Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q131263" start="5782" end="5790" title="barracks" label="barracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q170373" start="6041" end="6061" title="Sir Christopher Wren" label="Sir Christopher Wren"/>
<link wikidata="Q7428432" start="6068" end="6084" title="Savoy Conference" label="Savoy Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144064" start="6149" end="6163" title="Nonconformist (Protestantism)" label="nonconformists"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586104" start="6299" end="6317" title="French Protestant Church of London" label="French Protestants"/>
<link wikidata="Q48968279" start="6426" end="6442" title="German Lutherans" label="German Lutherans"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="6523" end="6532" title="Calvinist" label="Calvinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5504247" start="6546" end="6566" title="Quaker Meeting House" label="Quaker Meeting House"/>
<link wikidata="Q129987" start="6631" end="6642" title="William III of England" label="William III"/>
<link wikidata="Q6969435" start="6842" end="6855" title="Nathan Wright (judge)" label="Nathan Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869896" start="6857" end="6886" title="Lord Keeper of the Great Seal" label="Lord Keeper of the Great Seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342247" start="7086" end="7098" title="Robert Bowes (lawyer)" label="Robert Bowes"/>
<link wikidata="Q85795780" start="7105" end="7118" title="Ralph Jackson (priest)" label="Ralph Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q117190872" start="7122" end="7137" title="Thomas Thurland" label="Thomas Thurland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1731117" start="7162" end="7175" title="Richard Neile" label="Richard Neile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101772" start="7182" end="7198" title="George Montaigne" label="George Montaigne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7964237" start="7206" end="7225" title="Walter Balcanquhall" label="Walter Balcanquhall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393093" start="7233" end="7257" title="Marco Antonio de Dominis" label="Marco Antonio de Dominis"/>
<link wikidata="Q55640160" start="7292" end="7303" title="John Wilson (Dean of Ripon)" label="John Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6222424" start="7310" end="7319" title="John Bond (jurist)" label="John Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q16844707" start="7326" end="7339" title="William Hooke (minister)" label="William Hooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q584403" start="7346" end="7361" title="Gilbert Sheldon" label="Gilbert Sheldon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5724318" start="7369" end="7384" title="Henry Killigrew (playwright)" label="Henry Killigrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q455155" start="7667" end="7683" title="William Chambers (architect)" label="William Chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344889" start="7761" end="7775" title="Somerset House" label="Somerset House"/>
<link wikidata="Q501003" start="8584" end="8599" title="Waterloo Bridge" label="Waterloo Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q40662" start="8723" end="8742" title="St John the Baptist" label="St John the Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="8768" end="8776" title="Lutheran" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="8811" end="8828" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914544" start="8855" end="8873" title="Duchy of Lancaster" label="Duchy of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q94050" start="8878" end="8899" title="Royal Victorian Order" label="Royal Victorian Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="8918" end="8928" title="folk music" label="folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1903579" start="8940" end="8953" title="Martin Carthy" label="Martin Carthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q746639" start="9060" end="9071" title="Savoy Hotel" label="Savoy Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165797" start="9080" end="9093" title="Savoy Theatre" label="Savoy Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7428442" start="9238" end="9249" title="Savoy Place" label="Savoy Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164410" start="9284" end="9325" title="Institution of Engineering and Technology" label="Institution of Engineering and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914544" start="9361" end="9379" title="Duchy of Lancaster" label="Duchy of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6616015" start="9470" end="9523" title="List of demolished buildings and structures in London" label="List of demolished buildings and structures in London"/>
<link wikidata="Q6575275" start="9526" end="9546" title="List of Jesuit sites" label="List of Jesuit sites"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="140329" wikidata="Q9182" url="?curid=140329" title="Carignano, Piedmont">
<text>Carignano (; ) is a &quot;comune&quot; (municipality) in the Metropolitan City of Turin in the Italian region Piedmont, located about south of Turin. Carignano borders the following municipalities: Moncalieri, Vinovo, La Loggia, Piobesi Torinese, Villastellone, Castagnole Piemonte, Osasio, Lombriasco and Carmagnola.

== Points of interest ==
* Sanctuary of Valinotto, a masterwork by the architect Bernardo Vittone, lies within the territory of the town.
* Villa Malenchini Fortuny, Carignano, a 16th-century rural palace.

== See also ==
* Carignane

== References ==
== External links ==
* 
* Official website </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9182" start="0" end="9" title="Carignano, Piedmont" label="Carignano"/>
<link wikidata="Q747074" start="26" end="32" title="comune" label="comune"/>
<link wikidata="Q18288162" start="61" end="87" title="Metropolitan City of Turin" label="Metropolitan City of Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216" start="110" end="118" title="Piedmont" label="Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q495" start="143" end="148" title="Turin" label="Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9474" start="198" end="208" title="Moncalieri" label="Moncalieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q10361" start="210" end="216" title="Vinovo" label="Vinovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q9412" start="218" end="227" title="La Loggia" label="La Loggia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9578" start="229" end="245" title="Piobesi Torinese" label="Piobesi Torinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q10360" start="247" end="260" title="Villastellone" label="Villastellone"/>
<link wikidata="Q9221" start="262" end="281" title="Castagnole Piemonte" label="Castagnole Piemonte"/>
<link wikidata="Q9525" start="283" end="289" title="Osasio" label="Osasio"/>
<link wikidata="Q9432" start="291" end="301" title="Lombriasco" label="Lombriasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q9187" start="306" end="316" title="Carmagnola" label="Carmagnola"/>
<link wikidata="Q30889453" start="346" end="368" title="Sanctuary of Valinotto" label="Sanctuary of Valinotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3638755" start="400" end="416" title="Bernardo Vittone" label="Bernardo Vittone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4012245" start="459" end="494" title="Villa Malenchini Fortuny, Carignano" label="Villa Malenchini Fortuny, Carignano"/>
<link wikidata="Q251054" start="543" end="552" title="Carignane" label="Carignane"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="140330" wikidata="Q1436661" url="?curid=140330" title="Force (disambiguation)">
<text>In physics, [[force]] is what, when unopposed, changes the motion of an object.

Force is also a dialectal term for a &quot;waterfall&quot;.

Force or forces may also refer to:

==Places==
*Force, Marche, a municipality in Ascoli Piceno, Italy
*Forcé, Mayenne, France; a commune
*Force, Pennsylvania, an unincorporated community in Pennsylvania

==People==
* Anna Laura Force (1868-1952), American educator
* The Force family of American drag racing:
** John Force (born 1949), family patriarch; father of four daughters, three of whom are or have been racers themselves: 
*** Ashley Force Hood (born 1982)
*** Brittany Force (born 1986)
*** Courtney Force (born 1988)

==Arts, entertainment, and media==
===Fictional entities===
*Force (comics), a character in the Marvel Comics &quot;Iron Man&quot; titles
*Major Force, a fictional character in the DC Comics universe

===Films===
* &quot;Force&quot; (film series), a series of Indian Hindi-language action-thriller films
** &quot;Force&quot; (2011 film), first installment of the series
** &quot;Force 2&quot; (2016), second installment of the series
* &quot;Force&quot; (2014 film), an Indian Bengali-language film

===Music===
*Force, the early name of the Swedish band Europe
*&quot;Force&quot; (A Certain Ratio album), 1986
*&quot;Force&quot; (Superfly album), 2012
**&quot;Force&quot; (Superfly song)
*&quot;Force&quot; (Alan Walker song), 2015

===Other uses in arts, entertainment, and media===
*Forcing (magic), a magician&#x27;s technique sometimes called a &quot;force&quot;
*&quot;Sonic Forces&quot;, a video game

==Law, policing, and military==
*Force (law), unlawful violence or lawful compulsion
*Forces, the armed forces collectively of a nation&#x27;s military
** Security forces, the name of the armed forces in some nations
*The force, the police force of a particular jurisdiction

==Mathematics and science==
*Brute force method, proof by exhaustion in mathematics
*Fundamental force, an interaction between particles that cannot be explained by other interactions

==Sports==
===Teams===
*Cleveland Force (disambiguation), defunct indoor soccer teams based in Northeast Ohio
*Georgia Force, an Arena Football League team 
*Ipswich Force, an Australian basketball team 
*Kansas City Force, an American women&#x27;s gridiron football team
*San Antonio Force, an Arena Football League team that played during the 1992 season
*Western Force, an Australian rugby union team in the Super 14
===Other===
*FORCE (Formula One Race Car Engineering), a design and construction company within the Haas Lola Formula One team
*Force play, a situation in baseball where the runner is compelled to advance to the next base

==Other uses==
*Force (cereal), a wheat flake cereal
*Coming into force
*Force Motors, an Indian automotive company
*Force-feeding, the practice of feeding a human or other animal against their will
*Fuerza (political party) (English translation: Force), a political party in Guatemala
*The Force, a power in the Star Wars franchise

==See also==
*Armed forces (disambiguation)
*Brute force (disambiguation)
*Elite Force (disambiguation)
*Energy (disambiguation)
*Force 1 (disambiguation)
*Force 10 (disambiguation)
*Force B (disambiguation)
*Force Commander (disambiguation)
*Force field (disambiguation)
*&quot;Force majeure&quot; (disambiguation)
*Force of Nature (disambiguation)
*Force One (disambiguation)
*Force XXI (disambiguation)
*Forcing (disambiguation)
*Physical force (disambiguation)
*Special forces (disambiguation)
*Taskforce (disambiguation)
*X force (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1436661" start="12" end="21" title="Force (disambiguation)" label="[[force]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436661" start="81" end="86" title="Force (disambiguation)" label="Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q34038" start="124" end="133" title="waterfall" label="waterfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436661" start="142" end="147" title="Force (disambiguation)" label="Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436661" start="151" end="157" title="Force (disambiguation)" label="forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q56070" start="190" end="203" title="Force, Marche" label="Force, Marche"/>
<link wikidata="Q375188" start="245" end="250" title="Forcé" label="Forcé"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467407" start="280" end="299" title="Force, Pennsylvania" label="Force, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q131786405" start="359" end="375" title="Anna Laura Force" label="Anna Laura Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q6233593" start="454" end="464" title="John Force" label="John Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q4805435" start="577" end="594" title="Ashley Force Hood" label="Ashley Force Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q20829397" start="611" end="625" title="Brittany Force" label="Brittany Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178606" start="642" end="656" title="Courtney Force" label="Courtney Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467422" start="731" end="745" title="Force (comics)" label="Force (comics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2440257" start="809" end="820" title="Major Force" label="Major Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q27964569" start="885" end="916" title="Force (film series)" label="&amp;quot;Force&amp;quot; (film series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467424" start="977" end="1006" title="Force (2011 film)" label="&amp;quot;Force&amp;quot; (2011 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20715671" start="1049" end="1056" title="Force 2" label="Force 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q18124879" start="1106" end="1135" title="Force (2014 film)" label="&amp;quot;Force&amp;quot; (2014 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q185144" start="1225" end="1231" title="Europe (band)" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q25096634" start="1233" end="1274" title="Force (A Certain Ratio album)" label="&amp;quot;Force&amp;quot; (A Certain Ratio album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4391851" start="1282" end="1316" title="Force (Superfly album)" label="&amp;quot;Force&amp;quot; (Superfly album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q39358" start="1325" end="1358" title="Force (song)" label="&amp;quot;Force&amp;quot; (Superfly song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q28378916" start="1360" end="1396" title="Force (Alan Walker song)" label="&amp;quot;Force&amp;quot; (Alan Walker song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q28457382" start="1456" end="1471" title="Forcing (magic)" label="Forcing (magic)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25999239" start="1545" end="1557" title="Sonic Forces" label="Sonic Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467425" start="1612" end="1623" title="Force (law)" label="Force (law)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8473" start="1722" end="1730" title="military" label="military"/>
<link wikidata="Q7444961" start="1734" end="1749" title="Security forces" label="Security forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q35535" start="1812" end="1824" title="police force" label="police force"/>
<link wikidata="Q9299950" start="1884" end="1902" title="Brute force method" label="Brute force method"/>
<link wikidata="Q104934" start="1940" end="1957" title="Fundamental force" label="Fundamental force"/>
<link wikidata="Q5132135" start="2064" end="2096" title="Cleveland Force (disambiguation)" label="Cleveland Force (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2378826" start="2151" end="2164" title="Georgia Force" label="Georgia Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q48800447" start="2198" end="2211" title="Ipswich Force" label="Ipswich Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q85773518" start="2245" end="2262" title="Kansas City Force" label="Kansas City Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7413329" start="2313" end="2330" title="San Antonio Force" label="San Antonio Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q915507" start="2398" end="2411" title="Western Force" label="Western Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109413" start="2560" end="2569" title="Haas Lola" label="Haas Lola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183721" start="2588" end="2598" title="Force play" label="Force play"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467419" start="2699" end="2713" title="Force (cereal)" label="Force (cereal)"/>
<link wikidata="Q490812" start="2737" end="2754" title="Coming into force" label="Coming into force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436646" start="2756" end="2768" title="Force Motors" label="Force Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296926" start="2800" end="2813" title="Force-feeding" label="Force-feeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q20652377" start="2883" end="2907" title="Fuerza (political party)" label="Fuerza (political party)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093766" start="2970" end="2979" title="The Force" label="The Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793054" start="3031" end="3060" title="Armed forces (disambiguation)" label="Armed forces (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209494" start="3062" end="3090" title="Brute force (disambiguation)" label="Brute force (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5361911" start="3092" end="3120" title="Elite Force (disambiguation)" label="Elite Force (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5402200" start="3122" end="3145" title="Energy (disambiguation)" label="Energy (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q92771899" start="3147" end="3171" title="Force 1 (disambiguation)" label="Force 1 (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467423" start="3173" end="3198" title="Force 10 (disambiguation)" label="Force 10 (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16782461" start="3200" end="3224" title="Force B (disambiguation)" label="Force B (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467435" start="3226" end="3258" title="Force Commander (disambiguation)" label="Force Commander (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q424235" start="3260" end="3288" title="Force field (disambiguation)" label="Force field (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194605" start="3290" end="3332" title="Force majeure (disambiguation)" label="&amp;quot;Force majeure&amp;quot; (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8564472" start="3334" end="3366" title="Force of Nature (disambiguation)" label="Force of Nature (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q92771899" start="3368" end="3394" title="Force One (disambiguation)" label="Force One (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25098957" start="3396" end="3422" title="Force XXI (disambiguation)" label="Force XXI (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467581" start="3424" end="3448" title="Forcing (disambiguation)" label="Forcing (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q105237372" start="3450" end="3481" title="Physical force (disambiguation)" label="Physical force (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383382" start="3483" end="3514" title="Special forces (disambiguation)" label="Special forces (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7687364" start="3516" end="3542" title="Taskforce (disambiguation)" label="Taskforce (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q47016204" start="3544" end="3568" title="X force (disambiguation)" label="X force (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="140332" wikidata="Q108325927" url="?curid=140332" title="List of The Simpsons episodes (season 21–present)">
<text>&lt;section begin=head/&gt;
&lt;section begin=head/&gt;&quot;The Simpsons&quot; is an American animated sitcom created by Matt Groening for the Fox Broadcasting Company. It is a satirical depiction of a dysfunctional middle-class American lifestyle starring the eponymous family: Homer, Marge, Bart, Lisa, and Maggie. Set in the town of Springfield, the show lampoons both American culture and the human condition. The family was conceived by Groening shortly before a pitch for a series of animated shorts with producer James L. Brooks. Groening named each character (other than Bart an anagram for brat) after members of his own family. The shorts became part of the Fox series &quot;The Tracey Ullman Show&quot; on April 19, 1987. After a three-season run, the sketch was developed into a half-hour prime-time hit show.

The show holds several American television longevity records. It is the longest-running prime-time animated series and longest-running sitcom in the United States. With its twenty-first season (2009–10), the series surpassed &quot;Gunsmoke&quot; in seasons to claim the spot as the longest-running American prime-time scripted television series, and later also surpassed &quot;Gunsmoke&quot; in episode count with the twenty-ninth season episode &quot;Forgive and Regret&quot; on April 29, 2018.

Episodes of &quot;The Simpsons&quot; have won dozens of awards, including 31 Emmys (ten for Outstanding Animated Program), 30 Annies, and a Peabody. &quot;The Simpsons Movie&quot;, a feature-length film, was released in theaters worldwide on July 26 and 27, 2007 and grossed US$526.2 million worldwide. The first twenty seasons are available on DVD in regions 1, 2, and 4, with the twentieth season released on both DVD and Blu-ray in 2010 to celebrate the 20th anniversary of the series. On April 8, 2015, showrunner Al Jean announced that there would be no more DVD or Blu-ray releases, shifting focus to digital distribution, although this was later reversed on July 22, 2017. Almost two years later, on July 20, 2019, it was announced that Season 19 would be released on December 3, 2019, on DVD.

On January 26, 2023, &quot;The Simpsons&quot; was renewed for seasons 35 and 36. On February 19, 2012, &quot;The Simpsons&quot; reached its 500th episode in the twenty-third season. It reached its 600th episode on October 16, 2016, in its twenty-eighth season. On March 21, 2021, &quot;The Simpsons&quot; reached its 700th episode in its thirty-second season.

 &lt;/onlyinclude&gt;
==Series overview==
==Episodes==
===Season 21 (2009–10)===
Note: This is the first season to air entirely in high definition.


===Season 22 (2010–11)===

===Season 23 (2011–12)===

===Season 24 (2012–13)===

===Season 25 (2013–14)===

===Season 26 (2014–15)===

===Season 27 (2015–16)===

===Season 28 (2016–17)===

===Season 29 (2017–18)===

===Season 30 (2018–19)===

===Season 31 (2019–20)===

===Season 32 (2020–21)===

===Season 33 (2021–22)===

===Season 34 (2022–23)===

===Season 35 (2023–24)===

===Season 36 (2024–25)===

==Upcoming episodes without a scheduled air date==







==See also==

*&quot;The Simpsons&quot; Tracey Ullman shorts
*&quot;The Simpsons&quot; Disney+ shorts
*&quot;The Simpsons Guy&quot; – a crossover episode of &quot;Family Guy&quot;
*&quot;The Simpsons&quot; home media

== Notes ==

==References==
Bibliography


==External links==
*

&lt;section end=tail/&gt;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q886" start="61" end="73" title="The Simpsons" label="The Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q4765080" start="95" end="110" title="animated sitcom" label="animated sitcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q43994" start="122" end="135" title="Matt Groening" label="Matt Groening"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="144" end="168" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="Fox Broadcasting Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q128758" start="178" end="187" title="satirical" label="satirical"/>
<link wikidata="Q906343" start="203" end="216" title="dysfunctional family" label="dysfunctional"/>
<link wikidata="Q9762" start="272" end="278" title="Simpson family" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810" start="280" end="285" title="Homer Simpson" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7828" start="287" end="292" title="Marge Simpson" label="Marge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5480" start="294" end="298" title="Bart Simpson" label="Bart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5846" start="300" end="304" title="Lisa Simpson" label="Lisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834" start="310" end="316" title="Maggie Simpson" label="Maggie"/>
<link wikidata="Q151076" start="337" end="348" title="Springfield (The Simpsons)" label="Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044835" start="373" end="389" title="Culture of the United States" label="American culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124515" start="398" end="413" title="human condition" label="human condition"/>
<link wikidata="Q605111" start="491" end="506" title="The Simpsons shorts" label="animated shorts"/>
<link wikidata="Q95125" start="521" end="536" title="James L. Brooks" label="James L. Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216882" start="686" end="708" title="The Tracey Ullman Show" label="The Tracey Ullman Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507963" start="997" end="1016" title="The Simpsons season 21" label="twenty-first season"/>
<link wikidata="Q29641" start="1055" end="1063" title="Gunsmoke" label="Gunsmoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q27688954" start="1242" end="1261" title="The Simpsons season 29" label="twenty-ninth season"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="1398" end="1402" title="Emmy Award" label="Emmy"/>
<link wikidata="Q337926" start="1413" end="1441" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Animated Program (for Programming Less Than One Hour)" label="Outstanding Animated Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q566905" start="1447" end="1452" title="Annie Award" label="Annie"/>
<link wikidata="Q838121" start="1461" end="1468" title="Peabody Award" label="Peabody"/>
<link wikidata="Q182254" start="1476" end="1494" title="The Simpsons Movie" label="The Simpsons Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063273" start="1666" end="1669" title="DVD-Video" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q746611" start="1673" end="1680" title="DVD region code" label="regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q47770" start="1745" end="1752" title="Blu-ray" label="Blu-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q2829373" start="1839" end="1846" title="Al Jean" label="Al Jean"/>
<link wikidata="Q752947" start="2259" end="2276" title="At Long Last Leave" label="its 500th episode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460067" start="2284" end="2303" title="The Simpsons season 23" label="twenty-third season"/>
<link wikidata="Q27333749" start="2316" end="2333" title="Treehouse of Horror XXVII" label="its 600th episode"/>
<link wikidata="Q24211712" start="2362" end="2382" title="The Simpsons season 28" label="twenty-eighth season"/>
<link wikidata="Q105235047" start="2436" end="2453" title="Manger Things" label="its 700th episode"/>
<link wikidata="Q61816313" start="2461" end="2481" title="The Simpsons season 32" label="thirty-second season"/>
<link wikidata="Q605111" start="3112" end="3157" title="The Simpsons shorts" label="&amp;quot;The Simpsons&amp;quot; Tracey Ullman shorts"/>
<link wikidata="Q113715181" start="3159" end="3198" title="The Simpsons Disney+ shorts" label="&amp;quot;The Simpsons&amp;quot; Disney+ shorts"/>
<link wikidata="Q17487808" start="3206" end="3222" title="The Simpsons Guy" label="The Simpsons Guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5930" start="3260" end="3270" title="Family Guy" label="Family Guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3621232" start="3278" end="3313" title="List of The Simpsons home video releases" label="&amp;quot;The Simpsons&amp;quot; home media"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="140339" wikidata="Q5467425" url="?curid=140339" title="Force (law)">
<text>In law, force means lawful violence, or lawful . &quot;Forced entry&quot; is an expression falling under the category of unlawful violence; &quot;in force&quot; or &quot;forced sale&quot; would be examples of expressions in the category of lawful compulsion.

When something is said to have been done &quot;by force&quot;, it usually implies that it was done by actual or threatened violence (&quot;might&quot;), not necessarily by legal authority (&quot;right&quot;).

&quot;Force of arms&quot; is a special case that can be an example of unlawful violence or lawful compulsion dependent on who is exercising the violence (or threat thereof) and their legal right and/or responsibility to do so.

When one citizen threatens another with a weapon without being in danger from the person he or she is threatening, this would be an example of the unlawful expression of force of arms. The same threat expressed by police officer making a lawful arrest would typically be considered lawful compulsion, due to the state having a monopoly on violence.

==Indian Penal Code==
In Indian Penal Code, Section 349 explains the meaning of force as under:-
&#x27;A person is said to use force to another if he causes motion, change of motion, or cessation of motion to that other, or if he causes to any substance such motion, or change of motion, or cessation of motion as brings that substance into contact with any part of that other&#x27;s body, or with anything which that other is wearing or carrying, or with anything so situated that such contact affects that other&#x27;s sense of feeling: Provided that the person causing the motion, or change of motion, or cessation of motion, causes that motion, change of motion, or cessation of motion in one of the three ways hereinafter described.
(First) — By his own bodily power.
(Secondly) —By disposing any substance in such a manner that the motion or change or cessation of motion takes place without any further act on his part, or on the part of any other person.
(Thirdly) — By inducing any animal to move, to change its motion, or to cease to move.&#x27;

== See also ==
* Coming into force
* Power (social and political)
* Police power
* Use of force
* Economic power

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7748" start="3" end="6" title="law" label="law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467425" start="8" end="13" title="Force (law)" label="force"/>
<link wikidata="Q124490" start="27" end="35" title="violence" label="violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q780687" start="432" end="447" title="Right" label="legal authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q29677" start="653" end="664" title="legal right" label="legal right"/>
<link wikidata="Q728" start="740" end="746" title="weapon" label="weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q384593" start="912" end="926" title="police officer" label="police officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1403016" start="943" end="949" title="arrest" label="arrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508788" start="1025" end="1045" title="monopoly on violence" label="monopoly on violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q490812" start="2122" end="2139" title="Coming into force" label="Coming into force"/>
<link wikidata="Q25107" start="2142" end="2170" title="Power (social and political)" label="Power (social and political)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389196" start="2173" end="2185" title="Police power (United States constitutional law)" label="Police power"/>
<link wikidata="Q971119" start="2188" end="2200" title="Use of force" label="Use of force"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400813" start="2203" end="2217" title="Economic power" label="Economic power"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="140342" wikidata="Q719933" url="?curid=140342" title="Carlos Ortiz (boxer)">
<text>Carlos Ortiz (September 9, 1936 – June 13, 2022) was a Puerto Rican professional boxer. He held world titles in lightweight and light welterweight weight divisions. Along with Félix Trinidad, Miguel Cotto, Wilfredo Gómez, Héctor Camacho, José Torres, Edwin Rosario and Wilfred Benítez, Ortiz is considered among the best Puerto Rican boxers of all time by sports journalists and analysts. As of January 2018, Ortiz holds the record for the most wins in unified lightweight title bouts in boxing history at 10.

In 1991, Ortiz was inducted into the International Boxing Hall of Fame. In 2002, Ortiz was voted by &quot;The Ring&quot; magazine as the 60th greatest fighter of the last 80 years. He held 21st place in BoxRec ranking of the greatest pound for pound boxers of all time.

==Boxing career==

Ortiz, born in Ponce, started his professional career in 1955 with a first round knockout of Harry Bell in New York City. He moved from Puerto Rico to New York before he began boxing as a professional, he would campaign there during the first stages of his career. After 9 bouts there, he fought outside New York for the first time, moving to Massachusetts to knock Al Duarte out in 4 rounds. His next 3 bouts were also outside New York, but he stayed within the confines of New England, as they happened, once again in Massachusetts, and in New Jersey.

He returned to New York again and won 4 more bouts in a row, then made his California debut, beating Mickey Northrup by a decision in 10 rounds. 2 more fights in California and one in New York went by, after which he returned to California to meet Lou Filippo, who was subsequently inducted into the International Boxing Hall Of Fame as a referee. The first time, it was declared a no-contest after 9 rounds, but in the second, Carlos prevailed, by a knockout in 9. 5 more wins followed, and then he met Johnny Busso, who handed Carlos his first loss, on a 10-round decision. That fight was held in New York, and in an immediate rematch between Ortiz and Busso, Carlos won, also by a 10-round decision, and also in New York.

Next Carlos flew to England to meet Dave Charnley, who was considered one of the top challengers of that time. Ortiz won the fight at Harringay Arena on a 10-round decision, after which promoters thought he was ready for a world title try.

===Junior welterweight world champion===
Carlos met Kenny Lane for the vacant world Jr. Welterweight title, in New York on the night of 12 June 1959. Lane had handed Carlos his second loss months before, winning a 10-round decision over Ortiz in Florida. This time, Carlos became the World&#x27;s Jr Welterweight champion, with a TKO of Lane at the end of 2nd round. Ortiz became the first Puerto Rican world boxing champion since Sixto Escobar more than 30 years before, and only the second Puerto Rican world boxing champion ever. Unfortunately for him, not much importance was being given to that division at the time, since that division&#x27;s title had been vacant for 13 years. But Carlos defended his title twice, knocking out the respected, until then undefeated Mexican puncher Battling Torres in Torres&#x27; home ground of Los Angeles, and beating Duilio Loi in 15 rounds by decision at San Francisco.

His next fight was a rematch with Loi, and it took Ortiz to Milan, Italy to defend his crown. This time, it was Loi&#x27;s turn to become a world champion, winning by a 15-round decision.

After another win, Ortiz traveled to Milan once again, and met Loi in a rubber match. This time, he lost again, by 15-round decision.

===Lightweight world champion===
Instead of going up in weight, like most boxers throughout history have done after losing the title in their original division, Ortiz went &quot;down&quot; in weight, and challenged world champion Joe Brown (also a member of the International Boxing Hall Of Fame). Ortiz won a 15-round decision over Brown on 21 April 1962 in Las Vegas, to win his second world title, this time in his second championship division. Ortiz defended with a 5-round knockout of Teruo Kosaka in Tokyo before making his Puerto Rican debut, with a 13-round knockout win over Doug Valiant to retain his title on 7 April 1963 in San Juan.

A knockout win in 14 rounds over another Hall of Famer, Gabriel Elorde, &quot;Flash&quot; in the Philippines followed, and then a rematch with Lane, this time Ortiz retaining his world Lightweight title with a 15-round decision in San Juan. But in 1965 he went to Panama and fought yet another member of the International Boxing Hall Of Fame, Ismael Laguna who defeated him in 15 rounds to claim Ortiz&#x27;s world Lightweight title. A rematch in San Juan followed, and Ortiz regained the world Lightweight title beating Laguna by a 15-round decision also.

1966 saw Ortiz draw with world Jr Welterweight champion Nicolino Locche in a ten-round non-title affair in Argentina, and retain his title vs Johnny Bizarro (KO in 12 in Pittsburgh), Cuban Sugar Ramos (another International Boxing Hall Of Fame Member, KO in 5 rounds in Mexico City), and Filipino Flash Elorde, also by KO in 14 at a New York rematch. The Ramos fight proved controversial, because the WBC&#x27;s president proclaimed at first that the punch with which Ortiz had beaten Ramos had been illegal, but he later reconsidered and gave Ortiz the title, and the knockout victory, back, with the condition that a rematch be fought in the future.

And so 1967 came, and Ortiz and Ramos met once again, this time in San Juan. Ortiz retained the title by a knockout in 4 rounds, and this time the bout went without any controversies. Then, he and Laguna fought a third time, and Ortiz retained his title by a 15-round decision in New York.

===Later career===
29 June 1968 proved to be Ortiz&#x27;s last day as a world champion, as he lost his world lightweight title to Dominican Carlos Cruz on a 15-round decision in the Dominican Republic. Ortiz kept on fighting, but he never got another chance at a world title. He retired after losing at Madison Square Garden by a knockout in 6 rounds to Ken Buchanan. It was the only time he was stopped in his career. His final record was of 61 wins, 7 losses and 1 draw, with one bout declared a no-contest and 30 knockout wins.

Ortiz is also a member of the International Boxing Hall Of Fame and he always enjoyed taking photos with his fans and signing autographs for them.

==Death==
Carlos Ortiz died on June 13, 2022, in New York at age 85.

==Professional boxing record==

==Legacy==
He is recognized at Ponce&#x27;s Parque de los Ponceños Ilustres in the area of sports.

==See also==

* Lineal championship
* List of lightweight boxing champions
* List of light welterweight boxing champions
* List of WBA world champions
* List of WBC world champions
* List of undisputed boxing champions
* List of Puerto Rican boxing world champions
* List of Puerto Ricans
* Sports in Puerto Rico
==References==
==External links==
*Carlos Ortiz - CBZ Profile
* https://boxrec.com/media/index.php/National_Boxing_Association%27s_Quarterly_Ratings:_1962
* https://www.wbaboxing.com/wba-history/world-boxing-association-history
* https://titlehistories.com/boxing/na/usa/ny/nysac-l.html


|-
|-
|-






|-
|-
|-
|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q719933" start="0" end="12" title="Carlos Ortiz (boxer)" label="Carlos Ortiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631720" start="68" end="86" title="professional boxer" label="professional boxer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051922" start="112" end="123" title="lightweight" label="lightweight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112498" start="128" end="146" title="light welterweight" label="light welterweight"/>
<link wikidata="Q17080472" start="147" end="163" title="weight divisions" label="weight divisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q249478" start="176" end="190" title="Félix Trinidad" label="Félix Trinidad"/>
<link wikidata="Q543778" start="192" end="204" title="Miguel Cotto" label="Miguel Cotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972279" start="206" end="220" title="Wilfredo Gómez" label="Wilfredo Gómez"/>
<link wikidata="Q114355" start="222" end="236" title="Héctor Camacho" label="Héctor Camacho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1685019" start="238" end="249" title="José Torres (boxer)" label="José Torres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294939" start="251" end="264" title="Edwin Rosario" label="Edwin Rosario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386541" start="269" end="284" title="Wilfred Benítez" label="Wilfred Benítez"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918606" start="440" end="484" title="Undisputed championship (boxing)" label="most wins in unified lightweight title bouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q572227" start="548" end="581" title="International Boxing Hall of Fame" label="International Boxing Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140774" start="611" end="640" title="The Ring (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;The Ring&amp;quot; magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q895505" start="714" end="720" title="BoxRec" label="BoxRec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636859" start="745" end="760" title="pound for pound" label="pound for pound"/>
<link wikidata="Q864024" start="816" end="821" title="Ponce, Puerto Rico" label="Ponce"/>
<link wikidata="Q668642" start="882" end="890" title="knockout" label="knockout"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="908" end="921" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="937" end="948" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="1144" end="1157" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="1276" end="1287" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="1343" end="1353" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="1431" end="1441" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q5730493" start="1604" end="1615" title="Lou Filippo" label="Lou Filippo"/>
<link wikidata="Q572227" start="1656" end="1689" title="International Boxing Hall Of Fame" label="International Boxing Hall Of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017143" start="2118" end="2131" title="Dave Charnley" label="Dave Charnley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5664507" start="2216" end="2231" title="Harringay Arena" label="Harringay Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q6391123" start="2375" end="2385" title="Kenny Lane" label="Kenny Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="2569" end="2576" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485763" start="2754" end="2767" title="Sixto Escobar" label="Sixto Escobar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7299300" start="3111" end="3126" title="Battling Torres" label="Battling Torres"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="3158" end="3169" title="Los Angeles, California" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q328126" start="3183" end="3193" title="Duilio Loi" label="Duilio Loi"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="3222" end="3235" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="3298" end="3303" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="3305" end="3310" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q32112" start="3636" end="3642" title="boxing" label="boxers"/>
<link wikidata="Q332060" start="3792" end="3801" title="Joe Brown (boxer)" label="Joe Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624848" start="3921" end="3930" title="Las Vegas Valley" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="4068" end="4073" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q41211" start="4198" end="4206" title="San Juan, Puerto Rico" label="San Juan"/>
<link wikidata="Q983128" start="4265" end="4279" title="Gabriel Elorde" label="Gabriel Elorde"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="4306" end="4317" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="4473" end="4479" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394608" start="4552" end="4565" title="Ismael Laguna" label="Ismael Laguna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329514" start="4823" end="4838" title="Nicolino Locche" label="Nicolino Locche"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="4874" end="4883" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="4937" end="4947" title="Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195125" start="4950" end="4955" title="Cuban people" label="Cuban"/>
<link wikidata="Q128448" start="4956" end="4967" title="Sugar Ramos" label="Sugar Ramos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="5037" end="5048" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q4172847" start="5055" end="5063" title="Filipino people" label="Filipino"/>
<link wikidata="Q983128" start="5064" end="5076" title="Flash Elorde" label="Flash Elorde"/>
<link wikidata="Q724450" start="5168" end="5171" title="World Boxing Council" label="WBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="5841" end="5850" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican"/>
<link wikidata="Q2939477" start="5851" end="5862" title="Carlos Cruz (boxer)" label="Carlos Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q186125" start="6014" end="6035" title="Madison Square Garden" label="Madison Square Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2398357" start="6065" end="6077" title="Ken Buchanan" label="Ken Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q572227" start="6273" end="6306" title="International Boxing Hall Of Fame" label="International Boxing Hall Of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872572" start="6369" end="6379" title="autographs" label="autographs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7139700" start="6537" end="6568" title="Parque del Tricentenario (Ponce, Puerto Rico)" label="Parque de los Ponceños Ilustres"/>
<link wikidata="Q886814" start="6609" end="6628" title="Lineal championship" label="Lineal championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562728" start="6631" end="6667" title="List of lightweight boxing champions" label="List of lightweight boxing champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075905" start="6670" end="6713" title="List of light welterweight boxing champions" label="List of light welterweight boxing champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837705" start="6716" end="6743" title="List of WBA world champions" label="List of WBA world champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837719" start="6746" end="6773" title="List of WBC world champions" label="List of WBC world champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354610" start="6776" end="6811" title="List of undisputed boxing champions" label="List of undisputed boxing champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6595179" start="6814" end="6857" title="List of Puerto Rican boxing world champions" label="List of Puerto Rican boxing world champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6595198" start="6860" end="6881" title="List of Puerto Ricans" label="List of Puerto Ricans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7579902" start="6884" end="6905" title="Sports in Puerto Rico" label="Sports in Puerto Rico"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="140345" wikidata="Q164955" url="?curid=140345" title="Müritz (district)">
<text>Müritz is a former &quot;Kreis&quot; (district) in the southern part of Mecklenburg-Vorpommern, Germany. It is named after the lake Müritz. Neighboring districts were (from the west clockwise) Parchim, Güstrow, Demmin, Mecklenburg-Strelitz, the district-free city Neubrandenburg and the district Ostprignitz-Ruppin in Brandenburg. The district was disbanded at the district reform of September 2011. Its territory has been part of the Mecklenburgische Seenplatte district since.

==Geography==
The district of Müritz constituted roughly the western half of the Müritz lakeland and the Müritz National Park. The lake Müritz has an area of 117 km2; it is the second largest lake of Germany after Lake Constance, and the largest lake entirely within the German borders.

==History==
Müritz District was established on June 12, 1994, by merging the previous districts of Röbel and Waren; along with a few municipalities from the districts of Malchin and Neustrelitz. This district was merged with the district of Mecklenburg-Strelitz and most of the district of Demmin at the district reform of September 2011, forming the new Mecklenburgische Seenplatte district.

==Coat of arms==
==Towns and municipalities==
The subdivisions of the district were (situation August 2011): 

==References==
==External links==

*Official website (German)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q164955" start="0" end="6" title="Müritz (district)" label="Müritz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196" start="72" end="94" title="Mecklenburg-Vorpommern" label="Mecklenburg-Vorpommern"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="96" end="103" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q3369" start="132" end="138" title="Müritz" label="Müritz"/>
<link wikidata="Q430923" start="193" end="200" title="Parchim (district)" label="Parchim"/>
<link wikidata="Q559600" start="202" end="209" title="Güstrow (district)" label="Güstrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q559530" start="211" end="217" title="Demmin (district)" label="Demmin"/>
<link wikidata="Q559552" start="219" end="239" title="Mecklenburg-Strelitz (district)" label="Mecklenburg-Strelitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3958" start="264" end="278" title="Neubrandenburg" label="Neubrandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6125" start="296" end="314" title="Ostprignitz-Ruppin" label="Ostprignitz-Ruppin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208" start="318" end="329" title="Brandenburg" label="Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902" start="435" end="462" title="Mecklenburgische Seenplatte (district)" label="Mecklenburgische Seenplatte"/>
<link wikidata="Q702495" start="585" end="605" title="Müritz National Park" label="Müritz National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3369" start="616" end="622" title="Müritz" label="Müritz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4127" start="694" end="708" title="Lake Constance" label="Lake Constance"/>
<link wikidata="Q559552" start="997" end="1029" title="Mecklenburg-Strelitz (district)" label="district of Mecklenburg-Strelitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q559530" start="1046" end="1064" title="Demmin (district)" label="district of Demmin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902" start="1123" end="1150" title="Mecklenburgische Seenplatte (district)" label="Mecklenburgische Seenplatte"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="140351" wikidata="Q6661758" url="?curid=140351" title="Llansantffraed">
<text>Llansantffraed (Llansantffraed-juxta-Usk) is a parish in the community of Talybont-on-Usk in Powys, Wales, near Brecon. The benefice of Llansantffraed with Llanrhystud and Llanddeiniol falls within the Diocese of St Davids in the Church in Wales.

==Church and churchyard==
The church of St Ffraed is a Grade II listed building. It was largely restored in 1690 and was completely rebuilt in 1885 by the architect Stephen W. Williams.

The parish is the burial place of the poet Henry Vaughan (1621–1695), who was born in the hamlet of Scethrog within the parish. Vaughan&#x27;s grave in the churchyard, on the slopes of a hill known as Allt yr Esgair or simply The Allt, overlooks the River Usk. The poets Siegfried Sassoon, Roland Mathias, Brian Morris and Anne Cluysenaar were all inspired to write poems by their visits to the grave. Sassoon&#x27;s &quot;At the Grave of Henry Vaughan&quot; is the best-known of these and is read every year at the graveside following the Vaughan memorial service.

Another grave of note in the churchyard is a Grade II listed tomb erected for the Gwynne-Holford family, residents of nearby Buckland Hall (see below). The family included James Gwynne-Holford, Conservative member of parliament for Brecon (died 1886).

Vaughan&#x27;s twin brother, Thomas Vaughan, became rector of Llansantffraed in about 1644. He was forced to vacate the position in 1650, on grounds that included his having been on the Royalist side during the English Civil War.

==Other buildings==
The Old Rectory, which stands close by the church to the northwest, is a Grade II listed building, with an estimated date of late 18th century. It is thought to have been built as a hunting lodge for the Buckland estate and converted into a rectory in the 19th century, but was released by the church during the 1950s. It later became a guest house.

===Buckland Hall===
Buckland Hall, home of the Gwynne-Holfords, stands in a large park a small distance from the village. It is a Grade II listed building. Its Edwardian garden is listed, also at Grade II, on the Cadw/ICOMOS Register of Parks and Gardens of Special Historic Interest in Wales. The park contains a tennis pavilion, graded at II*, by Henry Avray Tipping.

==Governance==
An electoral ward with the same name exists. The population of this ward at the 2011 census was 1,880.

==References==
== External links ==
*Photos of Llansantffraed and surrounding area at geograph.org.uk</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6661758" start="0" end="14" title="Llansantffraed" label="Llansantffraed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7680426" start="74" end="89" title="Talybont-on-Usk" label="Talybont-on-Usk"/>
<link wikidata="Q156150" start="93" end="98" title="Powys" label="Powys"/>
<link wikidata="Q904472" start="112" end="118" title="Brecon" label="Brecon"/>
<link wikidata="Q13644939" start="156" end="167" title="Llanrhystud" label="Llanrhystud"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="172" end="184" title="Llanddeiniol" label="Llanddeiniol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376211" start="202" end="222" title="Diocese of St Davids" label="Diocese of St Davids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089788" start="230" end="245" title="Church in Wales" label="Church in Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q80979" start="288" end="297" title="Brigid of Kildare" label="St Ffraed"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="303" end="311" title="Grade II" label="Grade II"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="312" end="327" title="listed building" label="listed building"/>
<link wikidata="Q16200538" start="413" end="432" title="Stephen W. Williams" label="Stephen W. Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q545363" start="478" end="491" title="Henry Vaughan" label="Henry Vaughan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="535" end="543" title="Scethrog" label="Scethrog"/>
<link wikidata="Q4733313" start="636" end="650" title="Allt yr Esgair" label="Allt yr Esgair"/>
<link wikidata="Q19699" start="685" end="694" title="River Usk" label="River Usk"/>
<link wikidata="Q363729" start="706" end="723" title="Siegfried Sassoon" label="Siegfried Sassoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7360342" start="725" end="739" title="Roland Mathias" label="Roland Mathias"/>
<link wikidata="Q4964811" start="741" end="753" title="Brian Morris, Baron Morris of Castle Morris" label="Brian Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q18518769" start="758" end="773" title="Anne Cluysenaar" label="Anne Cluysenaar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1127" end="1140" title="Buckland Hall" label="Buckland Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q26289884" start="1174" end="1194" title="James Gwynne-Holford" label="James Gwynne-Holford"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="1209" end="1229" title="member of parliament" label="member of parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q4960072" start="1234" end="1240" title="Brecon (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Brecon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3397209" start="1284" end="1298" title="Thomas Vaughan (philosopher)" label="Thomas Vaughan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3147441" start="1307" end="1313" title="rector (ecclesiastical)" label="rector"/>
<link wikidata="Q2284765" start="1441" end="1449" title="Cavalier" label="Royalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="1466" end="1483" title="English Civil War" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1688" end="1701" title="Hunting and shooting in the United Kingdom#Hunting_lodge" label="hunting lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="1987" end="2011" title="Listed building" label="Grade II listed building"/>
<link wikidata="Q185852" start="2017" end="2026" title="Edwardian era" label="Edwardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5016629" start="2070" end="2149" title="Cadw/ICOMOS Register of Parks and Gardens of Special Historic Interest in Wales" label="Cadw/ICOMOS Register of Parks and Gardens of Special Historic Interest in Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q276173" start="2178" end="2186" title="pavilion" label="pavilion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5717577" start="2206" end="2225" title="Henry Avray Tipping" label="Henry Avray Tipping"/>
<link wikidata="Q589282" start="2246" end="2260" title="Wards and electoral divisions of the United Kingdom" label="electoral ward"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="140352" wikidata="Q545363" url="?curid=140352" title="Henry Vaughan">
<text>Henry Vaughan (17 April 1621 – 23 April 1695) was a Welsh metaphysical poet, author and translator writing in English, and a medical physician. His religious poetry appeared in &quot;Silex Scintillans&quot; in 1650, with a second part in 1655. In 1646 his &quot;Poems, with the Tenth Satire of Juvenal Englished&quot; was published. Meanwhile he had been persuaded by reading the religious poet George Herbert to renounce &quot;idle verse&quot;. The prose &quot;Mount of Olives&quot; and &quot;Solitary Devotions&quot; (1652) show his authenticity and depth of convictions. Two more volumes of secular verse followed, ostensibly without his sanction, but it is his religious verse that has been acclaimed. He also translated short moral and religious works and two medical works in prose. In the 1650s he began a lifelong medical practice.

==Early life==
Henry Vaughan was born at Newton by Usk in the Llansantffraed (St. Bridget&#x27;s) parish of Brecknockshire, the eldest known child of Thomas Vaughan (c. 1586–1658) of Tretower and Denise Jenkin (born c. 1593), the only daughter and heir of David and Gwenllian Morgan of Llansantffraed. Vaughan had a twin brother, Thomas Vaughan, who became a philosopher and alchemist.

Vaughan was kin to two powerful Welsh families, one Catholic, one Protestant. His paternal grandfather, William, owned Tretower Court. His paternal grandmother, Frances, was the natural daughter of Thomas Somerset, who spent some 24 years in the Tower of London for adhering to Catholicism. As she survived into Vaughan&#x27;s boyhood, there may have been some direct Catholic influence on his early nurturing. Vaughan shared ancestry with the Herbert family through the daughter of a famous Welsh knight, Dafydd Gam, slain at Agincourt, the &quot;Davy Gam, esquire&quot; of William Shakespeare&#x27;s &quot;Henry V&quot;. He is not known to have claimed kinship with George Herbert, but may have been aware of the tie.

==Education==
Thomas Vaughan later remarked that &quot;English is a Language the Author was not born to.&quot; Both boys were sent to school under Matthew Herbert, Rector of Llangattock, to whom both wrote tributes. Matthew Herbert may have reinforced a devotion to church and monarchy the boys had learnt at home. Like several of Vaughan&#x27;s clerical acquaintances, he later proved uncompromising during the interregnum. He was imprisoned, his property was seized, and he narrowly avoided banishment.

The buttery books of Jesus College, Oxford show Thomas Vaughan being admitted in May 1638. It is thought that Henry went up at the same time; Anthony Wood states, &quot;He made his first entry into Jesus College in Michaelmas term 1638, aged 17 years. There is no clear record to establish Henry&#x27;s residence or matriculation, but the assumption of his association with Oxford, supported by his inclusion in &quot;Athenae Oxoniensis&quot;, is reasonable enough.&quot;

Recent research in the Jesus College archives, however, suggests that Henry did not enter Jesus College before 1641, unless he did so in 1639 without matriculating or paying an admission fee, and left before the record in the surviving buttery books resumes in December of that year. It has been suggested that Henry went to Oxford later, after Thomas, based on poems each wrote for a 1651 edition of the &quot;Comedies, Tragi-Comedies, with Other Poems&quot; of William Cartwright, who had died in 1643. Thomas had clearly attended Cartwright&#x27;s lectures, which were a draw at the time: &quot;When He did read, how did we flock to hear!&quot; Henry apparently had not, as his poem &quot;Upon the poems and plays of the ever-memorable Mr William Cartwright&quot; begins with the words, &quot;I did but see thee.&quot; This and the 1647 poem &quot;Upon Mr Fletcher&#x27;s plays&quot; are celebrations of Royalist volumes that implied &quot;a reaffirmation of Cavalier ideals and a gesture of defiance against the society which had repudiated them.&quot;

As the Civil War developed, Vaughan was recalled home from London, initially to serve as a secretary to Sir Marmaduke Lloyd, a chief justice on the Brecknockshire circuit and staunch royalist. Vaughan is thought to have served briefly in the Royalist army. On his return, he began to practise medicine.

By 1646, Vaughan had married Catherine Wise, with whom he reared a son, Thomas, and three daughters, Lucy, Frances, and Catherine. His courtship with his first wife is reflected in &quot;Upon the Priory Grove&quot;, in his first volume of poetry, &quot;Poems, with the Tenth Satire of Juvenal Englished&quot; (1646). After his first wife&#x27;s death, he married her sister, Elizabeth, probably in 1655.

==Secular works==
Vaughan took his literary inspiration from his native environment and chose the descriptive name &quot;Silurist&quot;, derived from his homage to the Silures, a Celtic tribe of pre-Roman south Wales that strongly resisted the Romans. The name reflects the love Vaughan felt for the Welsh mountains of his home, in what is now part of the Brecon Beacons National Park and the River Usk valley, where he spent most of his early and professional life.

By 1647, Vaughan with his wife and children had chosen life in the countryside. This was the setting in which Vaughan wrote &quot;Olor Iscanus&quot; (The Swan of Usk). However, it was not published until 1651, over three years after it was written, which presumably reflects some crisis in Vaughan&#x27;s life. During those years, his grandfather William Vaughan died and he was evicted from his living in Llansantffraed. Vaughan later decried the publication, having &quot;long ago condemned these poems to obscurity.&quot;

&quot;Olor Iscanus&quot; is filled with odd words and similes that beg attention, despite its dark and morbid cognitive appeal. It is founded on crises felt in Vaughan&#x27;s homeland, Brecknockshire. No major battle was fought there in the Civil War, but the effects of the war were deeply felt by him and his community. The Puritan Parliament visited misfortune, ejecting Anglicans and Royalists. Vaughan also lost his home at that time.

There is a marked difference in the atmosphere Vaughan attempts to convey in this work and in his most famous work, &quot;Silex Scintillans&quot;. &quot;Olor Iscanus&quot; represents a specific period in Vaughan&#x27;s life, which emphasises other secular writers and provides allusions to debt and happy living. A fervent topic of Vaughan throughout the poems is the Civil War, and it reveals Vaughan&#x27;s somewhat paradoxical thinking, which ultimately fails to show whether he took part or not. Vaughan states complete satisfaction at being clean of &quot;innocent blood&quot;, but also provides seemingly eyewitness accounts of battles and his own &quot;soldiery&quot;. Although Vaughan is thought to have been a Royalist, these poems express contempt for all current authority and show a lack of zeal for the Royalist cause. His poems generally reflect a sense of severe decline, which may mean he lamented the effects of the war on the monarchy and society. His short poem &quot;The Timber&quot;, ostensibly about a dead tree, concludes: &quot;thy strange resentment after death / Means only those who broke – in life – thy peace.&quot;

&quot;Olor Iscanus&quot; includes translations from the Latin of Ovid, Boethius, and the Polish poet Casimir Sarbiewski.

==Conversion and sacred poetry==
It was not until the writing of &quot;Silex Scintillans&quot; that Vaughan received significant acclaim. The period shortly preceding the publication of the first volume of the work (1650) marked an important period of his life. Certain indications in the first volume and explicit statements in the preface to the second volume (1655) suggest that Vaughan suffered a prolonged sickness that inflicted much pain. Vaughan interprets this experience as an encounter with death that alerted him to a &quot;misspent youth&quot;. Vaughan believed he had been spared to make amends and start a new course not only in his life but in the literature he would produce. He described his previous work as foul and a contribution to &quot;corrupt literature&quot;. Perhaps the most notable mark of Vaughan&#x27;s conversion is how much it is credited to George Herbert. Vaughan claims he is the least of Herbert&#x27;s many &quot;pious converts&quot;. The influence of Herbert&#x27;s poetry has been widely noted, with many of Vaughan&#x27;s works based on works by Herbert. It was during this period of Vaughan&#x27;s life, around 1650, that he adopted the saying &quot;Moriendo, revixi&quot; – by dying, I gain new life.

The first volume of &quot;Silex Scintillans&quot; was followed by &quot;The Mount of Olives, or Solitary Devotions&quot; (1652), a prose book of devotions providing prayers for various stages in the day, for prayer in church and for other purposes. It appears as a &quot;companion volume&quot; to the Book of Common Prayer, to which it alludes frequently, although it had been outlawed under the Commonwealth. The work was also influenced by Lancelot Andrewes&#x27;s &quot;Preces Privatae&quot; (1615) and John Cosin&#x27;s &quot;Collection of Private Devotions&quot; (1627). &quot;Flores Solitudinis&quot; (1654) contains translations from the Latin of two works by the Spanish Jesuit Juan Eusebio Nieremberg, one by a 5th-century Bishop of Lyon, Eucherius, and by Paulinus of Nola, of whom Vaughan wrote a prose life.

Vaughan practised medicine, perhaps as early as the 1640s. He attached to the second volume of &quot;Silex Scintillans&quot; (1655) a translation of Henry Nollius&#x27;s &quot;Hermetical Physick&quot;. He went on to produce a translation of Nollius&#x27;s &quot;The Chymists Key&quot; in 1657.

==Poetic influences==
Vaughan was much indebted to George Herbert, who provided a model for his new-found spiritual life and literary career, showing a &quot;spiritual quickening and the gift of gracious feeling&quot; derived from Herbert.

Archbishop Trench took the view, &quot;As a divine Vaughan may be inferior [to Herbert], but as a poet he is certainly superior.&quot; Critics praise Vaughan&#x27;s use of literary elements. His monosyllables, long-drawn alliterations and ability to compel the reader to rate him as &quot;more than the equal of George Herbert&quot;. Yet others say the two are not even comparable, as Herbert is in fact the Master. While these commentators admit that Henry Vaughan&#x27;s use of words can be superior to Herbert&#x27;s, they believe his poetry is, in fact, worse. Herbert&#x27;s superiority is said to rest on his profundity and consistency.

Certainly Vaughan would have never written the way he did without Herbert&#x27;s posthumous direction. (The latter had died in 1633.) The explicit spiritual influence here is all but proclaimed in the preface to &quot;Silex Scintillans&quot;. The prose of Vaughan exemplifies this as well. For instance, Herbert&#x27;s &quot;The Temple&quot; is often seen as the inspiration and model on which Vaughan created his work. &quot;Silex Scintillans&quot; is most often classed with this collection of Herbert&#x27;s, as it borrows the same themes, experience and beliefs. Herbert&#x27;s influence is evident in the shape and the spirituality of Vaughan&#x27;s poetry. For example, the opening to Vaughan&#x27;s poem &quot;Unprofitableness&quot; – &quot;How rich, O Lord! How fresh thy visits are!&quot; – recalls Herbert&#x27;s &#x27;The Flower&#x27;:

:How fresh, O Lord, how sweet and clean
:Are thy returns! ev&#x27;n as the flowers in spring

Another work of Vaughan&#x27;s that parallels Herbert is &quot;Mount of Olives&quot;, for example in the passage, &quot;Let sensual natures judge as they please, but for my part, I shall hold it no paradoxe to affirme, there are no pleasures in the world. Some coloured griefes of blushing woes there are, which look as clear as if they were true complexions; but it is very sad and tyred truth, that they are but painted.&quot; This echoes Herbert&#x27;s &quot;Rose&quot;:

:In this world of sugar&#x27;s lies,
:And to use a larger measure
:Than my strict yet welcome size.
:First, there is no pleasure here:
:Coloure&#x27;d griefs indeed there are,
:Blushing woes that look as clear,
:As if they could beauty spare.

Critics have argued that Vaughan is enslaved to Herbert&#x27;s works, using similar &quot;little tricks&quot; such as abrupt introductions and whimsical titles as a framework for his work, and &quot;failing to learn&quot; from Herbert. Vaughan was said to be unable to know his limits and focus more on the intensity of the poem, meanwhile losing the attention of his audience.

Yet Alexander Grosart denies that Vaughan was solely an imitator of Herbert. There are moments when the reader can see Vaughan&#x27;s true self, where he shows naturalness, immediacy and ability to relate the concrete through poetry. In some cases he draws observations from Herbert&#x27;s language that are distinctly his own. It is as if Vaughan takes proprietorship of some of Herbert&#x27;s work, yet makes it unique to himself. Vaughan takes another step away from Herbert in his presentation. Herbert in &quot;The Temple&quot; – often the source of comparison between the two writers – lays down explicit instructions on its reading. This contrasts with Vaughan&#x27;s attitude that the experience of reading is the best guide to his meanings, so that he promoted no special reading method.

At these times Vaughan shows himself different from any other poet. Much of the distinction comes from an apparent lack of sympathy with the world about him. His aloof appeal to his surroundings detaches him and displays his love of nature and mysticism. This in turn influenced later poets such as Wordsworth. His mind thinks in terms of a physical and spiritual world and the obscure relation between the two, often moved to original, unfamiliar, remote places reflected in his poetry. He was loyal to the themes of the Anglican Church and religious festivals, but found his true voice in the more mystical themes of eternity, communion with the dead, nature, and childhood. He was a &quot;poet of revelation&quot; who used the Bible, Nature and his own experience to illustrate his vision of eternity. This gives Vaughan&#x27;s poetry a particularly modern sound.

Alliteration, conspicuous in Welsh poetry, is more commonly used by Vaughan than by most of his contemporaries in English, noticeably in the opening to &quot;The Water-fall&quot;.

Vaughan drew on personal loss in two well-known poems: &quot;The World&quot; and &quot;They Are All Gone into the World of Light&quot;. Another, &quot;The Retreat&quot;, combines the theme of loss with the corruption of childhood, which is yet another consistent theme of his. Vaughan&#x27;s new-found personal voice and persona are seen to result of the death of a younger brother.

This is an example of an especially beautiful fragment of one of his poems entitled &#x27;The World&#x27;:

:I saw Eternity the other night,
:Like a great ring of pure and endless light,
::All calm, as it was bright,
:And round beneath it, Time in hours, days, years
::Driv&#x27;n by the spheres
:Like a vast shadow mov&#x27;d; in which the world
::And all her train were hurl&#x27;d.

==Death and legacy==
Henry Vaughan was acclaimed less in his lifetime than after his death, on 23 April 1695 aged 74. He was buried in the churchyard of St Bride&#x27;s, Llansantffraed, Powys, where he had spent most of his life. The grave is visited by enthusiasts and has been the inspiration for other poets, including Siegfried Sassoon, Roland Mathias and Brian Morris.

Vaughan is recognised as an &quot;example of a poet who can write both graceful and effective prose&quot;. He influenced the work of poets such as Wordsworth, Tennyson and Siegfried Sassoon. The American science fiction writer Philip K. Dick also named Vaughan as a key influence.

==Musical settings==
Several poems by Vaughan from &quot;Silex Scintillans&quot; have been set to music, including:
*&quot;The Evening-Watch: Dialogue between Body and Soul&quot; by Gustav Holst (1924)
*The Eucharistic poem &quot;Welcome, sweet and sacred feast&quot; set by Gerald Finzi as the anthem &quot;Welcome, sweet and sacred feast&quot; in &quot;Three anthems&quot;, Op. 27 (1953)
*&quot;Peace&quot;, set as the first of Hubert Parry&#x27;s &quot;Songs of Farewell&quot; (1916–1918): &quot;My soul, there is a country&quot;.
*Several poems set by Daniel Jones in his cantata &quot;The Country Beyond the Stars&quot;
*&quot;Christ&#x27;s Nativity&quot; and &quot;Peace&quot; set by the American composer Timothy Hoekman in his 1992 sequence of three songs entitled &quot;The Nativity&quot; for soprano and orchestra
*&quot;They Are All Gone into the World of Light&quot; set by the British composer Howard Goodall in his 2004 choral work &quot;As Angels in some brighter dreams&quot; and first performed by The Shrewsbury Chorale on 5 June 2004

==Works==
*&quot;Poems, with the Tenth Satire of Juvenal Englished&quot; (1646), includes a translation of a &quot;Satire&quot; by the Latin poet Juvenal.
*&quot;Olor Iscanus&quot; (1647, published 1651)
*&quot;Silex Scintillans&quot; (1650 and 1655)
*&quot;Mount of Olives, or Solitary Devotions&quot; (1652)
*&quot;Flores Solitudinis&quot; (1654)
*&quot;Hermetical Physics&quot; (1655), translated from the Latin of Henry Nollius
*&quot;The Chymists Key&quot; (1657), translated from the Latin of Henry Nollius
*Several translations from the Latin contributed to Thomas Powell&#x27;s &quot;Humane Industry&quot; (1661)
*&quot;Thalia Rediviva&quot; (1678), a joint collection of poetry with his brother Thomas Vaughan, after Thomas&#x27;s death

==See also==

*Physician writer

==Notes==
==References==
* Katz, Philo-Semitism, pp. 185–186.
*Rev. Alexander B. Grosart (ed.): &quot;Essay on the Life and Writings of Henry Vaughan, Silurist&quot;, in &quot;The Works in Verse and Prose Complete of Henry Vaughan, Silurist, Vol. II&quot;. Blackburn, 1871, pp. ix–ci. Reprinted in &quot;Literature Criticism from 1400 to 1800&quot;, Vol. 27
*
*

==Further reading== 
*Grant, Patrick. 1974. &quot;The Transformation of Sin: Studies in Donne, Herbert, Vaughan, and Traherne&quot;. Montreal:McGill-Queen&#x27;s University Press. 

==External links==
*
*
*Henry Vaughan (PoetSeers website)
*Index entry for Henry Vaughan at Poets&#x27; Corner
*The Sacred Poets. Ch. 9–13 − The Cambridge History of English and American Literature.
*Examples of Henry Vaughan&#x27;s varied poetic forms </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q545363" start="0" end="13" title="Henry Vaughan" label="Henry Vaughan"/>
<link wikidata="Q827137" start="58" end="75" title="metaphysical poet" label="metaphysical poet"/>
<link wikidata="Q317887" start="395" end="409" title="George Herbert" label="George Herbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q6661758" start="903" end="917" title="Llansantffraed" label="Llansantffraed"/>
<link wikidata="Q547052" start="949" end="963" title="Brecknockshire" label="Brecknockshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838879" start="1024" end="1032" title="Tretower" label="Tretower"/>
<link wikidata="Q3397209" start="1171" end="1185" title="Thomas Vaughan (philosopher)" label="Thomas Vaughan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="1200" end="1211" title="philosopher" label="philosopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q39689" start="1216" end="1225" title="alchemy" label="alchemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838880" start="1347" end="1361" title="Tretower Court" label="Tretower Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q6485846" start="1426" end="1441" title="Thomas Somerset" label="Thomas Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q62378" start="1474" end="1489" title="Tower of London" label="Tower of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q679417" start="1734" end="1744" title="Dafydd Gam" label="Dafydd Gam"/>
<link wikidata="Q188495" start="1755" end="1764" title="Battle of Agincourt" label="Agincourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="1803" end="1822" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q495954" start="1836" end="1843" title="Henry V (play)" label="Henry V"/>
<link wikidata="Q317887" start="1896" end="1910" title="George Herbert" label="George Herbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q13129643" start="2123" end="2134" title="Llangattock" label="Llangattock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558636" start="2361" end="2372" title="Interregnum (England)" label="interregnum"/>
<link wikidata="Q661356" start="2397" end="2416" title="Sequestration (Law)" label="property was seized"/>
<link wikidata="Q81174" start="2476" end="2497" title="Jesus College, Oxford" label="Jesus College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q691873" start="2597" end="2609" title="Anthony Wood (antiquary)" label="Anthony Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q6835655" start="2670" end="2685" title="Michaelmas term" label="Michaelmas term"/>
<link wikidata="Q2782419" start="3391" end="3409" title="William Cartwright (dramatist)" label="William Cartwright"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="3993" end="4002" title="English Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6772051" start="4094" end="4109" title="Marmaduke Lloyd" label="Marmaduke Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q2284765" start="4169" end="4177" title="Cavalier" label="royalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127109" start="4863" end="4870" title="Silures" label="Silures"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="4874" end="4878" title="Celt" label="Celt"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="4906" end="4911" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258062" start="4939" end="4945" title="Roman invasion of Britain" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q15052206" start="5051" end="5079" title="Brecon Beacons National Park" label="Brecon Beacons National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q19699" start="5088" end="5097" title="River Usk" label="River Usk"/>
<link wikidata="Q199714" start="5743" end="5749" title="simile" label="simile"/>
<link wikidata="Q137073" start="6015" end="6022" title="Puritan" label="Puritan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="6063" end="6071" title="Anglican" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="7341" end="7345" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q102851" start="7347" end="7355" title="Boethius" label="Boethius"/>
<link wikidata="Q471723" start="7377" end="7395" title="Casimir Sarbiewski" label="Casimir Sarbiewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q317887" start="8273" end="8287" title="George Herbert" label="George Herbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q784710" start="8944" end="8965" title="Book of Common Prayer" label="Book of Common Prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q330362" start="9039" end="9051" title="English Commonwealth" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801816" start="9085" end="9102" title="Lancelot Andrewes" label="Lancelot Andrewes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5612348" start="9149" end="9159" title="John Cosin" label="John Cosin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087430" start="9329" end="9352" title="Juan Eusebio Nieremberg" label="Juan Eusebio Nieremberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q671419" start="9391" end="9400" title="Eucherius of Lyon" label="Eucherius"/>
<link wikidata="Q132473" start="9409" end="9425" title="Paulinus of Nola" label="Paulinus of Nola"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9613" end="9626" title="Henry Nollius" label="Henry Nollius"/>
<link wikidata="Q11703211" start="10000" end="10017" title="Richard Chenevix Trench" label="Archbishop Trench"/>
<link wikidata="Q4718302" start="12688" end="12705" title="Alexander Grosart" label="Alexander Grosart"/>
<link wikidata="Q363729" start="15623" end="15640" title="Siegfried Sassoon" label="Siegfried Sassoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7360342" start="15642" end="15656" title="Roland Mathias" label="Roland Mathias"/>
<link wikidata="Q4964811" start="15661" end="15673" title="Brian Morris, Baron Morris of Castle Morris" label="Brian Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q45546" start="15823" end="15833" title="Wordsworth" label="Wordsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q173869" start="15835" end="15843" title="Alfred Tennyson, 1st Baron Tennyson" label="Tennyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q363729" start="15848" end="15865" title="Siegfried Sassoon" label="Siegfried Sassoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q171091" start="15903" end="15917" title="Philip K. Dick" label="Philip K. Dick"/>
<link wikidata="Q200867" start="16140" end="16152" title="Gustav Holst" label="Gustav Holst"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="16165" end="16176" title="Eucharistic" label="Eucharistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q713025" start="16233" end="16245" title="Gerald Finzi" label="Gerald Finzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q354250" start="16388" end="16400" title="Hubert Parry" label="Hubert Parry"/>
<link wikidata="Q56260333" start="16414" end="16431" title="Songs of Farewell" label="Songs of Farewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161262" start="16514" end="16526" title="Daniel Jones (composer)" label="Daniel Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q943914" start="16865" end="16879" title="Howard Goodall" label="Howard Goodall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707099" start="17127" end="17133" title="Satires (Juvenal)" label="Satire"/>
<link wikidata="Q193800" start="17158" end="17165" title="Juvenal" label="Juvenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7793241" start="17577" end="17590" title="Thomas Powell (Rector of Cantref)" label="Thomas Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3397209" start="17716" end="17730" title="Thomas Vaughan (philosopher)" label="Thomas Vaughan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17774" end="17790" title="Physician writer#17th century" label="Physician writer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18177" end="18191" title="Patrick Grant (academic)" label="Grant, Patrick"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="140353" wikidata="Q7794665" url="?curid=140353" title="Thomas Vaughan">
<text>Thomas Vaughan may refer to:

*Thomas Vaughan (footballer) (born 1864), Welsh international footballer
*Thomas Vaughan (MP) (bef. 1479–1543), Member of Parliament for Dover
*Thomas Vaughan (philosopher) (1621–1666), Welsh philosopher
*Thomas Vaughan (pirate) (died 1696), Irish pirate and privateer who served France
*Thomas Vaughan (singer) (1782–1843), English singer
*Thomas Vaughan (died 1483) (c. 1410–1483), Welsh soldier, diplomat, and chamberlain to the eldest son of King Edward IV
*Thomas Vaughan (bodysnatcher) (flourished c. 1827)
==See also==
*Tom Vaughan (disambiguation)
*Tom Vaughn (disambiguation)
*Thomas Franklin Vaughns (Born 1920), Tuskegee Airman</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7794665" start="0" end="14" title="Thomas Vaughan" label="Thomas Vaughan"/>
<link wikidata="Q25207077" start="31" end="58" title="Thomas Vaughan (footballer)" label="Thomas Vaughan (footballer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7794666" start="104" end="123" title="Thomas Vaughan (MP)" label="Thomas Vaughan (MP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3397209" start="174" end="202" title="Thomas Vaughan (philosopher)" label="Thomas Vaughan (philosopher)"/>
<link wikidata="Q112787697" start="235" end="258" title="Thomas Vaughan (pirate)" label="Thomas Vaughan (pirate)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18672669" start="318" end="341" title="Thomas Vaughan (singer)" label="Thomas Vaughan (singer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223054" start="371" end="397" title="Thomas Vaughan (died 1483)" label="Thomas Vaughan (died 1483)"/>
<link wikidata="Q131745144" start="492" end="521" title="Thomas Vaughan (bodysnatcher)" label="Thomas Vaughan (bodysnatcher)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817933" start="557" end="585" title="Tom Vaughan (disambiguation)" label="Tom Vaughan (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817935" start="587" end="614" title="Tom Vaughn (disambiguation)" label="Tom Vaughn (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q98152519" start="616" end="639" title="Thomas Franklin Vaughns" label="Thomas Franklin Vaughns"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="140354" wikidata="Q6524435" url="?curid=140354" title="Leoline Jenkins">
<text>Sir Leoline Jenkins (1625 – 1 September 1685) was a Welsh academic, diplomat involved in the negotiation of international treaties (e.g. Nimègue), jurist and politician. He was a clerical lawyer who served as Judge of the High Court of Admiralty from 1668 to 1685, and enjoyed a high reputation for judicial integrity. As a statesman he served as Secretary of State from 1680 to 1684.

==Biography==

He was originally from Llantrisant in south Wales, son of Leoline (an anglicisation of &quot;Llewellyn&quot;) Jenkins, a small landowner. He himself spoke fluent Welsh, and was fond of quoting Welsh proverbs, sometimes to the bewilderment of his listeners. He went to school in the nearby town of Cowbridge and then to Jesus College, Oxford.

==Civil War and Interregnum ==

He fought on the Royalist side during the English Civil War. On the failure of the Royalist cause, he retired to Glamorgan in 1648, and entered the household of the Welsh Royalist Sir John Aubrey, first of the Aubrey baronets, at Llantrithyd, as did his two most valuable patrons, Gilbert Sheldon, the future Archbishop of Canterbury, and Sir Francis Mansell, Jenkins&#x27; predecessor as Principal of Jesus College. 

He set up a small private school for the education of Aubrey&#x27;s son and other local boys, but it was broken up by Parliament in 1651 as a seminary for potential traitors. He moved with some of his pupils to Oxford, where he set up another school known popularly as &quot;the Little Welsh Hall&quot;, but in 1655 he was forced to flee to the Continent. At the Restoration of Charles II he was made a fellow of Jesus College and became Principal on Mansell&#x27;s retirement the following year.

==Restoration ==

As Principal of Jesus College from 1661 to 1673, he was responsible for much construction work, including the college library. The position was one of several rewards he received from King Charles II of England for his loyalty to the Royalist cause during the English Civil War.

===Judge ===
Due to his close friendship with Archbishop Sheldon, he was also created a judge, first of the consistory court of Westminster, then of the Arches Court and finally of the Court of Admiralty. As Judge of the Court of Admiralty he won Samuel Pepys&#x27; warm praise for his ability and integrity, although Pepys was told that his appointment had not been welcomed by the advocates at Doctors Commons. He played a crucial role in the development of English Admiralty law as a coherent body of legal principles.

He was also an expert on international law. On the death of the queen mother Henrietta Maria at Colombes in August 1669, Jenkins was sent to Paris to argue that the disposition of her personal property was governed by English, not French law: the result would be that the property would pass in its entirety to Charles II, rather than to his sister Henrietta, Duchess of Orleans, who would have been the beneficiary under French law. His arguments were successful and on his return to England, Charles rewarded him with a knighthood.

===Diplomat ===
He was one of the Commissioners appointed to negotiate the abortive Union with Scotland in 1669. In the 1670s he spent much of his time on the Continent engaged in a number of diplomatic missions. Notably, he was England&#x27;s principal representative at the Congress of Nijmegen (1676-1679) which brought to an end the Franco-Dutch War, and for a time the sole representative. Critics said that he was &quot;in agony&quot; at being left with the sole responsibility for making decisions. Certainly, as the English government ruefully admitted, Nijmegen was &quot;far from being such a peace as his Majesty would have wished for&quot;, although the unsatisfactory outcome from the English point of view was largely due to the resentment of English interference by both French and Dutch representatives at the Congress, rather than to any blunder by Jenkins.

==Secretary of State ==

Jenkins was made a privy counsellor in February 1680. During the Exclusion Crisis he vehemently opposed Exclusion, and acted as the effective Government leader in the Commons. After the failure of Exclusion he played a major role in the so-called &quot;Tory Revenge&quot;, the 1681-4 campaign to crush the Whig opposition.

He served as Secretary of State for the Northern Department from 26 April 1680 to 2 February 1681 and Secretary of State for the Southern Department from 2 February 1681 to 14 April 1684. His major legislative achievements include authoring the Statute of Frauds (29 Cha. 2. c. 3) and the Statute of Distributions (22 &amp; 23 Cha. 2. c. 10), dealing with the inheritance of personal property. Whilst Secretary of State, he was served by the Welsh lawyer (and former student of Jesus College) Owen Wynne, who has been called &quot;an early example of the permanent civil servant.&quot;

As a Minister, if not noted for brilliance, he was hard-working and incorruptible. Though Gilbert Burnet found him &quot;heavy and dull&quot; he could show great spirit and determination when necessary. At a meeting of the Privy Council in October 1681, some of the Councillors, Jenkins wrote to a colleague, &quot;were pleased to fall upon me&quot; for not sharing with them important items of foreign policy. Jenkins staunchly defended the practice of keeping such information strictly confidential. He argued that the Secretaries of State &quot;were not at liberty to carry any part of their intelligences to the Council, unless his Majesty directed it specifically&quot;: this was a rule which he had always followed and by which he was &quot;indispensably bound&quot;.

In failing health, he retired in 1684 to his house at Hammersmith and died there the following year. He never married.

He is regarded as the second founder of the eminent Cowbridge Grammar School, renowned for its academic standards which he had himself attended. He is buried in the chapel of Jesus College, at which he had previously been a student before becoming Principal, and to which he bequeathed most of his estate.

==Leoline Fellows==

In his will, Jenkins stated: &quot;It is but too obvious that the persons in Holy Orders employed in his Majesty&#x27;s fleet at sea and foreign plantations are too few&quot;. To address this, he established two Fellowships at Jesus College, whose holders should serve as clergy &quot;in any of his Majesty&#x27;s fleets or in his Majesty&#x27;s plantations&quot; under the direction of the Lord High Admiral and the Bishop of London respectively. The last such fellow, Frederick de Winton, was appointed in 1876 and held his fellowship until his death in 1932. This category of fellowship was abolished in 1877 by the Oxford and Cambridge Universities Commission, without prejudice to the rights of existing holders such as de Winton.

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6524435" start="0" end="19" title="Leoline Jenkins" label="Sir Leoline Jenkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="52" end="57" title="Wales" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q316900" start="137" end="144" title="Treaties of Nijmegen" label="Nimègue"/>
<link wikidata="Q188462" start="179" end="194" title="clerical lawyer" label="clerical lawyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q60768555" start="209" end="245" title="Judge of the High Court of Admiralty" label="Judge of the High Court of Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330789" start="424" end="435" title="Llantrisant" label="Llantrisant"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="445" end="450" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763564" start="471" end="484" title="Anglicisation of names" label="anglicisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6984015" start="494" end="503" title="Llywelyn (name)" label="Llewellyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="563" end="568" title="Welsh language" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145305" start="698" end="707" title="Cowbridge" label="Cowbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q81174" start="720" end="741" title="Jesus College, Oxford" label="Jesus College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q943197" start="793" end="801" title="Royalist" label="Royalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="818" end="835" title="English Civil War" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q870815" start="889" end="898" title="Glamorgan" label="Glamorgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4819206" start="986" end="1001" title="Aubrey baronets" label="Aubrey baronets"/>
<link wikidata="Q21999685" start="1006" end="1017" title="Llantrithyd" label="Llantrithyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q584403" start="1057" end="1072" title="Gilbert Sheldon" label="Gilbert Sheldon"/>
<link wikidata="Q29282" start="1085" end="1109" title="Archbishop of Canterbury" label="Archbishop of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q5481847" start="1119" end="1134" title="Francis Mansell" label="Francis Mansell"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="1360" end="1368" title="traitors" label="traitors"/>
<link wikidata="Q34217" start="1406" end="1412" title="Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q846848" start="1558" end="1583" title="Restoration of Charles II" label="Restoration of Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="1900" end="1921" title="Charles II of England" label="Charles II of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2284765" start="1945" end="1953" title="Cavalier" label="Royalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="1971" end="1988" title="English Civil War" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163231" start="2099" end="2115" title="consistory court" label="consistory court"/>
<link wikidata="Q189960" start="2119" end="2130" title="Westminster" label="Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q4786150" start="2144" end="2156" title="Arches Court" label="Arches Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q106143" start="2238" end="2250" title="Samuel Pepys" label="Samuel Pepys"/>
<link wikidata="Q380075" start="2374" end="2383" title="advocates" label="advocates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233915" start="2387" end="2402" title="Doctors Commons" label="Doctors Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q382113" start="2459" end="2472" title="Admiralty law" label="Admiralty law"/>
<link wikidata="Q4394526" start="2539" end="2556" title="international law" label="international law"/>
<link wikidata="Q10477002" start="2578" end="2590" title="queen mother" label="queen mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q848615" start="2591" end="2606" title="Henrietta Maria" label="Henrietta Maria"/>
<link wikidata="Q174002" start="2610" end="2618" title="Colombes" label="Colombes"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="2655" end="2660" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q499094" start="2698" end="2715" title="personal property" label="personal property"/>
<link wikidata="Q230921" start="2863" end="2892" title="Henrietta of England" label="Henrietta, Duchess of Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2596417" start="2918" end="2929" title="beneficiary" label="beneficiary"/>
<link wikidata="Q833163" start="3036" end="3046" title="Knight Bachelor" label="knighthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="3144" end="3152" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q47887" start="3337" end="3345" title="Nijmegen" label="Nijmegen"/>
<link wikidata="Q646322" start="3386" end="3402" title="Franco-Dutch War" label="Franco-Dutch War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383566" start="4015" end="4031" title="Exclusion Crisis" label="Exclusion Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q499956" start="4203" end="4207" title="Tories (British political party)" label="Tory"/>
<link wikidata="Q108700" start="4256" end="4260" title="Whig (British political party)" label="Whig"/>
<link wikidata="Q3954358" start="4287" end="4333" title="Secretary of State for the Northern Department" label="Secretary of State for the Northern Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q3954357" start="4376" end="4422" title="Secretary of State for the Southern Department" label="Secretary of State for the Southern Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604647" start="4519" end="4536" title="Statute of Frauds" label="Statute of Frauds"/>
<link wikidata="Q122898620" start="4538" end="4547" title="29 Cha. 2" label="29 Cha. 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604645" start="4563" end="4587" title="Statute of Distributions" label="Statute of Distributions"/>
<link wikidata="Q118945372" start="4589" end="4607" title="22 &amp;amp; 23 Cha. 2" label="22 &amp;amp; 23 Cha. 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q7114710" start="4767" end="4777" title="Owen Wynne (civil servant)" label="Owen Wynne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250014" start="4951" end="4965" title="Gilbert Burnet" label="Gilbert Burnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246345" start="5084" end="5097" title="Privy Council of England" label="Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q277162" start="5690" end="5701" title="Hammersmith" label="Hammersmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179611" start="5808" end="5832" title="Cowbridge Grammar School" label="Cowbridge Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108374" start="5921" end="5944" title="Chapel of Jesus College, Oxford" label="chapel of Jesus College"/>
<link wikidata="Q662862" start="6161" end="6172" title="Holy Orders" label="Holy Orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="6189" end="6209" title="Royal Navy" label="Majesty&amp;#x27;s fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201599" start="6229" end="6239" title="Plantation (settlement or colony)" label="plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q396266" start="6475" end="6492" title="British Admiralty" label="Lord High Admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587771" start="6501" end="6517" title="Bishop of London" label="Bishop of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q5499184" start="6554" end="6573" title="Frederick de Winton" label="Frederick de Winton"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="140355" wikidata="Q702495" url="?curid=140355" title="Müritz National Park">
<text>The Müritz National Park () is a national park situated roughly in the middle between Berlin and Rostock, in the south of the German state of Mecklenburg-Vorpommern. It extends over large portions of the Müritz lakeland in the district of Mecklenburgische Seenplatte. Müritz National Park was founded in 1990. The total area is 318 km2. Near the city of Waren visitors can get information on the national park at the Müritzeum. The beech forests within the national park were inscribed on the UNESCO World Heritage List in 2011 as an extension of the Primeval Beech Forests of Europe site because of their unspoilt nature and testimony to the ecological history of Europe since the Last Glacial Period.

== Geography ==
The National Park is divided into two separated areas, Müritz and Serrahn. The first, larger portion extends from the eastern shore of Lake Müritz to the town of Neustrelitz. The latter, smaller part is situated east of Neustrelitz. The landscape features of the park are made up from terminal moraine, sandur and lowlands. 65% of the territory is covered with forest, 12% by lakes. The remaining area is made up of swamps or meadows.

Lake Müritz has an area of 118 km2, but only its eastern shore is part of the National Park. The towns of Waren and Neustrelitz are the closest towns. There are about 100 lakes in Müritz National Park, including Bullowsee, and many more smaller waterbodies, runs, ditches and brooks. The Havel rises in the Müritz section, close to the water divide between the Baltic and the North Sea.

== Fauna and flora ==
Notable animals in the park include the red deer, the crane, the white-tailed eagle and the osprey. Other animals include great bittern, reed warbler, redshank, greenshank, black stork, crane, teal, garganey and little stint.

In addition to the unspoiled nature in general, a lot of open common juniper stands can be found in the national park. They were formerly used for cattle grazing.

==References==
== External links ==
* Official site </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q702495" start="4" end="24" title="Müritz National Park" label="Müritz National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q46169" start="33" end="46" title="national park" label="national park"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="86" end="92" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2861" start="97" end="104" title="Rostock" label="Rostock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221156" start="126" end="138" title="German state" label="German state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196" start="142" end="164" title="Mecklenburg-Vorpommern" label="Mecklenburg-Vorpommern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902" start="239" end="266" title="Mecklenburgische Seenplatte (district)" label="Mecklenburgische Seenplatte"/>
<link wikidata="Q4346" start="354" end="359" title="Waren (Müritz)" label="Waren"/>
<link wikidata="Q872955" start="417" end="426" title="Müritzeum" label="Müritzeum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="493" end="499" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="500" end="519" title="World Heritage List" label="World Heritage List"/>
<link wikidata="Q156011" start="551" end="583" title="Ancient and Primeval Beech Forests of the Carpathians and Other Regions of Europe" label="Primeval Beech Forests of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q754949" start="682" end="701" title="Last Glacial Period" label="Last Glacial Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q3369" start="855" end="866" title="Lake Müritz" label="Lake Müritz"/>
<link wikidata="Q20352" start="882" end="893" title="Neustrelitz" label="Neustrelitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585022" start="1005" end="1021" title="terminal moraine" label="terminal moraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q670772" start="1023" end="1029" title="outwash plain" label="sandur"/>
<link wikidata="Q12183361" start="1034" end="1041" title="lowland" label="lowland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4421" start="1081" end="1087" title="forest" label="forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q23397" start="1096" end="1100" title="lake" label="lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q166735" start="1136" end="1141" title="swamp" label="swamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3369" start="1156" end="1167" title="Lake Müritz" label="Lake Müritz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4346" start="1262" end="1267" title="Waren (Müritz)" label="Waren"/>
<link wikidata="Q20352" start="1272" end="1283" title="Neustrelitz" label="Neustrelitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004552" start="1368" end="1377" title="Bullowsee" label="Bullowsee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682" start="1444" end="1449" title="Havel" label="Havel"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="1517" end="1523" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="1532" end="1541" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q79794" start="1606" end="1614" title="red deer" label="red deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q25365" start="1620" end="1625" title="crane (bird)" label="crane"/>
<link wikidata="Q25438" start="1631" end="1649" title="white-tailed eagle" label="white-tailed eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q25332" start="1658" end="1664" title="osprey" label="osprey"/>
<link wikidata="Q25709" start="1688" end="1701" title="great bittern" label="great bittern"/>
<link wikidata="Q159080" start="1703" end="1715" title="Eurasian reed warbler" label="reed warbler"/>
<link wikidata="Q18859" start="1717" end="1725" title="common redshank" label="redshank"/>
<link wikidata="Q18840" start="1727" end="1737" title="greenshank" label="greenshank"/>
<link wikidata="Q25398" start="1739" end="1750" title="black stork" label="black stork"/>
<link wikidata="Q4764" start="1752" end="1757" title="common crane" label="crane"/>
<link wikidata="Q25700" start="1759" end="1763" title="common teal" label="teal"/>
<link wikidata="Q28106902" start="1765" end="1773" title="garganey" label="garganey"/>
<link wikidata="Q27232" start="1778" end="1790" title="little stint" label="little stint"/>
<link wikidata="Q26325" start="1855" end="1869" title="Juniperus communis" label="common juniper"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="140356" wikidata="Q242796" url="?curid=140356" title="Antonia Fraser">
<text>Lady Antonia Margaret Caroline Fraser, (; born 27 August 1932) is a British author of history, novels, biographies and detective fiction. She is the widow of the 2005 Nobel Laureate in Literature, Harold Pinter (1930–2008), and prior to his death was also known as Lady Antonia Pinter.

==Family background and education==
Fraser is the first-born of the eight children of Frank Pakenham, 7th Earl of Longford (1905–2001) and his wife, Elizabeth, Countess of Longford, &quot;née&quot; Elizabeth Harman (1906–2002). As the daughter of an earl, she is accorded the courtesy title &quot;Lady&quot; and thus customarily addressed formally as &quot;Lady Antonia&quot;.

As a teenager, she and her siblings converted to Catholicism, following the conversions of their parents. Her &quot;maternal grandparents were Unitarians – a non-conformist faith with a strong emphasis on social reform&quot;. In response to criticism of her writing about Oliver Cromwell, she has said, &quot;I have no Catholic blood&quot;. Before his own conversion in his thirties following a nervous breakdown in the Army, as she explains: &quot;My father was Protestant Church of Ireland, and my mother was Unitarian up to the age of 20 when she abandoned it.&quot;

She was educated at the Dragon School in Oxford, St Mary&#x27;s School, Ascot, and Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford; the last was also her mother&#x27;s alma mater. Prior to going to Oxford in 1950, she was a debutante in the London social season.

==Career==
Fraser began work as an &quot;all-purpose assistant&quot; for George Weidenfeld at Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson (her &quot;only job&quot;), which later became her own publisher and part of Orion Publishing Group, which publishes her works in the UK.

Her first major work, published by Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson, was &quot;Mary, Queen of Scots&quot; (1969), which was followed by several other biographies, including &quot;Cromwell, Our Chief of Men&quot; (1973). Fraser won the Wolfson History Award in 1984 for &quot;The Weaker Vessel&quot;, a study of women&#x27;s lives in 17th-century England. From 1988 to 1989, she was president of English PEN, and she chaired its Writers in Prison Committee.

She also has written detective novels, the most popular involving a character named Jemima Shore, and they were adapted into the television series &quot;Jemima Shore Investigates&quot;, which aired in the UK in 1983.

Fraser acknowledges she is &quot;less interested in ideas than in &#x27;the people who led nations&#x27; and so on. I don&#x27;t think I could ever have written a history of political thought or anything like that. I&#x27;d have to come at it another way.&quot; Fraser&#x27;s study, &quot;The Warrior Queens&quot; (1989), is an account of military royal women since the days of Boadicea and Cleopatra. In 1992, a year after Alison Weir&#x27;s book &quot;The Six Wives of Henry VIII&quot;, she published a book with the same title.

She chronicled the life and times of Charles II in a well-reviewed 1979 eponymous biography. The book was cited as an influence on the 2003 BBC/A&amp;E mini-series, &quot;Charles II: The Power &amp; the Passion&quot;, in a featurette on the DVD, by Rufus Sewell who played the title character. Fraser served as editor for many monarchical biographies, including those featured in the &quot;Kings and Queens of England&quot; and &quot;Royal History of England&quot; series, and, in 1996, she also published a book entitled &quot;The Gunpowder Plot: Terror and Faith in 1605&quot;, which won both the St. Louis Literary Award and the Crime Writers&#x27; Association (CWA) Non-Fiction Gold Dagger.

Her biography, &quot;Marie Antoinette: The Journey&quot; (2001, 2002), was adapted for the film &quot;Marie Antoinette&quot; (2006), directed by Sofia Coppola, with Kirsten Dunst in the title role, and &quot;Love and Louis XIV: The Women in the Life of the Sun King&quot; (2006). She contemplated a biography of Queen Elizabeth I, but shelved the idea as this subject has already been extensively covered.

===Related experience===
Fraser was a contestant on the BBC Radio 4 panel game &quot;My Word!&quot; from 1979 to 1990.

From 1983 to 1984, she was president of Edinburgh&#x27;s Sir Walter Scott Club. She serves as a judge for the Enid McLeod Literary Prize, awarded by the Franco-British Society, previously winning that prize for her biography &quot;Marie Antoinette&quot; (2001).

Fraser is a vice-president of the London Library.

===Memoir===
Fraser&#x27;s memoir &quot;Must You Go? My Life with Harold Pinter&quot; was published in January 2010 and she read a shortened version as BBC Radio Four&#x27;s &quot;Book of the Week&quot; that month.

==Marriages and later life==
From 1956 until their divorce in 1977, she was married to Sir Hugh Fraser (1918–1984), a descendant of Scottish aristocracy 14 years her senior and a Roman Catholic Conservative Unionist MP in the House of Commons (sitting for Stafford), who was a friend of the American Kennedy family. They had six children, including Rebecca Fraser and Flora Fraser.

On 22 October 1975, Hugh and Antonia Fraser, together with Caroline Kennedy, who was visiting them at their Holland Park home, in Kensington, west London, were almost blown up by an IRA car bomb placed under the wheels of his Jaguar, which had been triggered to go off at 9 am when he left the house; the bomb exploded, killing the cancer researcher Gordon Hamilton Fairley. Fairley, a neighbour of the Frasers, had been walking his dog, when he noticed something amiss and stopped to examine the bomb.

In 1975, she began an affair with playwright Harold Pinter, who was then married to the actress Vivien Merchant. In 1977, after she had been living with Pinter for two years, the Frasers&#x27; union was legally dissolved. Merchant spoke about her distress publicly to the press, which quoted her cutting remarks about her rival, but she resisted divorcing Pinter. In 1980, after Merchant signed divorce papers, Fraser and Pinter married. Fraser and Pinter were married in the Roman Catholic Church. Harold Pinter died from cancer on 24 December 2008, aged 78.

Fraser lives at Campden Hill Square, in the London district of Holland Park, in the Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea, south of Notting Hill Gate, in the Fraser family home, where she still writes in her fourth-floor study.

Fraser is a vice-president of the Royal Stuart Society.

==Honours==
Fraser was appointed Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) in the 1999 Birthday Honours and promoted to Dame Commander of the Order of the British Empire (DBE) in the 2011 New Year Honours for services to literature. She was appointed a Member of the Order of the Companions of Honour (CH) in the 2018 New Year Honours for services to literature.

==The Lady Antonia Fraser Archive in the British Library==

Lady Antonia Fraser&#x27;s uncatalogued papers (relating to her &quot;Early Writing&quot;, &quot;Fiction&quot;, and &quot;Non-Fiction&quot;) are on loan at the British Library. Papers by and relating to Lady Antonia Fraser are also catalogued as part of the Harold Pinter Archive, which is part of its permanent collection of Additional Manuscripts.

==Awards==
* James Tait Black Memorial Prize (1969), for her book &quot;Mary, Queen of Scots&quot;.
* Wolfson History Prize (1984), for her book &quot;The Weaker Vessel&quot;.
* Crime Writers&#x27; Association Macallan Gold Dagger for Non-Fiction (1996), for her book &quot;The Gunpowder Plot&quot;.
* St. Louis Literary Award from the Saint Louis University Library Associates.
* Historical Association Norton Medlicott Medal (2000).
* Enid McLeod Literary Prize (2001), from the Franco-British Society, for &quot;Marie Antoinette&quot;.

==Works==
===Non-fiction works===
* &quot;Mary Queen of Scots&quot; (1969). .
** Reissued, Phoenix paperback, 2001; .
** 40th-anniversary edition, reissued Orion paperback, 7 May 2009; .
* &quot;Dolls&quot; (1963)
* &quot;A History of Toys&quot; (1966)
* &quot;Cromwell, Our Chief of Men&quot; (1973);
** Also published as &quot;Cromwell: The Lord Protector&quot;. .
* &quot;King James VI and I&quot; (1974)
* &quot;The Lives of the Kings and Queens of England&quot; (1975) [editor]
* &quot;King Charles II&quot; (1979)
** Also published as &quot;Royal Charles: Charles II and the Restoration&quot; and &quot;Charles II&quot;; .
* &quot;Heroes and Heroines&quot; (1980)
* &quot;The Weaker Vessel: Woman&#x27;s Lot in Seventeenth-century England&quot; (1984)
* &quot;The Warrior Queens: Boadicea&#x27;s Chariot&quot; (1988), Weidenfeld and Nicolson, London.
** Also published as &quot;Warrior Queens: The Legends and Lives of Women Who have led Their Nations in War&quot;.
* &quot;The Six Wives of Henry VIII&quot; (London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1996); Orion, 1999, .
** Rpt. &amp; updated edition, London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 2007.
** Also published as the Orion audio-book &quot;The Six Wives of Henry VIII&quot; (November 2006); .
** The first paperback edition is &quot;The Six Wives of Henry VIII&quot; (London: Mandarin, 1993); .
** The 1st American edition is entitled &quot;The Wives of Henry VIII&quot;. New York: Knopf, 1992; .
* &quot;The Gunpowder Plot: Terror and Faith in 1605&quot; (1996)
** Also published as &quot;Faith and Treason: The Gunpowder Plot&quot;; .
* &quot;Marie Antoinette&quot; (2001); 
** Also published with the subtitle &quot;Marie Antoinette: The Journey&quot;, (2002); .
* &quot;Love and Louis XIV: The Women in the Life of the Sun King&quot; (2006); .
* &quot;Must You Go? My Life with Harold Pinter&quot; (2010), London: Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson (Orion Books); .
** 1st U.S. edition, New York: Nan A. Talese/Doubleday; .
** 1st paperback edition London: Phoenix, 2010; 
** Also published in audio &amp; digital editions) - &quot;Shortlisted for Galaxy National Book Awards: Non-Fiction Book of the Year 2010.&quot;
* &quot;Perilous Question: The Drama of the Great Reform Bill 1832&quot; (2013); 
* &quot;My History. A Memoir of Growing Up&quot; (2015), New York:  Doubleday. 
* &quot;Our Israeli Diary: Of That Time, Of That Place&quot; (2017); 
* &quot;The King and the Catholics: The Fight for Rights, 1829&quot; (2018); 
* &quot;The Case of the Married Woman: Caroline Norton: A 19th Century Heroine Who Wanted Justice for Women&quot; (2021); 
* &quot;Caroline Lamb: A Free Spirit&quot; (2023); 

===Historical fiction===
* &quot;King Arthur and the Knights of the Round Table&quot; (1954)
* &quot;Robin Hood&quot; (1955)

===Jemima Shore novels===
* &quot;Quiet as a Nun&quot; (1977)
* &quot;The Wild Island&quot; (1978). Also published as &quot;Tartan Tragedy&quot;.
* &quot;A Splash of Red&quot; (1981)
* &quot;Cool Repentance&quot; (1982)
* &quot;Oxford Blood&quot; (1985)
* &quot;Jemima Shore&#x27;s First Case&quot; (1986)
* &quot;Your Royal Hostage&quot; (1987)
* &quot;The Cavalier Case&quot; (1990)
* &quot;Jemima Shore at the Sunny Grave&quot; (1991)
* &quot;Political Death&quot; (1995)
* &quot;Quiet as a Nun / Tartan Tragedy / Splash of Red&quot; (omnibus) (2005)
* &quot;Jemima Shore on the Case&quot; (omnibus) (2006)

===Editor===
* &quot;Scottish Love Poems&quot; (1975)
* &quot;The Lives of the Kings and Queens of England&quot; (1975)
* &quot;Love Letters&quot; (1976)
* &quot;The Pleasure of Reading&quot; (1992)
* &quot;A Red Rose or A Satin Heart&quot; (2010)

==See also==
* Earl of Longford

==Notes==
==Further reading==

===Biographies and profiles===
* Gussow, Mel. &quot;The Lady Is a Writer&quot;. &quot;The New York Times Magazine&quot;, 9 September 1984.
* &quot;Our President in 1983/84 was: Lady Antonia Fraser&quot; bio at Edinburgh Sir Walter Scott Club.
* Snowman, Daniel. &quot;Lady Antonia Fraser&quot;. &quot;History Today&quot; 50.10 (October 2000): 26–28.
* Wroe, Nicholas. &quot;Profile: The History Woman&quot;, &quot;The Guardian&quot;, 24 August 2002.

===Interviews and articles===
* Dougary, Ginny. &quot;Lady Antonia Fraser&#x27;s Life Less Ordinary: In a Frank Interview, the Famed Writer Talks about Motherhood, Catholicism, Her Parents and Soulmate Harold Pinter&quot;. &quot;The Times&quot;, 5 July 2008.
* &quot;Interviews: Antonia Fraser Peers into the Heart of Louis XIV&quot;. National Public Radio, &quot;Weekend Edition Saturday&quot;, 11 November 2006.
* Leith, Sam. &quot;Literary Lazing&quot;. &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot;, 10 July 2007.
* Talese, Nan A. Interview with Antonia Fraser. &quot;Random House Books&quot;, 2001.
* Weinberg, Kate. &quot;Culture Clinic: Lady Antonia Fraser&quot;. &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot;. 15 Mar. 2008.

==External links==
* &quot;AntoniaFraser.com&quot; – Official website of Antonia Fraser.
* &quot;Antonia Fraser&quot; – Author webpage at Orion Publishing Group (UK publisher)
* &quot;Antonia Fraser&quot; – Author webpage at Random House (US publisher)
* Antonia Fraser – Client page at Curtis Brown Literary and Talent Agency
* &quot;Antonia&#x27;s Choice&quot; – In &quot;Desert Island Discs&quot; on BBC Radio 4 (first broadcast 27 July 2008)
* &quot;Must You Go?&quot; extract – &quot;First Night&quot; (Chapter One), Galaxy National Book Awards (Phoenix edn)
* Translated Penguin Book – at Penguin First Editions reference site of early first edition Penguin Books.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q242796" start="0" end="37" title="Antonia Fraser" label="Lady Antonia Margaret Caroline Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q36279" start="103" end="114" title="biography" label="biographies"/>
<link wikidata="Q186424" start="119" end="136" title="detective fiction" label="detective fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="167" end="195" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel Laureate in Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q41042" start="197" end="210" title="Harold Pinter" label="Harold Pinter"/>
<link wikidata="Q242796" start="265" end="284" title="Antonia Fraser" label="Lady Antonia Pinter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295962" start="373" end="409" title="Frank Pakenham, 7th Earl of Longford" label="Frank Pakenham, 7th Earl of Longford"/>
<link wikidata="Q530870" start="436" end="467" title="Elizabeth Pakenham, Countess of Longford" label="Elizabeth, Countess of Longford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507958" start="475" end="478" title="née" label="née"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128240" start="537" end="541" title="earl" label="earl"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="563" end="594" title="Courtesy titles in the United Kingdom#Courtesy prefix of &amp;quot;Lady&amp;quot;" label="courtesy title &amp;quot;Lady&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="714" end="725" title="Catholicism" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q106687" start="808" end="818" title="Unitarianism" label="Unitarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q44279" start="937" end="952" title="Oliver Cromwell" label="Oliver Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q875668" start="1128" end="1156" title="Church of Ireland" label="Protestant Church of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q610999" start="1260" end="1273" title="Dragon School" label="Dragon School"/>
<link wikidata="Q34217" start="1277" end="1283" title="Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3967641" start="1285" end="1313" title="St Mary&amp;#x27;s School, Ascot" label="St Mary&amp;#x27;s School, Ascot"/>
<link wikidata="Q951946" start="1319" end="1345" title="Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford" label="Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780030" start="1439" end="1448" title="debutante" label="debutante"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400492" start="1463" end="1476" title="Social season (United Kingdom)" label="social season"/>
<link wikidata="Q84842" start="1552" end="1569" title="George Weidenfeld" label="George Weidenfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567082" start="1573" end="1598" title="Weidenfeld &amp;amp; Nicolson" label="Weidenfeld &amp;amp; Nicolson"/>
<link wikidata="Q861799" start="1676" end="1698" title="Orion Publishing Group" label="Orion Publishing Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q6780563" start="1810" end="1830" title="Mary, Queen of Scots (1969 book)" label="Mary, Queen of Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q4020686" start="1966" end="1987" title="Wolfson History Prize" label="Wolfson History Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q206811" start="2134" end="2137" title="International PEN" label="PEN"/>
<link wikidata="Q186424" start="2210" end="2225" title="detective novel" label="detective novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6177174" start="2273" end="2285" title="Jemima Shore" label="Jemima Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q104850060" start="2342" end="2367" title="Jemima Shore Investigates" label="Jemima Shore Investigates"/>
<link wikidata="Q184634" start="2785" end="2793" title="Boadicea" label="Boadicea"/>
<link wikidata="Q635" start="2798" end="2807" title="Cleopatra VII of Egypt" label="Cleopatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788781" start="2831" end="2842" title="Alison Weir (historian)" label="Alison Weir"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="2976" end="2986" title="Charles II of England" label="Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="3079" end="3082" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q277561" start="3083" end="3090" title="A&amp;amp;E Network" label="A&amp;amp;E"/>
<link wikidata="Q299217" start="3188" end="3200" title="Rufus Sewell" label="Rufus Sewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q45810" start="3471" end="3485" title="Gunpowder Plot" label="Gunpowder Plot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7589655" start="3538" end="3562" title="St. Louis Literary Award" label="St. Louis Literary Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2185131" start="3571" end="3602" title="Crime Writers&amp;#x27; Association" label="Crime Writers&amp;#x27; Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157223" start="3621" end="3632" title="Gold Dagger" label="Gold Dagger"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3656" end="3685" title="Marie Antoinette: The Journey" label="Marie Antoinette: The Journey"/>
<link wikidata="Q829695" start="3737" end="3753" title="Marie Antoinette (2006 film)" label="Marie Antoinette"/>
<link wikidata="Q193628" start="3780" end="3793" title="Sofia Coppola" label="Sofia Coppola"/>
<link wikidata="Q76478" start="3800" end="3813" title="Kirsten Dunst" label="Kirsten Dunst"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="3852" end="3861" title="Louis XIV" label="Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="3947" end="3964" title="Elizabeth I of England" label="Queen Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="4098" end="4109" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049337" start="4110" end="4120" title="panel game" label="panel game"/>
<link wikidata="Q6946644" start="4127" end="4135" title="My Word!" label="My Word!"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="4202" end="4211" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q79025" start="4219" end="4240" title="Walter Scott" label="Sir Walter Scott Club"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4393" end="4409" title="Marie Antoinette: The Journey" label="Marie Antoinette"/>
<link wikidata="Q269192" start="4459" end="4473" title="London Library" label="London Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q5930848" start="4779" end="4794" title="Hugh Fraser (British politician)" label="Sir Hugh Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="4886" end="4907" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Unionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="4918" end="4934" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q988420" start="4948" end="4956" title="Stafford (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Stafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q34821" start="4992" end="5006" title="Kennedy family" label="Kennedy family"/>
<link wikidata="Q43388390" start="5041" end="5055" title="Rebecca Fraser" label="Rebecca Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460298" start="5060" end="5072" title="Flora Fraser (writer)" label="Flora Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q230303" start="5134" end="5150" title="Caroline Kennedy" label="Caroline Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q251630" start="5183" end="5195" title="Holland Park" label="Holland Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q288781" start="5205" end="5215" title="Kensington" label="Kensington"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="5222" end="5228" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q504628" start="5257" end="5260" title="Provisional Irish Republican Army" label="IRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q162555" start="5407" end="5424" title="Oncology" label="cancer researcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773495" start="5425" end="5448" title="Gordon Hamilton Fairley" label="Gordon Hamilton Fairley"/>
<link wikidata="Q41042" start="5624" end="5637" title="Harold Pinter" label="Harold Pinter"/>
<link wikidata="Q266397" start="5675" end="5690" title="Vivien Merchant" label="Vivien Merchant"/>
<link wikidata="Q251630" start="6203" end="6215" title="Holland Park" label="Holland Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q188801" start="6224" end="6263" title="Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea" label="Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7063571" start="6274" end="6291" title="Notting Hill Gate" label="Notting Hill Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374880" start="6405" end="6425" title="Royal Stuart Society" label="Royal Stuart Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="6461" end="6505" title="Order of the British Empire" label="Commander of the Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4594535" start="6519" end="6540" title="1999 Birthday Honours" label="1999 Birthday Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q4621996" start="6620" end="6641" title="2011 New Year Honours" label="2011 New Year Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137694" start="6704" end="6737" title="Order of the Companions of Honour" label="Order of the Companions of Honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q48807673" start="6750" end="6771" title="2018 New Year Honours" label="2018 New Year Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q23308" start="7021" end="7036" title="British Library" label="British Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q392586" start="7225" end="7256" title="James Tait Black Memorial Prize" label="James Tait Black Memorial Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q6780563" start="7284" end="7304" title="Mary, Queen of Scots (1969 book)" label="Mary, Queen of Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q4020686" start="7314" end="7335" title="Wolfson History Prize" label="Wolfson History Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q2185131" start="7390" end="7421" title="Crime Writers&amp;#x27; Association" label="Crime Writers&amp;#x27; Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157223" start="7431" end="7442" title="Gold Dagger" label="Gold Dagger"/>
<link wikidata="Q7589655" start="7514" end="7538" title="St. Louis Literary Award" label="St. Louis Literary Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q734774" start="7548" end="7570" title="Saint Louis University" label="Saint Louis University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5773836" start="7593" end="7615" title="Historical Association" label="Historical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q17126380" start="7616" end="7638" title="Norton Medlicott Medal" label="Norton Medlicott Medal"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7727" end="7743" title="Marie Antoinette: The Journey" label="Marie Antoinette"/>
<link wikidata="Q6780563" start="7794" end="7813" title="Mary Queen of Scots (1969 book)" label="Mary Queen of Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187658" start="8013" end="8039" title="Cromwell, Our Chief of Men" label="Cromwell, Our Chief of Men"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9205" end="9249" title="The Gunpowder Plot: Terror and Faith in 1605" label="The Gunpowder Plot: Terror and Faith in 1605"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9419" end="9448" title="Marie Antoinette: The Journey" label="Marie Antoinette: The Journey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251563" start="10063" end="10072" title="Doubleday (publisher)" label="Doubleday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277341" start="11400" end="11416" title="Earl of Longford" label="Earl of Longford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4152873" start="11482" end="11493" title="Mel Gussow" label="Gussow, Mel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028269" start="11535" end="11562" title="The New York Times Magazine" label="The New York Times Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138561" start="11750" end="11763" title="History Today" label="History Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="11863" end="11875" title="Guardian.co.uk" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q41042" start="12102" end="12115" title="Harold Pinter" label="Harold Pinter"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="12129" end="12138" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q671510" start="12235" end="12256" title="National Public Radio" label="National Public Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979420" start="12264" end="12279" title="Weekend Edition" label="Weekend Edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="12363" end="12382" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q6962172" start="12406" end="12420" title="Nan Talese" label="Talese, Nan A."/>
<link wikidata="Q861799" start="12743" end="12765" title="Orion Publishing Group" label="Orion Publishing Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q744182" start="12830" end="12842" title="Random House" label="Random House"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195696" start="12892" end="12931" title="Curtis Brown (literary agents)" label="Curtis Brown Literary and Talent Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200587" start="12979" end="12998" title="Desert Island Discs" label="Desert Island Discs"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="13008" end="13019" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="140357" wikidata="Q2295962" url="?curid=140357" title="Frank Pakenham, 7th Earl of Longford">
<text>Francis Aungier Pakenham, 7th Earl of Longford (5 December 1905 – 3 August 2001), known to his family as Frank Longford and styled Lord Pakenham from 1945 to 1961, was a British politician and social reformer. A member of the Labour Party, he was one of its longest-serving politicians. He held cabinet positions on several occasions between 1947 and 1968. Longford was politically active until his death in 2001. A member of an old, landed Anglo-Irish family, the Pakenhams (who became Earls of Longford), he was one of the few aristocratic hereditary peers ever to serve in a senior capacity within a Labour government. 

Longford was famed for championing social outcasts and unpopular causes. He is especially notable for his lifelong advocacy of penal reform. Longford visited prisons on a regular basis for nearly 70 years until his death. He advocated for rehabilitation programmes and helped create the modern British parole system in the 1960s following the abolition of the death penalty. His ultimately unsuccessful campaign for the release of Moors murderer Myra Hindley attracted much media and public controversy. For this work, the Longford Prize is named after him. It is awarded annually during the Longford Lecture and recognises achievement in the field of penal reform.

As a devout Christian determined to translate faith into action, he was known for his bombastic style and his eccentricity. Although a shrewd and influential politician, he was also widely unpopular among Labour leaders, particularly for his lack of ministerial ability, and was moved from cabinet post to cabinet post, never serving more than two years at any one ministry. Labour Prime Minister Harold Wilson opined that Longford had the mental capacity of a 12-year-old.

In 1972, he was made a Knight Companion of the Garter. In the same year, he was appointed to head the group charged with investigating the effects of pornography on society which published the controversial Pornography Report (the Longford Report). He became known as a campaigner against pornography and held the view that it was degrading to both its users and to those who worked in the trade, especially women. Longford was also an outspoken critic of the British press, and once said it was &quot;trembling on the brink of obscenity&quot;.

Longford was instrumental in decriminalising homosexuality in the United Kingdom, but was always forthright with his strong moral disapproval of homosexual acts on religious grounds. He opposed furthering gay rights legislation, including the equalisation of the age of consent, and also supported the passage of Section 28.

==Background and education==
Born in London to an Anglo-Irish aristocratic family, he was the second son of Thomas Pakenham, 5th Earl of Longford in the Peerage of Ireland. He was educated at Eton College and New College, Oxford, where as an undergraduate he was a member of the Bullingdon Club. He graduated with a first-class honours degree in Philosophy, Politics, and Economics and became a don at Christ Church.

==Political career==

After a disastrous spell in stockbroking with Buckmaster &amp; Moore, in 1931 the 25-year-old Pakenham joined the Conservative Research Department where he developed education policy for the Conservative Party. His wife Elizabeth persuaded him to become a socialist. They were married on 3 November 1931 and had eight children. In 1940, only a few months after the onset of the Second World War, he suffered a nervous breakdown and was invalided out of the armed forces. The same year, he became a Roman Catholic. His wife was initially dismayed by this, for she had been brought up a Unitarian and associated the Church of Rome with reactionary politics, but in 1946 she joined the same church. During the war, Pakenham was hired as an assistant for William Beveridge, and was involved in the production of the Beveridge Report and the 1944 book &quot;Full Employment in a Free Society&quot;.

Pakenham then embarked on a political career. In July 1945 he contested Oxford against the sitting Conservative member, Quintin Hogg, but was defeated by nearly 3,000 votes. In October of that year he was created Baron Pakenham, of Cowley in the City of Oxford, in the Peerage of the United Kingdom, by the Labour government of Clement Attlee, and took his seat in the House of Lords as one of the few Labour peers. He was immediately appointed a Lord-in-waiting by Attlee. In 1947, he was appointed deputy Foreign Secretary, outside the cabinet, with special responsibility for the British zone in occupied Germany. He made headlines by telling German audiences that the British people forgave them for what had happened in the war; at his death, the Lord Bishop of Birmingham remarked that West German Chancellor Konrad Adenauer was supposed to have &quot;counted him as one of the founders of the Federal Republic&quot;. In May 1948, he was moved to the lower-profile role of Minister of Civil Aviation and was sworn of the Privy Council in June of that year. He continued in this post until May 1951. From May until the fall of the administration in October 1951, he was First Lord of the Admiralty.
In 1961, Pakenham inherited from his brother the earldom of Longford in the Peerage of Ireland and from then onward was generally known to the public as &quot;Lord Longford&quot;. When Labour returned to power in October 1964 under Harold Wilson, Longford was appointed Lord Privy Seal and Leader of the House of Lords, despite the fact that Wilson had little respect for him. In December 1965 he became Secretary of State for the Colonies, continuing as Leader of the House of Lords. After only four months at the Colonial Office, he was removed from the post for failing to master his brief, and again became Lord Privy Seal in April 1966. Wilson often talked about sacking Longford from his government, which is believed by some to have led to Longford&#x27;s resignation as Lord Privy Seal and Leader of the House of Lords in January 1968 – though the actual occasion of his resignation was the failure of Education Secretary Patrick Gordon Walker to agree to the raising of the school-leaving age. In 1972 he was created a Knight Companion of the Garter.

==Penal reform==
Longford began visiting prisoners in the 1930s when he was a city councillor in Oxford, and continued to do so every week, all around the country, until shortly before his death in 2001. Among the thousands he befriended and helped were a small number of individuals who had committed the most notorious crimes, including child murderer Myra Hindley.

In 1956, he set up New Bridge Foundation, an organisation that aimed to help prisoners stay in touch with society and integrate them back into it.

New Bridge set up &quot;Inside Time&quot; in 1990, the only national newspaper for the UK&#x27;s prison population. , novelist and journalist Rachel Billington, Longford&#x27;s daughter, worked at the title one day a week. Longford organised many debates on prison reform in the House of Lords from the 1950s onward, and in 1963 chaired the commission whose report recommended reform in sentencing policy and the establishment of a parole system.

Longford was a leading figure in the Nationwide Festival of Light of 1971, protesting against the commercial exploitation of sex and violence, and advocating the teaching of Christ as the key to recovering moral stability in the nation. His anti-pornography campaigning made him the subject of derision and he was labelled by the press as &quot;Lord Porn&quot; when he and former prison doctor Christine Temple-Saville set out on a wide-ranging tour of sex industry establishments in the early 1970s to compile a self-funded report. The press made much of his visits to strip clubs in Copenhagen.

Peter Stanford wrote in &quot;The Guardian&quot;″s obituary of Longford that in the late 1980s, the peer was contacted by the solicitor for a young Dutchman, convicted of a drugs offence, sent to Albany prison on the Isle of Wight, who was suffering from AIDS and had been cut off by his family. Longford was the only person to visit the dying man, a gesture repeated in countless episodes that never made headlines, but which brought succour and relief.

===Myra Hindley===
He gained a reputation for eccentricity, becoming known for his efforts to rehabilitate offenders and in particular campaigning for the parole and release from prison of the Moors murderer Myra Hindley, who had been jailed for life along with Ian Brady in 1966 for the Moors murders.

Longford&#x27;s support for Hindley led to the soubriquet &quot;Lord Wrongford&quot; from the tabloid press, which largely opposed Hindley being released from prison. It also coincided with Longford&#x27;s contact with Hindley becoming public knowledge in 1972, when &quot;Lord Porn&quot; was in the midst of the debacle of a much-lampooned anti-pornography crusade against &quot;indecency&quot;, giving rise to more allegations of hypocrisy than had already resulted from his tours of sex clubs. 

In 1977, 11 years after Hindley was convicted of two murders and being an accessory to a third murder, Longford appeared on television and spoke openly of his belief that Hindley should now be considered for parole as she had shown clear signs of progress in prison and now served long enough for the Parole Board to assess her suitability for parole. He also supported Hindley&#x27;s claims that her role in the Moors Murders was merely that of an unwilling accessory, rather than an active participant, and that she had only taken part due to Brady&#x27;s abuse and threats. These claims were aired in the inaugural episode of &quot;Brass Tacks&quot;, which featured arguments for and against Hindley being considered for parole. Ann West, the mother of Lesley Ann Downey, spoke out against the suggestion of Hindley ever being paroled, and openly told viewers that she would kill Hindley if she ever was released.

In 1985, he condemned the Parole Board&#x27;s decision not to consider Hindley&#x27;s release for another five years as &quot;barbaric&quot;. His campaign for Hindley continued even after she admitted to two more murders in 1986, which further strengthened media and public suspicion that Hindley’s reported rehabilitation and remorse were nothing more than a ploy to boost her chances of gaining parole. There was also widespread doubt regarding Hindley’s claims that she had only taken part in the killings due to being bullied and blackmailed by Brady.

In 1990, Home Secretary David Waddington ruled that &quot;life should mean life&quot; for Hindley, who had been told by earlier Home Secretaries and High Court judges that she would have to serve a minimum of 25 and then 30 years before being considered for parole. Hindley was not informed of the decision until December 1994, following a High Court ruling that all life sentence prisoners had to be informed of their minimum sentences, and Longford later expressed his &quot;disgust&quot; at this ruling, comparing her imprisonment to that of Jews in Nazi Germany. By this time Hindley, who had initially thought that having &quot;friends in high places&quot; could only help her cause, had cut off all contact and communication with him, now considering him a liability whose &quot;campaigning&quot; was little more than publicity-seeking on his own behalf. She did regain contact with him again following this, however.

The next three Home Secretaries all agreed with Waddington&#x27;s ruling. Hindley appealed against her whole life tariff in the High Court in December 1997, November 1998 and March 2000, but each appeal was rejected. Longford maintained that she was a reformed character who was no longer a threat to society, and had qualified for parole. He regularly commented, along with several other Hindley supporters, that she was a &quot;political prisoner&quot; who was being kept in prison for votes, to serve the interests of a succession of Home Secretaries and their respective governments. Home Office files would later reveal that in 1975 Longford had also lobbied various government ministers, including the Home Secretary Roy Jenkins, on Brady&#x27;s behalf, as well. This resulted in Brady obtaining special treatment while remaining in the prison hospital, rather than being returned to the segregation unit. This gave him access to adolescent &quot;youth custody&quot; inmates; he was only removed from this privileged situation in 1982, after he was accused by several underage inmates of sexual assault. Unlike Hindley, Brady never wanted to be paroled from his life sentence, and remained in custody for more than 50 years until his death in May 2017 at the age of 79.

In March 1996, Longford backed up Hindley&#x27;s claim in an Oxford University magazine that she was still in prison so that the Conservative government – trailing in the opinion polls since the autumn of 1992 – would win more votes. This claim was met with anger by the mothers of two of the Moors Murders victims, including Ann West, who remained at the centre of the campaign to ensure that Hindley was never released, and once again vowed to kill Hindley if she was set free. Longford regularly condemned the media - especially &quot;The Sun&quot; newspaper - for its &quot;exploitation&quot; of Ann West, who frequently opposed any suggestion of Hindley being paroled, often threatening to kill her if she was ever set free. 

In 1986, Longford reportedly told Ann West that unless she forgave Hindley and Brady, she would not go to heaven when she died. He also commented that he was &quot;tremendously sorry for her, but letting her decide Myra&#x27;s fate would be ludicrous&quot;.

Hindley died in November 2002, having never been paroled.

The story of Longford&#x27;s campaign to free Hindley was told in the Channel 4 film &quot;Longford&quot; in 2006. Longford was played by Jim Broadbent (who won a BAFTA for his role) and Hindley was played by Samantha Morton.

==Decriminalisation of homosexuality==
In 1956, Longford launched the first Parliamentary debate in support of the Wolfenden Report, which recommended the decriminalisation of private and consensual homosexual acts between men over the age of 21. He had been a staunch public supporter of Lord Montagu and his lover Peter Wildeblood after the two were jailed for breaking anti-gay laws in the early 1950s, and visited them regularly in prison.

In the 1960s, while continuing to support the decriminalisation of homosexuality in England and Wales, he nonetheless asserted that homosexuality was &quot;nauseating&quot; and that, regardless of any change in the law, it was &quot;utterly wrongful&quot;. He was of the belief that homosexuality was something that could be &quot;taught&quot;.

In the mid-1980s, Longford was a vocal supporter of the introduction of Section 28 by Margaret Thatcher&#x27;s Conservative government and, during the Parliamentary debates, he stated his opinion that homosexuals are &quot;handicapped people&quot;. In the late 1990&#x27;s and early 2000&#x27;s, he fought attempts by the Labour government to remove it. Section 28 was eventually repealed in 2003, two years after his death. 

Longford&#x27;s highly publicised condemnation of homosexuality in the late 1980s made him a target of comedian Julian Clary, who often satirised him in his stage shows and television appearances.

Longford also opposed any attempts to lower the age of consent for homosexual acts below 21; in 1977 and in 1994, he spoke against lowering it to 18, claiming that &quot;the years of 18 and 19 are [...] the years when the destiny of young men may be decided for life&quot; and that people of that age could have too easily been seduced into a homosexual lifestyle; in the early years of Tony Blair&#x27;s Ministry, he criticized plans to equalise the age of consent for gay men (at that time 18) with that of heterosexual men (16), remarking in a 1998 House of Lords debate that:

...if someone seduced my daughter, it would be damaging and horrifying but not fatal. She would recover, marry and have lots of children... On the other hand, if some elderly, or not so elderly, schoolmaster seduced one of my sons and taught him to be a homosexual, he would ruin him for life. That is the fundamental distinction.

He was ultimately unsuccessful on those counts, as the age of consent for gay men was lowered to 18 in 1994 and to 16 in 2001.

==House of Lords reforms (1999)==
Under the House of Lords Act 1999, the majority of hereditary peers lost the privilege of a seat and right to vote in the House of Lords. However, Longford was one of four individuals who were hereditary peers of the first creation (in his case 1st Baron Pakenham). As such, he was created a life peer, and remained in the Lords as Baron Pakenham of Cowley, of Cowley in the County of Oxfordshire. At the age of 93, he became the second-oldest person to be granted a peerage (after Lord Maenan).

==Writings==
Known for his interest in Irish history, he wrote a number of books on the topic. &quot;Peace By Ordeal: An Account from First-Hand Sources of the Negotiation and Signature of the Anglo-Irish Treaty of 1921&quot;, published in 1935, is arguably his best-known work. It documents the negotiations of the Anglo-Irish Treaty of 1921 between Irish and British representatives. His account uses primary sources from the time, many however anonymous. Commentators differ widely on its merits and reliability.

Longford came greatly to admire Éamon de Valera and was chosen as the co-author of his official biography &quot;Éamon de Valera&quot;, which was published in 1970, co-written with Thomas P. O&#x27;Neill. He campaigned for decades to have the Hugh Lane bequest pictures restored to Dublin, and with Lord Moyne and Sir Denis Mahon, brokered a compromise-sharing agreement in 1959.

==Marriage and children==
At Oxford, Longford met his wife, Elizabeth Harman, an undergraduate at Lady Margaret Hall. Lady Longford was the author of &quot;Victoria R.I.&quot; (1964), a biography of Queen Victoria, published in the US as &quot;Born to Succeed&quot;. She also wrote a two-volume biography of the Duke of Wellington, and a volume of memoirs, &quot;The Pebbled Shore&quot;. She stood for Parliament as Labour candidate for Cheltenham in the 1935 general election and for Oxford in 1950.

The marriage produced four sons and four daughters, followed by 26 grandchildren and 18 great-grandchildren. Their children were:

* Lady Antonia Margaret Caroline Pakenham (born 27 August 1932), writer, previously married to Hugh Fraser and had six children, and then to playwright Harold Pinter until his death.
* Thomas Frank Dermot Pakenham, 8th Earl of Longford (born 14 August 1933)
* Hon Patrick Maurice Pakenham (17 April 1937 - 8 June 2005)
* Lady Judith Elizabeth Pakenham (14 August 1940 - 18 September 2018)
* Lady Rachel Mary Pakenham (born 11 April 1942), writer, married to director Kevin Billington, four children.
* Hon Sir Michael Aidan Pakenham KBE CMG (born 3 November 1943)
* Lady Catherine Rose Pakenham (28 February 1946 - 11 August 1969)
* Hon Kevin John Toussaint Pakenham (1 November 1947 - 19 July 2020)

==Death==
Lord Longford died from heart failure at Chelsea and Westminster Hospital on 3 August 2001 at the age of 95 and was cremated at Mortlake Crematorium. He was succeeded in the earldom by his eldest son, Thomas.

The Countess of Longford died in October 2002 at the age of 96. 

The then Prime Minister, Tony Blair, said of Longford after his death: &quot;He was a great man of passionate integrity and humanity, and a great reformer committed to modernising the law, while also caring deeply for individuals&quot;.

==Arms==
==See also==
*The Longford Lectures
*The Longford Prize

==References ==
==Films about Lord Longford==
*&quot;Longford&quot; (2006): Longford&#x27;s efforts to obtain parole for Moors murderer Myra Hindley were dramatised in a Channel 4 film, with Longford portrayed by Jim Broadbent, Samantha Morton as Myra Hindley, Lindsay Duncan as Lady Longford and Andy Serkis as Ian Brady.

==Books about Lord Longford==
* Fraser, Antonia (2015), &quot;My History: A Memoir of Growing Up&quot;, New York: Doubleday. [Account, both personal and political, by a daughter of Pakenham.]  

==External links==
*Longford Trust
*New Bridge Foundation
*&quot;Campaigner Lord Longford dies&quot;. BBC News article dated Friday, 3 August 2001
*&quot;Lord Longford: Aristocratic moral crusader&quot;. BBC News obituary dated Friday, 3 August 2001
*&quot;Tributes to humanist peer&quot;. BBC News article dated Friday, 3 August 2001
*Lord Longford. &quot;Guardian&quot; obituary by Peter Stanford dated Monday, 6 August 2001
*Announcement of his taking the oath for the first time as Lord Pakenham of Cowley, House of Lords Minute of Proceedings, 17 November 1999
*Recognition of his work on the Hugh Lane bequest
*Portrait of Frank Pakenham in the UK Parliamentary Collections</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2295962" start="0" end="46" title="Frank Pakenham, 7th Earl of Longford" label="Francis Aungier Pakenham, 7th Earl of Longford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295962" start="105" end="119" title="Frank Pakenham, 7th Earl of Longford" label="Frank Longford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295962" start="131" end="144" title="Frank Pakenham, 7th Earl of Longford" label="Lord Pakenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="226" end="238" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2849692" start="441" end="452" title="Anglo-Irish" label="Anglo-Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277341" start="487" end="504" title="Earls of Longford" label="Earls of Longford"/>
<link wikidata="Q808719" start="542" end="557" title="hereditary peer" label="hereditary peer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16468" start="1055" end="1069" title="Moors Murders" label="Moors murderer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16468" start="1070" end="1082" title="Myra Hindley" label="Myra Hindley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673837" start="1147" end="1161" title="Longford Prize" label="Longford Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389971" start="1216" end="1232" title="Longford Lecture" label="Longford Lecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q128956" start="1688" end="1701" title="Harold Wilson" label="Harold Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q215248" start="1789" end="1819" title="Knight of the Garter" label="Knight Companion of the Garter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7458681" start="2341" end="2392" title="decriminalising homosexuality in the United Kingdom" label="decriminalising homosexuality in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q17898" start="2517" end="2527" title="gay rights" label="gay rights"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2555" end="2589" title="LGBT rights in the United Kingdom#Equal age of consent" label="equalisation of the age of consent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098925" start="2625" end="2635" title="Section 28" label="Section 28"/>
<link wikidata="Q2849692" start="2688" end="2699" title="Anglo-Irish" label="Anglo-Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276568" start="2746" end="2783" title="Thomas Pakenham, 5th Earl of Longford" label="Thomas Pakenham, 5th Earl of Longford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859616" start="2791" end="2809" title="Peerage of Ireland" label="Peerage of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q192088" start="2830" end="2842" title="Eton College" label="Eton College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376987" start="2847" end="2866" title="New College, Oxford" label="New College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q469039" start="2917" end="2932" title="Bullingdon Club" label="Bullingdon Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971470" start="2954" end="2973" title="British undergraduate degree classification" label="first-class honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q2777850" start="2984" end="3019" title="Philosophy, Politics, and Economics" label="Philosophy, Politics, and Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4166008" start="3033" end="3036" title="University don" label="don"/>
<link wikidata="Q745967" start="3040" end="3053" title="Christ Church, Oxford" label="Christ Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q15040612" start="3124" end="3146" title="Buckmaster &amp;amp; Moore" label="Buckmaster &amp;amp; Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163090" start="3192" end="3224" title="Conservative Research Department" label="Conservative Research Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="3269" end="3287" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="3334" end="3343" title="socialist" label="socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3456" end="3472" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="3488" end="3505" title="nervous breakdown" label="nervous breakdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907112" start="3567" end="3590" title="Catholicisation" label="became a Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501533" start="3663" end="3672" title="General Assembly of Unitarian and Free Christian Churches" label="Unitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q192957" start="3712" end="3732" title="reactionary politics" label="reactionary politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q335049" start="3829" end="3846" title="William Beveridge" label="William Beveridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583737" start="3890" end="3906" title="Beveridge Report" label="Beveridge Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508030" start="3931" end="3964" title="Full Employment in a Free Society" label="Full Employment in a Free Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q918397" start="4022" end="4031" title="1945 United Kingdom general election" label="July 1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115222" start="4045" end="4051" title="Oxford (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="4072" end="4084" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q175366" start="4093" end="4105" title="Quintin Hogg, Baron Hailsham of St Marylebone" label="Quintin Hogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953777" start="4205" end="4211" title="Cowley, Oxford" label="Cowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q34217" start="4219" end="4233" title="City of Oxford" label="City of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q863009" start="4242" end="4271" title="Peerage of the United Kingdom" label="Peerage of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q129006" start="4301" end="4315" title="Clement Attlee" label="Clement Attlee"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="4342" end="4356" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q5212367" start="4420" end="4435" title="Lord-in-waiting" label="Lord-in-waiting"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4556" end="4588" title="Allied-occupied Germany#British zone" label="British zone in occupied Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="4765" end="4776" title="West German" label="West German"/>
<link wikidata="Q2492" start="4788" end="4803" title="Konrad Adenauer" label="Konrad Adenauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246797" start="4952" end="4978" title="Secretary of State for Transport" label="Minister of Civil Aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q683120" start="5000" end="5013" title="Privy Council (United Kingdom)" label="Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q21561383" start="5148" end="5175" title="First Lord of the Admiralty" label="First Lord of the Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277341" start="5226" end="5245" title="Earl of Longford" label="earldom of Longford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859616" start="5253" end="5271" title="Peerage of Ireland" label="Peerage of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q128956" start="5409" end="5422" title="Harold Wilson" label="Harold Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q910308" start="5447" end="5462" title="Lord Privy Seal" label="Lord Privy Seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2012061" start="5467" end="5495" title="Leader of the House of Lords" label="Leader of the House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519998" start="5581" end="5616" title="Secretary of State for the Colonies" label="Secretary of State for the Colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477306" start="6087" end="6106" title="Secretary of State for Education" label="Education Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q333745" start="6107" end="6128" title="Patrick Gordon Walker" label="Patrick Gordon Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q215248" start="6205" end="6235" title="Order of the Garter" label="Knight Companion of the Garter"/>
<link wikidata="Q16468" start="6592" end="6604" title="Myra Hindley" label="Myra Hindley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6037850" start="6779" end="6790" title="Inside Time" label="Inside Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1556074" start="6897" end="6914" title="Rachel Billington" label="Rachel Billington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7139410" start="7187" end="7200" title="Parole Board" label="parole system"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979878" start="7240" end="7268" title="Nationwide Festival of Light" label="Nationwide Festival of Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q7177077" start="7801" end="7815" title="Peter Stanford" label="Peter Stanford"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="7831" end="7843" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5635126" start="7997" end="8010" title="HM Prison Albany" label="Albany prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="8056" end="8060" title="AIDS" label="AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q16468" start="8450" end="8464" title="Moors murders" label="Moors murderer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16468" start="8519" end="8528" title="Ian Brady" label="Ian Brady"/>
<link wikidata="Q16468" start="8545" end="8558" title="Moors murders" label="Moors murders"/>
<link wikidata="Q7139410" start="9361" end="9373" title="Parole Board" label="Parole Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q19571114" start="9695" end="9706" title="Brass Tacks (British TV programme)" label="Brass Tacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484309" start="10544" end="10558" title="Home Secretary" label="Home Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q334565" start="10559" end="10575" title="David Waddington" label="David Waddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992231" start="10587" end="10620" title="Whole life tariff" label="&amp;quot;life should mean life&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128539" start="10684" end="10694" title="High Court" label="High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617747" start="11588" end="11598" title="High Court of Justice" label="High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q217105" start="11890" end="11908" title="political prisoner" label="political prisoner"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="12798" end="12815" title="Oxford University" label="Oxford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q208875" start="13275" end="13282" title="The Sun (United Kingdom)" label="The Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q4489450" start="13575" end="13581" title="heaven" label="heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="13857" end="13866" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259103" start="13878" end="13886" title="Longford (film)" label="Longford"/>
<link wikidata="Q185079" start="13925" end="13938" title="Jim Broadbent" label="Jim Broadbent"/>
<link wikidata="Q400007" start="13950" end="13955" title="BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role" label="BAFTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q230190" start="13996" end="14011" title="Samantha Morton" label="Samantha Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q771738" start="14129" end="14145" title="Wolfenden Report" label="Wolfenden Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636" start="14213" end="14223" title="homosexual" label="homosexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q336243" start="14303" end="14315" title="Edward Douglas-Scott-Montagu, 3rd Baron Montagu of Beaulieu" label="Lord Montagu"/>
<link wikidata="Q432245" start="14330" end="14346" title="Peter Wildeblood" label="Peter Wildeblood"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467353" start="14377" end="14399" title="Labouchere Amendment" label="breaking anti-gay laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636" start="14526" end="14539" title="homosexuality" label="homosexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="14543" end="14550" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="14555" end="14560" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098925" start="14877" end="14887" title="Section 28" label="Section 28"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="14891" end="14908" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="15127" end="15133" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q6307060" start="15344" end="15356" title="Julian Clary" label="Julian Clary"/>
<link wikidata="Q128758" start="15368" end="15377" title="satirised" label="satirised"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="15817" end="15827" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q327538" start="15881" end="15895" title="age of consent" label="age of consent"/>
<link wikidata="Q592" start="15900" end="15903" title="gay" label="gay"/>
<link wikidata="Q120826" start="16515" end="16538" title="House of Lords Act 1999" label="House of Lords Act 1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q808719" start="16556" end="16571" title="hereditary peer" label="hereditary peer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="16627" end="16641" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914468" start="16797" end="16806" title="life peer" label="life peer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482572" start="16987" end="16998" title="Lord Maenan" label="Lord Maenan"/>
<link wikidata="Q541191" start="17318" end="17336" title="Anglo-Irish Treaty" label="Anglo-Irish Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q173347" start="17551" end="17566" title="Éamon de Valera" label="Éamon de Valera"/>
<link wikidata="Q64020621" start="17699" end="17721" title="Thomas P. O&amp;#x27;Neill (historian)" label="Thomas P. O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548836" start="17761" end="17770" title="Hugh Lane" label="Hugh Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q530870" start="17959" end="17975" title="Elizabeth Pakenham, Countess of Longford" label="Elizabeth Harman"/>
<link wikidata="Q951946" start="17997" end="18015" title="Lady Margaret Hall" label="Lady Margaret Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q131691" start="18211" end="18229" title="Duke of Wellington" label="Duke of Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239188" start="18336" end="18346" title="Cheltenham (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Cheltenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q918378" start="18354" end="18375" title="1935 United Kingdom general election" label="1935 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115222" start="18384" end="18390" title="Oxford (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q748667" start="18394" end="18398" title="1950 United Kingdom general election" label="1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q13108106" start="18534" end="18538" title="Courtesy titles in the United Kingdom" label="Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q242796" start="18539" end="18573" title="Antonia Fraser" label="Antonia Margaret Caroline Pakenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5930848" start="18627" end="18638" title="Hugh Fraser (British politician)" label="Hugh Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q41042" start="18684" end="18697" title="Harold Pinter" label="Harold Pinter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426431" start="18717" end="18767" title="Thomas Pakenham (historian)" label="Thomas Frank Dermot Pakenham, 8th Earl of Longford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746176" start="18792" end="18795" title="The Honourable" label="Hon"/>
<link wikidata="Q15442336" start="18853" end="18883" title="Judith Kazantzis" label="Lady Judith Elizabeth Pakenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1556074" start="18923" end="18948" title="Rachel Billington" label="Lady Rachel Mary Pakenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6395839" start="18999" end="19015" title="Kevin Billington" label="Kevin Billington"/>
<link wikidata="Q6833339" start="19042" end="19064" title="Michael Pakenham" label="Michael Aidan Pakenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="19065" end="19068" title="Order of the British Empire" label="KBE"/>
<link wikidata="Q585087" start="19069" end="19072" title="Order of St Michael and St George" label="CMG"/>
<link wikidata="Q181754" start="19267" end="19280" title="heart failure" label="heart failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090151" start="19284" end="19316" title="Chelsea and Westminster Hospital" label="Chelsea and Westminster Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q6914776" start="19371" end="19391" title="Mortlake Crematorium" label="Mortlake Crematorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="19544" end="19554" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389971" start="19780" end="19801" title="The Longford Lectures" label="The Longford Lectures"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673837" start="19803" end="19821" title="The Longford Prize" label="The Longford Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259103" start="19876" end="19884" title="Longford (film)" label="Longford"/>
<link wikidata="Q16468" start="19959" end="19971" title="Myra Hindley" label="Myra Hindley"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="19993" end="20002" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q185079" start="20036" end="20049" title="Jim Broadbent" label="Jim Broadbent"/>
<link wikidata="Q230190" start="20051" end="20066" title="Samantha Morton" label="Samantha Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q16468" start="20070" end="20082" title="Myra Hindley" label="Myra Hindley"/>
<link wikidata="Q242504" start="20084" end="20098" title="Lindsay Duncan" label="Lindsay Duncan"/>
<link wikidata="Q530870" start="20102" end="20115" title="Lady Longford" label="Lady Longford"/>
<link wikidata="Q206922" start="20120" end="20131" title="Andy Serkis" label="Andy Serkis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16468" start="20135" end="20144" title="Ian Brady" label="Ian Brady"/>
<link wikidata="Q242796" start="20179" end="20194" title="Fraser, Antonia" label="Fraser, Antonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160945" start="20444" end="20452" title="BBC News" label="BBC News"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="140358" wikidata="Q530870" url="?curid=140358" title="Elizabeth Longford">
<text>Elizabeth Pakenham, Countess of Longford, (&quot;née&quot; Harman; 30 August 1906 – 23 October 2002), better known as Elizabeth Longford, was an English historian. She was a member of the Royal Society of Literature and was on the board of trustees of the National Portrait Gallery in London. She is best known as a historian, especially for her biographies of 19th-century figures including Queen Victoria (1964), Lord Byron (1976) and the Duke of Wellington (1969).

==Early life==
Elizabeth Harman was born on 30 August 1906 at 108 Harley Street in Marylebone, London. The daughter of eye specialist Nathaniel Bishop Harman, she was educated at Francis Holland School and Headington School, and was an undergraduate at Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford. &quot;Able, articulate and beautiful&quot;, in the words of &quot;The New York Times&quot;, she was &quot;the Zuleika Dobson of her day, with undergraduates and even dons tumbling over one another to fall in love with her&quot;. A few years after her graduation, on 3 November 1931, she married Frank Pakenham, later 7th Earl of Longford, who died in August 2001. Her obituary by the BBC said the marriage was &quot;famously harmonious&quot;. &quot;The New York Times&quot;, in its review of &quot;The Pebbled Shore&quot;, called Lady Longford &quot;easily the best writer in what is predominantly a literary family&quot;.

She and her husband were both devout Roman Catholic converts, Lady Longford having been raised a Unitarian, and avid social reformers. The Longfords had eight children:

# Lady Antonia Margaret Caroline Pakenham (27 August 1932)
# Thomas Francis Dermot Pakenham, 8th Earl of Longford (14 August 1933)
# The Honourable Patrick Maurice Pakenham (17 April 1937 – 8 June 2005)
# Lady Judith Elizabeth Pakenham (14 August 1940 – 18 September 2018)
# Lady Rachel Mary Pakenham (11 May 1942)
# The Honourable Michael Aidan Pakenham (3 November 1943)
# Lady Catherine Rose Pakenham (28 February 1946 – 11 August 1969)
# The Honourable John Toussaint Pakenham (1 November 1947)
Daughters Lady Antonia Fraser, Lady Rachel Billington, Judith Kazantzis are all writers, and Thomas Pakenham succeeded his father as Earl of Longford. Her brother, John B. Harman, was a physician; his daughter is Labour politician Harriet Harman. Lady Longford was a great-niece of the politician Joseph Chamberlain and a first cousin once removed of the British prime minister Neville Chamberlain.

==Political career==
She made several unsuccessful attempts to win election to the House of Commons as a Labour MP. In 1935 she contested Cheltenham, which was a safely Conservative seat, and in 1950 she was defeated by Quintin Hogg at Oxford. Through the war she had sought selection at Birmingham King&#x27;s Norton until she felt compelled to cease her candidacy upon her sixth pregnancy in 1944; the seat was a Labour gain in 1945 by 12,000 votes.

== Death ==
Longford died on 23 October 2002, aged 96, at Bernhurst in Hurst Green, East Sussex.

==Publications==

* &quot;&quot; (1964) Awarded the James Tait Black Memorial Prize
* &quot;&quot; (1969) and &quot;&quot; (1972), a two-volume biography of the first Duke of Wellington, who numbered among her husband&#x27;s relatives
* &quot;&quot; (1974)
* &quot;&quot; (1974)
* &quot;Byron&quot; (1976)
* &quot;A Pilgrimage of Passion: The Life of Wilfrid Scawen Blunt&quot; (1979) (I.B. Tauris, re-issued 2007)
* &quot;&quot; (1982)
* &quot;Elizabeth R: A Biography&quot; (1983)
*

==References==

=== Citations ===
=== Bibliography ===

==External links==
*&quot;Lady Longford dies aged 96&quot;, BBC News, 2002
*Elizabeth Longford , obituary by &quot;The Times&quot; 
* &quot;Elizabeth Longford (Elizabeth, Countess of Longford)&quot;, Fellows Remembered, The Royal Society of Literature</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q530870" start="0" end="40" title="Elizabeth Longford" label="Elizabeth Pakenham, Countess of Longford"/>
<link wikidata="Q530870" start="59" end="65" title="Elizabeth Longford" label="Harman"/>
<link wikidata="Q530870" start="118" end="136" title="Elizabeth Longford" label="Elizabeth Longford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468277" start="188" end="215" title="Royal Society of Literature" label="Royal Society of Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q238587" start="256" end="281" title="National Portrait Gallery, London" label="National Portrait Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="392" end="406" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5679" start="415" end="425" title="Lord Byron" label="Lord Byron"/>
<link wikidata="Q131691" start="441" end="459" title="Duke of Wellington" label="Duke of Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q773458" start="535" end="548" title="Harley Street" label="Harley Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q123634" start="552" end="562" title="Marylebone" label="Marylebone"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="564" end="570" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q5481304" start="648" end="670" title="Francis Holland School" label="Francis Holland School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689654" start="675" end="692" title="Headington School" label="Headington School"/>
<link wikidata="Q951946" start="722" end="748" title="Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford" label="Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q8075113" start="860" end="874" title="Zuleika Dobson" label="Zuleika Dobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295962" start="1045" end="1059" title="Frank Pakenham, 7th Earl of Longford" label="Frank Pakenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277341" start="1071" end="1087" title="Earl of Longford" label="Earl of Longford"/>
<link wikidata="Q106687" start="1471" end="1480" title="Unitarianism" label="Unitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q242796" start="1546" end="1585" title="Antonia Fraser" label="Lady Antonia Margaret Caroline Pakenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426431" start="1605" end="1657" title="Thomas Pakenham, 8th Earl of Longford" label="Thomas Francis Dermot Pakenham, 8th Earl of Longford"/>
<link wikidata="Q15442336" start="1749" end="1779" title="Judith Kazantzis" label="Lady Judith Elizabeth Pakenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1556074" start="1819" end="1844" title="Lady Rachel Billington" label="Lady Rachel Mary Pakenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q242796" start="2053" end="2072" title="Lady Antonia Fraser" label="Lady Antonia Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1556074" start="2074" end="2096" title="Lady Rachel Billington" label="Lady Rachel Billington"/>
<link wikidata="Q15442336" start="2098" end="2114" title="Judith Kazantzis" label="Judith Kazantzis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426431" start="2136" end="2151" title="Thomas Pakenham (historian)" label="Thomas Pakenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6219976" start="2207" end="2221" title="John B. Harman" label="John B. Harman"/>
<link wikidata="Q234182" start="2274" end="2288" title="Harriet Harman" label="Harriet Harman"/>
<link wikidata="Q315999" start="2340" end="2358" title="Joseph Chamberlain" label="Joseph Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q10664" start="2421" end="2440" title="Neville Chamberlain" label="Neville Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="2526" end="2542" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="2548" end="2554" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q918378" start="2562" end="2566" title="1935 United Kingdom general election" label="1935"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239188" start="2581" end="2591" title="Cheltenham (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Cheltenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="2612" end="2624" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q748667" start="2638" end="2642" title="1950 United Kingdom general election" label="1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q175366" start="2663" end="2675" title="Quintin Hogg, Baron Hailsham of St Marylebone" label="Quintin Hogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115222" start="2679" end="2685" title="Oxford (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916736" start="2731" end="2760" title="Birmingham King&amp;#x27;s Norton (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Birmingham King&amp;#x27;s Norton"/>
<link wikidata="Q918397" start="2873" end="2877" title="1945 United Kingdom general election" label="1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792899" start="2967" end="2991" title="Hurst Green, East Sussex" label="Hurst Green, East Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q392586" start="3046" end="3077" title="James Tait Black Memorial Prize" label="James Tait Black Memorial Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q131691" start="3155" end="3179" title="Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington" label="first Duke of Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q706891" start="3345" end="3365" title="Wilfrid Scawen Blunt" label="Wilfrid Scawen Blunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3146461" start="3380" end="3391" title="I.B. Tauris" label="I.B. Tauris"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="3651" end="3660" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468277" start="3756" end="3787" title="The Royal Society of Literature" label="The Royal Society of Literature"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="140359" wikidata="Q3402409" url="?curid=140359" title="John Edward Lloyd">
<text>Sir John Edward Lloyd (5 May 1861 – 20 June 1947) was born in Liverpool. He was educated in the University College of Wales, Aberystwyth (which later become the University of Wales, Aberystwyth), which he left in 1881, and Lincoln College, Oxford, from which he graduated in 1883 with a first class honours degree. Upon leaving Oxford in 1883, he obtained an academic position in his &quot;alma mater&quot; in Aberystwyth teaching history. In 1891 he applied for the post of College Principal. However, his application was unsuccessful, which prompted him to look for an academic post elsewhere, which he obtained shortly afterwards in Bangor University. 

Lloyd married Clementina (Tina) Miller within a year of arriving in Bangor, and they had two children, Edmund and Eluned. He was knighted in 1934.
==Career==
Lloyd became a much-published and famous Welsh historian. He wrote the first serious history of the country&#x27;s formative years, &quot;A History of Wales from the Earliest Times to the Edwardian Conquest&quot; (1911) and &quot;Owen Glendower/Owain Glyn Dŵr&quot; (1931). And he was the first editor of &#x27;Y Bywgraffiadur Cymreig&#x27;, which was published posthumously in 1953. Its English counterpart, the &quot;Dictionary of Welsh Biography&quot;, was published in 1959 with Robert Thomas Jenkins as its sole editor. 

==Publications==

The following publications are a selection of Lloyd&#x27;s published output. See Garmon (1948) below and for additional publications.

===Articles===
*

===Books===
*
*
*

===Editorships===
*(With Hubert Lewis) 
*
*(With R.T. Jenkins) 

==References==
==Further reading==
===Articles===
* 
===Books===
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3402409" start="0" end="21" title="John Edward Lloyd" label="Sir John Edward Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="62" end="71" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q319761" start="161" end="193" title="University of Wales, Aberystwyth" label="University of Wales, Aberystwyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q81153" start="223" end="246" title="Lincoln College, Oxford" label="Lincoln College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q790029" start="636" end="653" title="Bangor University" label="Bangor University"/>
<link wikidata="Q131358528" start="771" end="777" title="Eluned Garmon Jones" label="Eluned"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="856" end="861" title="Wales" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q201788" start="862" end="871" title="historian" label="historian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5273977" start="1234" end="1263" title="Dictionary of Welsh Biography" label="Dictionary of Welsh Biography"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350348" start="1298" end="1319" title="Robert Thomas Jenkins" label="Robert Thomas Jenkins"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="140360" wikidata="Q559552" url="?curid=140360" title="Mecklenburg-Strelitz (district)">
<text>Mecklenburg-Strelitz was a &quot;Kreis&quot; (district) in the southern part of Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, Germany. Neighboring districts were (from the north clockwise) Demmin, Ostvorpommern Uecker-Randow, the districts Uckermark, Oberhavel and Ostprignitz-Ruppin in Brandenburg, and the district Müritz. The district-free city Neubrandenburg was nearly surrounded by the district.

==History==
The name of this district traces back to the duchy of Mecklenburg-Strelitz. This duchy was established in 1701 after the former duchy of Mecklenburg-Güstrow ceased to exist. The area of the district is roughly identical with the old duchy&#x27;s main territory, the Stargarder Land. The old duchy included an exclave around Ratzeburg, which is today situated in Schleswig-Holstein. Southern parts of the older Mecklenburg-Strelitz, including the town of Fürstenberg, today belong to Brandenburg&#x27;s Oberhavel district. The capital of the duchy was the town of Strelitz, which was completely destroyed in a fire in 1712. After this disaster the duke ordered a new town built at the shore of a small lake called the Zierker See. This town became Neustrelitz (= &quot;New Strelitz&quot;).

Mecklenburg-Strelitz District was established by merging the three previous districts of Neubrandenburg, Neustrelitz and Strasburg in 1994. On 4 September 2011, it was merged into Mecklenburgische Seenplatte.

==Coat of arms==
==Towns and municipalities==
The subdivisions of the district were (situation August 2011): 

==References==
==External links==

*Official website (German)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q559552" start="0" end="20" title="Mecklenburg-Strelitz (district)" label="Mecklenburg-Strelitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196" start="80" end="109" title="Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania" label="Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="111" end="118" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q559530" start="174" end="180" title="Demmin (district)" label="Demmin"/>
<link wikidata="Q559583" start="182" end="195" title="Ostvorpommern" label="Ostvorpommern"/>
<link wikidata="Q559492" start="196" end="209" title="Uecker-Randow" label="Uecker-Randow"/>
<link wikidata="Q338635" start="225" end="234" title="Uckermark" label="Uckermark"/>
<link wikidata="Q6119" start="236" end="245" title="Oberhavel" label="Oberhavel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6125" start="250" end="268" title="Ostprignitz-Ruppin" label="Ostprignitz-Ruppin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208" start="272" end="283" title="Brandenburg" label="Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q164955" start="302" end="308" title="Müritz (district)" label="Müritz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3958" start="333" end="347" title="Neubrandenburg" label="Neubrandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751106" start="445" end="474" title="duchy of Mecklenburg-Strelitz" label="duchy of Mecklenburg-Strelitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q552822" start="537" end="556" title="Mecklenburg-Güstrow" label="Mecklenburg-Güstrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q45880" start="666" end="681" title="Stargarder Land" label="Stargarder Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q490025" start="724" end="733" title="Ratzeburg" label="Ratzeburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194" start="762" end="780" title="Schleswig-Holstein" label="Schleswig-Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q311539" start="854" end="865" title="Fürstenberg/Havel" label="Fürstenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208" start="883" end="894" title="Brandenburg" label="Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6119" start="902" end="911" title="Oberhavel" label="Oberhavel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902" start="1370" end="1397" title="Mecklenburgische Seenplatte (district)" label="Mecklenburgische Seenplatte"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="140362" wikidata="Q178167" url="?curid=140362" title="Mount Kosciuszko">
<text>Mount Kosciuszko ( ; ( ) Ngarigo: ) is mainland Australia&#x27;s highest mountain, at above sea level. It is located on the Main Range of the Snowy Mountains in Kosciuszko National Park, part of the Australian Alps National Parks and Reserves, in New South Wales, Australia, and is located west of Crackenback and close to Jindabyne, near the border with Victoria. Mount Kosciuszko is ranked 35th by topographic isolation.

==Etymology and charting==
The mountain was named by the Polish explorer Paweł (Paul) Edmund Strzelecki in 1840, in honour of Polish freedom fighter General Tadeusz Kościuszko, because of its perceived resemblance to the Kościuszko Mound in Kraków, Poland.

An exploration party led by Strzelecki and James Macarthur beside him with Indigenous guides Charlie Tarra and Jackey set off on what is called Strzelecki’s Southern expedition. Macarthur was seeking new pastures. Strzelecki wanted to investigate the climate, geology, paleontology and geography of NSW and to publish his findings. This included identifying Australia’s highest summit, which Strzelecki reached on 12 March 1840.
The approach was made from Geehi Valley. After climbing Hannel’s Spur, the peak now named Mount Townsend was reached. Here Strzelecki used his instruments to make observations. Mt Townsend is Australia&#x27;s second highest mountain, adjacent to and almost the same height as Mt Kosciuszko, and Strzelecki saw that the neighbouring peak was slightly higher. In the presence of Macarthur he named the higher summit Mount Kosciusko after the famous Polish-Lithuanian military leader who died in 1817. As it was late, Macarthur decided to return to camp and Strzelecki alone climbed the Kosciuszko summit.

Based on Strzelecki’s records, Australia’s highest summit was mapped. A cartographical mistake made in an edition of Victorian maps transposed Mount Kosciusko to the position of the present Mount Townsend. Later editions of the map continued to show the original location. NSW maps did not make this mistake.

The Victorian error created confusion. In 1885, Austrian explorer Robert von Lendenfeld, guided by James M. Spencer, a local pastoralist, aided by a map containing the transposition error, reached Mount Townsend believing it was Mount Kosciusko. According to Spencer, the local Aboriginals called Mount Kosciusko &quot;Tar-gan-gil&quot;. Like Strzelecki, Lendenfeld also observed that the neighbouring peak was higher. He named it Mount Townsend to honour the surveyor who in 1846 traversed the peak.

Lendenfeld claimed he had identified and reached the highest peak of the continent. The NSW Department of Mines discovered Lendenfeld&#x27;s mistake and assigned the name Mount Townsend to the second-highest mountain of the range. Lendenfeld&#x27;s announcement created further confusion. When Lendenfeld&#x27;s mistake was corrected, a popular legend was created that the established names of the two mountains were swapped rather than re-educate the populace of the name of the highest mountain.

The confusion was straightened out in 1940 by B. T. Dowd, a cartographer and historian of the NSW Lands Department. His study reaffirmed that the mountain named by Strzelecki as Mount Kosciuszko was indeed, as the NSW maps had always shown, Australia’s highest summit. When Macarthur’s field book of the historical journey was published in 1941 by C. Daley, it further confirmed Dowd’s clarification. This means that Targangil, mentioned in Spencer’s 1885 article, was the indigenous name of Mount Townsend, not of Mount Kosciusko. According to A. E. J. Andrews, Mount Kosciuszko had no indigenous name. Detailed analysis of the mountain history can be found in books by H. P. G. Clews and in the cited A.E.J. Andrews&#x27; book &quot;Kosciusko: The Mountain in History&quot;.

The name of the mountain was previously spelled &quot;Mount Kosciusko&quot;, an Anglicisation, but the spelling &quot;Mount Kosciuszko&quot; was officially adopted in 1997 by the Geographical Names Board of New South Wales. The traditional English pronunciation of Kosciuszko is , but the pronunciation is now sometimes used, which is substantially closer to the Polish pronunciation .

===Aboriginal names===
There are several native Aboriginal (Ngarigo) names associated with Mount Townsend, where J. Macarthur recorded in 1840 some campings of the natives. There is some confusion as to the exact sounds. These are &quot;Jagungal, Jar-gan-gil, Tar-gan-gil, Tackingal&quot;; however, all of them mean Bogong Moth, which aestivate on the mountain.

In 2019, &quot;Kunama Namadgi&quot; was submitted to the Geographical Names Board of New South Wales as a proposed dual name for Mount Kosciuszko. The proposal was submitted by the Toomaroombah Kunama Namadgi Indigenous Corporation, which states that the proposed name means &quot;snow&quot; and &quot;mountain&quot;. According to Uncle John Casey, the mountain&#x27;s Ngarigo name has &quot;been Kunama Namadgi for 4,000 years, since we&#x27;ve been on country, until the white man came in the early 1800s and that&#x27;s when they changed it&quot;. However, Iris White, the chairperson of the Southern Kosciuszko Executive Advisory Committee, disputed that account, stating &quot;that name is not from our language. It&#x27;s offensive because in some of our languages &#x27;Kunama&#x27; actually means faeces&quot;. White said that a new name should not be given &quot;just for the sake of it sounding Aboriginal or sounding good&quot;.

==Geography==
The mountain was formed by geologic uplift. It was not formed by any recent volcanic activity. Eroded granite intrusions remain at the summit as large boulders above the more heavily eroded sedimentary rocks.

Plant species found in the mountain include:

*Kosciuszko buttercup (&quot;Ranunculus anemoneus&quot;)
*Vickery&#x27;s grass (&quot;Rytidosperma vickeryae&quot;)
*Phebalium (&quot;Nematalolepis ovatifolia&quot;)
*Billy buttons (&quot;Craspedia&quot; spp.)
*Snow gum

==Reaching the summit==
Mount Kosciuszko is the highest summit in mainland Australia. Until 1977 it was possible to drive from Charlotte Pass to within a few metres of the summit, but in 1977 the road was closed to public motor vehicle access due to environmental concerns. The road is open from Charlotte Pass for walkers and cyclists for to Rawson Pass, at an elevation of above sea level. From there a walking path leads to the summit.

The peak may also be approached from Thredbo, taking 3 to 3.5 hours for a round trip. This straightforward walk starts from the top of the Thredbo Kosciuszko Express chairlift, which operates all year-round. The walking path is popular in summer, and is a mesh walkway to protect the native vegetation and prevent erosion. It is to Rawson Pass, where it meets the track from Charlotte Pass, and from where it is a further to the summit.
The walk to the summit is the easiest of all the Seven Summits.

Australia&#x27;s highest public toilet was built at Rawson pass in 2007, to cope with the more than 100,000 people visiting the mountain each summer.

The third and often overlooked route up Mount Kosciuszko is up the very challenging and historic Hannel&#x27;s Spur Track (), which approaches from the NW and is the only route to pass through the Western Fall Wilderness Zone – passing through four different bio-diversity bands along the ascent. The Hannel&#x27;s Spur Track is officially Australia&#x27;s biggest vertical ascent of . This is the same route that explorer Paul Strzelecki climbed and discovered Kosciuszko in 1840 and also the same annual route that the stockmen once brought the cattle up/down from the valley almost below to graze in the alpine meadows of Kosi throughout the summer. The various aboriginal tribes from the Murray valley also used this same route annually for millennia to access Kosciuszko to harvest the delicacies of Bogong moths that were abundant throughout the summer months and to socialise with other tribes from the coast and northern plains. The Hannel&#x27;s Spur Track trailhead (sign) is about a hike SSE of the Geehi Rest Area on the Alpine Way road between the towns of Thredbo and Khancoban.

The peak and the surrounding areas are snow-covered in winter and spring (usually beginning in June and continuing until October or later). The road from Charlotte Pass is marked by snow poles and provides a guide for cross-country skiers, and the track from Thredbo is easily followed until covered by snow in winter.



=== Recreation ===

Kosciuszko National Park is also the location of the downhill ski slopes closest to Canberra and Sydney, containing the Thredbo, Charlotte Pass, and Perisher ski resorts. Mount Kosciuszko may have been ascended by Indigenous Australians long before the first recorded ascent by Europeans.

Each year in December, an ultramarathon running race called the Coast to Kosciuszko ascends to the top of Mount Kosciuszko after starting at the coast away.

==Higher Australian mountains==
Higher peaks exist within territory administered or claimed by Australia: outside the continent are Mawson Peak () on Heard Island and Dome Argus (), Mount McClintock () and Mount Menzies () in the Australian Antarctic Territory.

Although not in Australia, Puncak Jaya in New Guinea, Indonesia, which stands at , is the highest mountain in the Australian continent as well as Oceania.

==In popular culture==
The 1863 picture by Eugene von Guerard hanging in the National Gallery of Australia titled &quot;Northeast view from the northern top of Mount Kosciusko&quot; is actually from Mount Townsend.

In the well known poem by Banjo Paterson, The Man From Snowy River is said to hail from “up by Kosciusko’s side”.

Australian rock band Midnight Oil recorded a song called &quot;Kosciusko&quot; on its 1984 album &quot;Red Sails in the Sunset&quot;, referring to the mountain. The spelling was updated to &quot;Kosciuszko&quot; for the group&#x27;s 1997 compilation album, &quot;20,000 Watt R.S.L.&quot;

A species of lizard, &quot;Eulamprus kosciuskoi&quot;, is named after Mount Kosciuszko.

The mountain top was the finish line on the fifth season of &quot;The Amazing Race Australia&quot;.

==Gallery==
==See also==

* Australian Alps
* Australian Alps National Parks and Reserves
*List of mountains of Australia

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==

* Mt Kosciuszko Inc. — page for information about explorer P. E. Strzelecki – and news about Mount Kosciuszko 
* — photo</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q178167" start="0" end="16" title="Mount Kosciuszko" label="Mount Kosciuszko"/>
<link wikidata="Q7022072" start="25" end="32" title="Ngarigo language" label="Ngarigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3960" start="48" end="64" title="Australia (continent)" label="Australia&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q8502" start="73" end="81" title="mountain" label="mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6736046" start="124" end="134" title="Main Range (Snowy Mountains)" label="Main Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q1577859" start="142" end="157" title="Snowy Mountains" label="Snowy Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755161" start="161" end="185" title="Kosciuszko National Park" label="Kosciuszko National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q16826297" start="199" end="242" title="Australian Alps National Parks and Reserves" label="Australian Alps National Parks and Reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="247" end="262" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="264" end="273" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020373" start="323" end="332" title="Jindabyne" label="Jindabyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q36687" start="355" end="363" title="Victoria, Australia" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237459" start="400" end="421" title="topographic isolation" label="topographic isolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="481" end="487" title="Poland" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q708284" start="497" end="527" title="Paweł Strzelecki" label="Paweł (Paul) Edmund Strzelecki"/>
<link wikidata="Q191479" start="581" end="599" title="Tadeusz Kościuszko" label="Tadeusz Kościuszko"/>
<link wikidata="Q641398" start="645" end="661" title="Kościuszko Mound" label="Kościuszko Mound"/>
<link wikidata="Q31487" start="665" end="671" title="Kraków" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q6138667" start="725" end="740" title="James Macarthur (politician)" label="James Macarthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937" start="933" end="940" title="climate" label="climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069" start="942" end="949" title="geology" label="geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="951" end="963" title="paleontology" label="paleontology"/>
<link wikidata="Q542041" start="1201" end="1215" title="Mount Townsend (Snowy Mountains)" label="Mount Townsend"/>
<link wikidata="Q2158029" start="2091" end="2112" title="Robert J. Lendlmayer von Lendenfeld" label="Robert von Lendenfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535075" start="3983" end="4026" title="Geographical Names Board of New South Wales" label="Geographical Names Board of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q7022072" start="4251" end="4258" title="Ngarigo language" label="Ngarigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q285592" start="4507" end="4518" title="Bogong Moth" label="Bogong Moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q822123" start="4526" end="4535" title="aestivate" label="aestivate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535075" start="4611" end="4654" title="Geographical Names Board of New South Wales" label="Geographical Names Board of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310220" start="4669" end="4678" title="Dual naming" label="dual name"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339282" start="4923" end="4930" title="Ngarigo" label="Ngarigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q184554" start="5536" end="5551" title="Orogeny" label="geologic uplift"/>
<link wikidata="Q17832246" start="5794" end="5814" title="Ranunculus anemoneus" label="Ranunculus anemoneus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142972" start="5851" end="5863" title="Rytidosperma" label="Rytidosperma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707886" start="5882" end="5891" title="Phebalium" label="Phebalium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182455" start="5947" end="5968" title="Craspedia (plant)" label="&amp;quot;Craspedia&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165298" start="5976" end="5984" title="Snow gum" label="Snow gum"/>
<link wikidata="Q681050" start="6034" end="6041" title="Extremes on Earth" label="highest"/>
<link wikidata="Q988298" start="6113" end="6127" title="Charlotte Pass, New South Wales" label="Charlotte Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013176" start="6463" end="6470" title="Thredbo, New South Wales" label="Thredbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q850767" start="6592" end="6601" title="chairlift" label="chairlift"/>
<link wikidata="Q208126" start="6912" end="6925" title="Seven Summits" label="Seven Summits"/>
<link wikidata="Q813966" start="6953" end="6966" title="public toilet" label="public toilet"/>
<link wikidata="Q18544844" start="8391" end="8411" title="Cross-country skiing" label="cross-country skiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114" start="8599" end="8607" title="Canberra" label="Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="8612" end="8618" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013176" start="8635" end="8642" title="Thredbo, New South Wales" label="Thredbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q988298" start="8644" end="8658" title="Charlotte Pass, New South Wales" label="Charlotte Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1629394" start="8664" end="8672" title="Perisher Ski Resort" label="Perisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q170355" start="8729" end="8751" title="Indigenous Australians" label="Indigenous Australians"/>
<link wikidata="Q26303" start="8831" end="8844" title="ultramarathon" label="ultramarathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138236" start="8869" end="8888" title="Coast to Kosciuszko" label="Coast to Kosciuszko"/>
<link wikidata="Q2114101" start="9095" end="9106" title="Mawson Peak" label="Mawson Peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q131198" start="9113" end="9125" title="Heard Island and McDonald Islands" label="Heard Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q593197" start="9130" end="9136" title="Dome A" label="Dome A"/>
<link wikidata="Q7133081" start="9145" end="9161" title="Mount McClintock" label="Mount McClintock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964883" start="9169" end="9182" title="Mount Menzies" label="Mount Menzies"/>
<link wikidata="Q178994" start="9193" end="9223" title="Australian Antarctic Territory" label="Australian Antarctic Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045888" start="9253" end="9264" title="Puncak Jaya" label="Puncak Jaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q40285" start="9268" end="9278" title="New Guinea" label="New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="9280" end="9289" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3960" start="9340" end="9360" title="Australia (continent)" label="Australian continent"/>
<link wikidata="Q55643" start="9372" end="9379" title="Oceania" label="Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q507521" start="9425" end="9443" title="Eugene von Guerard" label="Eugene von Guerard"/>
<link wikidata="Q795228" start="9459" end="9488" title="National Gallery of Australia" label="National Gallery of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q542041" start="9581" end="9595" title="Mount Townsend (Snowy Mountains)" label="Mount Townsend"/>
<link wikidata="Q436699" start="9624" end="9638" title="Banjo Paterson" label="Banjo Paterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16386865" start="9640" end="9664" title="The Man from Snowy River (poem)" label="The Man From Snowy River"/>
<link wikidata="Q48284" start="9734" end="9746" title="Midnight Oil" label="Midnight Oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q950825" start="9816" end="9839" title="Red Sails in the Sunset (album)" label="Red Sails in the Sunset"/>
<link wikidata="Q222910" start="9951" end="9968" title="compilation album" label="compilation album"/>
<link wikidata="Q4597077" start="9976" end="9994" title="20,000 Watt R.S.L." label="20,000 Watt R.S.L."/>
<link wikidata="Q751866" start="10029" end="10049" title="Eulamprus" label="Eulamprus kosciuskoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q96419482" start="10135" end="10147" title="The Amazing Race Australia 5" label="fifth season"/>
<link wikidata="Q17049209" start="10157" end="10183" title="The Amazing Race Australia" label="The Amazing Race Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q390226" start="10220" end="10235" title="Australian Alps" label="Australian Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q16826297" start="10238" end="10281" title="Australian Alps National Parks and Reserves" label="Australian Alps National Parks and Reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435810" start="10283" end="10313" title="List of mountains in Australia" label="List of mountains of Australia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="140367" wikidata="Q191479" url="?curid=140367" title="Tadeusz Kościuszko">
<text>Andrzej Tadeusz Bonawentura Kościuszko (; 4 or 12 February 174615 October 1817) was a Polish military engineer, statesman, and military leader who then became a national hero in Poland, the United States, Lithuania, and Belarus. He fought in the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth&#x27;s struggles against Russia and Prussia, and on the U.S. side in the American Revolutionary War. As Supreme Commander of the Polish National Armed Forces, he led the 1794 Kościuszko Uprising.

Kościuszko was born in February 1746, in a manor house on the Mereczowszczyzna estate in Brest Litovsk Voivodeship, then Grand Duchy of Lithuania, a part of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth, now the Ivatsevichy District of Belarus. At age 20, he graduated from the Corps of Cadets in Warsaw, Poland. After the start of the civil war in 1768, Kościuszko moved to France in 1769 to study. He returned to the Commonwealth in 1774, two years after the First Partition, and was a tutor in Józef Sylwester Sosnowski&#x27;s household. In 1776, Kościuszko moved to North America, where he took part in the American Revolutionary War as a colonel in the Continental Army. An accomplished military architect, he designed and oversaw the construction of state-of-the-art fortifications, including those at West Point, New York. In 1783, in recognition of his services, the Continental Congress promoted him to brigadier general.

Upon returning to Poland in 1784, Kościuszko was commissioned as a major general in the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth Army in 1789. After the Polish–Russian War of 1792 resulted in the Commonwealth&#x27;s Second Partition, he commanded an uprising against the Russian Empire in March 1794 until he was captured at the Battle of Maciejowice in October 1794. The defeat of the Kościuszko Uprising that November led to Poland&#x27;s Third Partition in 1795, which ended the Commonwealth. In 1796, following the death of Tsaritsa Catherine II, Kościuszko was pardoned by her successor, Tsar Paul I, and he emigrated to the United States. A close friend of Thomas Jefferson, with whom he shared ideals of human rights, Kościuszko wrote a will in 1798, dedicating his U.S. assets to the education and freedom of the U.S. slaves. Kościuszko eventually returned to Europe and lived in Switzerland until his death in 1817. The execution of his testament later proved difficult, and the funds were never used for the purpose he intended.

==Early life==
Kościuszko was born in February 1746 in a manor house on the Mereczowszczyzna estate near Kosów in Nowogródek Voivodeship, Grand Duchy of Lithuania, a part of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth. His exact birthdate is unknown; commonly cited are 4 February and 12 February.

Kościuszko was the youngest son of a member of the &quot;szlachta&quot; (untitled Polish nobility), Ludwik Tadeusz Kościuszko, an officer in the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth Army, and his wife Tekla Ratomska. The family held the Polish &quot;Roch III coat of arms&quot;. At the time of Tadeusz Kościuszko&#x27;s birth, the family possessed modest landholdings in the Grand Duchy worked by 31 peasant families.

Tadeusz was baptized in the Catholic church, thereby receiving the names &quot;Andrzej&quot;, &quot;Tadeusz&quot;, and &quot;Bonawentura&quot;. His paternal family was originally Ruthenian and traced their ancestry to Konstanty Fiodorowicz Kostiuszko, a courtier of Polish King and Grand Duke of Lithuania Sigismund I the Old. Kościuszko&#x27;s maternal family, the Ratomskis, were also Ruthenian.
His family had become Polonized as early as the 16th century. Like most Polish–Lithuanian nobility of the time, the Kościuszkos spoke Polish and identified with Polish culture. Kościuszko also, as was common for Polish nobility in the region, clearly stressed his attachment to the multiethnic Identity of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania in later letters. For example, in 1790 Kościuszko wrote &quot;If this does not soften you and you do not raise my case in the Sejm so that I can return, I myself will probably, God sees, do something bad to myself, as I am angry because being from Lithuania I serve the Kingdom [of Poland] when you do not have three generals&quot;, while during the Uprising of 1794 Kościuszko wrote &quot;Lithuania! My countrymen and tribesmen! I was born in your land, sincere love for my homeland evokes in me a special favor for those among whom I began my life&quot;.

In 1755, Kościuszko began attending school in Lubieszów but never finished due to his family&#x27;s financial straits after his father&#x27;s death in 1758. King Stanisław August Poniatowski established a Corps of Cadets (&quot;Korpus Kadetów&quot;) in 1765, at what is now Warsaw University, to educate military officers and government officials. Kościuszko enrolled in the Corps on 18 December 1765, likely thanks to the Czartoryski family&#x27;s patronage. The school emphasized military subjects and the liberal arts, and after graduating on 20 December 1766, Kościuszko was promoted to &quot;chorąży&quot;, a military rank roughly equivalent to modern lieutenant. He stayed on as a student instructor and, by 1768, had attained the rank of captain.

===European travels===
In 1768, civil war broke out in the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth, when the Bar Confederation sought to depose King Stanisław August Poniatowski. One of Kościuszko&#x27;s brothers, Józef, fought on the side of the insurgents. Faced with a difficult choice between the rebels and his sponsors—the King and the Czartoryski family, who favored a gradualist approach to shedding Russian domination—Kościuszko chose to leave Poland. In late 1769, he and a colleague, artist Aleksander Orłowski, were granted royal scholarships; on 5 October, they embarked for Paris. They wanted to further their military education. As foreigners, they were barred from enrolling in French military academies, and so they enrolled in the Royal Academy of Painting and Sculpture. There Kościuszko pursued his interest in drawing and painting and took private lessons in architecture from architect Jean-Rodolphe Perronet.

Kościuszko did not give up on improving his military knowledge. He audited lectures for five years and frequented the libraries of the Paris military academies. His exposure to the French Enlightenment, along with the religious tolerance practised in the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth, strongly influenced his later career. The French economic theory of physiocracy made a particularly strong impression on his thinking. He also developed his artistic skills, and while his career took him in a different direction, all his life he continued drawing and painting.

In the First Partition of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth in 1772, Russia, Prussia, and Austria annexed large swaths of Commonwealth territory and gained influence over the internal politics. When Kościuszko returned home in 1774, he found that his brother Józef had squandered most of the family fortune, and there was no place for him in the Army, as he could not afford to buy an officer&#x27;s commission. He took a position as tutor to the family of the magnate, province governor (voivode) and hetman Józef Sylwester Sosnowski and fell in love with the governor&#x27;s daughter Ludwika. Their elopement was thwarted by her father&#x27;s retainers. Kościuszko received a thrashing at their hands, an event that may have led to his antipathy for class distinctions.

In the autumn of 1775 he emigrated to avoid Sosnowski and his retainers. In late 1775 he attempted to join the Saxon army but was turned down and decided to return to Paris. There he learned of the American Revolutionary War outbreak, in which the British colonies in North America had revolted against the British Crown and begun their struggle for independence. The first American successes were well-publicized in France, and the French people and government openly supported the revolutionaries&#x27; cause.

==American Revolutionary War==
On learning of the American Revolution, Kościuszko, a man of revolutionary aspirations, sympathetic to the American cause and an advocate of human rights, sailed for the Americas in June 1776 along with other foreign officers, likely with the help of a French supporter of the American revolutionaries, Pierre Beaumarchais. After finally arriving in Philadelphia (after a Caribbean shipwreck) he sought out Benjamin Franklin at his print shop; offering to take engineering subject exams (in lieu of any letters of recommendation), he received a high mark on a geometry exam and Franklin&#x27;s recommendation. On 30 August 1776, Kościuszko submitted an application to the Second Continental Congress at the Pennsylvania State House, and was assigned to the Continental Army the next day.

===Northern region===
Kościuszko&#x27;s first task was building fortifications at Fort Billingsport in Paulsboro, New Jersey, to protect the banks of the Delaware River and prevent a possible British advance up the river to Philadelphia. He initially served as a volunteer in the private employ of Benjamin Franklin, but on 18 October 1776, Congress commissioned him a colonel of engineers in the Continental Army.

In spring 1777, Kościuszko was attached to the Northern Army under Major General Horatio Gates, arriving at the Canada–U.S. border in May 1777. Subsequently, posted to Fort Ticonderoga, he reviewed the defences of what had been one of the most formidable fortresses in North America. His surveys prompted him to strongly recommend the construction of a battery on Sugar Loaf, a high point overlooking the fort. His prudent recommendation, in which his fellow engineers concurred, was turned down by the garrison commander, Brigadier General Arthur St. Clair.

This proved a tactical blunder: when a British army under Major General John Burgoyne arrived in July 1777, Burgoyne did exactly what Kościuszko had warned of, and had his engineers place artillery on the hill. With the British in complete control of the high ground, the Americans realized their situation was hopeless and abandoned the fortress with hardly a shot fired in the siege of Ticonderoga. The British advance force nipped hard on the heels of the outnumbered and exhausted Continentals as they fled south. Major General Philip Schuyler, desperate to put distance between his men and their pursuers, ordered Kościuszko to delay the enemy. Kościuszko designed an engineer&#x27;s solution: his men felled trees, dammed streams, and destroyed bridges and causeways. Encumbered by their huge supply train, the British began to bog down, giving the Americans the time needed to safely withdraw across the Hudson River.

Gates tapped Kościuszko to survey the country between the opposing armies, choose the most defensible position, and fortify it. Finding just such a spot near Saratoga, overlooking the Hudson at Bemis Heights, Kościuszko laid out a robust array of defences, nearly impregnable. His judgment and meticulous attention to detail frustrated the British attacks during the Battle of Saratoga, and Gates accepted the surrender of Burgoyne&#x27;s force there on 16 October 1777. The dwindling British army had been dealt a sound defeat, turning the tide to American advantage. Kościuszko&#x27;s work at Saratoga received great praise from Gates, who later told his friend, Dr. Benjamin Rush: &quot;The great tacticians of the campaign were hills and forests, which a young Polish engineer was skillful enough to select for my encampment.&quot;

At some point in 1777, Kościuszko composed a polonaise and scored it for the harpsichord. Named for him, and with lyrics by Rajnold Suchodolski, it later became popular with Polish patriots during the November 1830 Uprising. Around that time, Kościuszko was assigned an African American orderly, Agrippa Hull, whom he treated as an equal and a friend.

In March 1778, Kościuszko arrived at West Point, New York, and spent more than two years strengthening the fortifications and improving the stronghold&#x27;s defences. It was these defences that the American General Benedict Arnold subsequently attempted to surrender to the British when he defected. Soon after Kościuszko finished fortifying West Point, in August 1780, General George Washington granted Kościuszko&#x27;s request to transfer to combat duty with the Southern Army. Kościuszko&#x27;s West Point fortifications were widely praised as innovative for the time.

===Southern region===
After travelling south through rural Virginia in October 1780, Kościuszko proceeded to North Carolina to report to his former commander General Gates. Following Gates&#x27;s disastrous defeat at Camden on 16 August 1780, the Continental Congress selected Washington&#x27;s choice, Major General Nathanael Greene, to replace Gates as commander of the Southern Department. When Greene formally assumed command on 3 December 1780, he retained Kościuszko as his chief engineer. By then, he had been praised by both Gates and Greene.

During this campaign, Kościuszko was placed in command of building bateaux, siting the location for camps, scouting river crossings, fortifying positions, and developing intelligence contacts. Many of his contributions were instrumental in preventing the destruction of the Southern Army. This was especially so during the &quot;Race to the Dan&quot;, when British General Charles Cornwallis chased Greene across of rough backcountry in January and February 1781. Thanks largely to a combination of Greene&#x27;s tactics, Kościuszko&#x27;s bateaux, and accurate scouting of the rivers ahead of the main body, the Continentals safely crossed each river, including the Yadkin and the Dan. Cornwallis, having no boats, and finding no way to cross the swollen Dan, abandoned the chase and withdrew into North Carolina. The Continentals regrouped south of Halifax, Virginia, where Kościuszko had earlier, at Greene&#x27;s request, established a fortified depot.

During the Race to the Dan, Kościuszko had helped select the site where Greene eventually returned to fight Cornwallis at Guilford Courthouse. Though tactically defeated, the Americans all but destroyed Cornwallis&#x27;s army as an effective fighting force and gained a permanent strategic advantage in the South. Thus, when Greene began his reconquest of South Carolina in the spring of 1781, he summoned Kościuszko to rejoin the main body of the Southern Army. The combined forces of the Continentals and Southern militia gradually forced the British from the backcountry into the coastal ports during the latter half of 1781 and, on 25 April, Kościuszko participated in the Second Battle of Camden. At Ninety-Six, Kościuszko besieged the Star Fort from 22 May to 18 June. During the unsuccessful siege, he suffered his only wound in seven years of service, bayonetted in the buttocks during an assault by the fort&#x27;s defenders on the approach trench that he was constructing.

Kościuszko subsequently helped fortify the American bases in North Carolina, before taking part in several smaller operations in the final year of hostilities, harassing British foraging parties near Charleston, South Carolina. After the death of his friend, Colonel John Laurens, Kościuszko became engaged in these operations, taking over Laurens&#x27;s intelligence network in the area. He commanded two cavalry squadrons and an infantry unit, and his last known battlefield command of the war occurred at James Island, South Carolina, on 14 November 1782. In what has been described as the Continental Army&#x27;s final armed action of the war, he was nearly killed as his small force was routed. A month later, he was among the Continental troops that reoccupied Charleston following the city&#x27;s British evacuation. Kościuszko spent the rest of the war there, conducting a fireworks display on 23 April 1783, to celebrate the signing of the Treaty of Paris earlier that month.

===Leaving for home===
Having not been paid in his seven years of service, in late May 1783, Kościuszko decided to collect the salary owed to him. That year, he was asked by Congress to supervise the fireworks during the 4 July celebrations at Princeton, New Jersey. On 13 October 1783, Congress promoted him to brigadier general, but he still had not received his back pay. Many other officers and soldiers were in the same situation. While waiting for his pay, unable to finance a voyage back to Europe, Kościuszko, like several others, lived on money borrowed from the Polish–Jewish banker Haym Solomon. Eventually, he received a certificate for 12,280 dollars, at 6%, to be paid on 1 January 1784 (equivalent to ~$323,000, paid as installments ~$19,400 a month in 2022), and the right to of land, but only if he chose to settle in the United States. 

For the winter of 1783–84, his former commanding officer, General Greene, invited Kościuszko to stay at his mansion. He was inducted into the Society of the Cincinnati and into the American Philosophical Society in 1785. During the Revolution, Kościuszko carried an old Spanish sword at his side, which was inscribed with the words &quot;Do not draw me without reason; do not sheathe me without honour.&quot;

==Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth==
On 15 July 1784, Kościuszko set off for Poland, where he arrived on 26 August. Due to a conflict between his patrons, the Czartoryski family, and King Stanisław August Poniatowski, Kościuszko once again failed to get a commission in the Commonwealth Army. He settled in a small town called Siechnowicze. His brother Józef had lost most of the family&#x27;s lands through bad investments, but with the help of his sister Anna, Kościuszko secured part of the lands for himself. He decided to limit his male peasants&#x27; &quot;corvée&quot; (obligatory service to the lord of the manor) to two days a week and completely exempted the female peasants. His estate soon stopped being profitable, and he began going into debt. The situation was not helped by the failure of the money promised by the American government—interest on late payment for his seven years&#x27; military service—to materialize. Kościuszko struck up friendships with liberal activists; Hugo Kołłątaj offered him a position as lecturer at Kraków&#x27;s Jagiellonian University, which Kościuszko declined.

The Great Sejm of 1788–1792 introduced some reforms, including a planned build-up of the army to defend the Commonwealth&#x27;s borders. Kościuszko saw a chance to return to military service and spent some time in Warsaw, among those who engaged in the political debates outside the Great Sejm. He wrote a proposal to create a militia force, on the American model. As political pressure grew to build up the army, and Kościuszko&#x27;s political allies gained influence with the King, Kościuszko again applied for a commission, and on 12 October 1789, received a royal commission as a major general, but to Kosciuszko&#x27;s dismay in the Army of the Kingdom of Poland.

He began receiving a high salary of 12,000 zlotys a year, ending his financial difficulties. On 1 February 1790, he reported for duty in Włocławek, and wrote in a letter after a few days, calling the local inhabitants &quot;lazy&quot; and &quot;careless&quot;, in contrast to &quot;good and economical Lithuanians&quot;. In the same letter, Kosciuszko begged general Franciszek Ksawery Niesiołowski for a transfer to the Army of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania, but his wishes were not granted. Around summer, he commanded some infantry and cavalry units in the region between the Bug and Vistula Rivers. In August 1790 he was posted to Volhynia, stationed near Starokostiantyniv and Międzyborze. Prince Józef Poniatowski, who was the King&#x27;s nephew, recognized Kościuszko&#x27;s superior experience and made him his second-in-command, leaving him in command when he was absent.

Meanwhile, Kościuszko became more closely involved with political reformers such as Hugo Kołłątaj, Julian Ursyn Niemcewicz and others. Kościuszko argued that the peasants and Jews should receive full citizenship status, as this would motivate them to help defend Poland in the event of war. The political reformers centered in the Patriotic Party scored a significant victory with adopting the Constitution of 3 May 1791. Kościuszko saw the Constitution as a step in the right direction, but was disappointed that it retained the monarchy and did little to improve the situation of the most underprivileged, the peasants and the Jews. The Commonwealth&#x27;s neighbors saw the Constitution&#x27;s reforms as a threat to their influence over Polish internal affairs. A year after the Constitution&#x27;s adoption, on 14 May 1792, reactionary magnates formed the Targowica Confederation, which asked Russia&#x27;s Tsaritsa Catherine II for help in overthrowing the Constitution. Four days later, on 18 May 1792, a 100,000-man Russian army crossed the Polish border, headed for Warsaw, beginning the Polish–Russian War of 1792.

===Defence of the Constitution===
The Russians had a 3:1 advantage in strength, with some 98,000 troops against 37,000 Poles; they also had an advantage in combat experience. Before the Russians invaded, Kościuszko had been appointed deputy commander of Prince Józef Poniatowski&#x27;s infantry division, stationed in West Ukraine. When the Prince became Commander-in-Chief of the entire Polish (Crown) Army on 3 May 1792, Kościuszko was given command of a division near Kiev.

The Russians attacked a wide front with three armies. Kościuszko proposed that the entire Polish army be concentrated and engage one of the Russian armies, to assure numerical parity and boost the morale of the most inexperienced Polish forces with a quick victory; but Poniatowski rejected this plan. On 22 May 1792, the Russian forces crossed the border in Ukraine, where Kościuszko and Poniatowski were stationed. The Crown Army was judged too weak to oppose the four enemy columns advancing into West Ukraine, and began a fighting withdrawal to the western side of the Southern Bug River, with Kościuszko commanding the rear guard.

On 18 June, Poniatowski won the Battle of Zieleńce; Kościuszko&#x27;s division, on detached rear-guard duty, did not take part in the battle and rejoined the main army only at nightfall. His diligent protection of the main army&#x27;s rear and flanks won him the newly created Virtuti Militari, to this day Poland&#x27;s highest military decoration. Storożyński states that Kościuszko received the Virtuti Militari for his later, 18 July victory at Dubienka. The Polish withdrawal continued, and on 7 July Kościuszko&#x27;s forces fought a delaying battle against the Russians at Volodymyr-Volynskyi, the Battle of Włodzimierz. On reaching the northern Bug River, the Polish Army was split into three divisions to hold the river defensive line—weakening the Poles&#x27; point of numerical superiority, against Kościuszko&#x27;s counsel of a single strong, concentrated army.

Kościuszko&#x27;s force was assigned to protect the front&#x27;s southern flank, touching up to the Austrian border. At the Battle of Dubienka (18 July 1792), Kościuszko repulsed a numerically superior enemy, skilfully using terrain obstacles and field fortifications, and came to be regarded as one of Poland&#x27;s most brilliant military commanders of the age. With some 5,300 men, he was confront 25,000 Russians led by General Michail Kachovski. Kościuszko had to retreat from Dubienka, as the Russians crossed the nearby Austrian border and began flanking his positions. Russians won the battle. 

After the battle, King Stanisław August Poniatowski promoted Kościuszko to lieutenant-general and also offered him the Order of the White Eagle, but Kościuszko, a convinced republican would not accept a royal honor. News of Kościuszko&#x27;s victory spread over Europe, and on 26 August he received the honorary citizenship of France from the Legislative Assembly of revolutionary France. While Kościuszko considered the war&#x27;s outcome to still be unsettled, the King requested a ceasefire. On 24 July 1792, before Kościuszko had received his promotion to lieutenant-general, the King shocked the army by announcing his accession to the Targowica Confederation and ordering the Polish–Lithuanian troops to cease hostilities against the Russians. Kościuszko considered abducting the King as the Bar Confederates had done two decades earlier, in 1771, but was dissuaded by Prince Józef Poniatowski. On 30 August, Kościuszko resigned from his army position and briefly returned to Warsaw, where he received his promotion and pay, but refused the King&#x27;s request to remain in the Army. Around that time, he also fell ill with jaundice.

==Émigré==
The King&#x27;s capitulation was a hard blow for Kościuszko, who had not lost a single battle in the campaign. By mid-September 1792, he was resigned to leaving the country, and in early October, he departed from Warsaw. First, he went east, to the Czartoryski family manor at Sieniawa, which gathered various malcontents. In mid-November, he spent two weeks in Lwów, where he was welcomed by the populace. Since the war&#x27;s end, his presence had drawn crowds eager to see the famed commander. Izabela Czartoryska discussed having him marry her daughter Zofia. The Russians planned to arrest him if he returned to territory under their control; the Austrians, who held Lwów, offered him a commission in the Austrian Army, which he turned down. Subsequently, they planned to deport him, but he left Lwów before they could do so. At the turn of the month, he stopped in Zamość at the Zamoyskis&#x27; estate, met Stanisław Staszic, then went on to Puławy.

He did not tarry there for long: on 12–13 December, he was in Kraków; on 17 December, in Wrocław; and shortly after, he settled in Leipzig, where many notable Polish soldiers and politicians formed an émigré community. Soon he and some others began plotting an uprising against Russian rule in Poland. The politicians, grouped around Ignacy Potocki and Hugo Kołłątaj, sought contacts with similar opposition groups in Poland and by spring 1793 had been joined by other politicians and revolutionaries, including Ignacy Działyński. While Kołłątaj and others had begun planning an uprising before Kościuszko joined them, his support was a significant boon to them, as he was among the most famous individuals in Poland. 

After two weeks in Leipzig, before the second week of January 1793, Kościuszko set off for Paris, where he tried to gain French support for Poland&#x27;s planned uprising. He stayed there until summer, but despite the growing revolutionary influence, the French paid only lip service to the Polish cause and refused to commit themselves to anything concrete. Kościuszko concluded that the French authorities were not interested in Poland beyond what use it could have for their cause, and he was increasingly disappointed in the pettiness of the French Revolution—the infighting among different factions, and the growing reign of terror.

On 23 January 1793, Prussia and Russia signed the Second Partition of Poland. The Grodno Sejm, convened under duress in June, ratified the partition and was also forced to rescind the Constitution of 3 May 1791. With the second partition, Poland became a small country of roughly and a population of some 4 million. This came as a shock to the Targowica Confederates, who had seen themselves as defenders of centuries-old privileges of the magnates but had hardly expected that their appeal for help to the Tsarina of Russia would further reduce and weaken their country.

In August 1793, Kościuszko, though worried that an uprising would have little chance against the three partitioning powers, returned to Leipzig, where he was met with demands to start planning one as soon as possible. In September he clandestinely crossed the Polish border to conduct personal observations and meet with sympathetic high-ranking officers in the residual Polish Army, including General Józef Wodzicki. The preparations went slowly, and he left for Italy, planning to return in February 1794. However, the situation in Poland was changing rapidly. The Russian and Prussian governments forced Poland to again disband most of her army, and the reduced units were to be incorporated into the Russian Army. In March, Tsarist agents discovered the revolutionaries in Warsaw and began arresting notable Polish politicians and military commanders. Kościuszko was forced to execute his plan earlier than he had intended and, on 15 March 1794, set off for Kraków.

==Kościuszko Uprising==

Learning that the Russian garrison had departed Kraków, Kościuszko entered the city on the night of 23 March 1794. The next morning, in the Main Square, he announced an uprising. Kościuszko received the title of &quot;Naczelnik&quot; (commander-in-chief) of Polish–Lithuanian forces fighting against the Russian occupation.

Kościuszko gathered an army of some 6,000, including 4,000 regular soldiers and 2,000 recruits, and marched on Warsaw. The Russians succeeded in organizing an army to oppose him more quickly than he had expected. Still, he scored a victory at Racławice on 4 April 1794, where he turned the tide by personally leading an infantry charge of peasant volunteers (&quot;kosynierzy&quot;, scythemen). Nonetheless, this Russian defeat was not strategically significant, and the Russian forces quickly forced Kościuszko to retreat toward Kraków. Near Połaniec he received reinforcements and met with other Uprising leaders (Kołłątaj, Potocki); at Połaniec he issued a major political declaration of the Uprising, the Proclamation of Połaniec. The declaration stated that serfs were entitled to civil rights and reduced their work obligations (corvée). Meanwhile, the Russians set a bounty for Kościuszko&#x27;s capture, &quot;dead or alive&quot;.
By June, the Prussians had begun actively aiding the Russians, and on 6 June 1794, Kościuszko fought a defensive battle against a Prussian–Russian force at Szczekociny. From late June, for several weeks, he defended Warsaw, controlled by the insurgents. On 28 June, a mob of insurgents in Warsaw captured and hanged Bishop Ignacy Massalski and six others. Kościuszko issued a public reproach, writing, &quot;What happened in Warsaw yesterday filled my heart with bitterness and sorrow&quot;, urging, successfully for no more lynchings in the area. 

By the morning of 6 September, the Prussian forces having been withdrawn to suppress an uprising underway in Greater Poland, the siege of Warsaw was lifted. On 10 October, during a sortie against a new Russian attack, Kościuszko was wounded and captured at Maciejowice. He was imprisoned by the Russians at Saint Petersburg in the Peter and Paul Fortress. Soon afterwards, the uprising ended with the Battle of Praga, where, according to a contemporary Russian witness, the Russian troops massacred 20,000 Warsaw residents. The subsequent Third Partition of Poland ended the existence of a sovereign Polish and Lithuanian state for the next 123 years.

==Later life==
The death of Tsaritsa Catherine the Great on 17 November 1796 led to a change in Russia&#x27;s policies toward Poland. On 28 November, Tsar Paul I, who had hated Catherine, pardoned Kościuszko and set him free after he had tendered an oath of loyalty. Paul promised to free all Polish political prisoners held in Russian prisons and those who were forcibly settled in Siberia. The Tsar gave Kościuszko 12,000 rubles, which the Pole later, in 1798, attempted to return, when also renouncing the oath.

Kościuszko left for the United States, via Stockholm, Sweden and London, departing from Bristol on 17 June 1797, and arriving in Philadelphia on 18 August. Though welcomed by the populace, he was viewed with suspicion by the American government, controlled by the Federalists, who distrusted Kościuszko for his previous association with the Democratic-Republican Party.

In March 1798, Kościuszko received a bundle of letters from Europe. The news in one of them came as a shock to him, causing him, still in his wounded condition, to spring from his couch and limp unassisted to the middle of the room and exclaim to General Anthony Walton White, &quot;I must return at once to Europe!&quot; The letter in question contained news that Polish General Jan Henryk Dąbrowski and Polish soldiers were fighting in France under Napoleon and that Kościuszko&#x27;s sister had sent his two nephews in Kościuszko&#x27;s name to serve in Napoleon&#x27;s ranks. Around that time, Kościuszko also received news that Talleyrand was seeking Kościuszko&#x27;s moral and public endorsement for the French fight against one of Poland&#x27;s partitioners, Prussia.

The call of family and country drew Kościuszko back to Europe. He immediately consulted then Vice President of the United States Thomas Jefferson, who procured a passport for him under a false name and arranged for his secret departure for France. Kościuszko left no word for either Julian Ursyn Niemcewicz, his former comrade-in-arms and fellow St. Petersburg prisoner, or for his servant, leaving only some money for them.

Other factors contributed to his decision to depart. His French connections meant that he was vulnerable to deportation or imprisonment under the terms of the Alien and Sedition Acts. Jefferson was concerned that the U.S. and France were on the brink of war after the XYZ Affair and regarded him as an informal envoy. Kościuszko later wrote, &quot;Jefferson considered that I would be the most effective intermediary in bringing an accord with France, so I accepted the mission even if without any official authorization.&quot;

===Disposition of American estate===
Before Kościuszko left for France, he collected his back pay, wrote a will, and entrusted it to Jefferson as executor. Kościuszko and Jefferson had become close friends by 1797 and thereafter corresponded for twenty years in a spirit of mutual admiration. Jefferson wrote that &quot;He is as pure a son of liberty as I have ever known.&quot; In the will, Kościuszko left his American estate to be sold to buy the freedom of black slaves, including Jefferson&#x27;s own, and to educate them for independent life and work.

Several years after Kościuszko&#x27;s death, Jefferson, aged 77, pleaded an inability to act as executor due to age and the numerous legal complexities of the bequest. It was tied up in the courts until 1856. Jefferson recommended his friend John Hartwell Cocke, who also opposed slavery, as executor, but Cocke likewise declined to execute the bequest.

The case of Kościuszko&#x27;s American estate reached the U.S. Supreme Court three times. Kościuszko had made four wills, three of which postdated the American one.

None of the money that Kościuszko had earmarked for the manumission and education of African Americans in the United States was ever used for that purpose. Though the American will was never carried out as defined, its legacy was used to found an educational institute at Newark, New Jersey, in 1826, for African Americans in the United States. It was named for Kościuszko.

===Return to Europe===

Kościuszko arrived in Bayonne, France, on 28 June 1798. By that time, Talleyrand&#x27;s plans had changed and no longer included him. Kościuszko remained politically active in Polish émigré circles in France, and on 7 August 1799, he joined the Society of Polish Republicans (&quot;Towarzystwo Republikanów Polskich&quot;). Kościuszko refused the offered command of Polish Legions being formed for service with France. On 17 October and 6 November 1799, he met with Napoleon Bonaparte. He failed to reach an agreement with the French general, who regarded Kościuszko as a &quot;fool&quot; who &quot;overestimated his influence&quot; in Poland. Kościuszko disliked Napoleon for his dictatorial aspirations and called him the &quot;undertaker of the [French] Republic&quot;. In 1807, Kościuszko settled in château de Berville, near La Genevraye, distancing himself from politics.

Kościuszko did not believe that Napoleon would restore Poland in any durable form. When Napoleon&#x27;s forces approached the borders of Poland, Kościuszko wrote him a letter, demanding guarantees of parliamentary democracy and substantial national borders, which Napoleon ignored. Kościuszko concluded that Napoleon had created the Duchy of Warsaw in 1807 only as an expedient, not because he supported Polish sovereignty. Consequently, Kościuszko did not move to the Duchy of Warsaw or join the new Army of the Duchy, allied with Napoleon.

After the fall of Napoleon, he met with Russia&#x27;s Tsar Alexander I, in Paris and then in Braunau am Inn. The Tsar hoped that Kościuszko could be convinced to return to Poland, where the Tsar planned to create a new, Russian-allied Polish state (the Congress Kingdom). In return for his prospective services, Kościuszko demanded social reforms and restoration of territory, which he wished would reach the Dvina and Dnieper Rivers in the east. However, soon afterwards, in Vienna, Kościuszko learned that the Kingdom of Poland to be created by the Tsar would be even smaller than the earlier Duchy of Warsaw. Kościuszko called such an entity &quot;a joke&quot;.

On 2 April 1817, Kościuszko emancipated the peasants in his remaining lands in Poland, but Tsar Alexander disallowed this. Suffering from poor health and old wounds, Kościuszko died in Solothurn at age 71 after falling from a horse, developing a fever, and suffering a stroke a few days later on 15 October 1817.

==Funerals==
Kościuszko&#x27;s first funeral was held on 19 October 1817, at a formerly Jesuit church in Solothurn. As news of his death spread, Masses and memorial services were held in partitioned Poland. His embalmed body was deposited in a crypt of the Solothurn church. In 1818, Kościuszko&#x27;s body was transferred to Kraków, arriving at St. Florian&#x27;s Church on 11 April 1818. On 22 June 1818, or 23 June 1819 (accounts vary), to the tolling of the Sigismund Bell and the firing of cannon, his body was placed in a crypt at Wawel Cathedral, a pantheon of Polish kings and national heroes.

Kościuszko&#x27;s internal organs, which had been removed during embalming, were separately interred in a graveyard at Zuchwil, near Solothurn. Kościuszko&#x27;s organs remain there to this day; a large memorial stone was erected in 1820, next to a Polish memorial chapel. However, his heart was not interred with the other organs but instead kept in an urn at the Polish Museum in Rapperswil, Switzerland. The heart, along with the rest of the Museum&#x27;s holdings, were repatriated back to Warsaw in 1927, where the heart now reposes in a chapel at the Royal Castle.

==Memorials and tributes==

He has been proclaimed and claimed as a National Hero of Poland, the United States of America, Belarus, and Lithuania.

The Polish historian Stanisław Herbst states in the 1967 &quot;Polish Biographical Dictionary&quot; that Kościuszko may be Poland&#x27;s and the world&#x27;s most popular Pole ever. There are monuments to him around the world, beginning with the Kościuszko Mound at Kraków, erected in 1820–23 by men, women, and children bringing earth from the battlefields where he had fought. Bridges named in his honor include the Kosciuszko Bridge built in 1939 in New York City and the Thaddeus Kosciusko Bridge completed in 1959 across the Mohawk River between Albany and Saratoga counties in upstate New York The New York City bridge was partially replaced in April 2017 by a new bridge of the same name, with an additional bridge that opened in August 2019. A commemorative plaque dedicated to Tadeusz Kosciuszko was placed on the newly built bridge in October 2022 by the Polish foundation &quot;Będziem Polakami&quot; (We Will Be Poles) together with the Dobra Polska Szkoła Foundation from New York with financial support from the Polish government.

Kościuszko&#x27;s 1796 Philadelphia residence is now the Thaddeus Kosciuszko National Memorial, America&#x27;s smallest national park or unit of the National Park System. There is a Kościuszko Museum at his last residence, in Solothurn, Switzerland. A Polish-American cultural agency, the Kosciuszko Foundation, headquartered in New York City, was created in 1925.

A series of Polish Air Force units have borne the name &quot;Kościuszko Squadron&quot;. During World War II a Polish Navy ship bore his name, as did the Polish 1st Tadeusz Kościuszko Infantry Division.

One of the first examples of a historical novel, &quot;Thaddeus of Warsaw&quot;, was written in Kościuszko&#x27;s honor by the Scottish author Jane Porter; it proved very popular, particularly in the United States, and went through over eighty editions in the 19th century. An opera, &quot;Kościuszko nad Sekwaną&quot; (Kościuszko at the Seine), written in the early 1820s, featured music by Franciszek Salezy Dutkiewicz and libretto by Konstanty Majeranowski. Later works have included dramas by Apollo Korzeniowski, Justyn Hoszowski and Władysław Ludwik Anczyc; three novels by Józef Ignacy Kraszewski, one by Walery Przyborowski, one by Władysław Stanisław Reymont; and works by Maria Konopnicka. Kościuszko also appears in non-Polish literature, including a sonnet by Samuel Taylor Coleridge, another by James Henry Leigh Hunt, poems by John Keats and Walter Savage Landor, and a work by Karl Eduard von Holtei.

In 1933, the U.S. Post Office issued a commemorative stamp depicting an engraving of &quot;Brigadier General Thaddeus Kosciuszko,&quot; a statue of Kościuszko that stands in Washington, D.C.&#x27;s Lafayette Square, near the White House. The stamp was issued on the 150th anniversary of Kościuszko&#x27;s naturalization as an American citizen. Poland has also issued several stamps in his honor. In 2010, a copy of the monument was unveiled in Warsaw, Poland.

There are statues of Kościuszko in Poland at Kraków (by Leonard Marconi), which was destroyed by German forces during the World War II occupation and was later replaced with a replica by Germany in 1960 and Łódź (by Mieczysław Lubelski); in the United States at Boston, West Point, Philadelphia (by Marian Konieczny), Detroit (a copy of Leonard Marconi&#x27;s Kraków statue), Washington, D.C., Chicago, Milwaukee and Cleveland; and in Switzerland at Solothurn. Kościuszko has been the subject of paintings by Richard Cosway, Franciszek Smuglewicz, Michał Stachowicz, Juliusz Kossak and Jan Matejko. A monumental &quot;Racławice Panorama&quot; was painted by Jan Styka and Wojciech Kossak for the centenary of the 1794 Battle of Racławice. A commemorative monument was built in Minsk, Belarus in 2005.

In 2023, the monument at West Point was dismantled for refurbishment, and a sealed lead box of about was discovered in the base. The time capsule is believed to date either from 1828 when it was erected by the Corp of Cadets, or 1913 when Polish clergy and laity of the United States donated a statue of Kosciuszko to sit atop the column. In June 2023, X-rays revealed that there was a box within the lead case. The opening of the box that August revealed what only appeared to be dirt but was later found to contain a medal and several coins.

Geographic features that bear his name include Mount Kosciuszko, the highest mountain in the continent of Australia. It lies in an extensive New South Wales national park also named after him, Kosciuszko National Park. Other geographic entities named after Kościuszko include Kosciusko Island in Alaska, Kosciusko County in Indiana, and numerous cities, towns, streets and parks, particularly in the United States.

Kościuszko has been the subject of many written works. The first biography of him was published in 1820 by Julian Ursyn Niemcewicz, who served beside Kościuszko as his aide-de-camp and was also imprisoned in Russia after the uprising. English-language biographies have included Monica Mary Gardner&#x27;s &quot;Kościuszko: A Biography&quot;, which was first published in 1920, and a 2009 work by Alex Storozynski titled &quot;The Peasant Prince: Thaddeus Kosciuszko and the Age of Revolution&quot;.

=== Kosciuszko Commemorative Plaques ===
The Tadeusz Kosciuszko Commemorative Plaques are seven cast bronze plaques commemorating Tadeusz Kosciuszko, on the Kosciuszko Bridge over Newtown Creek in New York City. The plaques are hung on the main pillar of the bridge in the westbound direction, along the pedestrian and bicycle path. Two of the plaques, “Battle of Saratoga” and “West Point Academy”, are dedicated to Kosciuszko&#x27;s most important military achievements during the American Revolution. Kosciuszko devised the successful defensive strategy for the Battle of Saratoga, which became the turning point of the American Revolution. Kosciuszko drafted plans to build West Point Fortress, suggesting to Thomas Jefferson that it be used as a West Point Military Academy. The main plaques contains the most important information about Tadeusz Kościuszko.

The creative concept for the plaques was initiated by Andrzej Cierkosz. Text for the plaques was written by Alex Storozynski. The design was created by Andrzej Cierkosz and Grzegorz Godawa and carried out by sculptor Grzegorz Godawa in Poland. They were cast in a Polish bronze foundry Brązart in Poland.
The project was sponsored by Dobra Polska Szkola Foundation from New York and the Będziem Polakami Foundation from Poland. It received financial support from Andrzej Cierkosz, New York Governor Kathy Hochul and received significant financial support from the office of Polish Prime Minister Mateusz Morawiecki. The plaques were unveiled at a ceremony on 15 October 2022, the 205th anniversary of Kosciuszko’s death.

==See also==
* Casimir Pulaski, similarly honored Polish commander in the American Revolutionary War
* Michael Kovats de Fabriczy, Hungarian commander in the American Revolutionary War, known as &quot;the father of the American cavalry&quot;
* Statue of Tadeusz Kościuszko (Washington, D.C.) – a monument in Washington, D.C.
* Camp Kosciuszko

==Notes==

== References ==


==Sources== 
* 
* 
* , Book (), Book ()
* E&#x27;book
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

* 
* 
* , Book
* 
* 

===Other sources===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
* U.S. Kosciuszko National Monument web site.
* Will of Thaddeus Kosciuszko.
* Kosciusko Mississippi.
* Famous Belarusians/Tadeusz Kościuszko
* Tadeusz Kosciuszko. Life like a movie </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q191479" start="0" end="38" title="Tadeusz Kościuszko" label="Andrzej Tadeusz Bonawentura Kościuszko"/>
<link wikidata="Q158797" start="93" end="110" title="Military engineering" label="military engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="246" end="276" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="302" end="308" title="Russian Empire" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="313" end="320" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="350" end="376" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q849176" start="452" end="471" title="Kościuszko Uprising" label="Kościuszko Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579602" start="536" end="552" title="Mieračoŭščyna" label="Mereczowszczyzna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347977" start="563" end="588" title="Brest Litovsk Voivodeship" label="Brest Litovsk Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q49683" start="595" end="619" title="Grand Duchy of Lithuania" label="Grand Duchy of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1885601" start="675" end="695" title="Ivatsevichy District" label="Ivatsevichy District"/>
<link wikidata="Q282366" start="741" end="756" title="Corps of Cadets (Warsaw)" label="Corps of Cadets"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="760" end="766" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q874784" start="799" end="808" title="War of the Bar Confederation" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q597506" start="924" end="939" title="First Partition of Poland" label="First Partition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3917240" start="960" end="985" title="Józef Sylwester Sosnowski" label="Józef Sylwester Sosnowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q104680" start="1106" end="1113" title="colonel" label="colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q54122" start="1121" end="1137" title="Continental Army" label="Continental Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q679753" start="1271" end="1281" title="West Point, New York" label="West Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q26718" start="1338" end="1358" title="Continental Congress" label="Continental Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q152956" start="1375" end="1392" title="brigadier general" label="brigadier general"/>
<link wikidata="Q157148" start="1462" end="1475" title="major general" label="major general"/>
<link wikidata="Q6857766" start="1483" end="1518" title="Military of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352215" start="1538" end="1564" title="Polish–Russian War of 1792" label="Polish–Russian War of 1792"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025374" start="1581" end="1617" title="Second Partition of Poland" label="Commonwealth&amp;#x27;s Second Partition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237038" start="1714" end="1735" title="Battle of Maciejowice" label="Battle of Maciejowice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453505" start="1826" end="1841" title="Third Partition of Poland" label="Third Partition"/>
<link wikidata="Q36450" start="1922" end="1934" title="Catherine the Great" label="Catherine II"/>
<link wikidata="Q15189" start="1983" end="1989" title="Paul I of Russia" label="Paul I"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="2048" end="2064" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932113" start="2127" end="2133" title="Wills of Tadeusz Kościuszko" label="a will"/>
<link wikidata="Q155656" start="2331" end="2340" title="Will and testament" label="testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579602" start="2501" end="2517" title="Mieračoŭščyna" label="Mereczowszczyzna"/>
<link wikidata="Q956635" start="2530" end="2535" title="Kosava, Belarus" label="Kosów"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991196" start="2539" end="2561" title="Nowogródek Voivodeship (1507–1795)" label="Nowogródek Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q49683" start="2563" end="2587" title="Grand Duchy of Lithuania" label="Grand Duchy of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="2603" end="2633" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q311995" start="2772" end="2780" title="szlachta" label="szlachta"/>
<link wikidata="Q6857766" start="2860" end="2895" title="Military of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth Army"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2910" end="2924" title=":File:Kołtonowski Tekla Kościuszkowa.jpg" label="Tekla Ratomska"/>
<link wikidata="Q4398748" start="2959" end="2980" title="Roch III coat of arms" label="Roch III coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="3156" end="3164" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q690869" start="3307" end="3316" title="Ruthenians" label="Ruthenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q193360" start="3394" end="3405" title="List of Polish monarchs" label="Polish King"/>
<link wikidata="Q692301" start="3410" end="3433" title="List of rulers of Lithuania" label="Grand Duke of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q54056" start="3434" end="3453" title="Sigismund I the Old" label="Sigismund I the Old"/>
<link wikidata="Q639715" start="3548" end="3557" title="Polonization" label="Polonized"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="3660" end="3666" title="Polish language" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759877" start="3687" end="3701" title="Culture of Poland" label="Polish culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2639317" start="4465" end="4474" title="Liubeshiv" label="Lubieszów"/>
<link wikidata="Q54019" start="4581" end="4609" title="Stanisław August Poniatowski" label="Stanisław August Poniatowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q282366" start="4624" end="4639" title="Corps of Cadets (Warsaw)" label="Corps of Cadets"/>
<link wikidata="Q144488" start="4693" end="4710" title="University of Warsaw" label="Warsaw University"/>
<link wikidata="Q189290" start="4723" end="4740" title="Officer (armed forces)" label="military officers"/>
<link wikidata="Q890246" start="4842" end="4877" title="Czartoryski" label="Czartoryski family&amp;#x27;s patronage"/>
<link wikidata="Q189329" start="4927" end="4939" title="Liberal arts education" label="liberal arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q10816384" start="5016" end="5023" title="chorąży" label="chorąży"/>
<link wikidata="Q186024" start="5076" end="5086" title="lieutenant" label="lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q19100" start="5164" end="5171" title="Captain (armed forces)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q874784" start="5274" end="5291" title="Bar Confederation" label="Bar Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q937911" start="5667" end="5686" title="Aleksander Orłowski" label="Aleksander Orłowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q337579" start="5914" end="5953" title="Académie royale de peinture et de sculpture" label="Royal Academy of Painting and Sculpture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1685286" start="6073" end="6095" title="Jean-Rodolphe Perronet" label="Jean-Rodolphe Perronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="6286" end="6299" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q183225" start="6316" end="6335" title="Toleration" label="religious tolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q183244" start="6453" end="6464" title="physiocracy" label="physiocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q597506" start="6671" end="6724" title="First Partition of Poland" label="First Partition of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="6734" end="6740" title="Russian Empire" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="6742" end="6749" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="6755" end="6762" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q501844" start="7126" end="7133" title="Magnates of Poland and Lithuania" label="magnate"/>
<link wikidata="Q275102" start="7135" end="7152" title="Voivode" label="province governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q625652" start="7167" end="7173" title="hetman" label="hetman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3917240" start="7174" end="7199" title="Józef Sylwester Sosnowski" label="Józef Sylwester Sosnowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764032" start="7251" end="7258" title="Ludwika Sosnowska" label="Ludwika"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202" start="7549" end="7554" title="Saxony" label="Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="7636" end="7662" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="8123" end="8135" title="human rights" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q70326" start="8285" end="8304" title="Pierre Beaumarchais" label="Pierre Beaumarchais"/>
<link wikidata="Q34969" start="8389" end="8406" title="Benjamin Franklin" label="Benjamin Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983034" start="8654" end="8681" title="Second Continental Congress" label="Second Continental Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q390028" start="8689" end="8713" title="Independence Hall" label="Pennsylvania State House"/>
<link wikidata="Q54122" start="8739" end="8755" title="Continental Army" label="Continental Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470820" start="8853" end="8870" title="Fort Billingsport" label="Fort Billingsport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086337" start="8874" end="8883" title="Paulsboro, New Jersey" label="Paulsboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="8885" end="8895" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q143762" start="8925" end="8939" title="Delaware River" label="Delaware River"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="8963" end="8970" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191375" start="9234" end="9247" title="Departments of the Continental Army" label="Northern Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3280545" start="9254" end="9267" title="Major general (United States)" label="Major General"/>
<link wikidata="Q365124" start="9268" end="9281" title="Horatio Gates" label="Horatio Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438776" start="9355" end="9371" title="Fort Ticonderoga" label="Fort Ticonderoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3321809" start="9551" end="9561" title="Mount Defiance (New York)" label="Sugar Loaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q464245" start="9728" end="9744" title="Arthur St. Clair" label="Arthur St. Clair"/>
<link wikidata="Q436775" start="9819" end="9832" title="John Burgoyne" label="John Burgoyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="9935" end="9944" title="artillery" label="artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307876" start="10126" end="10146" title="Siege of Fort Ticonderoga (1777)" label="siege of Ticonderoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115886" start="10279" end="10294" title="Philip Schuyler" label="Philip Schuyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q892168" start="10510" end="10518" title="causeway" label="causeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140" start="10658" end="10670" title="Hudson River" label="Hudson River"/>
<link wikidata="Q518097" start="10831" end="10839" title="Saratoga, New York" label="Saratoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q846674" start="10867" end="10880" title="Battles of Saratoga" label="Bemis Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q846674" start="11040" end="11058" title="Battles of Saratoga" label="Battle of Saratoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129379" start="11112" end="11117" title="Convention Army" label="force"/>
<link wikidata="Q656478" start="11342" end="11355" title="Benjamin Rush" label="Benjamin Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q203478" start="11555" end="11564" title="polonaise" label="polonaise"/>
<link wikidata="Q81982" start="11587" end="11598" title="harpsichord" label="harpsichord"/>
<link wikidata="Q454761" start="11634" end="11653" title="Rajnold Suchodolski" label="Rajnold Suchodolski"/>
<link wikidata="Q462964" start="11711" end="11733" title="November Uprising" label="November 1830 Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="11780" end="11796" title="African Americans" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q4694179" start="11806" end="11818" title="Agrippa Hull" label="Agrippa Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q9219" start="11900" end="11920" title="United States Military Academy" label="West Point, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q298237" start="12079" end="12094" title="Benedict Arnold" label="Benedict Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="12242" end="12259" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="12497" end="12505" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="12547" end="12561" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539513" start="12655" end="12661" title="Battle of Camden" label="Camden"/>
<link wikidata="Q26718" start="12685" end="12705" title="Continental Congress" label="Continental Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q366113" start="12755" end="12771" title="Nathanael Greene" label="Nathanael Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q4868744" start="13057" end="13063" title="bateau" label="bateau"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13313" end="13340" title="Nathanael Greene#The race to the Dan River" label="&amp;quot;Race to the Dan&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q164723" start="13363" end="13381" title="Charles Cornwallis, 1st Marquess Cornwallis" label="Charles Cornwallis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520726" start="13657" end="13663" title="Yadkin River" label="Yadkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159151" start="13672" end="13675" title="Dan River (Virginia)" label="Dan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374283" start="13841" end="13858" title="Halifax, Virginia" label="Halifax, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q425773" start="14070" end="14089" title="Battle of Guilford Court House" label="Guilford Courthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456" start="14304" end="14318" title="South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q153936" start="14464" end="14471" title="militia" label="militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q494318" start="14625" end="14648" title="Battle of Hobkirk&amp;#x27;s Hill" label="Second Battle of Camden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003674" start="14653" end="14663" title="Ninety Six, South Carolina" label="Ninety-Six"/>
<link wikidata="Q7510275" start="14676" end="14698" title="Siege of Ninety-Six" label="besieged the Star Fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q173366" start="14808" end="14815" title="bayonet" label="bayonet"/>
<link wikidata="Q47716" start="15132" end="15158" title="Charleston, South Carolina" label="Charleston, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181906" start="15199" end="15211" title="John Laurens" label="John Laurens"/>
<link wikidata="Q6136614" start="15440" end="15468" title="James Island, South Carolina" label="James Island, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q33105503" start="15521" end="15578" title="Battle of James Island" label="the Continental Army&amp;#x27;s final armed action of the war"/>
<link wikidata="Q217450" start="15881" end="15896" title="Treaty of Paris (1783)" label="Treaty of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="16092" end="16100" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q86591" start="16139" end="16145" title="Independence Day (United States)" label="4 July"/>
<link wikidata="Q138518" start="16162" end="16183" title="Princeton, New Jersey" label="Princeton, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q607007" start="16511" end="16523" title="Haym Salomon" label="Haym Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632484" start="16916" end="16941" title="Society of the Cincinnati" label="Society of the Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="16955" end="16985" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q890246" start="17341" end="17359" title="Czartoryski" label="Czartoryski family"/>
<link wikidata="Q466259" start="17745" end="17751" title="corvée" label="corvée"/>
<link wikidata="Q127345" start="18174" end="18187" title="Hugo Kołłątaj" label="Hugo Kołłątaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q189441" start="18240" end="18263" title="Jagiellonian University" label="Jagiellonian University"/>
<link wikidata="Q883433" start="18297" end="18307" title="Great Sejm" label="Great Sejm"/>
<link wikidata="Q157148" start="18878" end="18891" title="major general" label="major general"/>
<link wikidata="Q123213" start="19007" end="19013" title="Polish zloty" label="zlotys"/>
<link wikidata="Q106681" start="19101" end="19110" title="Włocławek" label="Włocławek"/>
<link wikidata="Q9262626" start="19331" end="19362" title="Franciszek Ksawery Niesiołowski" label="Franciszek Ksawery Niesiołowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q156237" start="19542" end="19545" title="Bug (river)" label="Bug"/>
<link wikidata="Q548" start="19550" end="19564" title="Vistula" label="Vistula Rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7530" start="19598" end="19606" title="Volhynia" label="Volhynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q997429" start="19623" end="19640" title="Starokostiantyniv" label="Starokostiantyniv"/>
<link wikidata="Q6884983" start="19645" end="19656" title="Międzyborze, Greater Poland Voivodeship" label="Międzyborze"/>
<link wikidata="Q154382" start="19665" end="19682" title="Józef Poniatowski" label="Józef Poniatowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q458241" start="19944" end="19967" title="Julian Ursyn Niemcewicz" label="Julian Ursyn Niemcewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q9346766" start="20176" end="20191" title="Patriotic Party" label="Patriotic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129096" start="20239" end="20265" title="Constitution of 3 May 1791" label="Constitution of 3 May 1791"/>
<link wikidata="Q911889" start="20706" end="20729" title="Targowica Confederation" label="Targowica Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q36450" start="20757" end="20778" title="Catherine the Great" label="Tsaritsa Catherine II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352215" start="20942" end="20968" title="Polish–Russian War of 1792" label="Polish–Russian War of 1792"/>
<link wikidata="Q1729457" start="21289" end="21301" title="Western Ukraine" label="West Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="21326" end="21344" title="Commander-in-chief" label="Commander-in-Chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899" start="21442" end="21446" title="Kyiv" label="Kiev"/>
<link wikidata="Q188940" start="22022" end="22040" title="Southern Bug" label="Southern Bug River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628049" start="22118" end="22136" title="Battle of Zieleńce" label="Battle of Zieleńce"/>
<link wikidata="Q944955" start="22363" end="22379" title="Virtuti Militari" label="Virtuti Militari"/>
<link wikidata="Q2398279" start="22535" end="22543" title="Dubienka" label="Dubienka"/>
<link wikidata="Q33544" start="22666" end="22685" title="Volodymyr-Volynskyi" label="Volodymyr-Volynskyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888467" start="23086" end="23104" title="Battle of Dubienka" label="Battle of Dubienka"/>
<link wikidata="Q4217788" start="23394" end="23411" title="Mikhail Kakhovsky" label="Michail Kachovski"/>
<link wikidata="Q152951" start="23641" end="23659" title="Lieutenant general" label="lieutenant-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q84020" start="23685" end="23709" title="Order of the White Eagle (Poland)" label="Order of the White Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q16149677" start="23869" end="23899" title="List of people granted honorary French citizenship during the French Revolution" label="honorary citizenship of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q780457" start="23909" end="23929" title="National Legislative Assembly (France)" label="Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="23933" end="23953" title="French Revolution" label="revolutionary France"/>
<link wikidata="Q874784" start="24364" end="24380" title="Bar Confederation" label="Bar Confederates"/>
<link wikidata="Q133244" start="24696" end="24704" title="jaundice" label="jaundice"/>
<link wikidata="Q377994" start="24995" end="25003" title="Sieniawa" label="Sieniawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q36036" start="25080" end="25084" title="Lwów" label="Lwów"/>
<link wikidata="Q455182" start="25215" end="25234" title="Izabela Czartoryska" label="Izabela Czartoryska"/>
<link wikidata="Q8073357" start="25275" end="25280" title="Zofia Czartoryska" label="Zofia"/>
<link wikidata="Q129794" start="25385" end="25394" title="Austrian Partition" label="held Lwów"/>
<link wikidata="Q145972" start="25589" end="25595" title="Zamość" label="Zamość"/>
<link wikidata="Q145908" start="25603" end="25618" title="Zamoyski family" label="Zamoyskis&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q708435" start="25631" end="25648" title="Stanisław Staszic" label="Stanisław Staszic"/>
<link wikidata="Q320007" start="25666" end="25672" title="Puławy" label="Puławy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799" start="25764" end="25771" title="Wrocław" label="Wrocław"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079" start="25806" end="25813" title="Leipzig" label="Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q36742" start="26009" end="26023" title="Ignacy Potocki" label="Ignacy Potocki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056990" start="26187" end="26204" title="Ignacy Działyński" label="Ignacy Działyński"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="26941" end="26958" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q193547" start="27016" end="27031" title="Reign of Terror" label="reign of terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q152006" start="27084" end="27110" title="Partitions of Poland" label="Second Partition of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661055" start="27116" end="27127" title="Grodno Sejm" label="Grodno Sejm"/>
<link wikidata="Q770631" start="28739" end="28754" title="Main Square, Kraków" label="the Main Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q1577800" start="29160" end="29180" title="Battle of Racławice" label="victory at Racławice"/>
<link wikidata="Q4234899" start="29293" end="29303" title="Scythemen" label="kosynierzy"/>
<link wikidata="Q988658" start="29471" end="29479" title="Połaniec" label="Połaniec"/>
<link wikidata="Q386409" start="29637" end="29661" title="Proclamation of Połaniec" label="Proclamation of Połaniec"/>
<link wikidata="Q4372150" start="29802" end="29808" title="Bounty (reward)" label="bounty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467123" start="30023" end="30034" title="Battle of Szczekociny" label="Szczekociny"/>
<link wikidata="Q982413" start="30074" end="30089" title="Siege of Warsaw (1794)" label="defended Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656516" start="30190" end="30206" title="Ignacy Jakub Massalski" label="Ignacy Massalski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117601" start="30505" end="30540" title="Greater Poland uprising (1794)" label="uprising underway in Greater Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237038" start="30674" end="30685" title="Battle of Maciejowice" label="Maciejowice"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="30724" end="30740" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q38646" start="30748" end="30771" title="Peter and Paul Fortress" label="Peter and Paul Fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347209" start="30818" end="30833" title="Battle of Praga" label="Battle of Praga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453505" start="30956" end="30981" title="Third Partition of Poland" label="Third Partition of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918819" start="31098" end="31106" title="Tsarina" label="Tsaritsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q36450" start="31107" end="31126" title="Catherine the Great" label="Catherine the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q15189" start="31225" end="31231" title="Paul I of Russia" label="Paul I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451972" start="31320" end="31335" title="loyalty oath" label="oath of loyalty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7659544" start="31442" end="31460" title="Sybirak" label="settled in Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15788" start="31494" end="31499" title="ruble" label="ruble"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="31629" end="31638" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="31674" end="31681" title="Bristol" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q42189" start="31850" end="31861" title="Federalist Party" label="Federalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q42186" start="31927" end="31954" title="Democratic-Republican Party" label="Democratic-Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773671" start="32212" end="32232" title="Anthony Walton White" label="Anthony Walton White"/>
<link wikidata="Q158027" start="32337" end="32357" title="Jan Henryk Dąbrowski" label="Jan Henryk Dąbrowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q160499" start="32590" end="32600" title="Charles Maurice de Talleyrand-Périgord" label="Talleyrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699" start="32827" end="32862" title="Vice President of the United States" label="Vice President of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="32863" end="32879" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118757" start="33319" end="33342" title="Alien and Sedition Acts" label="Alien and Sedition Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q266994" start="33428" end="33438" title="XYZ Affair" label="XYZ Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q118382" start="34156" end="34162" title="Slavery in the United States" label="slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q6238090" start="34490" end="34509" title="John Hartwell Cocke" label="John Hartwell Cocke"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="34661" end="34679" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454489" start="34825" end="34836" title="manumission" label="manumission"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="34854" end="34871" title="African Americans" label="African Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q25395" start="35041" end="35059" title="Newark, New Jersey" label="Newark, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q134674" start="35190" end="35197" title="Bayonne" label="Bayonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2102497" start="35534" end="35548" title="Polish Legions (Napoleonic period)" label="Polish Legions"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="35634" end="35652" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q268265" start="35998" end="36010" title="La Genevraye" label="La Genevraye"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="36247" end="36270" title="Parliamentary system" label="parliamentary democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q152115" start="36380" end="36395" title="Duchy of Warsaw" label="Duchy of Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q2862957" start="36548" end="36565" title="Army of the Duchy of Warsaw" label="Army of the Duchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15193" start="36649" end="36660" title="Alexander I of Russia" label="Alexander I"/>
<link wikidata="Q131128" start="36683" end="36697" title="Braunau am Inn" label="Braunau am Inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q221457" start="36843" end="36859" title="Congress Poland" label="Congress Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q8197" start="36999" end="37004" title="Daugava" label="Dvina"/>
<link wikidata="Q40855" start="37009" end="37023" title="Dnieper" label="Dnieper Rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="37066" end="37072" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q221457" start="37102" end="37119" title="Congress Poland" label="Kingdom of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q68965" start="37441" end="37450" title="Solothurn" label="Solothurn"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="37525" end="37531" title="stroke" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="37658" end="37664" title="Jesuits" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q68965" start="37675" end="37684" title="Solothurn" label="Solothurn"/>
<link wikidata="Q132612" start="37715" end="37721" title="Mass in the Catholic Church" label="Masses"/>
<link wikidata="Q977282" start="37757" end="37775" title="History of Poland (1795–1918)" label="partitioned Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q332997" start="37781" end="37789" title="Embalming" label="embalmed"/>
<link wikidata="Q192619" start="37814" end="37819" title="crypt" label="crypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3394795" start="37916" end="37941" title="St. Florian&amp;#x27;s Church" label="St. Florian&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q218547" start="38032" end="38046" title="The Sigismund Bell" label="Sigismund Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q638519" start="38107" end="38122" title="Wawel Cathedral" label="Wawel Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376141" start="38126" end="38134" title="Pantheon (religion)" label="pantheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q84164296" start="38155" end="38170" title="Folk hero" label="national heroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q712378" start="38191" end="38206" title="Organ (anatomy)" label="internal organs"/>
<link wikidata="Q18473" start="38292" end="38299" title="Zuchwil" label="Zuchwil"/>
<link wikidata="Q11083119" start="38527" end="38530" title="urn" label="urn"/>
<link wikidata="Q689839" start="38538" end="38551" title="Polish Museum, Rapperswil" label="Polish Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q688539" start="38555" end="38565" title="Rapperswil" label="Rapperswil"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="38567" end="38578" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="38667" end="38673" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q756098" start="38730" end="38742" title="Royal Castle, Warsaw" label="Royal Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q8861685" start="38914" end="38930" title="Stanisław Herbst" label="Stanisław Herbst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485141" start="38956" end="38986" title="Polish Biographical Dictionary" label="Polish Biographical Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q641398" start="39139" end="39155" title="Kościuszko Mound" label="Kościuszko Mound"/>
<link wikidata="Q6433023" start="39311" end="39328" title="Kosciuszko Bridge" label="Kosciuszko Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708992" start="39368" end="39393" title="Thaddeus Kosciusko Bridge" label="Thaddeus Kosciusko Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345896" start="39423" end="39435" title="Mohawk River" label="Mohawk River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408350" start="39996" end="40033" title="Thaddeus Kosciuszko National Memorial" label="Thaddeus Kosciuszko National Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40121" end="40138" title="Kościuszko Museum" label="Kościuszko Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189552" start="40191" end="40206" title="Polish Americans" label="Polish-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673574" start="40228" end="40249" title="Kosciuszko Foundation" label="Kosciuszko Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q918504" start="40317" end="40333" title="Polish Air Force" label="Polish Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q6435623" start="40366" end="40385" title="Kościuszko&amp;#x27;s Squadron" label="Kościuszko Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q267167" start="40415" end="40426" title="Polish Navy" label="Polish Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3329954" start="40458" end="40505" title="1st Tadeusz Kościuszko Infantry Division" label="Polish 1st Tadeusz Kościuszko Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196408" start="40539" end="40555" title="historical fiction" label="historical novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q17021260" start="40563" end="40581" title="Thaddeus of Warsaw" label="Thaddeus of Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161890" start="40651" end="40662" title="Jane Porter" label="Jane Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344" start="40785" end="40790" title="opera" label="opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471" start="40846" end="40851" title="Seine" label="Seine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40900" end="40928" title="Franciszek Salezy Dutkiewicz" label="Franciszek Salezy Dutkiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q131084" start="40933" end="40941" title="libretto" label="libretto"/>
<link wikidata="Q4274808" start="40945" end="40967" title="Konstanty Majeranowski" label="Konstanty Majeranowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q619117" start="41005" end="41024" title="Apollo Korzeniowski" label="Apollo Korzeniowski"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41026" end="41042" title="Justyn Hoszowski" label="Justyn Hoszowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q713375" start="41047" end="41070" title="Władysław Ludwik Anczyc" label="Władysław Ludwik Anczyc"/>
<link wikidata="Q254524" start="41088" end="41111" title="Józef Ignacy Kraszewski" label="Józef Ignacy Kraszewski"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41120" end="41139" title="Walery Przyborowski" label="Walery Przyborowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q121180" start="41148" end="41175" title="Władysław Reymont" label="Władysław Stanisław Reymont"/>
<link wikidata="Q257852" start="41190" end="41206" title="Maria Konopnicka" label="Maria Konopnicka"/>
<link wikidata="Q80056" start="41270" end="41276" title="sonnet" label="sonnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q82409" start="41280" end="41303" title="Samuel Taylor Coleridge" label="Samuel Taylor Coleridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q655213" start="41316" end="41338" title="Leigh Hunt" label="James Henry Leigh Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q82083" start="41349" end="41359" title="John Keats" label="John Keats"/>
<link wikidata="Q645138" start="41364" end="41384" title="Walter Savage Landor" label="Walter Savage Landor"/>
<link wikidata="Q66388" start="41400" end="41422" title="Karl von Holtei" label="Karl Eduard von Holtei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756502" start="41464" end="41483" title="commemorative stamp" label="commemorative stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967190" start="41516" end="41553" title="Statue of Tadeusz Kościuszko (Washington, D.C.)" label="Brigadier General Thaddeus Kosciuszko"/>
<link wikidata="Q6471523" start="41599" end="41639" title="Lafayette Square, Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C.&amp;#x27;s Lafayette Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q11823485" start="41830" end="41852" title="Tadeusz Kościuszko Monument (Warsaw)" label="a copy of the monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="41869" end="41875" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342833" start="41942" end="41957" title="Leonard Marconi" label="Leonard Marconi"/>
<link wikidata="Q580" start="42093" end="42097" title="Łódź" label="Łódź"/>
<link wikidata="Q6843609" start="42102" end="42121" title="Mieczysław Lubelski" label="Mieczysław Lubelski"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="42148" end="42154" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q679753" start="42156" end="42166" title="West Point, New York" label="West Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="42168" end="42180" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6370836" start="42185" end="42201" title="Marian Konieczny" label="Marian Konieczny"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="42204" end="42211" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="42280" end="42287" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q37836" start="42289" end="42298" title="Milwaukee" label="Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="42303" end="42312" title="Cleveland" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2539929" start="42395" end="42409" title="Richard Cosway" label="Richard Cosway"/>
<link wikidata="Q594517" start="42411" end="42432" title="Franciszek Smuglewicz" label="Franciszek Smuglewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4441365" start="42434" end="42451" title="Michał Stachowicz" label="Michał Stachowicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q956091" start="42453" end="42467" title="Juliusz Kossak" label="Juliusz Kossak"/>
<link wikidata="Q189117" start="42472" end="42483" title="Jan Matejko" label="Jan Matejko"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753248" start="42504" end="42522" title="Racławice Panorama" label="Racławice Panorama"/>
<link wikidata="Q708238" start="42544" end="42553" title="Jan Styka" label="Jan Styka"/>
<link wikidata="Q727637" start="42558" end="42573" title="Wojciech Kossak" label="Wojciech Kossak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280" start="42663" end="42677" title="Minsk" label="Minsk, Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9219" start="42898" end="42912" title="United_States_Military_Academy" label="Corp of Cadets"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="43041" end="43046" title="X-ray" label="X-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q178167" start="43280" end="43296" title="Mount Kosciuszko" label="Mount Kosciuszko"/>
<link wikidata="Q208126" start="43298" end="43335" title="Seven_Summits" label="the highest mountain in the continent"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="43339" end="43348" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="43374" end="43389" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755161" start="43426" end="43450" title="Kosciuszko National Park" label="Kosciuszko National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741991" start="43509" end="43525" title="Kosciusko Island" label="Kosciusko Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="43529" end="43535" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q506376" start="43537" end="43553" title="Kosciusko County, Indiana" label="Kosciusko County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415" start="43557" end="43564" title="Indiana" label="Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q458241" start="43756" end="43779" title="Julian Ursyn Niemcewicz" label="Julian Ursyn Niemcewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q11785090" start="43927" end="43946" title="Monica Mary Gardner" label="Monica Mary Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q4717849" start="44045" end="44061" title="Alex Storozynski" label="Alex Storozynski"/>
<link wikidata="Q6433023" start="44306" end="44323" title="Kosciuszko Bridge" label="Kosciuszko Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983826" start="44329" end="44342" title="Newtown Creek" label="Newtown Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="44346" end="44359" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="44632" end="44651" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q846674" start="44714" end="44732" title="Battle of Saratoga" label="Battle of Saratoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q45956" start="45512" end="45524" title="Kathy Hochul" label="Kathy Hochul"/>
<link wikidata="Q11771436" start="45609" end="45627" title="Mateusz Morawiecki" label="Mateusz Morawiecki"/>
<link wikidata="Q381854" start="45750" end="45765" title="Casimir Pulaski" label="Casimir Pulaski"/>
<link wikidata="Q718364" start="45838" end="45864" title="Michael Kovats de Fabriczy" label="Michael Kovats de Fabriczy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967190" start="45979" end="46026" title="Statue of Tadeusz Kościuszko (Washington, D.C.)" label="Statue of Tadeusz Kościuszko (Washington, D.C.)"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="46043" end="46059" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q113358398" start="46062" end="46077" title="Camp Kosciuszko" label="Camp Kosciuszko"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="140369" wikidata="Q20352" url="?curid=140369" title="Neustrelitz">
<text>Neustrelitz (; ) is a town in the Mecklenburgische Seenplatte district in the state of Mecklenburg-Vorpommern, Germany. It is situated on the shore of the Zierker See in the Mecklenburg Lake District. From 1738 until 1918 it was the capital of the Duchy of Mecklenburg-Strelitz. From 1994 until 2011 it was the capital of the district of Mecklenburg-Strelitz.

The name &quot;Strelitz&quot; is derived from the Polabian word &quot;Strelci&quot;, meaning &quot;archers&quot; or &quot;shooters&quot;.

==History==

The village of Strelitz was first mentioned in 1278. It grew to a small town in the following centuries. In the 17th century Strelitz was a part of the duchy of Mecklenburg-Güstrow, which ceased to exist after the death of the last duke in 1695. Afterwards the new Duchy of Mecklenburg-Strelitz was established (1701). This small duchy contained the present-day district and an exclave around Ratzeburg, which is today situated in Schleswig-Holstein.

In 1712 the castle and the town of Strelitz burnt down. After this disaster the duke and his family lived on their hunting lodge at the lake called &quot;Zierker See&quot; (Lake Zierke) to the northwest of Strelitz. Around this place the new town of &quot;Neustrelitz&quot; (New Strelitz) was constructed. It became the official capital of Mecklenburg-Strelitz in 1736.

Neustrelitz remained the ducal seat until 1918 and was the capital of the Free State of Mecklenburg-Strelitz from 1918 to 1933. In 1934 it was merged with Mecklenburg-Schwerin to the &quot;Gau&quot; of Mecklenburg.

The ancient town of Strelitz continued to exist after the fire of 1712; it was a small village, which was suburbanised by Neustrelitz in 1931.

When the Red Army troops of the 2nd Belorussian Front entered the town on 30 April 1945, 681 people committed suicide.

==Sights and monuments==

The city centre is characterised by Baroque architecture. Its heart is the &quot;Marktplatz&quot; (Market Square), with the &quot;Stadtkirche&quot; (city church), built in 1768–1778 and the opposite &quot;Rathaus&quot; (Town Hall), built in 1841 by Friedrich W. Buttel, a disciple of Karl Friedrich Schinkel.

The Baroque Neustrelitz Palace was destroyed in 1945, but the palace gardens (&quot;Schloßgarten&quot;) still exist. Worth seeing are the 18th-century &quot;Orangerie&quot; (from orange), initially used as a summerhouse, the &quot;Schloßkirche&quot; (Palace Church) built in 1855–1859 in English Neo-Gothic style, the Neoclassic Hebe temple (with a replica of a statue of the goddess Hebe), and the Louise Temple, built in 1891 in the shape of a Greek temple to house the tomb of Queen Louise of Prussia, born Princess of Mecklenburg-Strelitz.

There is a small lake, Glambeck See, where one can swim in summer in a protected area and have lunch at a restaurant overlooking the lake.

==Transport==
The town has a station on the Berlin Northern Railway and provides direct connections to Berlin and Rostock.

== Gallery ==
==Entertainment==
The city has hosted the popular Immergut Festival since the year 2000, attended by almost 5000 visitors each year.

Neustrelitz boasts its own theatre with a permanent resident cast. Drama, operas, operettas and musicals are regularly performed there. The theatre seats 400 persons. A review (in German) of a 2017 opera performance of Offenbach&#x27;s The Tales of Hoffmann is to be found here. www.myway.de/hoffmann/1617-neustrelitz.html

== Notable people ==


* Adolf Friedrich von Olthof (1718-1793), a Swedish Pomeranian councillor and patron of the arts.
* Carl Eggers (1787–1863), history painter
* Albert Wolff (1814–1892), sculptor
* Wilhelm von Kardorff (1828-1907), landowner and politician 
* Heinrich Gärtner (1828–1909), landscape painter.
* Karl Ludwig Ernst Schroeder (1838–1887), gynecologist
* Karl Kraepelin (1848–1915), biologist, founder of the Natural History Museum in Hamburg
* Emil Cohn (1854–1944), physicist worked on theoretical electromagnetism.
* Emil Kraepelin (1856–1926), psychiatrist, considered as father of modern psychiatry
* Hans Kundt (1869–1939), German-Bolivian general in the First World War and the Chacokrieg
* Marie Kundt (1870–1932), photographer, teacher and director at the Lette-Verein, Berlin
* Carl Friedrich Roewer (1881–1963), pedagogue, arachnologist and museum director
* Franz Rademacher (1906–1973), lawyer and diplomat.
* Herbert Wagner (born 1948), politician (CDU), Lord Mayor of Dresden 1990–2001
* Thomas Böttger (born 1957), composer and pianist
* Charly Hübner (born 1972), actor
* Anna Kovalchuk (born 1977), a Russian film, TV and theatre actress.

=== Aristocracy ===
* Adolphus Frederick III (1686–1752), Duke of Mecklenburg-Strelitz from 1708 to 1752.
* Duke Charles Louis Frederick of Mecklenburg (1708–1752), member of the Strelitz branch of the House of Mecklenburg. 
* Prince Carl of Solms-Braunfels (1812–1875), German prince and military officer for Austria &amp; the Grand Duchy of Hesse; founded New Braunfels, Texas
* Frederick William, Grand Duke of Mecklenburg-Strelitz (1819–1904), grand duke from 1860 to 1904.
* Kuno von Moltke (1847–1923), adjutant to Wilhelm II; main player in the Eulenburg affair, a homosexual scandal.
* Adolphus Frederick V (1848–1914), grand duke of Mecklenburg-Strelitz from 1904 to 1914.
* Adolphus Frederick VI (1882–1918), the last reigning grand duke of Mecklenburg-Strelitz from 1914 to 1918.

=== Sport ===
* Bernhard Horwitz (1807–1885), chess master
* Rainer Ernst (born 1961), footballer, played over 330 games and 56 for East Germany
* Ulf Hoffmann (born 1961), gymnast, silver medallist at the 1988 Summer Olympics.
* Andreas Dittmer (born 1972), three time Olympic gold medallist in canoeing
* Olaf Winter (born 1973), gold medallist in canoeing at the 1996 Summer Olympics

==International relations==
===Twin towns – Sister cities===
Neustrelitz is twinned with:
* Chaykovsky, Russia
* Szczecinek, Poland
* Rovaniemi, Finland
* Schwäbisch Hall, Germany

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q20352" start="0" end="11" title="Neustrelitz" label="Neustrelitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902" start="34" end="61" title="Mecklenburgische Seenplatte (district)" label="Mecklenburgische Seenplatte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196" start="87" end="109" title="Mecklenburg-Vorpommern" label="Mecklenburg-Vorpommern"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="111" end="118" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q199102" start="155" end="166" title="Zierker See" label="Zierker See"/>
<link wikidata="Q701658" start="174" end="199" title="Mecklenburg Lake District" label="Mecklenburg Lake District"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751106" start="248" end="277" title="Duchy of Mecklenburg-Strelitz" label="Duchy of Mecklenburg-Strelitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q559552" start="338" end="358" title="Mecklenburg-Strelitz (district)" label="Mecklenburg-Strelitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q36741" start="411" end="419" title="Polabian language" label="Polabian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751106" start="778" end="807" title="Duchy of Mecklenburg-Strelitz" label="Duchy of Mecklenburg-Strelitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q490025" start="906" end="915" title="Ratzeburg" label="Ratzeburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194" start="944" end="962" title="Schleswig-Holstein" label="Schleswig-Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q979756" start="1410" end="1444" title="Free State of Mecklenburg-Strelitz" label="Free State of Mecklenburg-Strelitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q109057" start="1538" end="1549" title="Mecklenburg" label="Mecklenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="1705" end="1713" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q210633" start="1728" end="1749" title="2nd Belorussian Front" label="2nd Belorussian Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="1878" end="1885" title="Baroque" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q151759" start="2126" end="2149" title="Karl Friedrich Schinkel" label="Karl Friedrich Schinkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2242672" start="2164" end="2182" title="Neustrelitz Palace" label="Neustrelitz Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q186363" start="2448" end="2458" title="Neo-Gothic" label="Neo-Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q14378" start="2470" end="2480" title="Neoclassicism" label="Neoclassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q131125" start="2536" end="2540" title="Hebe (mythology)" label="Hebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q456533" start="2881" end="2904" title="Berlin Northern Railway" label="Berlin Northern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="2940" end="2946" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2861" start="2951" end="2958" title="Rostock" label="Rostock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660039" start="3025" end="3042" title="Immergut Festival" label="Immergut Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q361713" start="3458" end="3484" title="Adolf Friedrich von Olthof" label="Adolf Friedrich von Olthof"/>
<link wikidata="Q923770" start="3556" end="3567" title="Carl Eggers" label="Carl Eggers"/>
<link wikidata="Q742333" start="3581" end="3596" title="History painting" label="history painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q286318" start="3599" end="3611" title="Albert Wolff (sculptor)" label="Albert Wolff"/>
<link wikidata="Q96133" start="3636" end="3656" title="Wilhelm von Kardorff" label="Wilhelm von Kardorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q317463" start="3698" end="3714" title="Heinrich Gärtner" label="Heinrich Gärtner"/>
<link wikidata="Q91186" start="3749" end="3776" title="Karl Ludwig Ernst Schroeder" label="Karl Ludwig Ernst Schroeder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221899" start="3790" end="3802" title="gynecologist" label="gynecologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q68239" start="3805" end="3819" title="Karl Kraepelin" label="Karl Kraepelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q92123" start="3895" end="3904" title="Emil Cohn" label="Emil Cohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q11406" start="3950" end="3966" title="electromagnetism" label="electromagnetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q76828" start="3970" end="3984" title="Emil Kraepelin" label="Emil Kraepelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q65710" start="4056" end="4066" title="Hans Kundt" label="Hans Kundt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897398" start="4148" end="4159" title="Marie Kundt" label="Marie Kundt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821142" start="4215" end="4227" title="Lette-Verein" label="Lette-Verein"/>
<link wikidata="Q70682" start="4238" end="4259" title="Carl Friedrich Roewer" label="Carl Friedrich Roewer"/>
<link wikidata="Q190979" start="4284" end="4297" title="arachnologist" label="arachnologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q214348" start="4320" end="4336" title="Franz Rademacher" label="Franz Rademacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q105881" start="4373" end="4387" title="Herbert Wagner (politician)" label="Herbert Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q110742" start="4453" end="4467" title="Thomas Böttger" label="Thomas Böttger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067500" start="4504" end="4517" title="Charly Hübner" label="Charly Hübner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968459" start="4539" end="4553" title="Anna Kovalchuk" label="Anna Kovalchuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q361682" start="4630" end="4652" title="Adolphus Frederick III" label="Adolphus Frederick III"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751106" start="4674" end="4694" title="Duchy of Mecklenburg-Strelitz" label="Mecklenburg-Strelitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q699743" start="4716" end="4759" title="Duke Charles Louis Frederick of Mecklenburg" label="Duke Charles Louis Frederick of Mecklenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q700158" start="4810" end="4830" title="House of Mecklenburg" label="House of Mecklenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q215154" start="4835" end="4865" title="Prince Carl of Solms-Braunfels" label="Prince Carl of Solms-Braunfels"/>
<link wikidata="Q574612" start="4966" end="4986" title="New Braunfels, Texas" label="New Braunfels, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q61444" start="4989" end="5042" title="Frederick William, Grand Duke of Mecklenburg-Strelitz" label="Frederick William, Grand Duke of Mecklenburg-Strelitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q66400" start="5088" end="5103" title="Kuno von Moltke" label="Kuno von Moltke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677" start="5129" end="5139" title="Wilhelm II" label="Wilhelm II"/>
<link wikidata="Q703771" start="5160" end="5176" title="Eulenburg affair" label="Eulenburg affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q361740" start="5202" end="5222" title="Adolphus Frederick V" label="Adolphus Frederick V"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751106" start="5250" end="5270" title="Duchy of Mecklenburg-Strelitz" label="Mecklenburg-Strelitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q361748" start="5292" end="5313" title="Adolphus Frederick VI" label="Adolphus Frederick VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751106" start="5359" end="5379" title="Duchy of Mecklenburg-Strelitz" label="Mecklenburg-Strelitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q62031" start="5416" end="5432" title="Bernhard Horwitz" label="Bernhard Horwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q529631" start="5461" end="5473" title="Rainer Ernst" label="Rainer Ernst"/>
<link wikidata="Q152424" start="5532" end="5544" title="East Germany national football team" label="East Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q830250" start="5547" end="5559" title="Ulf Hoffmann" label="Ulf Hoffmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q8470" start="5606" end="5626" title="1988 Summer Olympics" label="1988 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q63868" start="5630" end="5645" title="Andreas Dittmer" label="Andreas Dittmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q96671" start="5707" end="5718" title="Olaf Winter" label="Olaf Winter"/>
<link wikidata="Q8531" start="5766" end="5786" title="1996 Summer Olympics" label="1996 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="5864" end="5871" title="Twin towns and sister cities" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q197654" start="5880" end="5890" title="Chaykovsky (town)" label="Chaykovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="5892" end="5898" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q848999" start="5901" end="5911" title="Szczecinek" label="Szczecinek"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="5913" end="5919" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q103717" start="5922" end="5931" title="Rovaniemi" label="Rovaniemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="5933" end="5940" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q14910" start="5943" end="5958" title="Schwäbisch Hall" label="Schwäbisch Hall"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="140372" wikidata="Q1505" url="?curid=140372" title="Sikkim">
<text>Sikkim ( ; ) is a state in northeastern India. It borders the Tibet Autonomous Region of China in the north and northeast, Bhutan in the east, Koshi Province of Nepal in the west, and West Bengal in the south. Sikkim is also close to the Siliguri Corridor, which borders Bangladesh. Sikkim is the least populous and second-smallest among the Indian states. Situated in the Eastern Himalaya, Sikkim is notable for its biodiversity, including alpine and subtropical climates, as well as being a host to Kangchenjunga, the highest peak in India and third-highest on Earth. Sikkim&#x27;s capital and largest city is Gangtok. Almost 35% of the state is covered by Khangchendzonga National Park – a UNESCO World Heritage Site.

The Kingdom of Sikkim was founded by the Namgyal dynasty in the 17th century. It was ruled by Buddhist priest-kings known as the Chogyal. It became a princely state of the British Indian Empire in 1890. Following Indian independence, Sikkim continued its protectorate status with the Union of India after 1947 and the Republic of India after 1950. It enjoyed the highest literacy rate and per capita income among Himalayan states. In 1973, anti-royalist riots took place in front of the Chogyal&#x27;s palace. In 1975, after the Indian Army took over the city of Gangtok, a referendum was held that led to the dissolution of the monarchy and Sikkim&#x27;s joining India as its 22nd state.

Modern Sikkim is a multiethnic and multilingual Indian state. The official languages of the state are English, Nepali, Bhutia, and Lepcha. Additional official languages include Gurung, Limbu, Magar, Mukhia, Newari, Rai, Sherpa and Tamang for the purpose of preservation of culture and tradition in the state. English is taught in schools and used in government documents. The predominant religion is Hinduism, with a significant Vajrayana Buddhist minority. Sikkim&#x27;s economy is largely dependent on agriculture and tourism. , the state had the fifth-smallest GDP among Indian states, although it is also among the fastest-growing.

== Toponymy ==
The name &quot;Sikkim&quot; is believed to be a combination of the Limbu words &quot;su&quot; &quot;new&quot; and &quot;khyim&quot; &quot;palace&quot; or &quot;house&quot;. The Tibetan name for Sikkim is &quot;Drenjong&quot; (Wylie-transliteration: &quot;bras ljongs&quot;), which means &quot;valley of rice&quot;, while the Bhutias call it &quot;Beyul Demazong&quot;, which means &quot;the hidden valley of rice&quot;. According to folklore, after establishing Rabdentse as his new capital, Bhutia king Tensung Namgyal built a palace and asked his Limbu Queen to name it. The Lepcha people, the original inhabitants of Sikkim, called it &quot;Nye-mae-el&quot;, meaning &quot;paradise&quot;. In historical Indian literature, Sikkim is known as &quot;Indrakil&quot;, the garden of the war god Indra.

== History ==

The Lepchas are considered to be the earliest inhabitants of Sikkim. However the Limbus and the Magars also lived in the inaccessible parts of West and South districts as early as the Lepchas perhaps lived in the East and North districts. The Buddhist saint Padmasambhava, also known as Guru Rinpoche, passed through the land in the 8th century. The Guru is reported to have blessed the land, introduced Buddhism, and foretold the era of monarchy that would arrive in Sikkim centuries later.

=== Foundation of the monarchy ===

According to legend, Khye Bumsa, a 14th-century prince from the Minyak House in Kham in eastern Tibet, received a divine revelation instructing him to travel south to seek his fortunes. A fifth-generation descendant of Khye Bumsa, Phuntsog Namgyal, became the founder of Sikkim&#x27;s monarchy in 1642, when he was consecrated as the first Chogyal, or priest-king, of Sikkim by the three venerated lamas at Yuksom.
Phuntsog Namgyal was succeeded in 1670 by his son, Tensung Namgyal, who moved the capital from Yuksom to Rabdentse (near modern Pelling). In 1700, Sikkim was invaded by the Bhutanese with the help of the half-sister of the Chogyal, who had been denied the throne. The Bhutanese were driven away by the Tibetan people, who restored the throne to the Chogyal ten years later. Between 1717 and 1733, the kingdom faced many raids by the Nepalese in the west and Bhutanese in the east, culminating with the destruction of the capital Rabdentse by the Nepalese. In 1791, China sent troops to support Sikkim and defend Tibet against the Gorkha Kingdom. Following the subsequent defeat of Gorkha, the Chinese Qing dynasty established control over Sikkim.

=== During the British Raj ===
Following the beginning of British rule in neighbouring India, Sikkim allied with Britain against their common adversary, Nepal. The Nepalese attacked Sikkim, overrunning most of the region including the Terai. This prompted the British East India Company to attack Nepal, resulting in the Gurkha War of 1814. Treaties signed between Sikkim and Nepal resulted in the return of the territory annexed by the Nepalese in 1817. However, ties between Sikkim and the British weakened when the latter began taxation of the Morang region. In 1849, two British physicians, Sir Joseph Dalton Hooker and Archibald Campbell, the latter being the superintendent of Darjeeling, ventured into the mountains of Sikkim with the prior permission of King Tsugphu Namgyal. The doctors were detained by an influential Dewan, leading to a punitive British expedition against the kingdom, after which the Darjeeling district and Morang were annexed to British India in 1853. The Chogyal of Sikkim became a titular ruler under the directive of the British governor as a result of the invasion.

Sikkim became a British protectorate in the later decades of the 19th century, formalised by a convention signed with China in 1890. Sikkim was gradually granted more sovereignty over the next three decades, and became a member of the Chamber of Princes, the assembly representing the rulers of the Indian princely states, in 1922.

=== Indian protectorate ===
Prior to Indian independence, Jawaharlal Nehru, as the Vice-President of the Executive Council, pushed through a resolution in the Indian Constituent Assembly to the effect that Sikkim and Bhutan, as Himalayan states, were not &#x27;Indian states&#x27; and their future should be negotiated separately. A standstill agreement was signed in February 1948.

Meanwhile, Indian independence and its move to democracy spurred a fledgling political movement in Sikkim, giving rise to the formation of Sikkim State Congress (SSC), a pro-accession political party. The party sent a plate of demands to the palace, including a demand for accession to India. The palace attempted to defuse the movement by appointing three secretaries from the SSC to the government and sponsoring a counter-movement in the name of Sikkim National Party, which opposed accession to India.

The demand for responsible government continued, and the SSC launched a civil disobedience movement. The Chogyal Palden Thondup Namgyal asked India for help in quelling the movement, which was offered in the form of a small military police force and an Indian Dewan. In 1950, a treaty was agreed between India and Sikkim which gave Sikkim the status of an Indian protectorate. Sikkim came under the suzerainty of India, which controlled its external affairs, defence, diplomacy and communications. In other respects, Sikkim retained administrative autonomy.

A state council was established in 1953 to allow for constitutional government under the Chogyal. Chogyal Palden Thondup Namgyal was able to preserve autonomy and shape a &quot;model Asian state&quot; where the literacy rate and per capita income were twice as high as neighbouring Nepal, Bhutan and India. Meanwhile, the Sikkim National Congress demanded fresh elections and greater representation for Nepalis in Sikkim. People marched on the palace against the monarchy. In 1973, anti-royalist agitations took place, which needed to be quelled using Indian security forces.

=== Merger and statehood ===

In 1975, the Prime Minister of Sikkim Kazi Lhendup Dorjee, appealed to the Indian Prime Minister, Indira Gandhi for Sikkim to become a state of India. In April of that year, the Indian Army took over the city of Gangtok and disarmed the Chogyal&#x27;s palace guards. Thereafter, a referendum was held in which 97.5 per cent of voters supported abolishing the monarchy, effectively approving union with India. India is said to have stationed 20,000–40,000 troops in a country of only 200,000 during the referendum. On 16 May 1975, Sikkim became the 22nd state of the Indian Union, and the monarchy was abolished. To enable the incorporation of the new state, the Indian Parliament amended the Indian Constitution. First, the 35th Amendment laid down a set of conditions that made Sikkim an &quot;Associate State&quot;, a special designation not used by any other state. A month later, the 36th Amendment repealed the 35th Amendment, and made Sikkim a full state, adding its name to the First Schedule of the Constitution.

=== Recent history ===
In 2000, the seventeenth Karmapa, Urgyen Trinley Dorje, who had been confirmed by the Dalai Lama and accepted as a tulku by the Chinese government, escaped from Tibet, seeking to return to the Rumtek Monastery in Sikkim. Chinese officials were in a dilemma on this issue, for any protests to India would mean an explicit endorsement of India&#x27;s governance of Sikkim, which China still recognised as an independent state occupied by India. The Chinese government eventually recognised Sikkim as an Indian state in 2003, in return for India declaring Tibet as a part of the territory of China; New Delhi had accepted Tibet as part of China in 1954, but China appears to have believed that the agreement had lapsed. The 2003 agreement led to a thaw in Sino-Indian relations. On 6 July 2006, the Sikkimese Himalayan pass of Nathu La was opened to cross-border trade, becoming the first open border between India and China. The pass, which was first opened during the 1904 Younghusband Expedition to Tibet, had remained closed since the 1962 Sino-Indian War.

On 18 September 2011, a magnitude 6.9Mw earthquake struck Sikkim, killing at least 116 people in the state and in Nepal, Bhutan, Bangladesh and Tibet. More than 60 people died in Sikkim alone, and the city of Gangtok suffered significant damage.

== Geography ==

Situated in the Himalayan mountains, the state of Sikkim is characterised by mountainous terrain. Almost the entire state is hilly, with an elevation ranging from in the south at the border with West Bengal to in the northern peaks near Nepal and Tibet. The summit of Kangchenjunga, the world&#x27;s third-highest peak, is the state&#x27;s highest point, situated on the border between Sikkim and Nepal. For the most part, the land is unfit for agriculture because of the rocky, precipitous slopes. However, some hill slopes have been converted into terrace farms.

Numerous snow-fed streams have carved out river valleys in the west and south of the state. These streams combine into the major Teesta River and its tributary, the Rangeet, which flow through the state from north to south. About a third of the state is heavily forested. The Himalayan mountains surround the northern, eastern and western borders of Sikkim. The Lower Himalayas, lying in the southern reaches of the state, are the most densely populated.

The state has 28 mountain peaks, more than 80 glaciers, 227 high-altitude lakes (including the Tsongmo, Gurudongmar and Khecheopalri Lakes), five major hot springs, and more than 100 rivers and streams. Eight mountain passes connect the state to Tibet, Bhutan and Nepal.

Sikkim&#x27;s hot springs are renowned for their medicinal and therapeutic value. Among the state&#x27;s most notable hot springs are those at Phurchachu, Yumthang, Borang, Ralang, Taram-chu and Yumey Samdong. The springs, which have a high sulphur content, are located near river banks; some are known to emit hydrogen. The average temperature of the water in these hot springs is .

===Geology===

The hills of Sikkim mainly consist of gneiss and schist which weather to produce generally poor and shallow brown clay soils. The soil is coarse, with large concentrations of iron oxide; it ranges from neutral to acidic and is lacking in organic and mineral nutrients. This type of soil tends to support evergreen and deciduous forests.

The rock consists of phyllites and schists, and is highly susceptible to weathering and erosion. This, combined with the state&#x27;s heavy rainfall, causes extensive soil erosion and the loss of soil nutrients through leaching. As a result, landslides are frequent, often isolating rural towns and villages from the major urban centres.

=== Climate ===
The state has five seasons: winter, summer, spring, autumn, and monsoon season. Sikkim&#x27;s climate ranges from sub-tropical in the south to tundra in the north. Most of the inhabited regions of Sikkim experience a temperate climate, with temperatures seldom exceeding in summer. The average annual temperature for most of Sikkim is around .

Sikkim is one of the few states in India to receive regular snowfall. The snow line ranges from in the south of the state to in the north. The tundra-type region in the north is snowbound for four months every year, and the temperature drops below almost every night. In north-western Sikkim, the peaks are frozen year-round; because of the high altitude, temperatures in the mountains can drop to as low as in winter.

During the monsoon, heavy rains increase the risk of landslides. The record for the longest period of continuous rain in Sikkim is 11 days. Fog affects many parts of the state during winter and the monsoons, making transportation perilous.

=== Flora and fauna ===
Sikkim is situated in an ecological hotspot of the lower Himalayas, one of only three among the ecoregions of India. The forested regions of the state exhibit a diverse range of fauna and flora. Owing to its altitudinal gradation, the state has a wide variety of plants, from tropical species to temperate, alpine and tundra ones, and is perhaps one of the few regions to exhibit such a diversity within such a small area. Nearly 81 per cent of the area of Sikkim comes under the administration of its forest department.

Sikkim is home to around 5,000 species of flowering plants, 515 rare orchids, 60 primula species, 36 rhododendron species, 11 oak varieties, 23 bamboo varieties, 16 conifer species, 362 types of ferns and ferns allies, 8 tree ferns, and over 900 medicinal plants. A relative of the Poinsettia, locally known as &quot;Christmas Flower&quot;, can be found in abundance in the mountainous state. The Noble Dendrobium is the official flower of Sikkim, while the rhododendron is the state tree.

Orchids, figs, laurel, bananas, sal trees and bamboo grow in the Himalayan subtropical broadleaf forests of the lower altitudes of Sikkim. In the temperate elevations above there are Eastern Himalayan broadleaf forests, where oaks, chestnuts, maples, birches, alders, and magnolias grow in large numbers, as well as Himalayan subtropical pine forests, dominated by Chir pine. Alpine-type vegetation is typically found between an altitude of . In lower elevations are found juniper, pine, firs, cypresses and rhododendrons from the Eastern Himalayan subalpine conifer forests. Higher up are Eastern Himalayan alpine shrub and meadows and high-altitude wetlands, which are home to a wide variety of rhododendrons and wildflowers.
The fauna of Sikkim include the snow leopard, musk deer, Himalayan tahr, red panda, Himalayan marmot, Himalayan serow, Himalayan goral, muntjac, common langur, Asian black bear, clouded leopard, marbled cat, leopard cat, dhole, Tibetan wolf, hog badger, binturong, and Himalayan jungle cat. Among the animals more commonly found in the alpine zone are yaks, mainly reared for their milk, meat, and as a beast of burden.

The avifauna of Sikkim include the impeyan pheasant, crimson horned pheasant, snow partridge, Tibetan snowcock, bearded vulture and griffon vulture, as well as golden eagles, quails, plovers, woodcocks, sandpipers, pigeons, Old World flycatchers, babblers and robins. Sikkim has more than 550 species of birds, some of which have been declared endangered.

Sikkim also has a rich diversity of arthropods, many of which remain unstudied. Some of the most understudied species are Sikkimese arthropods, specifically butterflies. Of the approximately 1,438 butterfly species found in the Indian subcontinent, 695 have been recorded in Sikkim. These include the endangered Kaiser-i-hind, the Yellow Gorgon and the Bhutan Glory.

====National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries====
List of National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries of Sikkim:
* Khangchendzonga National Park
* Pangolakha Wildlife Sanctuary
* Fambong Lho Wildlife Sanctuary
* Kyongnosla Alpine Sanctuary
* Maenam Wildlife Sanctuary
* Barsey Rhododendron Sanctuary
* Shingba Rhododendron Sanctuary
* Kitam Bird Sanctuary
* Sling Dong Faireanum Orchid Conservation Reserve

== Government and politics ==
According to the Constitution of India, Sikkim has a parliamentary system of representative democracy for its governance; universal suffrage is granted to state residents. The government structure is organised into three branches:

* Executive: As with all states of India, a governor stands at the head of the executive power of state, just as the president is the head of the executive power in the Union, and is appointed by the President of India. The governor&#x27;s appointment is largely ceremonial, and his or her main role is to oversee the swearing-in of the chief minister. The chief minister, who holds the real executive powers, is the head of the party or coalition garnering the largest majority in the state elections. The governor also appoints cabinet ministers on the advice of the chief minister.
* Legislature: Sikkim has a unicameral legislature, the Sikkim Legislative Assembly, like most other Indian states. Its state assembly has 32 seats, including one reserved for the Sangha. Sikkim is allocated one seat in each of the two chambers of India&#x27;s national bicameral legislature, the Lok Sabha and the Rajya Sabha.
* Judiciary: The judiciary consists of the Sikkim High Court and a system of lower courts. The High Court, located at Gangtok, has a Chief Justice along with two permanent justices. The Sikkim High Court is the smallest state high court in the country.

In 1975, after the abrogation of Sikkim&#x27;s monarchy, the Indian National Congress gained a majority in the 1977 elections. In 1979, after a period of instability, a popular ministry headed by Nar Bahadur Bhandari, leader of the Sikkim Sangram Parishad Party, was sworn in. Bhandari held on to power in the 1984 and 1989 elections. In the 1994 elections, Pawan Kumar Chamling of the Sikkim Democratic Front became the Chief Minister of the state. Chamling and his party had since held on to power by winning the 1999, 2004, 2009 and 2014 elections. However, the 2019 legislative assembly elections were won by the Sikkim Krantikari Morcha party and the chief minister since then is Prem Singh Tamang. The current Governor of Sikkim is Lakshman Acharya.

Sikkim is among India&#x27;s most environmentally conscious states, having banned plastic water bottles &quot;in all government functions and meetings&quot; and polystyrene products (throughout the state).

=== Subdivisions ===
Sikkim has six districts – Gangtok District, Mangan District, Namchi District, Pakyong District, Geyzing District and Soreng District. The district capitals are Gangtok, Mangan, Namchi, Pakyong, Gyalshing and Soreng respectively. These six districts are further divided into 16 subdivisions; Pakyong, Rongli, Rangpo and Gangtok are the subdivisions of the Gangtok and Pakyong Districts. Soreng, Yuksom, Gyalshing and Dentam are the subdivisions of the Geyzing and Soreng district. Chungthang, Dzongu, Kabi and Mangan are the subdivisions of the Mangan district. Ravongla, Jorethang, Namchi and Yangyang are the subdivisions of the Namchi district.

Each of Sikkim&#x27;s districts is overseen by a state government appointee, the district collector, who is in charge of the administration of the civilian areas of the district. The Indian Army has control over a large part of the state, as Sikkim forms part of a sensitive border area with China. Many areas are restricted to foreigners, and official permits are needed to visit them.

== Economy ==

Sikkim&#x27;s nominal state gross domestic product (GDP) was estimated at US$4.6 billion in 2019, with GDP per capita being $7,530 (₹ 5,50,000) thus constituting the third-smallest GDP among India&#x27;s 28 states. The state&#x27;s economy is largely agrarian based on the terraced farming of rice and the cultivation of crops such as maize, millet, wheat, barley, oranges, tea, and cardamom. Sikkim produces more cardamom than any other Indian state and is home to the largest cultivated area of cardamom. Sikkim achieved its ambition to convert its agriculture to fully organic between 2003 and 2016, and became the first state in India to achieve this distinction.

Because of its hilly terrain and poor transport infrastructure, Sikkim lacks a large-scale industrial base. Brewing, distilling, tanning and watchmaking are the main industries and are mainly located in the southern regions of the state, primarily in the towns of Melli and Jorethang. In addition, a small mining industry exists in Sikkim extracting minerals such as copper, dolomite, talc, graphite, quartzite, coal, zinc, and lead. Despite the state&#x27;s minimal industrial infrastructure, Sikkim&#x27;s economy has been among the fastest-growing in India since 2000; the state&#x27;s GDP expanded by 89.93% in 2010 alone. In 2003, Sikkim decided to fully convert to organic farming and achieved this goal in 2015 becoming India&#x27;s first &quot;organic state&quot;.

In recent years, the government of Sikkim has extensively promoted tourism. As a result, state revenue has increased 14 times since the mid-1990s. Sikkim has furthermore invested in a fledgling gambling industry promoting both casinos and online gambling. The state&#x27;s first casino, the Casino Sikkim, opened in March 2009. In the year 2010 the government subsequently issued three gambling licences for casinos and online sports betting in general. The Playwin lottery has been a notable success in the state.

The opening of the Nathu La pass on 6 July 2006, connecting Lhasa, Tibet, to India, was billed as a boon for Sikkim&#x27;s economy. Trade through the pass remains hampered by Sikkim&#x27;s limited infrastructure and government restrictions in both India and China, though the volume of traded goods has been steadily increasing.

== Transport ==
=== Air ===
Sikkim did not have any operational airport for a long time because of its rough terrain. However, in October 2018, Pakyong Airport, the state&#x27;s first airport, located in Pakyong Town at a distance of from Gangtok, became operational after a four-year delay. It has been constructed by the Airports Authority of India on 200 acres of land. At an altitude of above sea level, it is one of the five highest airports in India. The airport is capable of operating ATR aircraft.

Before October 2018, the closest operational airport to Sikkim was Bagdogra Airport near Siliguri in northern West Bengal. The airport is located about from Gangtok, and frequent buses connect the two. A daily helicopter service run by the Sikkim Helicopter Service connects Gangtok to Bagdogra; the flight is thirty minutes long, operates only once a day, and can carry four people. The Gangtok helipad is the only civilian helipad in the state.

=== Roads ===

National Highway 10 (NH 10; formerly NH 31A) links Siliguri to Gangtok. Sikkim Nationalised Transport runs bus and truck services. Privately run bus, tourist taxi, and jeep services operate throughout Sikkim and also connect it to Siliguri. A branch of the highway from Melli connects western Sikkim. Towns in eastern, southern and western Sikkim are connected to the hill stations of Kalimpong and Darjeeling in northern West Bengal. The state is furthermore connected to Tibet by the mountain pass of Nathu La.

List of National Highways of Sikkim:



=== Rail ===
Sikkim lacks significant railway infrastructure. The closest major railway stations are Siliguri Junction and New Jalpaiguri in neighbouring West Bengal. However, the New Sikkim Railway Project has been launched to connect the town of Rangpo in Sikkim with Sevoke on the West Bengal border. This line is Sevoke-Rangpo Railway Line from Sivok railway station to Rangpo railway station. The five-station line is intended to support both economic development and Indian Army operations and was initially planned to be completed by 2015, though as of 2023 its construction has met with delays. In 2019, the railway line up to Rangpo was expected to be completed in 2021. In the second phase the line will be extended up to Gangtok. In addition, the Ministry of Railways proposed plans in 2010 for railway lines linking Mirik in West Bengal to Namchi, Daramdin, Ranipool, and Gangtok.

== Infrastructure ==

Sikkim&#x27;s roads are maintained by the Border Roads Organisation (BRO), an offshoot of the Indian Army. The roads in southern Sikkim are in relatively good condition, landslides being less frequent in this region. The state government maintains of roadways that do not fall under the BRO&#x27;s jurisdiction.

Sikkim receives most of its electricity from 19 hydroelectric power stations. Power is also obtained from the National Thermal Power Corporation and Power Grid Corporation of India. By 2006, the state had achieved 100 per cent rural electrification. However, the voltage remains unstable and voltage stabilisers are needed. Per capita consumption of electricity in Sikkim was approximately 182 kWh in 2006. The state government has promoted biogas and solar power for cooking, but these have received a poor response and are used mostly for lighting purposes. In 2005, 73.2 per cent of Sikkim&#x27;s households were reported to have access to safe drinking water, and the state&#x27;s large number of mountain streams assures a sufficient water supply.

On 8 December 2008, it was announced that Sikkim had become the first state in India to achieve 100 per cent sanitation coverage, becoming completely free of public defecation, thus attaining the status of &quot;Nirmal State&quot;.

== Demographics ==


Sikkim is India&#x27;s least populous state, with 610,577 inhabitants according to the 2011 census. Sikkim is also one of the least densely populated Indian states, with only 86 persons per square kilometre. However, it has a high population growth rate, averaging 12.36% per cent between 2001 and 2011. The sex ratio is 889 females per 1,000 males, with a total of 321,661 males and 286,027 females recorded in 2011. With around 98,000 inhabitants as of 2011, the capital Gangtok is the most significant urban area in the mostly rural state; in 2005, the urban population in Sikkim constituted around 11.06 per cent of the total. In 2011, the average per capita income in Sikkim stood at 81,159 (US$1,305).

=== Languages ===
The official languages of the state are Nepali, Sikkimese, Lepcha and English. Additional official languages include Gurung, Limbu, Magar, Mukhia, Newar, Rai, Sherpa and Tamang for the purpose of preservation of culture and tradition in the state.

Nepali is the lingua franca of Sikkim, while Sikkimese (Bhutia) and Lepcha are spoken in certain areas. English is also spoken and understood in most of Sikkim. Other languages include Dzongkha, Groma, Hindi, Majhi, Majhwar, Thulung, Tibetan, and Yakha.

=== Ethnicity ===
The majority of Sikkim&#x27;s residents are Nepali Indians. The native Sikkimese include the Bhutias, who migrated from the Kham district of Tibet in the 14th century, and the Lepchas, who are believed to pre-date the Bhutias and are the oldest known inhabitants. Tibetans reside mostly in the northern and eastern reaches of the state. Migrant resident communities known as Plainsmen Sikkimese include Bengalis, Biharis and Marwaris, who are prominent in commerce in South Sikkim and Gangtok, only those who are the native residents since 1946.

=== Religion ===


According to the 2011 census, 57.8% follow Hinduism, making it the state&#x27;s majority religion. Buddhism is followed by 27.4% of the population, while Christianity is followed by 9.9%. Between 2001 and 2011, Christianity was the fastest growing religion in the state, going from 6.67% to 9.91% of the population. It was thus the fourth state with the highest Christian growth in the period, behind only Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur and Meghalaya. As of 2014, the Evangelical Presbyterian Church of Sikkim is the largest Christian denomination in Sikkim. Hinduism, on the other hand, declined from 60.93% to 57.76% of the population in the same period. Sikkim was the fourth state with the biggest decline in the percentage of Hindus, behind only Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur and Assam. Vajrayana Buddhism, which accounts for 27.3% of the population, is Sikkim&#x27;s second-largest, yet most prominent religion. Prior to Sikkim&#x27;s becoming a part of the Indian Union, Vajrayana Buddhism was the state religion under the Chogyal. Sikkim has 75 Buddhist monasteries, the oldest dating back to the 1700s. The public and visual aesthetics of Sikkim are executed in shades of Vajrayana Buddhism and Buddhism plays a significant role in public life, even among Sikkim&#x27;s majority Nepali Hindu population. Other religious minorities include Muslims of Bihari ethnicity and Jains, who each account for roughly 1% of the population. The traditional religions of the native Sikkimese account for much of the remainder of the population.

Although tensions between the Lepchas and the Nepalese escalated during the merger of Sikkim with India in the 1970s, there has never been any major degree of communal religious violence, unlike in other Indian states. The traditional religion of the Lepcha people is Mun, an animist practice which coexists with Buddhism and Christianity.

==Districts==
There are 6 districts in Sikkim, each overseen by a Central Government appointee, the district collector, who is in charge of the administration of the civilian areas of the districts. The Indian Army has control of a large territory, as the state is a sensitive border area. Many areas are restricted and permits are needed to visit them. 
The six districts are:
== Culture ==
===Festivals and holidays===

Sikkim&#x27;s Gorkhali majority celebrate all major Hindu festivals, including Tihar (Diwali) and Dashain (Dashera). Traditional local festivals, such as Maghe Sankranti, Ramnavmi, Janmastami, Holi, Shivaratri, Navratri, Sakela, Chasok Tangnam and Bhimsen Puja, are popular. Losar, Saga Dawa, Lhabab Duechen, Drupka Teshi and Bhumchu are among the Buddhist festivals celebrated in Sikkim. During the Losar (Tibetan New Year), most offices and educational institutions are closed for a week.

Sikkimese Muslims celebrate Eid ul-Fitr and Muharram. Christmas has been promoted in Gangtok to attract tourists during the off-season.

Western rock music and Indian pop have gained a wide following in Sikkim. Nepali rock and Lepcha music are also popular. Sikkim&#x27;s most popular sports are football and cricket, although hang gliding and river rafting have grown popular as part of the tourism industry.

=== Cuisine ===

Traditional cuisines of the Lepcha, Limbu, Magar, and Bhutia peoples incorporate the rich biodiversity of the place. The Buddhist saint Padmasambhava, also known as Guru Rinpoche, who passed through ancient Sikkim in the eighth century noted the rich produce of the place in his writings, There are about 155 varieties of fruits with different tastes and nutritional values. [These include] a walnut that tastes like butter; a fruit known as wallay… and a grape with the taste of wine. There are fruits called tingding with the taste of meat, and sedey, which can be eaten as the equivalent of an entire meal; turnips, and thirty-seven other types of root vegetables are available. There are twenty different varieties of garlic. Altogether, among the edible plants, there are 360 varieties available. There are wild radishes, along with tsolay, nyolay, and grapes in the valley. In the trees, among the rocks and hanging from the cliffs there are beehives.Noodle-based dishes such as thukpa, chow mein, thenthuk, fakthu, gyathuk and wonton are common in Sikkim. Momos – steamed dumplings filled with vegetables, chicken, mutton, beef or pork and served with soup – are a popular snack.

Beer, whiskey, rum and brandy are widely consumed in Sikkim, as is tongba, a millet-based alcoholic beverage that is popular in Nepal and Darjeeling. Sikkim has the third-highest per capita alcoholism rate among all Indian states, behind Punjab and Haryana.

== Media ==
In 1957, a Nepali monthly magazine &quot;Kanchenjunga&quot; became the first news outlet for the masses in Sikkim.

The southern urban areas of Sikkim have English, Nepali and Hindi daily newspapers. Nepali-language newspapers, as well as some English newspapers, are locally printed, whereas Hindi and English newspapers are printed in Siliguri. Important local dailies and weeklies include &quot;Hamro Prajashakti&quot; (Nepali daily), &quot;Himalayan Mirror&quot; (English daily), the &quot;Samay Dainik&quot;, &quot;Sikkim Express&quot; (English), &quot;Kanchanjunga Times&quot; (Nepali weekly), &quot;Pragya Khabar&quot; (Nepali weekly) and &quot;Himali Bela&quot;. Furthermore, the state receives regional editions of national English newspapers such as &quot;The Statesman&quot;, &quot;The Telegraph&quot;, &quot;The Hindu&quot; and &quot;The Times of India&quot;. &quot;Himalaya Darpan&quot;, a Nepali daily published in Siliguri, is one of the leading Nepali daily newspapers in the region. The &quot;Sikkim Herald&quot; is an official weekly publication of the government. Online media covering Sikkim include the Nepali newspaper &quot;Himgiri&quot;, the English news portal &quot;Haalkhabar&quot; and the literary magazine &quot;Tistarangit&quot;. &quot;Avyakta&quot;, &quot;Bilokan&quot;, the &quot;Journal of Hill Research&quot;, &quot;Khaber Khagaj&quot;, &quot;Panda&quot;, and the &quot;Sikkim Science Society Newsletter&quot; are among other registered publications.

Internet cafés are well established in the district capitals, but broadband connectivity is not widely available. Satellite television channels through dish antennae are available in most homes in the state. Channels served are largely the same as those available in the rest of India, although Nepali-language channels are also available. The main service providers include Airtel digital TV, Tata Sky, Dish TV, DD Free Dish and Nayuma.

== Education ==
In 2011, Sikkim&#x27;s adult literacy rate was 82.2 per cent: 87.29 per cent for males and 76.43 per cent for females. There are a total of 1,157 schools in the state, including 765 schools run by the state government, seven central government schools and 385 private schools. There is one Institute of National Importance, one central university and four private universities in Sikkim offering higher education.

Recently, Government of Sikkim has approved the open school board named Board of Open Schooling and Skill Education, BOSSE to provide Secondary Education, Senior Secondary as well as Skill &amp; Vocational Education up to pre-degree level and to provide opportunity to continue education to such students who have missed the opportunity of school education. Sikkim has a National Institute of Technology, currently operating from a temporary campus in Ravangla, South Sikkim, which is one among the ten newly sanctioned NITs by the Government of India under the 11th Five year Plan, 2009. The NIT Sikkim also has state of art super computing facility named PARAM Kanchenjunga which is said to be fastest among all 31 NITs. Sikkim University is the only central university in Sikkim. The public-private funded institution is the Sikkim Manipal University of Technological Sciences, which offers higher education in engineering, medicine and management. It also runs a host of distance education programs in diverse fields.

Medhavi Skills University is a private university located in the state of Sikkim, India. It was established in 2021 under the Sikkim Private Universities, (Amendment) Act, 2021. The university aims to provide skill-based education to students and bridge the gap between academia and industry.

There are two state-run polytechnic schools – the Advanced Technical Training Centre (ATTC) and the Centre for Computers and Communication Technology (CCCT) – which offer diploma courses in various branches of engineering. ATTC is situated at Bardang, Singtam, and CCCT at Chisopani, Namchi.

Sikkim University began operating in 2008 at Yangang, which is situated about from Singtam. Many students, however, migrate to Siliguri, Kolkata, Bangalore and other Indian cities for their higher education.

The campus of the National Institute of Electronics &amp; Information Technology (NIELIT), under the Ministry of Electronics &amp; Information Technology of the Government of India, is at Pakyong in East Sikkim, and offers formal and informal education in the IT/ITES sector.

==Towns and cities==
The major towns and cities of Sikkim are as follows:

Gangtok, Pakyong, Namchi, Jorethang, Rangpo, Singtam, Gyalshing, Mangan, Soreng, Pelling, Rhenock, Rongli, Rorathang, Ravangla, Chungthang, Ranipool, Lachen, Nayabazar, Lachung, Dikchu, Majitar, Legship, Melli, Yuksom, Sherathang, Namthang, Rinchenpong, Singhik, Hee Burmiok, Tashiding, Kumrek, Makha, Yangang, and Damthang.

==Sports==
The popular sports played in Sikkim include football, cricket, archery, volleyball, tennis, badminton, and athletics. Adventure sports like paragliding, Hiking and mountain biking are also popular in Sikkim. 
The stadiums of Sikkim are as follows:
* Mining Cricket Stadium, Rangpo
* Paljor Stadium, Gangtok
* Bhaichung Stadium, Namchi
* Resithang Athletics Stadium, Gangtok.

== See also ==

* Outline of Sikkim
* East Sikkim district

== References ==
== Further reading and bibliography ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


== External links ==
===Government===
* Official website of Sikkim Tourism

===General information===</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1505" start="0" end="6" title="Sikkim" label="Sikkim"/>
<link wikidata="Q131541" start="18" end="23" title="States and union territories of India" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="40" end="45" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q17269" start="62" end="85" title="Tibet Autonomous Region" label="Tibet Autonomous Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q917" start="123" end="129" title="Bhutan" label="Bhutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q25104008" start="143" end="157" title="Koshi Province" label="Koshi Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="161" end="166" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356" start="184" end="195" title="West Bengal" label="West Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666467" start="238" end="255" title="Siliguri Corridor" label="Siliguri Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="271" end="281" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q852687" start="297" end="311" title="List of states and union territories of India by population" label="least populous"/>
<link wikidata="Q652300" start="316" end="331" title="List of states and union territories of India by area" label="second-smallest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330191" start="373" end="389" title="Eastern Himalaya" label="Eastern Himalaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="417" end="429" title="biodiversity" label="biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q859654" start="441" end="447" title="Alpine climate" label="alpine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16305538" start="452" end="463" title="subtropical" label="subtropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q82019" start="501" end="514" title="Kangchenjunga" label="Kangchenjunga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536534" start="520" end="541" title="List of mountains in India" label="highest peak in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q669684" start="546" end="568" title="List of highest mountains on Earth" label="third-highest on Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="584" end="591" title="Capital (political)" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q186141" start="612" end="619" title="Gangtok" label="Gangtok"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605019" start="659" end="688" title="Khangchendzonga National Park" label="Khangchendzonga National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="693" end="699" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="700" end="719" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q3960459" start="726" end="743" title="Kingdom of Sikkim" label="Kingdom of Sikkim"/>
<link wikidata="Q861007" start="763" end="778" title="Chogyal" label="Namgyal dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="816" end="824" title="Buddhist" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q861007" start="851" end="858" title="Chogyal" label="Chogyal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336152" start="872" end="886" title="princely state" label="princely state"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="894" end="915" title="British Indian Empire" label="British Indian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q164142" start="977" end="989" title="protectorate" label="protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775277" start="1006" end="1020" title="Dominion of India" label="Union of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q24905760" start="1135" end="1151" title="Himalayan states" label="Himalayan states"/>
<link wikidata="Q355771" start="1251" end="1262" title="Indian Army" label="Indian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q7513843" start="1296" end="1306" title="1975 Sikkimese monarchy referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641089" start="1431" end="1442" title="multiethnic" label="multiethnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q30081" start="1447" end="1459" title="multilingual" label="multilingual"/>
<link wikidata="Q272756" start="1478" end="1496" title="Official languages of India" label="official languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="1514" end="1521" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q33823" start="1523" end="1529" title="Nepali language" label="Nepali"/>
<link wikidata="Q35285" start="1531" end="1537" title="Bhutia language" label="Bhutia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35990" start="1543" end="1549" title="Lepcha language" label="Lepcha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2392342" start="1589" end="1595" title="Gurung language" label="Gurung"/>
<link wikidata="Q56477" start="1597" end="1602" title="Limbu language" label="Limbu"/>
<link wikidata="Q56550" start="1604" end="1609" title="Magar language" label="Magar"/>
<link wikidata="Q56549" start="1611" end="1617" title="Sunwar language" label="Mukhia"/>
<link wikidata="Q33979" start="1619" end="1625" title="Newari language" label="Newari"/>
<link wikidata="Q922148" start="1627" end="1630" title="Kiranti languages" label="Rai"/>
<link wikidata="Q36612" start="1632" end="1638" title="Sherpa language" label="Sherpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449073" start="1643" end="1649" title="Tamang language" label="Tamang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348800" start="1721" end="1728" title="Indian English" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="1812" end="1820" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q172175" start="1841" end="1859" title="Vajrayana Buddhist" label="Vajrayana Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530354" start="1957" end="1999" title="List of Indian states by GDP" label="the fifth-smallest GDP among Indian states"/>
<link wikidata="Q56477" start="2131" end="2136" title="Limbu language" label="Limbu"/>
<link wikidata="Q34271" start="2241" end="2248" title="Standard Tibetan" label="Tibetan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="2367" end="2371" title="rice" label="rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975309" start="2389" end="2395" title="Bhutia" label="Bhutia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4900264" start="2411" end="2416" title="Beyul" label="Beyul"/>
<link wikidata="Q5641773" start="2568" end="2583" title="Tensung Namgyal" label="Tensung Namgyal"/>
<link wikidata="Q972684" start="2641" end="2654" title="Lepcha people" label="Lepcha people"/>
<link wikidata="Q622237" start="2770" end="2787" title="Indian literature" label="Indian literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752560" start="2848" end="2855" title="war god" label="war god"/>
<link wikidata="Q128335" start="2856" end="2861" title="Indra" label="Indra"/>
<link wikidata="Q972684" start="2883" end="2889" title="Lepcha people" label="Lepcha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668355" start="2960" end="2965" title="Limbu people" label="Limbu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605658" start="2975" end="2981" title="Magars" label="Magars"/>
<link wikidata="Q231582" start="3137" end="3150" title="Padmasambhava" label="Padmasambhava"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="3283" end="3291" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6403498" start="3429" end="3439" title="Khye Bumsa" label="Khye Bumsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7427" start="3472" end="3478" title="Minyak" label="Minyak"/>
<link wikidata="Q125990" start="3488" end="3492" title="Kham" label="Kham"/>
<link wikidata="Q17252" start="3504" end="3509" title="Tibet" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q192906" start="3522" end="3539" title="divine revelation" label="divine revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1946645" start="3639" end="3655" title="Phuntsog Namgyal" label="Phuntsog Namgyal"/>
<link wikidata="Q861007" start="3748" end="3755" title="Chogyal" label="Chogyal"/>
<link wikidata="Q191421" start="3806" end="3810" title="lama" label="lama"/>
<link wikidata="Q839046" start="3815" end="3821" title="Yuksom" label="Yuksom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5641773" start="3874" end="3889" title="Tensung Namgyal" label="Tensung Namgyal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244570" start="3928" end="3937" title="Rabdentse" label="Rabdentse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7161579" start="3951" end="3958" title="Pelling" label="Pelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q917" start="3996" end="4002" title="Bhutan" label="Bhutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q187985" start="4125" end="4139" title="Tibetan people" label="Tibetan people"/>
<link wikidata="Q861007" start="4172" end="4179" title="Chogyal" label="Chogyal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244570" start="4352" end="4361" title="Rabdentse" label="Rabdentse"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="4388" end="4393" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q17252" start="4435" end="4440" title="Tibet" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3332217" start="4453" end="4467" title="Gorkha Kingdom" label="Gorkha Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="4524" end="4536" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="4629" end="4641" title="British Raj" label="British rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="4724" end="4729" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133636" start="4806" end="4811" title="Terai" label="Terai"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="4831" end="4857" title="British East India Company" label="British East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q195378" start="4892" end="4902" title="Gurkha War" label="Gurkha War"/>
<link wikidata="Q28083" start="5118" end="5124" title="Morang" label="Morang"/>
<link wikidata="Q39631" start="5154" end="5163" title="physician" label="physician"/>
<link wikidata="Q157501" start="5170" end="5190" title="Joseph Dalton Hooker" label="Joseph Dalton Hooker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4798193" start="5195" end="5213" title="Archibald Campbell (doctor)" label="Archibald Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q169997" start="5484" end="5494" title="Darjeeling" label="Darjeeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371288" start="5585" end="5598" title="vassal state" label="titular ruler"/>
<link wikidata="Q164142" start="5697" end="5709" title="protectorate" label="protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876023" start="5768" end="5778" title="Convention of Calcutta" label="convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060650" start="5908" end="5926" title="Chamber of Princes" label="Chamber of Princes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336152" start="5979" end="5994" title="princely states" label="princely states"/>
<link wikidata="Q129053" start="6043" end="6062" title="Partition of India" label="Indian independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047" start="6064" end="6080" title="Jawaharlal Nehru" label="Jawaharlal Nehru"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340149" start="6165" end="6192" title="Constituent Assembly of India" label="Indian Constituent Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4391114" start="6529" end="6550" title="Sikkim State Congress" label="Sikkim State Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243855" start="6839" end="6860" title="Sikkim National Party" label="Sikkim National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q584660" start="7010" end="7032" title="Palden Thondup Namgyal" label="Palden Thondup Namgyal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772929" start="7157" end="7162" title="Dewan" label="Dewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q164142" start="7260" end="7272" title="protectorate" label="protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q463573" start="7296" end="7306" title="suzerainty" label="suzerainty"/>
<link wikidata="Q584660" start="7562" end="7584" title="Palden Thondup Namgyal" label="Palden Thondup Namgyal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8236" start="7667" end="7680" title="literacy rate" label="literacy rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="7685" end="7702" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="7738" end="7743" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q917" start="7745" end="7751" title="Bhutan" label="Bhutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277236" start="7778" end="7802" title="Sikkim National Congress" label="Sikkim National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q19881415" start="8066" end="8070" title="1975 in Sikkim" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072011" start="8101" end="8120" title="Kazi Lhendup Dorjee" label="Kazi Lhendup Dorjee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149" start="8161" end="8174" title="Indira Gandhi" label="Indira Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q186141" start="8275" end="8282" title="Gangtok" label="Gangtok"/>
<link wikidata="Q7513843" start="8342" end="8354" title="1975 Sikkimese monarchy referendum" label="a referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q695252" start="8725" end="8742" title="Parliament of India" label="Indian Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q477108" start="8755" end="8774" title="Constitution of India" label="Indian Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3348321" start="8787" end="8801" title="List of amendments of the Constitution of India" label="35th Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3348321" start="8951" end="8965" title="List of amendments of the Constitution of India" label="36th Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9048" end="9062" title="Constitution of India#First Schedule" label="First Schedule"/>
<link wikidata="Q477108" start="9070" end="9082" title="Constitution of India" label="Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q747371" start="9133" end="9140" title="Karmapa" label="Karmapa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9142" end="9162" title="Karmapa controversy#Urgyen Trinley Dorje" label="Urgyen Trinley Dorje"/>
<link wikidata="Q37349" start="9194" end="9204" title="Dalai Lama" label="Dalai Lama"/>
<link wikidata="Q651267" start="9223" end="9228" title="tulku" label="tulku"/>
<link wikidata="Q2444884" start="9269" end="9274" title="Tibet (1912–1951)" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546234" start="9301" end="9317" title="Rumtek Monastery" label="Rumtek Monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q17269" start="9661" end="9666" title="Tibet Autonomous Region" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q987" start="9704" end="9713" title="New Delhi" label="New Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q995884" start="9861" end="9882" title="Sino-Indian relations" label="Sino-Indian relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q499714" start="9932" end="9940" title="Nathu La" label="Nathu La"/>
<link wikidata="Q592550" start="10080" end="10103" title="Younghusband Expedition" label="Younghusband Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q208694" start="10149" end="10164" title="Sino-Indian War" label="Sino-Indian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q571891" start="10189" end="10217" title="2011 Sikkim earthquake" label="a magnitude 6.9Mw earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="10281" end="10286" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q917" start="10288" end="10294" title="Bhutan" label="Bhutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17269" start="10311" end="10316" title="Tibet Autonomous Region" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q186141" start="10376" end="10383" title="Gangtok" label="Gangtok"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="10447" end="10455" title="Himalaya" label="Himalaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q82019" start="10699" end="10712" title="Kangchenjunga" label="Kangchenjunga"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="10828" end="10833" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q838625" start="10981" end="10994" title="Terrace farming" label="terrace farms"/>
<link wikidata="Q907883" start="11126" end="11138" title="Teesta River" label="Teesta River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395774" start="11162" end="11169" title="Rangeet" label="Rangeet"/>
<link wikidata="Q35666" start="11499" end="11507" title="glaciers" label="glaciers"/>
<link wikidata="Q542864" start="11548" end="11555" title="Tsongmo Lake" label="Tsongmo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264090" start="11557" end="11568" title="Gurudongmar" label="Gurudongmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3214979" start="11573" end="11590" title="Khecheopalri Lake" label="Khecheopalri Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q177380" start="11605" end="11616" title="hot springs" label="hot springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q133056" start="11662" end="11675" title="mountain pass" label="mountain pass"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11774" end="11805" title="Hot spring#Therapeutic uses" label="medicinal and therapeutic value"/>
<link wikidata="Q8061162" start="11880" end="11888" title="Yumthang Valley" label="Yumthang"/>
<link wikidata="Q682" start="11966" end="11973" title="sulphur" label="sulphur"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="12036" end="12044" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q166409" start="12163" end="12169" title="gneiss" label="gneiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q15315" start="12174" end="12180" title="schist" label="schist"/>
<link wikidata="Q179177" start="12187" end="12194" title="Weathering" label="weather"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="12239" end="12243" title="clay" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q721849" start="12300" end="12310" title="iron oxide" label="iron oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q11158" start="12338" end="12344" title="acidic" label="acidic"/>
<link wikidata="Q190489" start="12429" end="12438" title="evergreen" label="evergreen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131316" start="12443" end="12459" title="deciduous forest" label="deciduous forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q731880" start="12484" end="12492" title="phyllite" label="phyllite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776499" start="12682" end="12690" title="Leaching (agriculture)" label="leaching"/>
<link wikidata="Q16305538" start="12932" end="12944" title="sub-tropical" label="sub-tropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q43262" start="12961" end="12967" title="tundra" label="tundra"/>
<link wikidata="Q167466" start="13035" end="13044" title="temperate" label="temperate"/>
<link wikidata="Q740358" start="13237" end="13246" title="snow line" label="snow line"/>
<link wikidata="Q167903" start="13636" end="13645" title="landslide" label="landslide"/>
<link wikidata="Q37477" start="13723" end="13726" title="Fog" label="Fog"/>
<link wikidata="Q864294" start="13873" end="13891" title="ecological hotspot" label="ecological hotspot"/>
<link wikidata="Q4530282" start="13944" end="13963" title="ecoregions of India" label="ecoregions of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q104021" start="14026" end="14031" title="fauna (animals)" label="fauna"/>
<link wikidata="Q131449" start="14036" end="14041" title="flora (plants)" label="flora"/>
<link wikidata="Q25308" start="14439" end="14446" title="orchidaceae" label="orchids"/>
<link wikidata="Q158974" start="14451" end="14458" title="primula" label="primula"/>
<link wikidata="Q189393" start="14471" end="14483" title="rhododendron" label="rhododendron"/>
<link wikidata="Q12004" start="14496" end="14499" title="oak" label="oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q670887" start="14514" end="14520" title="bamboo" label="bamboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q132825" start="14535" end="14542" title="pinophyta" label="conifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q80005" start="14565" end="14569" title="fern" label="fern"/>
<link wikidata="Q10282035" start="14591" end="14600" title="tree fern" label="tree fern"/>
<link wikidata="Q208253" start="14652" end="14662" title="Poinsettia" label="Poinsettia"/>
<link wikidata="Q636713" start="14767" end="14783" title="Dendrobium nobile" label="Noble Dendrobium"/>
<link wikidata="Q189393" start="14828" end="14840" title="rhododendron" label="rhododendron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722063" start="14848" end="14858" title="List of Indian state trees" label="state tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q59798" start="14870" end="14874" title="ficus" label="figs"/>
<link wikidata="Q26538" start="14876" end="14882" title="Lauraceae" label="laurel"/>
<link wikidata="Q503" start="14884" end="14890" title="banana" label="banana"/>
<link wikidata="Q909828" start="14893" end="14896" title="Shorea robusta" label="sal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3849849" start="14926" end="14965" title="Himalayan subtropical broadleaf forests" label="Himalayan subtropical broadleaf forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q4126533" start="15044" end="15079" title="Eastern Himalayan broadleaf forests" label="Eastern Himalayan broadleaf forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q129324" start="15093" end="15101" title="chestnut" label="chestnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q42292" start="15104" end="15109" title="maple" label="maple"/>
<link wikidata="Q25243" start="15112" end="15117" title="birch" label="birch"/>
<link wikidata="Q25239" start="15121" end="15126" title="alder" label="alder"/>
<link wikidata="Q157017" start="15133" end="15141" title="magnolia" label="magnolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080789" start="15177" end="15211" title="Himalayan subtropical pine forests" label="Himalayan subtropical pine forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239892" start="15226" end="15235" title="Chir pine" label="Chir pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q859654" start="15237" end="15248" title="Alpine climate" label="Alpine-type"/>
<link wikidata="Q25662" start="15334" end="15341" title="juniper" label="juniper"/>
<link wikidata="Q25350" start="15349" end="15352" title="fir" label="fir"/>
<link wikidata="Q146911" start="15355" end="15364" title="Cupressus" label="cypresses"/>
<link wikidata="Q3848508" start="15392" end="15435" title="Eastern Himalayan subalpine conifer forests" label="Eastern Himalayan subalpine conifer forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q4126532" start="15451" end="15493" title="Eastern Himalayan alpine shrub and meadows" label="Eastern Himalayan alpine shrub and meadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q30197" start="15621" end="15633" title="snow leopard" label="snow leopard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3866060" start="15635" end="15644" title="musk deer" label="musk deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q728636" start="15646" end="15660" title="Himalayan tahr" label="Himalayan tahr"/>
<link wikidata="Q41960" start="15662" end="15671" title="red panda" label="red panda"/>
<link wikidata="Q922076" start="15673" end="15689" title="Himalayan marmot" label="Himalayan marmot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619009" start="15691" end="15706" title="Himalayan serow" label="Himalayan serow"/>
<link wikidata="Q494436" start="15708" end="15723" title="Himalayan goral" label="Himalayan goral"/>
<link wikidata="Q234121" start="15725" end="15732" title="muntjac" label="muntjac"/>
<link wikidata="Q721407" start="15734" end="15747" title="common langur" label="common langur"/>
<link wikidata="Q124410" start="15749" end="15765" title="Asian black bear" label="Asian black bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q36135" start="15767" end="15782" title="clouded leopard" label="clouded leopard"/>
<link wikidata="Q80191" start="15784" end="15795" title="marbled cat" label="marbled cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q42627" start="15797" end="15808" title="leopard cat" label="leopard cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q132585" start="15810" end="15815" title="dhole" label="dhole"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468673" start="15817" end="15829" title="Tibetan wolf" label="Tibetan wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q11906411" start="15831" end="15841" title="hog badger" label="hog badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q213141" start="15843" end="15852" title="binturong" label="binturong"/>
<link wikidata="Q42623" start="15858" end="15878" title="Felis chaus affinis" label="Himalayan jungle cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q13408062" start="15941" end="15944" title="yak" label="yak"/>
<link wikidata="Q8495" start="15971" end="15975" title="milk" label="milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="16014" end="16022" title="Bird" label="avifauna"/>
<link wikidata="Q742818" start="16045" end="16061" title="impeyan pheasant" label="impeyan pheasant"/>
<link wikidata="Q685399" start="16063" end="16086" title="Satyr tragopan" label="crimson horned pheasant"/>
<link wikidata="Q833453" start="16088" end="16102" title="snow partridge" label="snow partridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q747124" start="16104" end="16120" title="Tibetan snowcock" label="Tibetan snowcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q126167" start="16122" end="16137" title="bearded vulture" label="bearded vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q177856" start="16142" end="16157" title="griffon vulture" label="griffon vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q41181" start="16170" end="16182" title="golden eagle" label="golden eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6072584" start="16185" end="16190" title="quail" label="quail"/>
<link wikidata="Q139321" start="16193" end="16199" title="plover" label="plover"/>
<link wikidata="Q642855" start="16202" end="16210" title="woodcock" label="woodcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q26626" start="16213" end="16222" title="sandpiper" label="sandpiper"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856" start="16225" end="16231" title="pigeon" label="pigeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q200989" start="16234" end="16254" title="Old World flycatcher" label="Old World flycatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q408457" start="16257" end="16265" title="Old World babbler" label="babblers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11394" start="16354" end="16364" title="endangered species" label="endangered"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360" start="16403" end="16413" title="arthropods" label="arthropods"/>
<link wikidata="Q11946202" start="16524" end="16535" title="butterfly" label="butterflies"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="16595" end="16614" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312986" start="16679" end="16692" title="Teinopalpus imperialis" label="Kaiser-i-hind"/>
<link wikidata="Q6803687" start="16698" end="16711" title="Meandrusa payeni" label="Yellow Gorgon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768041" start="16720" end="16732" title="Bhutanitis lidderdalii" label="Bhutan Glory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605019" start="16844" end="16873" title="Khangchendzonga National Park" label="Khangchendzonga National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q16896392" start="16876" end="16905" title="Pangolakha Wildlife Sanctuary" label="Pangolakha Wildlife Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3471769" start="16908" end="16938" title="Fambong Lho Wildlife Sanctuary" label="Fambong Lho Wildlife Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452052" start="16941" end="16968" title="Kyongnosla Alpine Sanctuary" label="Kyongnosla Alpine Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q17051622" start="16971" end="16996" title="Maenam Wildlife Sanctuary" label="Maenam Wildlife Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q16902550" start="16999" end="17028" title="Varsey Rhododendron Sanctuary" label="Barsey Rhododendron Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7497442" start="17031" end="17061" title="Shingba Rhododendron Sanctuary" label="Shingba Rhododendron Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q106257541" start="17064" end="17084" title="Kitam Bird Sanctuary" label="Kitam Bird Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17087" end="17135" title="Sling Dong Faireanum Orchid Conservation Reserve" label="Sling Dong Faireanum Orchid Conservation Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q477108" start="17184" end="17205" title="Constitution of India" label="Constitution of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="17220" end="17240" title="parliamentary system" label="parliamentary system"/>
<link wikidata="Q188759" start="17244" end="17268" title="representative democracy" label="representative democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q319891" start="17289" end="17307" title="universal suffrage" label="universal suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q131541" start="17424" end="17439" title="States and territories of India" label="states of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q132050" start="17443" end="17451" title="governor" label="governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670755" start="17736" end="17750" title="chief minister" label="chief minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q140247" start="18012" end="18022" title="unicameral" label="unicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q7513808" start="18040" end="18067" title="Sikkim Legislative Assembly" label="Sikkim Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q193944" start="18164" end="18170" title="Sangha (Buddhism)" label="Sangha"/>
<link wikidata="Q189445" start="18254" end="18263" title="bicameral" label="bicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q230003" start="18281" end="18290" title="Lok Sabha" label="Lok Sabha"/>
<link wikidata="Q244730" start="18299" end="18310" title="Rajya Sabha" label="Rajya Sabha"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="18329" end="18338" title="judiciary" label="judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532728" start="18355" end="18372" title="Sikkim High Court" label="Sikkim High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q10225" start="18627" end="18651" title="Indian National Congress" label="Indian National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277025" start="18762" end="18782" title="Nar Bahadur Bhandari" label="Nar Bahadur Bhandari"/>
<link wikidata="Q3279328" start="18798" end="18827" title="Sikkim Sangram Parishad Party" label="Sikkim Sangram Parishad Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475703" start="18924" end="18944" title="Pawan Kumar Chamling" label="Pawan Kumar Chamling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285614" start="18952" end="18975" title="Sikkim Democratic Front" label="Sikkim Democratic Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q4801137" start="19183" end="19207" title="Sikkim Krantikari Morcha" label="Sikkim Krantikari Morcha"/>
<link wikidata="Q23879743" start="19251" end="19268" title="Prem Singh Tamang" label="Prem Singh Tamang"/>
<link wikidata="Q28794126" start="19304" end="19320" title="Lakshman Acharya" label="Lakshman Acharya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855609" start="19357" end="19382" title="environmental consciousness" label="environmentally conscious"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757946" start="19405" end="19426" title="plastic bottle" label="plastic water bottles"/>
<link wikidata="Q146243" start="19484" end="19495" title="polystyrene" label="polystyrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q113956160" start="19578" end="19594" title="East Sikkim" label="Gangtok District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784149" start="19596" end="19611" title="North Sikkim" label="Mangan District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1805051" start="19613" end="19628" title="South Sikkim" label="Namchi District"/>
<link wikidata="Q108803704" start="19630" end="19646" title="Pakyong District" label="Pakyong District"/>
<link wikidata="Q611357" start="19648" end="19664" title="West Sikkim" label="Geyzing District"/>
<link wikidata="Q112939132" start="19669" end="19684" title="Soreng District" label="Soreng District"/>
<link wikidata="Q186141" start="19712" end="19719" title="Gangtok" label="Gangtok"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308307" start="19721" end="19727" title="Mangan, India" label="Mangan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483862" start="19729" end="19735" title="Namchi" label="Namchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7126101" start="19737" end="19744" title="Pakyong" label="Pakyong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707638" start="19746" end="19755" title="Gyalshing" label="Gyalshing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7563426" start="19760" end="19766" title="Soreng" label="Soreng"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722496" start="20281" end="20299" title="district collector" label="district collector"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="20492" end="20497" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468623" start="20544" end="20560" title="Foreigners (Protected Areas) Order 1958 (India)" label="official permits"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="20631" end="20653" title="gross domestic product" label="gross domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530354" start="20769" end="20816" title="List of Indian states by GDP" label="third-smallest GDP among India&amp;#x27;s 28 states"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="20854" end="20862" title="agriculture" label="agrarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="20896" end="20900" title="rice" label="rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="20938" end="20943" title="maize" label="maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q259438" start="20945" end="20951" title="millet" label="millet"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="20953" end="20958" title="wheat" label="wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q11577" start="20960" end="20966" title="barley" label="barley"/>
<link wikidata="Q13191" start="20968" end="20975" title="orange (fruit)" label="oranges"/>
<link wikidata="Q6097" start="20977" end="20980" title="tea" label="tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q14625808" start="20986" end="20994" title="cardamom" label="cardamom"/>
<link wikidata="Q165647" start="21154" end="21182" title="Organic agriculture" label="agriculture to fully organic"/>
<link wikidata="Q131734" start="21380" end="21387" title="Brewery" label="Brewing"/>
<link wikidata="Q211578" start="21401" end="21408" title="Tanning (leather)" label="tanning"/>
<link wikidata="Q157798" start="21413" end="21424" title="Watchmaker" label="watchmaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q6813093" start="21536" end="21541" title="Melli" label="Melli"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342106" start="21546" end="21555" title="Jorethang" label="Jorethang"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="21639" end="21645" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q167741" start="21647" end="21655" title="Dolomite (mineral)" label="dolomite"/>
<link wikidata="Q134583" start="21657" end="21661" title="talc" label="talc"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309" start="21663" end="21671" title="graphite" label="graphite"/>
<link wikidata="Q237883" start="21673" end="21682" title="quartzite" label="quartzite"/>
<link wikidata="Q24489" start="21684" end="21688" title="coal" label="coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="21690" end="21694" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="21700" end="21704" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q165647" start="21943" end="21958" title="organic farming" label="organic farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="22113" end="22120" title="tourism" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11416" start="22240" end="22248" title="gambling" label="gambling"/>
<link wikidata="Q133215" start="22273" end="22279" title="casino" label="casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550859" start="22285" end="22300" title="online gambling" label="online gambling"/>
<link wikidata="Q499714" start="22581" end="22589" title="Nathu La" label="Nathu La"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026100" start="22622" end="22627" title="Lhasa" label="Lhasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q17252" start="22629" end="22634" title="Tibet" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248784" start="22956" end="22963" title="airport" label="airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7126092" start="23036" end="23051" title="Pakyong Airport" label="Pakyong Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7126101" start="23096" end="23108" title="Pakyong" label="Pakyong Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630199" start="23215" end="23242" title="Airports Authority of India" label="Airports Authority of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q459083" start="23385" end="23388" title="ATR (aircraft manufacturer)" label="ATR"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900847" start="23467" end="23483" title="Bagdogra Airport" label="Bagdogra Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087" start="23489" end="23497" title="Siliguri" label="Siliguri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356" start="23510" end="23521" title="West Bengal" label="West Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q186141" start="23557" end="23564" title="Gangtok" label="Gangtok"/>
<link wikidata="Q34486" start="23610" end="23620" title="helicopter" label="helicopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q534159" start="23796" end="23803" title="helipad" label="helipad"/>
<link wikidata="Q25203046" start="23863" end="23882" title="National Highway 10 (India)" label="National Highway 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q19893264" start="23891" end="23906" title="List of National Highways in India by highway number" label="formerly NH 31A"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087" start="23914" end="23922" title="Siliguri" label="Siliguri"/>
<link wikidata="Q82650" start="24021" end="24025" title="taxicab" label="taxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q30113" start="24031" end="24035" title="jeep" label="jeep"/>
<link wikidata="Q6813093" start="24133" end="24138" title="Melli" label="Melli"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393184" start="24231" end="24243" title="hill station" label="hill station"/>
<link wikidata="Q500877" start="24248" end="24257" title="Kalimpong" label="Kalimpong"/>
<link wikidata="Q169997" start="24262" end="24272" title="Darjeeling" label="Darjeeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q17252" start="24336" end="24341" title="Tibet" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q499714" start="24366" end="24374" title="Nathu La" label="Nathu La"/>
<link wikidata="Q7515061" start="24518" end="24535" title="Siliguri Junction" label="Siliguri Junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q11790860" start="24540" end="24554" title="New Jalpaiguri" label="New Jalpaiguri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2726240" start="24665" end="24671" title="Rangpo" label="Rangpo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7458106" start="24687" end="24693" title="Sevoke" label="Sevoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q108730589" start="24734" end="24760" title="Sivok–Rangpo line" label="Sevoke-Rangpo Railway Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q24949023" start="24766" end="24787" title="Sivok railway station" label="Sivok railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q24949027" start="24791" end="24813" title="Rangpo railway station" label="Rangpo railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q186141" start="25149" end="25156" title="Gangtok" label="Gangtok"/>
<link wikidata="Q3347935" start="25175" end="25195" title="Ministry of Railways (India)" label="Ministry of Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733296" start="25245" end="25250" title="Mirik" label="Mirik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483862" start="25269" end="25275" title="Namchi" label="Namchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5222080" start="25277" end="25285" title="Daramdin" label="Daramdin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15271826" start="25287" end="25295" title="Ranipool" label="Ranipool"/>
<link wikidata="Q186141" start="25301" end="25308" title="Gangtok" label="Gangtok"/>
<link wikidata="Q893415" start="25375" end="25400" title="Border Roads Organisation" label="Border Roads Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="25694" end="25721" title="hydroelectric power station" label="hydroelectric power station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967805" start="25756" end="25790" title="National Thermal Power Corporation" label="National Thermal Power Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400886" start="25795" end="25826" title="Power Grid Corporation of India" label="Power Grid Corporation of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q182098" start="26040" end="26043" title="kilowatt hour" label="kWh"/>
<link wikidata="Q171076" start="26087" end="26093" title="biogas" label="biogas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483757" start="26098" end="26109" title="solar power" label="solar power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861882" start="26741" end="26752" title="2011 census of India" label="2011 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q10861780" start="26962" end="26971" title="human sex ratio" label="sex ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q186141" start="27127" end="27134" title="Gangtok" label="Gangtok"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="27306" end="27323" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q33823" start="27421" end="27427" title="Nepali language" label="Nepali"/>
<link wikidata="Q35285" start="27429" end="27438" title="Sikkimese language" label="Sikkimese"/>
<link wikidata="Q35990" start="27440" end="27446" title="Lepcha language" label="Lepcha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="27451" end="27458" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q2392342" start="27498" end="27504" title="Gurung language" label="Gurung"/>
<link wikidata="Q56477" start="27506" end="27511" title="Limbu language" label="Limbu"/>
<link wikidata="Q56550" start="27513" end="27518" title="Magar language" label="Magar"/>
<link wikidata="Q56549" start="27520" end="27526" title="Sunwar language" label="Mukhia"/>
<link wikidata="Q33979" start="27528" end="27533" title="Newar language" label="Newar"/>
<link wikidata="Q922148" start="27535" end="27538" title="Kiranti languages" label="Rai"/>
<link wikidata="Q36612" start="27540" end="27546" title="Sherpa language" label="Sherpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449073" start="27551" end="27557" title="Tamang language" label="Tamang"/>
<link wikidata="Q33081" start="27815" end="27823" title="Dzongkha" label="Dzongkha"/>
<link wikidata="Q56551" start="27825" end="27830" title="Groma language" label="Groma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568" start="27832" end="27837" title="Hindi" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6737786" start="27839" end="27844" title="Majhi language" label="Majhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6737795" start="27846" end="27853" title="Majhwar language" label="Majhwar"/>
<link wikidata="Q56553" start="27855" end="27862" title="Thulung language" label="Thulung"/>
<link wikidata="Q34271" start="27864" end="27871" title="Standard Tibetan" label="Tibetan"/>
<link wikidata="Q56666" start="27877" end="27882" title="Yakha language" label="Yakha"/>
<link wikidata="Q6020361" start="27947" end="27961" title="Nepali Indians" label="Nepali Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6024712" start="27967" end="27983" title="indigenous peoples of Sikkim" label="native Sikkimese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975309" start="27996" end="28002" title="Bhutia" label="Bhutia"/>
<link wikidata="Q972684" start="28079" end="28086" title="Lepcha people" label="Lepchas"/>
<link wikidata="Q17252" start="28167" end="28172" title="Tibet" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q402913" start="28306" end="28314" title="Bengali people" label="Bengalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6529576" start="28316" end="28323" title="Bihari people" label="Biharis"/>
<link wikidata="Q18356677" start="28328" end="28336" title="Marwaris" label="Marwaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1805051" start="28371" end="28383" title="South Sikkim" label="South Sikkim"/>
<link wikidata="Q186141" start="28388" end="28395" title="Gangtok" label="Gangtok"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="28512" end="28520" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="28568" end="28576" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="28623" end="28635" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162" start="28875" end="28892" title="Arunachal Pradesh" label="Arunachal Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193" start="28894" end="28901" title="Manipur" label="Manipur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195" start="28906" end="28915" title="Meghalaya" label="Meghalaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q110850258" start="28933" end="28974" title="Evangelical Presbyterian Church of Sikkim" label="Evangelical Presbyterian Church of Sikkim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162" start="29216" end="29233" title="Arunachal Pradesh" label="Arunachal Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193" start="29235" end="29242" title="Manipur" label="Manipur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164" start="29247" end="29252" title="Assam" label="Assam"/>
<link wikidata="Q172175" start="29254" end="29272" title="Vajrayana" label="Vajrayana Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q44613" start="29515" end="29535" title="Buddhist monasteries" label="Buddhist monasteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="29810" end="29816" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q9232" start="29842" end="29846" title="Jain" label="Jain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6024712" start="29933" end="29949" title="Indigenous peoples of Sikkim" label="native Sikkimese"/>
<link wikidata="Q611662" start="30272" end="30275" title="Mun (religion)" label="Mun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722496" start="30445" end="30463" title="district collector" label="district collector"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468623" start="30665" end="30672" title="Foreigners (Protected Areas) Order 1958 (India)" label="permits"/>
<link wikidata="Q15128500" start="30846" end="30851" title="Tihar (festival)" label="Tihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q10379695" start="30865" end="30872" title="Dashain" label="Dashain"/>
<link wikidata="Q16257775" start="30921" end="30936" title="Maghe Sankranti" label="Maghe Sankranti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771621" start="30938" end="30946" title="Ramnavmi" label="Ramnavmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q430574" start="30948" end="30958" title="Janmastami" label="Janmastami"/>
<link wikidata="Q10259" start="30960" end="30964" title="Holi" label="Holi"/>
<link wikidata="Q848070" start="30966" end="30976" title="Shivaratri" label="Shivaratri"/>
<link wikidata="Q10269" start="30978" end="30986" title="Navratri" label="Navratri"/>
<link wikidata="Q7402891" start="30988" end="30994" title="Sakela" label="Sakela"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087401" start="30996" end="31010" title="Chasok Tangnam" label="Chasok Tangnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347838" start="31042" end="31047" title="Losar" label="Losar"/>
<link wikidata="Q215700" start="31049" end="31058" title="Saga Dawa" label="Saga Dawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2506218" start="31060" end="31074" title="Lhabab Duechen" label="Lhabab Duechen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309383" start="31076" end="31088" title="Drupka Teshi" label="Drupka Teshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4902145" start="31093" end="31100" title="Bhumchu" label="Bhumchu"/>
<link wikidata="Q464458" start="31287" end="31298" title="Eid ul-Fitr" label="Eid ul-Fitr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952053" start="31303" end="31311" title="Muharram" label="Muharram"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809" start="31313" end="31322" title="Christmas" label="Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="31404" end="31414" title="rock music" label="rock music"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535998" start="31419" end="31429" title="Indian pop" label="Indian pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437868" start="31470" end="31481" title="Nepalese rock" label="Nepali rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="31555" end="31563" title="association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="31568" end="31575" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q208147" start="31586" end="31598" title="hang gliding" label="hang gliding"/>
<link wikidata="Q972684" start="31715" end="31721" title="Lepcha people" label="Lepcha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668355" start="31723" end="31728" title="Limbu people" label="Limbu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605658" start="31730" end="31735" title="Magars" label="Magar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975309" start="31741" end="31747" title="Bhutia" label="Bhutia"/>
<link wikidata="Q231582" start="31823" end="31836" title="Padmasambhava" label="Padmasambhava"/>
<link wikidata="Q192874" start="32644" end="32650" title="Noodle" label="Noodle"/>
<link wikidata="Q607114" start="32672" end="32678" title="thukpa" label="thukpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q964107" start="32680" end="32689" title="chow mein" label="chow mein"/>
<link wikidata="Q943696" start="32691" end="32699" title="thenthuk" label="thenthuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q553905" start="32721" end="32727" title="wonton" label="wonton"/>
<link wikidata="Q134092" start="32750" end="32755" title="Momo (food)" label="Momos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854639" start="32766" end="32774" title="dumpling" label="dumpling"/>
<link wikidata="Q44" start="32875" end="32879" title="Beer" label="Beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q281" start="32881" end="32888" title="whiskey" label="whiskey"/>
<link wikidata="Q83376" start="32890" end="32893" title="rum" label="rum"/>
<link wikidata="Q146470" start="32898" end="32904" title="brandy" label="brandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658587" start="32942" end="32948" title="tongba" label="tongba"/>
<link wikidata="Q259438" start="32952" end="32958" title="millet" label="millet"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="33003" end="33008" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q169997" start="33013" end="33023" title="Darjeeling" label="Darjeeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q15326" start="33065" end="33075" title="alcoholism" label="alcoholism"/>
<link wikidata="Q22424" start="33113" end="33119" title="Punjab (India)" label="Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174" start="33124" end="33131" title="Haryana" label="Haryana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087" start="33483" end="33491" title="Siliguri" label="Siliguri"/>
<link wikidata="Q7513788" start="33666" end="33680" title="Sikkim Express" label="Sikkim Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q372096" start="33912" end="33925" title="The Statesman (India)" label="The Statesman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1954990" start="33939" end="33952" title="The Telegraph (Kolkata)" label="The Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q926175" start="33966" end="33975" title="The Hindu" label="The Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q272399" start="34632" end="34645" title="Internet café" label="Internet café"/>
<link wikidata="Q194163" start="34698" end="34707" title="broadband" label="broadband"/>
<link wikidata="Q209588" start="34746" end="34766" title="Satellite television" label="Satellite television"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525208" start="35007" end="35024" title="Airtel digital TV" label="Airtel digital TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518953" start="35026" end="35034" title="Tata Sky" label="Tata Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519770" start="35036" end="35043" title="Dish TV" label="Dish TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259843" start="35045" end="35057" title="DD Free Dish" label="DD Free Dish"/>
<link wikidata="Q8236" start="35116" end="35129" title="literacy rate" label="literacy rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3351682" start="35415" end="35433" title="Central university (India)" label="central university"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35619" end="35624" title="BOSSE" label="BOSSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q13006147" start="35636" end="35655" title="Secondary Education" label="Secondary Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q15261132" start="35873" end="35905" title="National Institute of Technology Sikkim" label="National Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3065077" start="35954" end="35976" title="Ravangla" label="Ravangla, South Sikkim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520193" start="36022" end="36026" title="National Institutes of Technology" label="NITs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2767140" start="36034" end="36053" title="Government of India" label="Government of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q15261132" start="36095" end="36105" title="National Institute of Technology Sikkim" label="NIT Sikkim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595173" start="36159" end="36177" title="PARAM" label="PARAM Kanchenjunga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520193" start="36219" end="36223" title="NITs" label="NITs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4812252" start="36225" end="36242" title="Sikkim University" label="Sikkim University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7513814" start="36330" end="36355" title="Sikkim Manipal University" label="Sikkim Manipal University"/>
<link wikidata="Q11023" start="36416" end="36427" title="engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q11190" start="36429" end="36437" title="medicine" label="medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920921" start="36442" end="36452" title="management" label="management"/>
<link wikidata="Q159595" start="36477" end="36495" title="distance education" label="distance education"/>
<link wikidata="Q120913676" start="36525" end="36550" title="Medhavi Skills University, Sikkim" label="Medhavi Skills University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6634971" start="36556" end="36574" title="Private University (India)" label="private university"/>
<link wikidata="Q217577" start="36990" end="36997" title="diploma" label="diploma"/>
<link wikidata="Q934017" start="37071" end="37078" title="Singtam" label="Singtam"/>
<link wikidata="Q4812252" start="37112" end="37129" title="Sikkim University" label="Sikkim University"/>
<link wikidata="Q8048546" start="37157" end="37164" title="Yangang" label="Yangang"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087" start="37239" end="37247" title="Siliguri" label="Siliguri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="37249" end="37256" title="Kolkata" label="Kolkata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355" start="37258" end="37267" title="Bangalore" label="Bangalore"/>
<link wikidata="Q18648882" start="37339" end="37410" title="National Institute of Electronics &amp;amp; Information Technology" label="National Institute of Electronics &amp;amp; Information Technology (NIELIT)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16956017" start="37422" end="37474" title="Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology" label="Ministry of Electronics &amp;amp; Information Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7126101" start="37509" end="37516" title="Pakyong" label="Pakyong"/>
<link wikidata="Q186141" start="37673" end="37680" title="Gangtok" label="Gangtok"/>
<link wikidata="Q7126101" start="37682" end="37689" title="Pakyong" label="Pakyong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483862" start="37691" end="37697" title="Namchi" label="Namchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342106" start="37699" end="37708" title="Jorethang" label="Jorethang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2726240" start="37710" end="37716" title="Rangpo" label="Rangpo"/>
<link wikidata="Q934017" start="37718" end="37725" title="Singtam" label="Singtam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707638" start="37727" end="37736" title="Gyalshing" label="Gyalshing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308307" start="37738" end="37744" title="Mangan, India" label="Mangan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7563426" start="37746" end="37752" title="Soreng" label="Soreng"/>
<link wikidata="Q7161579" start="37754" end="37761" title="Pelling" label="Pelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3248884" start="37763" end="37770" title="Rhenock" label="Rhenock"/>
<link wikidata="Q24929455" start="37772" end="37778" title="Rongli" label="Rongli"/>
<link wikidata="Q7366816" start="37780" end="37789" title="Rorathang" label="Rorathang"/>
<link wikidata="Q3065077" start="37791" end="37799" title="Ravangla" label="Ravangla"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532375" start="37801" end="37811" title="Chungthang" label="Chungthang"/>
<link wikidata="Q15271826" start="37813" end="37821" title="Ranipool" label="Ranipool"/>
<link wikidata="Q3215806" start="37823" end="37829" title="Lachen, Sikkim" label="Lachen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342123" start="37831" end="37840" title="Nayabazar" label="Nayabazar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3635042" start="37842" end="37849" title="Lachung" label="Lachung"/>
<link wikidata="Q24929353" start="37851" end="37857" title="Dikchu" label="Dikchu"/>
<link wikidata="Q15243962" start="37859" end="37866" title="Majitar" label="Majitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6518693" start="37868" end="37875" title="Legship" label="Legship"/>
<link wikidata="Q6813093" start="37877" end="37882" title="Melli" label="Melli"/>
<link wikidata="Q839046" start="37884" end="37890" title="Yuksom" label="Yuksom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494668" start="37892" end="37902" title="Sherathang" label="Sherathang"/>
<link wikidata="Q6962099" start="37904" end="37912" title="Namthang" label="Namthang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7330404" start="37914" end="37925" title="Rinchenpong" label="Rinchenpong"/>
<link wikidata="Q15277878" start="37927" end="37934" title="Singhik" label="Singhik"/>
<link wikidata="Q5697859" start="37936" end="37947" title="Hee Burmiok" label="Hee Burmiok"/>
<link wikidata="Q24942421" start="37949" end="37958" title="Tashiding" label="Tashiding"/>
<link wikidata="Q115805620" start="37960" end="37966" title="Kumrek" label="Kumrek"/>
<link wikidata="Q115804250" start="37968" end="37973" title="Makha, Sikkim" label="Makha"/>
<link wikidata="Q8048546" start="37975" end="37982" title="Yangang" label="Yangang"/>
<link wikidata="Q5212982" start="37988" end="37996" title="Damthang, Sikkim" label="Damthang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="38054" end="38062" title="association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="38064" end="38071" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q108429" start="38073" end="38080" title="archery" label="archery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734" start="38082" end="38092" title="volleyball" label="volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="38094" end="38100" title="tennis" label="tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291" start="38102" end="38111" title="badminton" label="badminton"/>
<link wikidata="Q542" start="38117" end="38126" title="sport of athletics" label="athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q178380" start="38150" end="38161" title="paragliding" label="paragliding"/>
<link wikidata="Q12014035" start="38163" end="38169" title="Hiking" label="Hiking"/>
<link wikidata="Q520611" start="38174" end="38189" title="mountain biking" label="mountain biking"/>
<link wikidata="Q24747928" start="38260" end="38282" title="Mining Ground" label="Mining Cricket Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127652" start="38293" end="38307" title="Paljor Stadium" label="Paljor Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4843168" start="38319" end="38336" title="Bhaichung Stadium" label="Bhaichung Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q17071096" start="38404" end="38421" title="Outline of Sikkim" label="Outline of Sikkim"/>
<link wikidata="Q113956160" start="38424" end="38444" title="East Sikkim district" label="East Sikkim district"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="140374" wikidata="Q157201" url="?curid=140374" title="Bathory (band)">
<text>Bathory was a Swedish heavy metal band formed in Vällingby in March 1983. Named after Hungarian countess Elizabeth Báthory, they are considered pioneers of black metal (alongside Venom and Mercyful Fate) and Viking metal. The book &quot;Lords of Chaos&quot; described Bathory&#x27;s first four albums as &quot;the blueprint for Scandinavian black metal.&quot; 

Bathory abandoned the black metal sound for their fifth record, &quot;Hammerheart&quot; (1990), which is often cited as the first Viking metal album. The band continued in the Viking metal style for most of their remaining existence, although they experimented with a thrash metal style on the albums &quot;Requiem&quot; (1994) and &quot;Octagon&quot; (1995). They stopped performing live early on and never toured; frontman, founder and main songwriter Tomas &quot;Quorthon&quot; Forsberg was the sole constant member and at times responsible for all instruments. Bathory ended when Forsberg died from heart failure at the age of 38 in June 2004.

== History ==
=== Early years (1980s) ===
Bathory formed in Vällingby in March 1983. Quorthon, a 17-year-old guitarist (then known as &quot;Ace Shoot&quot;, a name inspired by sex jokes, two Motörhead songs – &quot;Ace of Spades&quot; and &quot;Sharpshooter&quot; – and Ace Frehley of Kiss), was joined by bass guitarist Frederick Melander (&quot;Hanoi&quot;) and drummer Jonas Åkerlund (&quot;Vans McBurger&quot;). According to Quorthon, he settled on the name &#x27;Bathory&#x27; after a visit to the London Dungeon, although Jonas says that it was also inspired and taken from the Venom song &quot;Countess Bathory&quot;. The Venom song was based on the life of Elizabeth Báthory who is believed to be one of the most prolific female murderesses. Before settling on &#x27;Bathory&#x27;, the band considered several names; including Nosferatu, Natas, Mephisto, Elizabeth Bathory and Countess Bathory. Quorthon worked part-time at the small record label Tyfon Grammofon, which was owned by his father, Börje Forsberg (1944-2017). In late 1983, the label was putting together a compilation of songs by Scandinavian metal bands. However, at the last minute, one of the bands backed out. Tyfon agreed to let Bathory appear on the record as a replacement. The album, called &quot;Scandinavian Metal Attack&quot;, was released in March 1984 and was Bathory&#x27;s first appearance on record. Unexpectedly, the two Bathory tracks &quot;Sacrifice&quot; and &quot;The Return of Darkness and Evil&quot; drew a great deal of fan mail.

Soon afterward, Tyfon asked Quorthon to record a full-length album. His bandmates having moved away, Quorthon recruited Rickard Bergman from his former oi-punk band Stridskuk as bassist and Stefan Larsson from punk band Obsklass as drummer. On 22 May 1984, they had their first and only rehearsal together before recording the album. Two songs were recorded at the 22 May rehearsal: &quot;Witchcraft&quot; and &quot;Satan My Master&quot; making it the first recording of the debut album line-up. The debut album, &quot;Bathory&quot;, was recorded in June at Heavenshore Studio (a converted garage) in Stockholm and released in October that year. Over the next four years, Bathory released a further three albums: &quot;The Return……&quot; (1985), &quot;Under the Sign of the Black Mark&quot; (1987) and &quot;Blood Fire Death&quot; (1988).

Bathory&#x27;s early work was dark, fast, heavily distorted and raw recording (lo-fi). Quorthon&#x27;s vocals were harsh, high-pitched and raspy with occasional shrieks and screams. The band&#x27;s lyrics focused on &#x27;dark&#x27; topics and included anti-Christian and &#x27;Satanic&#x27; references. These traits came to define black metal and the band used this style on their first four albums. Quorthon said that the band were not Satanists but used &#x27;Satanic&#x27; references to provoke and attack Christianity. With the third and fourth albums he began &quot;attacking Christianity from a different angle&quot;, realizing that Satanism is a &quot;Christian product&quot; and seeing them both as &quot;religious hocus-pocus&quot;.

Quorthon described Bathory&#x27;s early sound as a &quot;mixture&quot; of Black Sabbath, Motörhead and GBH, singling out GBH&#x27;s album &quot;City Baby Attacked by Rats&quot; and Motörhead&#x27;s &quot;Ace of Spades&quot; and &quot;Iron Fist&quot;, and was also influenced by the Exploited, Sex Pistols, Disorder, Riot/Clone, Anti-Nowhere League, Kiss, Anti Cimex, Asocial, Mob 47 and Exciter. The term &#x27;black metal&#x27; came from Venom&#x27;s 1982 album of that name. Many fans and reviewers have claimed Venom was an influence on Bathory, or even accused Bathory of copying Venom. Quorthon often denied being influenced by Venom and claimed that he &quot;heard Venom for the first time in late 1984 or early 1985&quot; and never owned a Venom album. However, he admitted in an interview for &quot;Metal Forces&quot; that he first listened to Venom&#x27;s &quot;Black Metal&quot; in 1983 and considered it &quot;one of the best albums ever made.&quot; Bathory&#x27;s early sound has always been associated with Slayer but Quorthon denied being influenced by them.

Bathory stopped performing live in 1985, with Quorthon viewing organizing concerts as too much hassle.

Although Bathory&#x27;s fourth album, &quot;Blood Fire Death&quot; (1988), largely followed in the style of the albums before it, some songs had a very different style. These songs have a much slower tempo, acoustic passages, choral background singing, and lyrics about Vikings and Norse mythology. Music critic Eduardo Rivadavia of AllMusic describes this &#x27;epic&#x27; style as &quot;possibly the first true example&quot; of Viking metal.

=== Viking metal years (1990s–2000s) ===
After &quot;Blood Fire Death&quot;, the band shed its early black metal style. Their fifth album, &quot;Hammerheart&quot; (1990), was the first &quot; Viking metal album&quot;. This was said to have been influenced by the American power metal band Manowar, although Quorthon described this rumour as &quot;another total misconception&quot;, but admitted that &quot;heavy Manowar beat seemed to perfectly suit my new ideas for lyrics at the time&quot;. A music video was made for the song &quot;One Rode to Asa Bay&quot;. The style of &quot;Hammerheart&quot; was continued on &quot;Twilight of the Gods&quot; (1991) and &quot;Blood on Ice&quot; (recorded in 1989 but completed in 1996).

With &quot;Requiem&quot; (1994) and &quot;Octagon&quot; (1995), Bathory changed style once more, this time turning to retro-thrash in the vein of 1980s Bay Area thrash bands. However, the 2001 release &quot;Destroyer of Worlds&quot; was a transitional release that led to a full return to the Viking metal style with the releases of &quot;Nordland I&quot; (2002) and &quot;Nordland II&quot; (2003).

=== Quorthon&#x27;s death ===
In June 2004, Quorthon was found dead in his home, apparently due to heart failure. On 3 June 2006, Black Mark Production released a box set in tribute to Quorthon, containing three CDs of his favorite Bathory and Quorthon songs, a 176-page booklet, a DVD with his long-form video for &quot;One Rode to Asa Bay&quot;, an interview and some rare promo footage and a poster.

Several Bathory tribute albums have been compiled by black metal artists, such as &quot;In Conspiracy with Satan – A Tribute to Bathory&quot; and &quot;Voices from Valhalla – A Tribute to Bathory&quot;. In August 2004, several members of the Norwegian black metal scene gathered to perform Bathory songs in a set titled A Tribute to Quorthon at the Hole in the Sky festival in Bergen, Norway. The lineup included Abbath (Immortal), Apollyon (Aura Noir), Faust and Samoth (Emperor and Zyklon), Gaahl (Gorgoroth), Grutle Kjellson and Ivar Bjørnson (Enslaved), Nocturno Culto (Darkthrone) and Satyr (Satyricon).

==Legacy==
The book &quot;Lords of Chaos&quot; described Bathory&#x27;s first four albums as &quot;the blueprint for Scandinavian black metal.&quot; Black metal acts influenced by Bathory&#x27;s early records include Mayhem, Burzum, Darkthrone, Gorgoroth, Satyricon, Emperor, Dark Funeral, Enslaved, Immortal, Marduk, Moonsorrow, and Dimmu Borgir. Ambient rock band Vision Eternel also cited Bathory as influential, singling out the albums &quot;Hammerheart&quot; and &quot;Twilight of the Gods&quot;.

Swedish black metal band Watain played a live tribute to Quorthon and Bathory at the Sweden Rock Festival in 2010. The resulting recording was the limited-edition album &quot;Tonight We Raise Our Cups and Toast in Angels Blood: A Tribute to Bathory&quot; with 7 tracks, and was released on 23 February 2015. It was also released as on 12-inch vinyl album, the latter in 1300 numbered copies with four tracks, &quot;A Fine Day to Die&quot;, &quot;The Return of Darkness and Evil&quot;, &quot;Rite of Darkness&quot; and &quot;Reaper&quot; on Side A and three tracks &quot;Enter the Eternal Fire&quot;, &quot;Sacrifice&quot; and &quot;Born for Burning&quot; on Side B. The release proved very popular with Swedish public, with the limited vinyl edition reaching number 1 on the vinyl chart. The album made it also to number 2 on the national Sverigetopplistan chart, the official Swedish Albums Chart in February 2015.

== Band members ==
* Quorthon (Thomas Börje Forsberg) – vocals, guitar, bass guitar, drums, percussion, keyboards, synthesizers lyrics, composer 
* The Animal (Björn Kristensen) – vocals 
* Freddan/Hanoi (Frederick Melander) – bass guitar 
* Vans McBurger (Jonas Åkerlund) – drums 
* Ribban (Rickard Bergman)– bass guitar 
* Stefan Larsson – drums 
* Adde (Andreas Johansson) – bass guitar 
* Christer Sandström – bass guitar 
* Paul Lundburg – drums 
* Kothaar – bass guitar 
* Vvornth – drums 

Timeline
== Discography ==
=== Studio albums ===
* &quot;Bathory&quot; (1984)
* &quot;The Return……&quot; (1985)
* &quot;Under the Sign of the Black Mark&quot; (1987)
* &quot;Blood Fire Death&quot; (1988)
* &quot;Hammerheart&quot; (1990)
* &quot;Twilight of the Gods&quot; (1991)
* &quot;Requiem&quot; (1994)
* &quot;Octagon&quot; (1995)
* &quot;Blood on Ice&quot; (1996) 
* &quot;Destroyer of Worlds&quot; (2001)
* &quot;Nordland I&quot; (2002)
* &quot;Nordland II&quot; (2003)

=== Compilation albums ===
* &quot;Jubileum Volume I&quot; (1992)
* &quot;Jubileum Volume II&quot; (1993)
* &quot;Jubileum Volume III&quot; (1998)
* &quot;Katalog&quot; (2001)
* &quot;In Memory of Quorthon&quot; (2006)

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Bibliography ==
* 

== External links ==

*Bathory on Black Mark Production 
*[ Bathory] at AllMusic
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q157201" start="0" end="7" title="Bathory (band)" label="Bathory"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="22" end="33" title="heavy metal music" label="heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2559389" start="49" end="58" title="Vällingby" label="Vällingby"/>
<link wikidata="Q170846" start="105" end="122" title="Elizabeth Báthory" label="Elizabeth Báthory"/>
<link wikidata="Q132438" start="156" end="167" title="black metal" label="black metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q192861" start="179" end="184" title="Venom (band)" label="Venom"/>
<link wikidata="Q647370" start="189" end="202" title="Mercyful Fate" label="Mercyful Fate"/>
<link wikidata="Q213149" start="208" end="220" title="Viking metal" label="Viking metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q427570" start="237" end="251" title="Lords of Chaos (book)" label="Lords of Chaos"/>
<link wikidata="Q570720" start="432" end="443" title="Hammerheart" label="Hammerheart"/>
<link wikidata="Q483352" start="630" end="642" title="thrash metal" label="thrash metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081898" start="669" end="676" title="Requiem (Bathory album)" label="Requiem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094402" start="700" end="707" title="Octagon (Bathory album)" label="Octagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q380318" start="816" end="851" title="Quorthon" label="Tomas &amp;quot;Quorthon&amp;quot; Forsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q181754" start="965" end="978" title="heart failure" label="heart failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2559389" start="1071" end="1080" title="Vällingby" label="Vällingby"/>
<link wikidata="Q380318" start="1096" end="1104" title="Quorthon" label="Quorthon"/>
<link wikidata="Q19697" start="1202" end="1211" title="Motörhead" label="Motörhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526077" start="1226" end="1239" title="Ace of Spades (song)" label="Ace of Spades"/>
<link wikidata="Q319610" start="1281" end="1292" title="Ace Frehley" label="Ace Frehley"/>
<link wikidata="Q124179" start="1296" end="1300" title="Kiss (band)" label="Kiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q455370" start="1383" end="1397" title="Jonas Åkerlund" label="Jonas Åkerlund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513107" start="1514" end="1528" title="London Dungeon" label="London Dungeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q192861" start="1595" end="1600" title="Venom (band)" label="Venom"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841577" start="1612" end="1628" title="Countess Bathory (song)" label="Countess Bathory"/>
<link wikidata="Q170846" start="1676" end="1693" title="Elizabeth Báthory" label="Elizabeth Báthory"/>
<link wikidata="Q880388" start="1966" end="1981" title="Tyfon Grammofon" label="Tyfon Grammofon"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="2113" end="2124" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2288" end="2313" title=":fi:Scandinavian Metal Attack" label="Scandinavian Metal Attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q274401" start="2690" end="2697" title="Oi Punk" label="oi-punk"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2703" end="2712" title="Stridskuk" label="Stridskuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q791320" start="3057" end="3064" title="Bathory (album)" label="Bathory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="3139" end="3148" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q328363" start="3257" end="3269" title="The Return……" label="The Return……"/>
<link wikidata="Q367235" start="3290" end="3322" title="Under the Sign of the Black Mark" label="Under the Sign of the Black Mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q804532" start="3346" end="3362" title="Blood Fire Death" label="Blood Fire Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507298" start="3457" end="3462" title="lo-fi music" label="lo-fi"/>
<link wikidata="Q335499" start="3493" end="3498" title="death growl" label="harsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q133363" start="3656" end="3663" title="Satanism" label="Satanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q132438" start="3710" end="3721" title="black metal" label="black metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q47670" start="4196" end="4209" title="Black Sabbath" label="Black Sabbath"/>
<link wikidata="Q19697" start="4211" end="4220" title="Motörhead" label="Motörhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q601984" start="4225" end="4228" title="GBH (band)" label="GBH"/>
<link wikidata="Q543628" start="4266" end="4292" title="City Baby Attacked by Rats" label="City Baby Attacked by Rats"/>
<link wikidata="Q481752" start="4326" end="4339" title="Ace of Spades (Motörhead album)" label="Ace of Spades"/>
<link wikidata="Q928033" start="4356" end="4365" title="Iron Fist (album)" label="Iron Fist"/>
<link wikidata="Q117684" start="4400" end="4413" title="the Exploited" label="the Exploited"/>
<link wikidata="Q82545" start="4415" end="4426" title="Sex Pistols" label="Sex Pistols"/>
<link wikidata="Q3710155" start="4428" end="4436" title="Disorder (band)" label="Disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q574728" start="4450" end="4469" title="Anti-Nowhere League" label="Anti-Nowhere League"/>
<link wikidata="Q124179" start="4471" end="4475" title="Kiss (band)" label="Kiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q574789" start="4477" end="4487" title="Anti Cimex" label="Anti Cimex"/>
<link wikidata="Q771968" start="4498" end="4504" title="Mob 47" label="Mob 47"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383552" start="4509" end="4516" title="Exciter (band)" label="Exciter"/>
<link wikidata="Q804229" start="4579" end="4597" title="Black Metal (Venom album)" label="album of that name"/>
<link wikidata="Q6822604" start="4929" end="4941" title="Metal Forces" label="Metal Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q131231" start="5142" end="5148" title="Slayer" label="Slayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q12567" start="5570" end="5577" title="Vikings" label="Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q128285" start="5582" end="5597" title="Norse mythology" label="Norse mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="5633" end="5641" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q213149" start="5730" end="5742" title="Viking metal" label="Viking metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q570720" start="5890" end="5901" title="Hammerheart" label="Hammerheart"/>
<link wikidata="Q57143" start="6017" end="6028" title="power metal" label="power metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q156049" start="6034" end="6041" title="Manowar" label="Manowar"/>
<link wikidata="Q193977" start="6240" end="6251" title="music video" label="music video"/>
<link wikidata="Q570720" start="6280" end="6299" title="One Rode to Asa Bay" label="One Rode to Asa Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q767966" start="6367" end="6387" title="Twilight of the Gods (album)" label="Twilight of the Gods"/>
<link wikidata="Q804535" start="6411" end="6423" title="Blood on Ice" label="Blood on Ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081898" start="6484" end="6491" title="Requiem (Bathory album)" label="Requiem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094402" start="6515" end="6522" title="Octagon (Bathory album)" label="Octagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q483352" start="6597" end="6603" title="thrash metal" label="thrash"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537356" start="6625" end="6640" title="Bay Area thrash metal" label="Bay Area thrash"/>
<link wikidata="Q646055" start="6680" end="6699" title="Destroyer of Worlds (album)" label="Destroyer of Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q239950" start="6812" end="6822" title="Nordland I" label="Nordland I"/>
<link wikidata="Q545956" start="6846" end="6857" title="Nordland II" label="Nordland II"/>
<link wikidata="Q880388" start="7003" end="7024" title="Black Mark Production" label="Black Mark Production"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="7155" end="7158" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296521" start="7519" end="7546" title="Early Norwegian black metal scene" label="Norwegian black metal scene"/>
<link wikidata="Q3786284" start="7626" end="7641" title="Hole in the Sky (festival)" label="Hole in the Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q306080" start="7690" end="7696" title="Olve Eikemo" label="Abbath"/>
<link wikidata="Q208417" start="7698" end="7706" title="Immortal (band)" label="Immortal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575825" start="7709" end="7717" title="Ole Moe" label="Apollyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q774240" start="7719" end="7728" title="Aura Noir" label="Aura Noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q554527" start="7731" end="7736" title="Faust (musician)" label="Faust"/>
<link wikidata="Q457595" start="7741" end="7747" title="Samoth" label="Samoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q264029" start="7749" end="7756" title="Emperor (band)" label="Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q245494" start="7761" end="7767" title="Zyklon" label="Zyklon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257488" start="7770" end="7775" title="Gaahl" label="Gaahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q152761" start="7777" end="7786" title="Gorgoroth" label="Gorgoroth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320495" start="7789" end="7804" title="Grutle Kjellson" label="Grutle Kjellson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801441" start="7809" end="7822" title="Ivar Bjørnson" label="Ivar Bjørnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q916688" start="7824" end="7832" title="Enslaved (band)" label="Enslaved"/>
<link wikidata="Q438518" start="7835" end="7849" title="Nocturno Culto" label="Nocturno Culto"/>
<link wikidata="Q160119" start="7851" end="7861" title="Darkthrone" label="Darkthrone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067783" start="7867" end="7872" title="Sigurd Wongraven" label="Satyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q335352" start="7874" end="7883" title="Satyricon (band)" label="Satyricon"/>
<link wikidata="Q427570" start="7913" end="7927" title="Lords of Chaos (book)" label="Lords of Chaos"/>
<link wikidata="Q485116" start="8104" end="8110" title="Mayhem (band)" label="Mayhem"/>
<link wikidata="Q193172" start="8112" end="8118" title="Burzum" label="Burzum"/>
<link wikidata="Q160119" start="8120" end="8130" title="Darkthrone" label="Darkthrone"/>
<link wikidata="Q152761" start="8132" end="8141" title="Gorgoroth" label="Gorgoroth"/>
<link wikidata="Q335352" start="8143" end="8152" title="Satyricon (band)" label="Satyricon"/>
<link wikidata="Q264029" start="8154" end="8161" title="Emperor (band)" label="Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2834192" start="8163" end="8175" title="Dark Funeral" label="Dark Funeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q916688" start="8177" end="8185" title="Enslaved (band)" label="Enslaved"/>
<link wikidata="Q208417" start="8187" end="8195" title="Immortal (band)" label="Immortal"/>
<link wikidata="Q683775" start="8197" end="8203" title="Marduk (band)" label="Marduk"/>
<link wikidata="Q954332" start="8205" end="8215" title="Moonsorrow" label="Moonsorrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q58207" start="8221" end="8233" title="Dimmu Borgir" label="Dimmu Borgir"/>
<link wikidata="Q29287816" start="8253" end="8267" title="Vision Eternel" label="Vision Eternel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509682" start="8415" end="8421" title="Watain" label="Watain"/>
<link wikidata="Q380318" start="8447" end="8455" title="Quorthon" label="Quorthon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118536" start="8475" end="8495" title="Sweden Rock Festival" label="Sweden Rock Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q216537" start="9229" end="9246" title="Sverigetopplistan" label="Sverigetopplistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q380318" start="9328" end="9336" title="Quorthon" label="Quorthon"/>
<link wikidata="Q455370" start="9564" end="9578" title="Jonas Åkerlund" label="Jonas Åkerlund"/>
<link wikidata="Q791320" start="9861" end="9868" title="Bathory (album)" label="Bathory"/>
<link wikidata="Q328363" start="9890" end="9902" title="The Return……" label="The Return……"/>
<link wikidata="Q367235" start="9924" end="9956" title="Under the Sign of the Black Mark" label="Under the Sign of the Black Mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q804532" start="9978" end="9994" title="Blood Fire Death" label="Blood Fire Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q570720" start="10016" end="10027" title="Hammerheart" label="Hammerheart"/>
<link wikidata="Q767966" start="10049" end="10069" title="Twilight of the Gods (album)" label="Twilight of the Gods"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081898" start="10091" end="10098" title="Requiem (Bathory album)" label="Requiem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094402" start="10120" end="10127" title="Octagon (Bathory album)" label="Octagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q804535" start="10149" end="10161" title="Blood on Ice" label="Blood on Ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q646055" start="10184" end="10203" title="Destroyer of Worlds (album)" label="Destroyer of Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q239950" start="10225" end="10235" title="Nordland I" label="Nordland I"/>
<link wikidata="Q545956" start="10257" end="10268" title="Nordland II" label="Nordland II"/>
<link wikidata="Q903713" start="10467" end="10488" title="In Memory of Quorthon" label="In Memory of Quorthon"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="10627" end="10635" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
</links>
</doc>
