<doc id="335149" wikidata="Q1396178" url="?curid=335149" title="Winston Peters">
<text>Winston Raymond Peters (born 11 April 1945) is a New Zealand politician who has been serving as the 13th deputy prime minister of New Zealand since November 2023, his third time in the role. He has been leader of New Zealand First since he founded the political party in 1993. He was re-elected for a fifteenth time at the 2023 general election, having previously been a member of Parliament (MP) from 1979 to 1981, 1984 to 2008 and 2011 to 2020. Peters also serves as the 25th minister of foreign affairs, 8th minister for racing, and 29th Minister for Rail.

Peters first entered the New Zealand House of Representatives for the National Party in the 1978 general election, taking office in 1979 after a high court ruling initially nullified his victory. Peters rose in prominence during the 1980s as an eloquent and charismatic Māori conservative, first gaining national attention for exposing the Māori loan affair in 1986. He first served in the Cabinet as minister of Māori affairs when Jim Bolger led the National Party to victory in 1990. He was dismissed from this post in 1991 after criticising his own Government&#x27;s economic and foreign ownership policies, particularly the neoliberal reforms known as Ruthanasia. Leaving the National Party in 1993, Peters briefly served as an independent and rewon his seat in a by-election. He then founded New Zealand First, a populist party with a distinctly Māori character, backed by ex-Labour and National voters alike disenchanted with neoliberalism. Peters started the Winebox Inquiry in 1994, which concerned companies using the Cook Islands as a tax haven.

As leader of New Zealand First, he held the balance of power after the 1996 election and formed a coalition with the National Party, securing the positions of deputy prime minister and treasurer, the latter position created for Peters. However, the coalition dissolved in 1998 following the replacement of Bolger by Jenny Shipley as prime minister. In 1999, New Zealand First returned to opposition before entering government with Labour Party Prime Minister Helen Clark, in which Peters served as minister of foreign affairs from 2005 to 2008. In the 2008 general election, after a funding scandal involving Peters and his party, New Zealand First failed to reach the 5% threshold. As a result, neither Peters nor New Zealand First were returned to Parliament. 

In the 2011 general election, New Zealand First experienced a resurgence in support, winning 6.8% of the party vote to secure eight seats in Parliament. Peters returned to Parliament and spent two terms in opposition before forming a coalition government with the Labour Party in 2017. The new prime minister Jacinda Ardern appointed Peters as deputy prime minister and minister of foreign affairs. Peters was acting prime minister from 21 June 2018 to 2 August 2018 while Ardern was on maternity leave. He failed to be elected for a third time in the 2020 election, but staged another comeback in 2023 and helped form the Sixth National Government. After entering into a coalition agreement with National leader Christopher Luxon, Peters serves as Luxon&#x27;s deputy prime minister from 27 November 2023 to 31 May 2025; he will be succeeded by David Seymour.

==Early life and education==
Peters&#x27;s birth certificate records his birth in Whangārei and his registration as Wynston Raymond Peters. His father was Māori, primarily of the Ngāti Wai iwi, but also of Ngāti Hine and Ngāpuhi. His mother was of Clan MacInnes Scottish ancestry. Two of his brothers, Ian and Jim, have also served as MPs, and another brother, Ron, has also stood as a New Zealand First candidate. According to the journalist Ian Wishart, Peters is not fluent in the Māori language because as a child English was the language in his home and children were not allowed to speak Māori at his primary school.

He grew up on a farm in Whananaki, and after attending Whangarei Boys&#x27; High School and Dargaville High School, Peters studied at the Auckland Teachers&#x27; Training College. In 1966 he taught at Te Atatū Intermediate School in Auckland but the next year went to Australia where he became a blast-furnace worker with BHP in Newcastle and later a tunneler in the Snowy Mountains.

In 1970 Peters returned to New Zealand and studied history, politics and law at the University of Auckland. During his university years, Peters joined the New Zealand Young Nationals, the youth wing of the centre-right New Zealand National Party, and became acquainted with Bruce Cliffe and Paul East, who later served as Cabinet ministers in the Fourth National Government. Like his brothers Ron, Wayne, and Allan, Peters played rugby. He was a member of the University Rugby Club in Auckland and captain of the Auckland Māori Rugby team. In 1973, Peters graduated with a BA and LLB. He married his girlfriend Louise, and later worked as a lawyer at Russell McVeagh between 1974 and 1978.

==Early political career==






Peters entered national politics in 1975 general election, standing unsuccessfully for the National Party in the electorate seat of Northern Maori. Securing 1,873 votes, Peters did not lose his deposit, which is rare for a National candidate in a Māori seat. This followed a successful campaign by Peters and other members of his Ngāti Wai iwi to retain their tribal land in the face of the Labour government&#x27;s plan to establish coastal-land reserves for the public. As a result, the government of the day took virtually no ancestral land in the Whangārei coastal areas, and the initiative helped inspire the 1975 Land March led by Whina Cooper.

Peters first became a member of parliament following the 1978 general election, but only after winning in the High Court an electoral petition which overturned the election-night result for the seat of (an electorate in the southern Auckland city area) against Malcolm Douglas, the brother of Roger Douglas. Peters took his seat—six months after polling day —– on 24 May 1979. He lost this seat in 1981, but in 1984 he successfully stood in the electorate of Tauranga.

After re-entering parliament Peters was appointed Shadow Minister of Māori Affairs, Consumer Affairs and Marketing by National leader Sir Robert Muldoon. When Muldoon was replaced as leader by Jim McLay, Peters retained only Māori Affairs in a reshuffle but was also allocated the transport portfolio. In March 1986 when McLay was replaced by Jim Bolger as leader, Peters was nominated for the deputy leadership, but he declined the nomination.

On 16 December 1986 Peters exposed the Māori loan affair in Parliament; this involved the-then Māori Affairs Department attempting to raise money illegally through a NZ$600 million loan-package offered by the Hawaiian businessman Michael Gisondi and the West German businessman Max Raepple. Peters became the National Party&#x27;s spokesperson on Māori Affairs, Consumer Affairs, and Transport. In 1987 Jim Bolger elevated him to National&#x27;s Opposition front bench as spokesperson for Māori Affairs, Employment, and Race Relations. After National won the 1990 election, Peters became Minister of Māori Affairs in the fourth National government, led by Jim Bolger.
As Minister of Māori Affairs, Peters co-authored the &quot;Ka Awatea&quot; report in 1992 which advocated merging the Ministry of Māori Affairs and the Iwi Transition Agency into the present Te Puni Kōkiri (Ministry for Māori Development).
Peters disagreed with the National Party leadership on a number of matters—such as the Ruthanasia economic policies—and frequently spoke out against his party regarding them. This earned him popular recognition and support. However, his party colleagues distrusted him, and his publicity-seeking behaviour made him increasingly disliked within the party. While the party leadership tolerated differences of opinion from a backbencher, they were far less willing to accept public criticism from a Cabinet minister, which (they determined) was undermining the National government. In October 1991, Bolger sacked Peters from Cabinet.

Peters remained as a National backbencher, continuing to publicly criticise the party. In late 1992, when the National Party was considering possible candidates for the elections in the following year, it moved to prevent Peters from seeking renomination (under any banner). In &quot;Peters v Collinge&quot;, Peters successfully challenged the party&#x27;s actions in the High Court, and in early 1993, he chose to resign from the party and from Parliament. This prompted a by-election in Tauranga some months before the scheduled general election. Peters stood in Tauranga as an independent and won easily.

==Fourth National Government (1993–1999)==
Shortly before the 1993 election in November, Peters established New Zealand First in July of the same year. He retained his Tauranga seat in the election. Another New Zealand First candidate, Tau Henare, unseated the Labour incumbent in Northern Maori, helping to convince people that New Zealand First was not simply Peters&#x27;s personal vehicle. So began a strong association of the party with Māori voters, according to scholar Todd Donovan. Peters started the Winebox Inquiry in 1994, which concerned companies using the Cook Islands as a tax haven.
During the 1992 and 1993 electoral reform referendums, Peters advocated the adoption of the mixed-member proportional (MMP) electoral system. In the 1996 general election, the MMP system delivered a large increase in representation for New Zealand First. Instead of the 2 seats in the previous parliament, the party won 17 seats and swept all of the Māori electorates. More importantly, it held the balance of power in Parliament. Neither National nor Labour had enough support to govern alone. Neither party could form a majority without the backing of New Zealand First, meaning Peters could effectively choose the next prime minister. As a result, Peters became known as the &quot;kingmaker&quot;.

It was widely expected that he would throw his support to Labour and make Labour leader Helen Clark New Zealand&#x27;s first female prime minister. Peters had bitterly criticised his former National colleagues, and appeared to promise that he would not even consider a coalition with Bolger. However, after over a month of negotiations with both parties, Peters decided to enter into a coalition with National. Michael Laws, then New Zealand First&#x27;s campaign manager, later claimed that Peters had already decided to enter into an agreement with National and used his negotiations with Labour simply to win more concessions from Bolger.

Whatever the case, Peters exacted a very high price for allowing Bolger to stay on as Prime Minister. Under the terms of a detailed coalition agreement, Peters won a number of concessions that were highly unusual for a junior coalition partner in a Westminster system, especially one as new as New Zealand First. Peters became Deputy Prime Minister and Treasurer (senior to the Minister of Finance), the latter post created especially for him. He also had full latitude to select the ministers from his own party, without approval from Bolger. Initially, there were concerns about whether Peters would be able to work with Bolger, who had previously sacked him from Cabinet, but the two did not seem to have any major difficulties.
Later, however, tensions began to develop between Peters and the National Party, which only worsened after Jenny Shipley staged a party room coup and became prime minister. After a dispute over the privatisation of Wellington International Airport, Shipley sacked Peters from Cabinet again on 14 August 1998. He immediately broke off the coalition and led New Zealand First back into opposition. However, several MPs, including deputy leader Henare, opted to stay in government and leave New Zealand First. It later came out that Henare had tried to oust Peters as leader, but failed. Henare and other disaffected New Zealand First MPs formed the short-lived Mauri Pacific party. None of the MPs who opted to stay in government retained their seats in the next election.

==Fifth Labour Government (1999–2008)==
New Zealand First was severely mauled in the 1999 election, which saw Labour oust National from power. The party suffered for the rash of party-switching. Additionally, there was a wide perception that Peters had led voters to believe a vote for New Zealand First would get rid of National, only to turn around and go into coalition &quot;with&quot; National. New Zealand First dropped to 4.3% of the vote. Under New Zealand&#x27;s MMP rules, a party that falls below the 5% threshold can still qualify for MMP by winning one electorate seat. However, Peters just barely held onto Tauranga after losing almost 20 percent of his vote from 1996, defeating a National challenger by 63 votes. As a result, New Zealand First remained in parliament but was reduced to five seats. Still in opposition (to the Fifth Labour Government), Peters continued to promote his traditional policies, but also became more noticeably concerned about immigration policies.

In the 2002 election, Peters performed well once again, campaigning on three main issues: reducing immigration, increasing punishments for crime, and ending the &quot;grievance industry&quot; around Treaty of Waitangi settlements. This message regained much support for both Peters and his party, especially from among the elderly who had in the past backed Peters, and New Zealand First won 10% of the vote and 13 seats. Peters seemed to hope that Labour would choose to ally with New Zealand First to stay in power. However, Clark explicitly rejected this possibility, instead relying on support from elsewhere.

In a speech at Orewa in 2005, he criticised immigration from Asian countries as &quot;imported criminal activity&quot; and warned that New Zealanders were &quot;being colonised without having any say in the numbers of people coming in and where they are from&quot;. He also accused the Labour Party of having an &quot;ethnic engineering and re-population policy&quot;. In July 2005, Peters said New Zealand should err on the side of caution in admitting immigrants until they &quot;affirm their commitment to our values and standards&quot;.

===2005 election===

As the 2005 general election approached, Peters did not indicate a preference for coalition with either of the major parties, declaring that he would not seek the &quot;baubles of office&quot;. He promised to either give support in confidence and supply to the party with the most seats, or to abstain from no-confidence votes against it, and that he would not deal with any coalition that included the Greens. He pledged to keep post-election negotiations to under three weeks following criticism of the seven-week marathon it took to broker a deal with National in 1996.

In the election, some of New Zealand First&#x27;s traditional support moved to National. Peters himself narrowly lost his longstanding hold on Tauranga to National MP Bob Clarkson, but New Zealand First did well enough to receive seven seats (down from 13 in 2002), allowing Peters to remain in Parliament as a list MP. Soon after the 2005 election Peters launched a legal challenge against Clarkson. The case alleged that Clarkson had spent more than the legal limit allowed for campaign budgets during elections in New Zealand. This legal bid ultimately failed, with a majority of the judges in the case declaring that Clarkson had not overspent.

In negotiations with Helen Clark after the election, Peters secured the ministerial portfolios of Foreign Affairs and Racing in the Labour-led government, a move which apparently lay at odds with his earlier promise to refuse the &quot;baubles of office&quot;. He was a member of the Executive Council, although he was outside cabinet; he was able to criticise the government in areas not related to his portfolios, which experts said was an unprecedented situation. Considering his previous comments relating to immigration, there were mixed reactions from commentators. His selection for the Foreign Affairs portfolio created some measure of surprise within the country and beyond. National Party leader Don Brash said the choice was &quot;astonishing&quot;, because &quot;the whole region distrusts Winston Peters – Australia, Asia [...]. I think putting him as minister of foreign affairs does huge damage for our international reputation.&quot; &quot;The Age&quot;, in Australia, expressed surprise that the position had been given to an &quot;outspoken, anti-migrant populist [and] nationalist&quot;.

Allegations concerning Peters&#x27;s involvement with Simunovich Fisheries and former Member of Parliament Ross Meurant, who was engaged as both adviser to Peters and in undefined business activities with Peter Simunovich (managing director of Simunovich Fisheries), culminated in a Parliamentary Select Committee enquiry into what became known as the &#x27;scampi enquiry&#x27;. The enquiry cleared Peters, Simunovich and Meurant of any wrongdoing.

In October 2006, Peters affirmed that he would continue to serve as leader for the 2008 election.

===SuperGold Card===
The SuperGold Card has been one of Peters&#x27;s flagship initiatives. As a condition of the 2005 confidence-and-supply agreement between New Zealand First and the Labour Government, Peters launched the SuperGold Card in August 2007. It included public transport benefits like free off-peak travel (funded by the Government) and discounts from businesses and companies across thousands of outlets. Peters negotiated with then Prime Minister Helen Clark despite widespread opposition to the card on the grounds of high cost.

=== Party donations ===
Peters attracted media attention in 2008 over controversial payments for legal services and party donations. He had received $100,000 in 2006 to fund legal costs of challenging the election of Bob Clarkson to the Tauranga electorate. The money came from Owen Glenn, a wealthy New Zealand businessman and philanthropist based in Monaco. Under parliamentary rules, any gift to MPs over the value of $500 must be declared. Peters denied knowing about the source of the money but this was not corroborated by his lawyer Brian Henry and Glenn contradicted Peters&#x27;s denial.

The Vela family, prominent in the racing industry, had donated $150,000 to Peters over a four-year period. The payments were made in sums of $10,000 to remain within rules governing political party funding. &quot;The Dominion Post&quot; published details from New Zealand First sources that before the 2005 election $25,000 had been donated to the party from Sir Bob Jones via the Spencer Trust. The Trust is administered by Wayne Peters, one of Winston&#x27;s brothers. Jones confirmed that he had paid the money to the Spencer Trust and was asked by Winston Peters to make the donation. Peters denies that he had asked Jones for a donation to the party. The donation was not declared to the Electoral Commission as required by law.

On 29 August 2008, Peters offered to stand down from his portfolios as Foreign Affairs and Racing Minister, pending an investigation by the Serious Fraud Office as to whether the donations from Sir Bob Jones and the Vela brothers reached New Zealand First as intended. On 10 September 2008, Peters gave evidence to the Privileges Committee of the New Zealand Parliament in an attempt to refute evidence given by Owen Glenn. The Privileges Committee returned a report on 22 September recommending that Peters be censured for &quot;knowingly providing false or misleading information on a return of pecuniary interests&quot;. Parliament passed a motion censuring Peters the following day. All but three of the parties in Parliament (New Zealand First, Labour, and Progressives who abstained) supported the censure.

Peters was later cleared by the Serious Fraud Office with respect to political donations, however some matters were referred back to the Electoral Commission as it was determined that, while no fraud had taken place, some electoral law matters with regard to funding declarations were not complied with. The police subsequently decided that no offence had been committed. Peters has referred to the affair as part of the &quot;most vicious character assassination seen in any campaign this country has ever witnessed&quot; and unsuccessfully sued Television New Zealand for defamation.

===2008 election===

Peters tried to regain Tauranga in the 2008 election and lost to National&#x27;s Simon Bridges by a margin of 11,742 votes, a much larger loss than in 2005. The loss was attributed to fallout from the fundraising scandal that was seen to have damaged Peters&#x27;s credibility.

With New Zealand First falling to 4.07% of the party vote—and failing to win a single electorate—Peters and his party were shut out of the 49th New Zealand Parliament. In his concession speech, Peters promised, &quot;This is not the end&quot;, and alluded to the fact that while New Zealand First would not have any members in Parliament, its 4.07% of the vote meant it was still New Zealand&#x27;s fourth largest party (after National, Labour, and the Greens). Despite this, political commentators described the defeat as &quot;the end of the road&quot; for Peters.

==In opposition (2008–2017)==
Peters generally shunned the media spotlight following the 2008 election. In 2009, he caused a brief flurry of interest when it was revealed he was still using a ministerial car, some months after his election defeat. Later it was reported he had started writing a rugby column for a local magazine. He appeared on TV ONE&#x27;s Q &amp; A programme on 5 July 2009, confirming that he was still the leader of New Zealand First. He hinted at a political comeback and attacked the New Zealand government&#x27;s review of the Foreshore and Seabed Act. In late 2010 and early 2011 Peters made a number of appearances on television and radio where he made it clear his and New Zealand First&#x27;s intention to contest the 2011 election. New Zealand First&#x27;s annual convention in July 2011 received widespread media coverage and somewhat restored the media&#x27;s interest in Peters and the party.

===2011 election===

In the 2011 general election New Zealand First experienced a resurgence in support, winning 6.8% of the party vote to secure eight seats in Parliament. Shortly after the election, Peters stated that his party would be in opposition and hold the &quot;balance of responsibility&quot;. During this term, he was the New Zealand First spokesperson for finance, economic development, foreign affairs, trade, defence, immigration, senior citizens, broadcasting, racing, state owned enterprises, and Treaty of Waitangi issues, and a member of the Finance and Expenditure Committee.

===2014 election===
During the 2014 general election, Peters tactically endorsed the Labour candidate Kelvin Davis in the Te Tai Tokerau Māori electorate as a means of opposing the Mana Movement MP Hone Harawira. Harawira had formed an electoral pact with the Internet Party, which was funded by controversial internet entrepreneur Kim Dotcom. Peters denounced Dotcom as a &quot;crooked German&quot; who &quot;had been here for five minutes&quot;. Peters was joined by Prime Minister and National Leader John Key and the Māori Party candidate Te Hira Paenga. As a result, Harawira was defeated during the 2014 election. During the election, New Zealand First increased their parliamentary representation further, winning 8.6% of the party vote to secure 11 seats in the New Zealand Parliament. Peters continued as New Zealand First spokesperson on finance, economic development, foreign affairs, racing and senior citizens, and as a member of the Finance and Expenditure Committee.

===2015 Northland by-election===

In 2015, National MP Mike Sabin resigned, leaving his seat of Northland open. The seat, located in the Far North District, and its predecessors had been in National hands for decades. However, Peters ran for the seat and won it with a commanding majority—the first time that New Zealand First had won an electorate seat since 2005. With Peters resigning his list seat to take up the Northland seat, this allowed New Zealand First&#x27;s representation in parliament to increase to 12, with Ria Bond, the next available candidate on New Zealand First&#x27;s party list filling the vacant list seat.

===2017 election===
During the lead-up to the 2017 general election, Peters reaffirmed his support for the campaign by families of the victims of the 2010 Pike River Mine disaster to re-enter the mine to recover their loved ones. Peters publicly stated that re-entry to the mine would be non-negotiable in any coalition deal and dismissed claims that it was too dangerous to re-enter the mine.

On 13 July, Peters traded barbs with Green Party MPs Barry Coates and Metiria Turei. Coates had written on the left-wing &quot;The Daily Blog&quot; that the Greens would prefer a snap election to being left out of a Labour and New Zealand First coalition government. Meanwhile, Turei had criticised what she alleged was Peters&#x27;s &quot;racist approach towards immigration&quot;. Peters responded that Coates&#x27; comments were the &quot;height of stupidity&quot;. He also rejected Turei&#x27;s claims that New Zealand First was racist and warned that there would be consequences for the Greens in any post-election talks. Green co-leader James Shaw later clarified that Coates&#x27; remarks did not represent Green Party policy.

At New Zealand First&#x27;s convention in South Auckland on 16 July 2017, Peters announced that if elected his party would hold a double referendum on eliminating the Māori seats and reducing the number of MPs in Parliament from 120 to 100 in mid-term 2017–2020. Peters also outlined his party&#x27;s policies which included reducing immigration to 10,000 a year and nationalising the country&#x27;s banks. Peters also proposed making KiwiBank the New Zealand government&#x27;s official trading bank. In terms of law and order, Peters said that his party would build no more prisons but would make prisoners do hard labour six days a week.

During the 2017 election held on 23 September, Peters lost his Northland electorate seat to the National candidate Matt King by a margin of 1,389 votes. Despite losing his seat, New Zealand First secured 7.2% of the party vote with the party&#x27;s parliamentary presence being reduced from twelve to nine seats. Since Peters ranked first on the New Zealand First list, he remained in Parliament as a list MP.

Following the 2017 election, Peters entered into coalition–forming talks with senior figures from the National and Labour parties. Neither major party had enough support to govern alone. National Party leader and Prime Minister Bill English signalled an interest in forming a coalition with New Zealand First; a potential National–New Zealand First coalition would have had 65 seats between them, enough to govern without the need for support from other parties. Labour leader Jacinda Ardern announced that her party was considering a three-way coalition with New Zealand First and the Greens. Peters indicated that he would not make his final decision until the special votes results were released on 7 October 2017.

During negotiations with Ardern, Peters abandoned his party&#x27;s policy to hold a referendum on Māori seats. He clarified that the defeat of the Māori Party during the 2017 election had eliminated the rationale for his call to abolish the Māori electorates. Peters stated that foreign ownership of homes would be one of the topics discussed during negotiations with both National and Labour. He also called for Labour to scrap its contentious water tax policy on farmers. Peters also refused to negotiate with the Greens directly on the grounds that they had campaigned on a partnership with Labour. He described the Greens as a minor party with a minimal role in any potential government.

==Sixth Labour Government (2017–2020)==
On 19 October 2017, Peters announced that New Zealand First would form a coalition with the Labour Party under Jacinda Ardern, citing changing international and internal economic circumstances as the reasoning behind his decision, coupled with a belief that a Labour government was best-placed to handle the social and economic welfare of New Zealanders in a global environment that was undergoing rapid and seismic change.

As part of the agreement, New Zealand First had four portfolios inside Cabinet and one outside. On 26 October 2017, Peters assumed the positions of Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Minister for State Owned Enterprises and Minister for Racing. On 19 January 2018, Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern announced that she was pregnant and that Peters would take the role of Acting Prime Minister for six weeks after the delivery, which happened on 21 June 2018. Peters managed the &quot;day to day&quot; business of the country while Ardern was on maternity leave—a first in modern politics. Ardern returned to the role of Prime Minister full-time on 2 August 2018.

In August 2019, Peters called for a binding referendum on the Government&#x27;s proposed Abortion Legislation Bill, claiming that it had not been part of New Zealand First&#x27;s coalition agreement with Labour. Peters&#x27;s remarks surprised both Justice Minister Andrew Little of the Labour Party and New Zealand First MP and cabinet minister Tracey Martin, who had participated in months of negotiations on the bill. Peters also declared that New Zealand First MPs would not be allowed a conscience vote on the issue and would vote as a caucus to support the bill at first reading. He warned that New Zealand First would withdraw support if the proposed law was not put to a public referendum. Little rejected Peters&#x27;s demands for a referendum on the grounds that the legislation was a parliamentary matter.

In October 2019 Peters announced $7.7 million investment into the SuperGold Card scheme. The &quot;upgrade&quot; includes a new website, a mobile app, and 500 new partner businesses.

According to &quot;The New Zealand Herald&quot; in July 2020, Peters&#x27;s New Zealand First fully or partially achieved 80% of the 70 promises made by Ardern to secure its support for her premiership.

===Foreign affairs===

As Minister of Foreign Affairs, his commitments include the initiation of a closer economic relations agreement with the UK, Australia, Canada, and other Commonwealth countries and to work towards a bilateral free-trade agreement with the Russia-Belarus-Kazakhstan Customs Union. In July 2019, during a visit to Washington, DC, Peters proposed a bilateral free-trade agreement between New Zealand and the United States.

On 5 May 2020, Peters expressed support for Taiwan rejoining the World Health Organization during a press conference. Peters&#x27;s announcement was welcomed by the Taiwanese Government, which reiterated its friendship with New Zealand. The New Zealand Government subsequently announced its support for Taiwan&#x27;s bid to join the WHO, putting New Zealand alongside Australia and the United States who have taken similar positions. In response, the Chinese Embassy issued a statement reminding Wellington to adhere to the One China Policy. In response, Peters told the Chinese Ambassador to &quot;listen to her master&quot;, and stated that New Zealand should follow Taiwan&#x27;s example of making the wearing of face masks compulsory. Peters&#x27;s remarks were criticised by Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesperson Zhao Lijian, who warned that they violated the One China Policy and would hurt China–New Zealand relations. Peters has stood by his remarks.

On 28 July 2020, Peters announced that New Zealand was suspending its extradition treaty with Hong Kong in response to the Hong Kong national security law, which he claimed &quot;eroded rule of law principles&quot; and undermined the &quot;one country, two systems&quot; rule. In response, the Chinese Embassy criticised the New Zealand Government for violating international law and norms, and interfering in China&#x27;s internal affairs.

On 22 July 2020, Peters attracted media scrutiny for allegedly using his position as Minister of Foreign Affairs to get Antarctica New Zealand to arrange a taxpayer–funded trip to Antarctica for two wealthy friends. Peters defended his actions and claimed that he was trying to raise NZ$50 million in private sponsorship to offset some of the costs of the NZ$250 million redevelopment of New Zealand&#x27;s Antarctic base Scott Base.

In response to evidence that Russian opposition leader Alexei Navalny was poisoned in September 2020, Peters called it &quot;deeply troubling&quot;.

=== Superannuation payments ===
In late August 2017, Peters admitted being overpaid in superannuation for seven years while living with his longtime partner Jan Trotman. The overpayment occurred because the relationship status box on his application form was left blank. Peters stated that he and the Ministry agreed that there had been a payment error but said he had paid the money back – amounting to nearly $18,000. Peters paid interest and penalties on the overpayment.

The overpayment was subsequently leaked to the media. Peters described it as a private matter and expressed outrage that it had been leaked. In 2019, while serving as Deputy Prime Minister, he took former National ministers Paula Bennett and Anne Tolley, the Ministry of Social Development, its former chief executive Brendon Boyle, and State Services Commissioner Peter Hughes to court seeking $450,000 from each defendant for breaching his privacy.

On 20 April 2020, Justice Geoffrey Venning of the Auckland High Court dismissed Peters&#x27;s case against Bennett, Tolley, the Ministry of Social Development, Boyle, and Hughes on the basis that Peters had not been able to establish that they were responsible for the disclosure of the payment irregularity to the media. However, the High Court also ruled that Peters&#x27;s privacy had been deliberately breached during the lead-up to the 2017 general election to publicly embarrass him and cause him harm.

On 20 July 2020, Peters was ordered by the Auckland High Court Justice Venning to pay a total $320,000 to the defendants Bennett and Tolley, State Services Commissioner Peter Hughes, the Ministry of Social Development and its former chief executive Brendan Boyle. In response, Peters announced that he would appeal the High Court&#x27;s judgment. In August 2021, the Court of Appeal dismissed Peters&#x27; appeal and ordered him to pay the legal costs of the Attorney-General, Boyle and Hughes – in addition to the $320,000 bill from the High Court.

===2020 general election===
In the 2020 New Zealand general election held on 17 October, Peters and his fellow New Zealand First MPs lost their seats after the party&#x27;s share of the popular vote dropped to 2.6%, below the five percent threshold needed to enter Parliament. Peters continued to serve in a caretaker role until 6 November 2020 (the date the members of the next Parliament took their seats), after which he was replaced by Grant Robertson as Deputy Prime Minister, and Nanaia Mahuta as Minister of Foreign Affairs.

==Out of parliament (2020–2023)==
On 20 June 2021, Peters announced during New Zealand First&#x27;s annual general meeting in East Auckland that he would continue leading the party for the 2023 general election. Peters also made a speech attacking the Labour, National and Green parties, the increasing use of the Māori language in official reports and public life, the Auckland cycle bridge, Auckland light rail, the Government&#x27;s COVID-19 vaccination rollout, purchase of Ihumātao land, Bright Line Test, elimination of referenda on Māori wards, and so-called wokeness in New Zealand society. This speech marked his first major public appearance since the 2020 general election.

On 9 October 2021, Peters attracted media attention after he alleged that a female sex worker connected to the criminal organisation Mongrel Mob had caused the Northland Region&#x27;s COVID-19 scare by traveling to Whangārei on false pretenses. Peters&#x27;s allegation that the woman was linked to the Mongrel Mob was disputed by Mongrel Mob leader Harry Tam on Māori Television&#x27;s Te Ao Māori News, who also threatened legal action. On 11 October, Peters criticised the Government&#x27;s failure to prevent a COVID-19 breach in the Northland region involving the sex worker, which had led to an Alert Level 3 lockdown in the region. On 19 October, Peters apologised to Tam for alleging that he helped a COVID-19 positive case breach the Auckland border.

In February 2022, Peters expressed support for the Convoy 2022 New Zealand protest outside Parliament, which called for an end to vaccine mandates. On 22 February, Peters visited the Parliament protest camp with former New Zealand First Member of Parliament Darroch Ball. He claimed that the mainstream media had been gaslighting protesters and urged Ardern and her Cabinet to speak with protesters.

On 3 May 2022, Peters was trespassed from Parliament for two years by the Speaker of the House Trevor Mallard for visiting anti-vaccine mandate protesters. In response, Peters announced that he would seek a judicial review of the trespass notice. In addition, several other people including former National MP Matt King were issued with similar trespass notices. On 4 May, Mallard withdrew five of the trespass notices, including Peters&#x27; trespass notice, in response to Peters&#x27; threat to seek a judicial review.

===2023 general election===
In late March 2023, Peters announced that if New Zealand First was elected into government, the party would remove Māori names from government departments and bring back English names. During the party&#x27;s campaign launch on 23 July, Peters announced that New Zealand First would campaign on five key issues: combating so-called &quot;racist separatism,&quot; fighting Australian-owned banks and the supermarket duopoly, investing in health, social services, and elderly care, and adopting &quot;tough on crime&quot; policies including building a &quot;gang prison&quot; and designating all gangs as terrorist organisations.

On 30 July, Peters campaigned on relocating the Ports of Auckland and the Royal New Zealand Navy&#x27;s Devonport base to Northport, extending the North Island Main Trunk Line to Marsden Point, building a new four-lane alternative highway through the Brynderwyn Range, and establishing a full inquiry into the Government&#x27;s handling of the COVID-19 pandemic in New Zealand. On 16 August, Peters announced New Zealand First&#x27;s policy on restricting transgender people&#x27;s access to bathrooms and their participation in female sporting events. The National Party criticised the policy. On 20 August, Peters announced that New Zealand First would designate English an official language of New Zealand and withdraw New Zealand from the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous People.

On 3 September, New Zealand First released a cowboy-themed campaign video featuring Peters riding a horse. On 10 September, Peters made remarks during a public meeting in Nelson that Māori people were not indigenous to New Zealand on the grounds that they originated in the Cook Islands and China. National Party leader Christopher Luxon criticised Peters&#x27;s remarks but avoided confirming nor denying whether his party would enter into coalition with New Zealand First in a future government. The National leader later confirmed that he would work with Peters in a government &quot;to keep Labour and the Coalition of chaos out&quot;.

On 16 September, Peters was ranked first on New Zealand First&#x27;s party list as a list candidate. While campaigning in Levin on 18 September, Peters reiterated New Zealand First&#x27;s opposition to government funding for news media, COVID-19 vaccine mandates, gangs, co-governance and changing New Zealand&#x27;s name to Aotearoa.

On 14 October, New Zealand First won 6.46% of the vote with 96.5% of ballots cast in the preliminary results during the 2023 general election. This marked a return for Peters and his party to Parliament. The final results confirmed that NZ First won 6.08% of the popular vote and eight seats. Peters was re-elected to Parliament on the party list.

==Sixth National Government (2023–present)==
===Coalition negotiations===
Following the 2023 election, National entered into talks with both NZ First and ACT. University of Otago law professor Andrew Geddis speculated that National&#x27;s coalition talks would be influenced by Peters&#x27; demands and history of playing a &quot;kingmaker&quot; role in previous elections. Peters had early publicly criticised several National and ACT policies during the 2023 election campaign including National&#x27;s proposal to ease the ban on foreign home purchases, tax cuts, agricultural emissions pricing, proposal to raise the retirement age from 65 to 67, and ACT&#x27;s proposal to slash government expenditure and public service jobs.

Following the release of the final election results on 3 November, National and ACT fell short of the 62-seat parliamentary majority needed to form the next government. As a result, the National-led government needed NZ First as its coalition partner. In early November, Peters along with several senior NZ First officials including Darroch Ball and Shane Jones took part in negotiations with National and ACT. Following the release of final results, David Seymour attempted to contact Peters via text message but Peters alleged that he had mistaken it for a scam. Due to the prolonged negotiation process, Peters criticised a law change by the previous Labour Government allowing voters to register on election day for delaying the Electoral Commission&#x27;s publication of final results by one week. Peters had earlier supported the law change in 2020.

On 23 November, coalition negotiations between the three parties concluded, with Peters meeting with Christopher Luxon and David Seymour in Wellington to finalise the coalition agreement. After Luxon informed Governor-General Dame Cindy Kiro that he had the numbers to form the incoming government, the three leaders signed the coalition agreement on 24 November, which was subsequently released to the public. Under the terms of the agreement, Peters and Seymour would share the position of deputy prime minister, with Peters holding the office for the first half of the 54th parliamentary term and Seymour holding the office during the second half. Peters also assumed the office of minister of foreign affairs in the new government. Peters took on the role of Acting Prime Minister for a single day on 12 December 2023, while Christopher Luxon was in Australia for his daughter&#x27;s graduation, and again on 20 and 21 December 2023 during Luxon&#x27;s diplomatic visit to Australia.

===Foreign affairs===

On 15 December 2023, Peters visited Fijian Prime Minister Sitiveni Rabuka in his first overseas engagement as Foreign Minister in the National-led coalition government. He reaffirmed bilateral relations between New Zealand and Fiji.

On 12 January 2024, Peters expressed New Zealand&#x27;s support for Anglo-American airstrikes against Iranian-backed Houthi forces in Yemen, which had been disrupting international shipping in response to the 2023 Israel–Hamas war. He said that the strikes supported international security and trade, adding that &quot;we are a trading nation that relies on international maritime law and the free flow of goods, and Houthi actions strike at the heart of New Zealand&#x27;s national security.&quot;

On 22 February 2024, Peters announced that New Zealand would contribute a NZ$25.9 million aid package to Ukraine including NZ$6.5 million to procure weapons and ammunition for Ukraine, NZ$7 million in humanitarian assistance, and $3 million to supporting the World Bank&#x27;s Ukrainian reconstruction fund. This aid package brings NZ&#x27;s total aid contribution to Ukraine since the war began to over NZ$100 million.

Between 10 and 16 March 2024, Peters undertook a tour of India, Indonesia and Singapore where he met with his foreign counterparts Subrahmanyam Jaishankar, Retno Marsudi and Vivian Balakrishnan, Chief Minister of Gujarat Bhupendrabhai Patel, Singaporean Defence Minister Ng Eng Hen and Clermont Group chair Richard Chandler. Peters stated that the coalition government regarded South and Southeast Asia as a priority in &quot;maintaining and building New Zealand&#x27;s security and prosperity.&quot;
On 14 March, Peters attracted media attention after making remarks, such as &quot;Where&#x27;s the evidence?&quot;, during an interview with the Indian media outlet &quot;The Indian Express&quot; that appeared to cast doubt on Five Eyes intelligence material from Canada asserting that the Indian Government was responsible for assassinating Canadian Sikh independence activist Hardeep Singh Nijjar. In response, a Foreign Affairs spokesperson issued a statement asserting New Zealand&#x27;s position that if the allegations were proven correct, &quot;then that would be of serious concern.&quot; The Foreign spokesperson added that Peters&#x27; point was that the matter &quot;is an ongoing investigation ... that needs to run its course before clear conclusions can be drawn.&quot; During a meeting with Canadian High Commissioner to Indian Cameron MacKay in New Delhi, Peters clarified that New Zealand&#x27;s position on Hardeep Singh remained unchanged and that he was not questioning Canada&#x27;s claim.

On 18 March, Peters hosted Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi during his state visit to Wellington. The two leaders discussed a range of issues important to China-New Zealand relations including trade, business, people-to-people relations links, and cooperation in the Indo-Pacific. Peters also voiced New Zealand&#x27;s concerns about human rights in Hong Kong, Xinjiang and Tibet, and tensions in the South China Sea and Taiwan Strait.Beginning on 1 April, Peters commenced a semi-global tour across parts of Africa, Europe, and America, beginning in Cairo, Egypt, meeting with Egyptian Foreign Minister Sameh Shoukry and Arab League Secretary General Ahmed Aboul-Gait. During this visit, Peters announced plans for humanitarian aide for Gaza due to the ongoing Gaza humanitarian crisis (2023–present). Peters later reaffirmed his support for Gaza at the United Nations, calling the situation an &quot;utter catastrophe&quot;.
From 2 to 6 April, Peters visited Poland, speaking with Radosław Sikorski in Warsaw, Poland. Then attended the NATO Foreign Ministers summit in Brussels, as a non-member attendee. Peters then concluded his tour in Europe by visiting Stockholm and meeting with Tobias Billström.
From 6 to 12 April, Peters began his visit to the United States of America, beginning in New York, speaking at the United Nations. Peters then travelled to Washington D.C., where he met with numerous prominent American political figures including Senator Lindsey Graham. Peters then concluded his tour after meeting with U.S. Secretary of State Antony Blinken, where Peters indicated a shift in longstanding New Zealand Foreign Policy, with a desire for a closer partner between New Zealand and the United States expressed. This sparked some controversy among New Zealanders, including former Prime Minister Helen Clark, whom Peters previously served as Foreign Minister Under, who stated that closer ties to the United States would compromise New Zealand&#x27;s independent foreign policy approach, as well as the governments approach to being a part of AUKUS, calling it &quot;Profoundly undemocratic&quot;. Peters responded, saying Clark &quot;would regret the comments she&#x27;s making&quot; and that the &quot;decision to at least explore association with AUKUS Pillar 2 was no different to the policy of the previous Labour Government&quot;.

Peters announced on 22 April that New Zealand would spend NZ$7 million on a humanitarian aid package for Ethiopia and Somalia to help tackle regional food insecurity. Additionally on 22 April, Peters stated that New Zealand will recognise the State of Palestine at some point in the future, saying that it was a matter of &quot;when not if&quot;. However, Peters did state that recognition would have to come at a later date, and would not encompass recognition of Hamas as its own entity. This indicated a shift in Israel–New Zealand relations, with New Zealand being open to fully adopting the proposed Two-State Solution by the United Nations.

Peters has criticised Bob Carr, formerly the Premier of New South Wales and the Australian Minister for Foreign Affairs, for his criticism of AUKUS, including a seminar he gave in Wellington against it with Helen Clark in April 2024. After Peters appeared on RNZ on 2 May and made explicit comments about Carr, Carr announced he would sue Peters for defamation, culminating in the Carr-Peters scandal.

In early May 2024, Peters confirmed that he would lead a delegation of New Zealand MPs including Health Minister and Pacific Peoples Minister Dr Shane Reti, Climate Change Minister Simon Watts, the NZ Parliament&#x27;s Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade Committee chairperson Tim van de Molen, and Labour&#x27;s foreign affairs spokesperson David Parker on a tour of five Pacific countries Solomon Islands, Papua New Guinea, Vanuatu, New Caledonia and Tuvalu between 11 and 18 May. Besides strengthening bilateral relations, other key issues include climate change, development policies and stability. On 12 May, Peters met with Solomon Islands Prime Minister Jeremiah Manele, who had succeeded Manasseh Sogavare following the 2024 Solomon Islands general election. On 14 May, Peters cancelled plans to visit New Caledonia in response to the 2024 New Caledonia unrest.

On 7 June 2024, Peters announced that New Zealand would resume its annual NZ$1 million funding to UNRWA (the United Nations Relief and Works Agency) that month. Between 4 and 13 June, Peters undertook state visits to Vietnam, Malaysia, the Philippines and Timor Leste where he met with several heads of government, state and foreign ministers including Vietnamese Prime Minister Pham Minh Chinh, Vietnamese Foreign Minister Bùi Thanh Sơn, Malaysian Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim, Filipino President Bongbong Marcos, Filipino Foreign Secretary Enrique Manalo and East Timorese President José Ramos-Horta.

Between 16 and 18 July 2024, Peters attended the 10th Pacific Islands Leaders Meeting (PALM10) in Tokyo with other members of the Pacific Islands Forum, French Polynesia and host country Japan. During the conference, he outlined New Zealand&#x27;s &quot;foreign policy reset&quot; called on the Forum to facilitate mediation following the 2024 New Caledonia unrest. While in Tokyo, Peters also met with Japanese Prime Minister Fumio Kishida, Chief Cabinet Secretary Yoshimasa Hayashi, and Defence Minister Minoru Kihara to reaffirm bilateral cooperation in engaging with the Pacific.

During the PALM10 conference in mid-July 2024, Peters questioned the legitimacy of the 2021 New Caledonian independence referendum due to the low 44% turnout, stating that &quot;within the letter of the law ... but it was not within the spirit of it.&quot; In response, French Ambassador to the Pacific Veronique Roger-Lacan accused Peters of interfering in a French internal matter. Meanwhile, the Kanaky Aotearoa Solidarity group expressed disappointment that Peters had not supported the Melanesian Spearhead Group&#x27;s calls for a UN mission to New Caledonia.

Between 8 and 16 August 2024, Peters led a delegation to visit Fiji and the three Micronesian states of Marshall Islands, Federated States of Micronesia and Palau as part of New Zealand&#x27;s Pacific reset strategy. On 12 August, Peters announced that New Zealand would invest NZ$6.2 million to help the Marshall Islands deal with natural disasters and climate change management.

In mid October 2024, Peters rebuffed Cook Islands Prime Minister Mark Brown&#x27;s proposal for a separate Cook Islands passport. He questioned whether Cook Islanders supported Brown&#x27;s proposal and warned of its implications for the territory&#x27;s status as an associated state. Brown responded that the Cook Islands passport proposal would not affect the territory&#x27;s constitutional relationship with New Zealand. Tuaine Unuia, the Clerk of the House of Ariki, said that the House supported Brown&#x27;s proposal. On 23 December, Peters&#x27; office clarified that the Cook Islands would not be able to have its own passport, citizenship and United Nations membership without attaining independence; which would have to be decided by the Cook Islanders via a referendum.

In late January 2025, Peters announced that the New Zealand Government would review its bilateral aid programme to Kiribati after Kiribati President Taneti Maamau cancelled three pre-arranged meetings including one scheduled for mid January 2025. The NZ Government had wanted to discuss how NZ$102 million worth of aid funding allocated to Kiribati between 2021 and 2024 was being spent. In response, Kiribati Education Minister Alexander Teabo claimed that Maamu was unavailable due to a pre-planned Catholic religious event. In response, Peters rejected Teabo&#x27;s claim that Maamu had a pre-planned commitment, countering that Maamu himself had arranged to meet with him on 21 and 22 January. Labour Party leader Chris Hipkins, Green MP Ricardo Menéndez March and Australian National University Development Policy Centre fellow Terence Wood expressed concern that the suspension of New Zealand developmental aid to Kiribati was counter-productive and could lead the island nation to align closer with China.

In early February 2025, Peters objected to Cook Islands Prime Minister Brown&#x27;s plans to sign a partnership agreement with China during a state visit to China between 10 and 14 February, describing it as a breach of the free association agreement between New Zealand and the Cook Islands. Peters said that neither New Zealand nor the Cook Islands people knew the contents of the agreement and described the partnership agreement as a &quot;second upset&quot; following Brown&#x27;s aborted Cook Islands passport proposal. In response to Peters&#x27; criticism, Brown said that the partnership agreement did not involve security and defence issues but concerned economy and development matters. He also argued that the Cook Islands did not need to consult New Zealand on the matter.

On 13 February 2025, Peters spoke with Israeli Foreign Minister Gideon Sa&#x27;ar by phone about the importance of a ceasefire between Israel and Hamas and the need for its full implementation including the release of all hostages and the resumption of humanitarian aid to the Palestinians. Sa&#x27;ar also thanked Peters for New Zealand designating Hamas and the Houthis as terrorist organisations, and extended an invitiation for Peters to visit Israel.

On 26 February 2025, Peters met with Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi to raise New Zealand&#x27;s concerns about Chinese naval exercises in the Tasman Sea and China&#x27;s recent partnership agreement with the Cook Islands. Wang agreed to consider New Zealand and Australian concerns that its military did not give enough notice before conducting live-fire exercises in the Tasman Sea.

===Domestic politics===
In late January 2024, Peters was part of a delegation of government ministers from the National and New Zealand First parties that attended the annual hui (meeting) at the Rātana Church&#x27;s pā (village) near Whanganui. During the hui, Peters along with fellow NZ First MP Shane Jones and Prime Minister Christopher Luxon gave speeches, which were booed by members of the audience. In his speech, Peters criticised Labour and Te Pāti Māori&#x27;s record for Māori and clashed with hecklers, stating that &quot;if you&#x27;re looking for trouble you&#x27;ve come to the right place.&quot; On 6 February 2024, Peters also spoke at the annual Waitangi Day gathering where protesters heckled his speech. Peters responded by telling protesters to &quot;get an education&quot; and &quot;get some manners&quot;.

On 17 March 2024, Peters delivered a State of the Nation speech in Palmerston North where he likened the previous Labour Government&#x27;s co-governance policies to &quot;race-based theory&quot; in Nazi Germany. He also claimed the Government&#x27;s proposed tax cuts were still possible despite media reports that the Government was facing a NZ$5.6 billion deficit. Peters also criticised the opposition Labour, Green and Māori parties, accusing them of competing to be &quot;most culturally woke.&quot; Peters also highlighted the migrant exploitation allegations against Green MP Darleen Tana and her husband. Peter also criticised the mainstream media for accepting government funding, allegedly favouring left-wing political narratives and agendas, and marginalising opposing views.

Peters&#x27; remarks likening co-governance to Nazism and the Holocaust were criticised by the Holocaust Centre of New Zealand&#x27;s spokesperson Ben Kepes, who described them as offensive to Holocaust victims and survivors. Labour leader and leader of the opposition Chris Hipkins described Peters as a &quot;drunk uncle at a wedding&quot; and accused him of &quot;using racism and anti-media rhetoric to divide the country.&quot; On 18 March, in an interview with Radio New Zealand, Peters doubled down on his comparison of co-governance with Nazi Germany&#x27;s race-based theories. On 19 March, Prime Minister Luxon subsequently spoke to Peters about his co-governance remarks, stating that such comments by political leaders were &quot;unhelpful&quot; but defended his work as Foreign Minister. In response to media coverage and political criticism, Peters defended his remarks, claiming they had been &quot;deliberately misrepresented.&quot; Peters said his remarks about Nazi Germany were a response to Te Pāti Maori co-leader Rawiri Waititi&#x27;s remarks about Māori genes being superior. Peters also denied mentioning the Holocaust and genocide. In response to Peters&#x27; doubling down on his remarks, Hipkins accused Luxon of being unable to control Peters. Peters later announced that Luxon was &quot;misinformed&quot; by the media about his state of the nation speech, quoting Luxon that he never listened to it. British anarchist punk band Chumbawamba also objected to Peters using their song &quot;Tubthumping&quot; for political campaigning and expressed disagreement with his politics. They also asked their record label Sony to issue a cease and desist notice against Peters.

In mid June 2024, Acting Prime Minister Peters and Housing Minister Chris Bishop jointly announced that the Government would begin consultation on policy changes that would allow &quot;granny flats&quot; (or dwellings of 60 meters or less) to be built outside of the resource consent process.

In late June 2024, Peters invoked the first use of the &quot;agree to disagree&quot; provisions in the coalition agreements in response to the Government&#x27;s announcement that it would allow the Royal Commission of Inquiry into COVID-19 Lessons Learned in its present form and retain Tony Blakely as its chair. The Government also confirmed that the second phase of the inquiry would examine vaccine efficacy and safety, the use of vaccine mandates and the socio-economic disruption caused by the Government&#x27;s pandemic response policies. Peters also claimed that the initial inquiry was &quot;designed to cover the Labour Party&#x27;s backside, to cover their incompetence and to cover the gross waste of the Covid lockdown months.&quot; In response, Labour leader Chris Hipkins accused Peters of appealing to conspiracy theorists and joked that Peters would prefer former TVNZ host and anti-vaccination activist Liz Gunn as a commissioner. Peters countered by saying that Hipkins could &quot;go down the rabbit hole that he&#x27;s talking about and stay down there.&quot;

After the Interislander ferry &quot;DEV Aratere&quot; ran aground after leaving Picton harbour on 21 June, Peters alleged in mid-July 2024 that KiwiRail had covered up the cause of the &quot;Aratere&quot; grounding and claimed that a crew member had left the boat on autopilot while having a cup of coffee. Peters&#x27; allegations were disputed by Interislander operations general manager Duncan Roy. Interislander subsequently acknowledged that a crew member had prematurely selected a turn on the autopilot that caused the ferry to sail offcourse to Titoki Bay instead of its intended shore point &quot;The Snout.&quot;

On 10 December 2024, Peters announced that the New Zealand Government would ban greyhound racing by July 2026. In addition, the Government pass urgent legislation preventing the unlawful killings of greyhounds during that transition period. On 11 December, Peters was appointed as the Minister for Rail.

==Views and policies==
===Political stance===
Peters has been labelled a nationalist and a populist by political commentators. He has long advocated direct democracy in the form of &quot;binding citizen initiated referenda&quot;, to create &quot;a democracy that is of the people and for the people&quot;, while forcing government &quot;to accept the will of the people&quot;. Peters has also used anti-establishment and anti-elite rhetoric, such as criticising what he regards as the &quot;intellectually arrogant elite in government and bureaucratic circles&quot;. Peters is often known widely as simply Winston, due to the ubiquity of his presence in New Zealand public life spanning five decades. Peters&#x27; &quot;charisma and effervescence&quot; has often manifested through his populist rhetoric.

===Economic and welfare issues===
He favours cutting taxes; however, he was critical of the free market policies enacted by the fourth Labour and fourth National governments in the 1980s and 1990s, opposing privatisations and deregulation. His platform retains elements of National Party economic policy from the Muldoon era.

Peters supports compulsory superannuation schemes for all New Zealanders. He has cultivated support among the elderly in particular, and support for his party has been concentrated among New Zealanders over 60 years of age.

===Immigration===
Peters is opposed to high levels of immigration, in order &quot;to avoid New Zealand&#x27;s identity, values and heritage being swamped&quot;. He has highlighted the &quot;threat&quot; of immigration in both cultural and economic terms. Peters has on several occasions characterised the rate of Asian immigration into New Zealand as too high; in 2004, he stated: &quot;We are being dragged into the status of an Asian colony and it is time that New Zealanders were placed first in their own country.&quot; On 26 April 2005, he said: &quot;Māori will be disturbed to know that in 17 years&#x27; time they will be outnumbered by Asians in New Zealand&quot;, an estimate disputed by Statistics New Zealand, the government&#x27;s statistics bureau. Peters responded that Statistics New Zealand had underestimated the growth-rate of the Asian community in the past.

In 2000 Peters described the risk of dog meat gaining popularity in New Zealand if Asian immigration continued, saying that such &quot;abused flesh is highly valued as an aphrodisiac by these ghouls&quot;. In 2002, he said &quot;we place our country at risk by bringing in thousands of people whose views are formed by alien cultures and rigid religious practices&quot;, and claimed he had &quot;Chinese blood&quot; after his comments sparked controversy. Peters&#x27; views on immigration came into conflict with those of the Labour Party when forming a government with them after the 2005 election. 

In June 2016, Peters advocated interviewing immigrants and reducing immigration numbers between 7,000 and 15,000 a year on TVNZ&#x27;s Q+A show. During the interview, he stated that he would want prospective migrants &quot;to salute our flag, respect our laws, honour our institutions and, above all, don&#x27;t bring absolutely anti-women attitudes with them, treating women like cattle, like fourth-class citizens&quot;. Peters also clarified that he was not opposed to refugees nor Muslim migrants per se. In addition, Peters argued that reducing immigration would stabilise the Auckland housing market and enable younger and poorer New Zealanders to buy their first home.

=== Feuds with other politicians ===
Peters has a history of personally insulting politicians he disagrees with across the political spectrum. &quot;The Spinoff&quot; has described Peters as having &quot;dexterity of language that can make his insults really sing&quot;. In May 2003, he said Prime Minister Helen Clark was the &quot;only politician in the Western world who can talk on foreign affairs with both feet in her mouth&quot;, and in 2005 described National MP Murray McCully as &quot;the only member of this House to eat a banana sideways&quot; when he challenged Peters on it. In 2012, he described National Party MP Gerry Brownlee as &quot;illiterate woodwork teacher&quot;, and later called Brownlee, Māori Party co-leader Marama Fox and attorney-general Chris Finlayson an &quot;unsightly trio of drama queens&quot;. In 2017, he described celebrity political investor Gareth Morgan as &quot;a toothless sheep... a thinned-out version of Kim Dotcom&quot;. When Simon Bridges led the National Party, Peters mocked his thick Tauranga accent and labelled him a &quot;joke&quot; during question time.
====David Seymour====

Peters is also known for his long-standing feud with ACT New Zealand leader and current coalition partner David Seymour. The two men have been regarded as rivals on a personal as well as a political level, exchanging insults since at least 2017. Although their relationship has reportedly stabilised since the formation of the Sixth National Government, Peters has mocked Seymour repetitively, both during the Sixth Labour Government and then afterwards in opposition. Peters has called Seymour an &quot;accidental Māori&quot;, a &quot;cuckolded puppet&quot;, a &quot;political cuckold&quot; (twice), and a &quot;chihuahua at the front gate barking at every cat, human being or fellow dog that passes by&quot;. In one notable incident in July 2020, Peters subsequently threatened to savage David Seymour in a boxing match, addressing him directly on Twitter and saying &quot;I reckon you’d last 10 seconds in the ring with me&quot;, and that &quot;there’d be three hits - you hitting me, me hitting you, and the ambulance hitting 100. Thank your lucky stars I’m not into physical violence.&quot; Seymour responded with &quot;I wouldn’t fight him like that, it would be elder abuse.&quot;

Prior to the government formation of the National–NZ First–ACT coalition in 2023, Seymour dismissed Peters by saying &quot;we&#x27;re not going to sit around the cabinet table with this clown.&quot; After the election, Seymour and the ACT Party attempted to contact Peters via text and email multiple times, to no response. Peters denied deliberately ignoring Seymour and claimed he thought the message was fake.

====Bob Carr====
Peters has also insulted Bob Carr, former Australian Minister of Foreign Affairs and Premier of New South Wales, for his stance on AUKUS. After Carr appeared at a Wellington event with Helen Clark in which he criticised AUKUS, Peters appeared on RNZ&#x27;s Morning Report and claimed Carr was &quot;nothing more than a Chinese puppet&quot;. Carr later announced he would sue Peters for defamation.

===Foreign affairs===
Peters is an ardent supporter of Brexit, having made a speech to the British House of Lords praising the idea ahead of that year&#x27;s referendum on the issue. In the same speech, he claimed he felt &quot;apprehension and dismay&quot; at the &quot;invasion&quot; of the United Kingdom by &quot;EU nationals from countries like Poland and Romania&quot;. In June 2016, he told the New Zealand Parliament that he hoped &quot;Britain [will] show its independence from an ungrateful European parliamentary yoke and come back to the Commonwealth&quot;. He is friends with Reform UK leader Nigel Farage and the significant Vote Leave campaign funder Arron Banks. In 2020, Banks&#x27; group Leave.EU made multiple posts praising Peters for his pro-Brexit stance and for his government&#x27;s response to the COVID-19 pandemic (but without mentioning Jacinda Ardern). Later that year, Peters confirmed that Brexit political operatives were working on the unsuccessful New Zealand First campaign to return to Parliament. In 2018, Farage reiterated his affection for Peters and claimed he was New Zealand&#x27;s &quot;own version&quot; of Donald Trump.

In March 2017, Peters criticised the then Foreign Minister Murray McCully for endorsing United Nations Security Council Resolution 2334 without consulting his fellow Cabinet ministers. The resolution controversially condemned Israeli settlement expansion in the West Bank and passed with the support of the United Nations Security Council including New Zealand, which held a rotating membership on the council.

===Islamophobia===
In 2005, Peters made a speech titled &quot;The End Of Tolerance&quot;. In it he said that New Zealand had always been a nation of immigrants but was not a nation of Islamic immigrants. He said &quot;In New Zealand the Muslim community have been quick to show us their more moderate face, but as some media reports have shown, there is a militant underbelly here as well. These two groups, the moderate and militant, fit hand and glove everywhere they exist. Underneath it all the agenda is to promote fundamentalist Islam.&quot; He refuted calls for an apology from those who mistakenly understood the speech to be an attack on muslim immigrants. Radio New Zealand said that &quot;Mr Peters told Morning Report (RNZ) the comments were made in the context of recent terror attacks in London and that Imams around the world were saying the same thing.&quot; 

Peters has condemned discrimination on the basis of religion and he denounced Islamophobia following the Christchurch mosque shootings. He called for the terrorist perpetrator to be deported to his home country Australia.
In March 2022, Indian drama film &quot;The Kashmir Files&quot; had received an R16 classification from the New Zealand Classification Office, with a scheduled release date of 24 March 2022. Members of the Muslim community in New Zealand raised concerns with chief censor David Shanks that the film could promote Islamophobia, citing intercommunal tensions relating to the film&#x27;s release in India. Shanks stated that the film&#x27;s R16 classification did not mean that the film was being banned. In response to the film&#x27;s R16 classification in New Zealand, Peters claimed that the film&#x27;s age restricted classification amounted to censorship of terrorist actions during the 9/11 attacks and the Christchurch mosque shootings. He added that efforts towards combating Islamophobia should not be used to &quot;shield the actions of terrorists in the name of Islam&quot;.

===LGBT issues===
In 1986, Peters voted, together with all but three of his fellow National MPs, against the Homosexual Law Reform Act which decriminalised sexual acts between males over 16. In 2012, Peters voted, together with all of his fellow New Zealand First MPs, against the Marriage Amendment Bill, which aimed to permit same sex marriage in New Zealand. Peters also had called for a referendum on the issue.

===Māori issues===
In a 2023 interview with Moana Maniopoto he declared that &quot;all my life I have worked for Māori&quot;, protesting against comparisons to David Seymour.

During the 2017 New Zealand general election, Peters called for the abolition of Māori seats. After entering into a coalition government with Labour, Peters dropped his objection to the Māori seats, citing the defeat of the Māori Party.

Following the 2020 New Zealand general election, Peters objected to the Labour Government&#x27;s promotion of the Māori language and expansion of Māori wards and constituencies in local government councils. During the 2023 New Zealand general election, Peters campaigned on removing Māori names from government departments, against so-called separatism, withdrawing New Zealand from the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous People, and opposed co-governance and renaming New Zealand Aotearoa. In September 2023, Peters claimed that Māori were not indigenous to New Zealand on the grounds that they originated in the Cook Islands and China.

Peter&#x27;s remarks on Māori issues during the 2023 general election campaign led 17 Māori leaders including David Letele to pen an open letter to National Party leader Christopher Luxon calling on him to condemn NZ First&#x27;s alleged racist comments. In response, Peters accused the letter writers of racism and reiterated his claims that co-governance was Apartheid.

In mid March 2024, Peters controversially likened co-governance to Nazi race theory, drawing criticism from the Holocaust Centre of New Zealand&#x27;s spokesperson Ben Kepes and Labour Party leader Chris Hipkins. Later that month, Peters objected to the University of Auckland&#x27;s decision to create &quot;safe zones&quot; for Māori and Pasifika students, stating that some universities had become a haven for &quot;woke cultural brainwashing.&quot; He also compared the policy to the Ku Klux Klan and Apartheid.

On 23 August 2024, Peters stated during Question Time in Parliament that he was willing to change his mind on ACT&#x27;s Treaty Principles Bill &quot;if there was prevailing compelling evidence to change one&#x27;s mind.&quot; When Labour leader Chris Hipkins pressed Peters further on the matter, Peters said that Māori leaders Peter Buck, Maui Pomare and James Carroll had concluded there were no Principles of the Treaty of Waitangi. Peters&#x27; remarks had contradicted statements by Christopher Luxon and Shane Jones during Māori King Tūheitia Paki&#x27;s Koroneihana (coronation anniversary celebration) that the National and NZ First parties would not support the Treaty Principles Bill beyond its first reading.

=== Media ===
Peters has a fraught relationship with the New Zealand media. In the run up to the 2011 New Zealand general election, he claimed that New Zealand First had been banned from leaders&#x27; debates on TVNZ and Radio New Zealand, and ignored by &quot;The New Zealand Herald&quot;, &quot;Dominion Post&quot; and &quot;The Press&quot;.

In 2002, Peters described big city media commentators as &quot;smart alec, arrogant, quiche eating, chardonnay drinking, pinky finger pointing snobbery, fart blossom.&quot; In 2023, his interactions with them became increasingly confrontational. After an antagonistic interview with TVNZ journalist Jack Tame, he referred to him as a &quot;left-wing shill&quot; and a &quot;moron&quot;. After becoming Deputy Prime Minister in the Sixth National Government, Peters accused TVNZ and Radio NZ on 28 November of lacking editorial independence since they had accepted funding from the previous Labour Government&#x27;s Public Interest Journalism Fund (PIJF), which included a controversial clause to honour the Treaty of Waitangi and to use te reo Māori. On 28 November, Andrew Shaw, a veteran broadcaster who served on the board of New Zealand On Air (which oversaw the PIJF funding), resigned after social media posts in which he said of Peters: &quot;He&#x27;s not truthful. He&#x27;s not accurate. He&#x27;s malicious and he is here on behalf of international tobacco.&quot; The comments violated NZ On Air&#x27;s code of conduct, which requires board members to maintain political impartiality. On 29 November, Peters confirmed that he was &quot;at war&quot; with the press gallery and mainstream media. While Peters has avoided mainstream media outlets, he has taken part in lengthy interviews with Sean Plunket&#x27;s online radio station &quot;The Platform&quot;.

In response, Prime Minister Christopher Luxon did not condemn Peters&#x27;s bribery allegations and said National had not agreed with the fund either, and that it led to perceptions of bias. ACT leader David Seymour disputed Peters allegations against the Public Interest Journalism Fund, stating that &quot;many people felt that [the PIJF] was distorting [media&#x27;s] priorities. I don&#x27;t know that it did, for the simple reason that it&#x27;s a tiny amount of overall revenue and journalists generally, while they may have a view I disagree with in some cases, they&#x27;re pretty fierce about that independence. The whole thing [notions of bribery] isn&#x27;t quite plausible.&quot; In addition, Finance Minister Nicola Willis stated that Peters was not the only MP who was critical of the media but added &quot;I think there&#x27;s a bit of hyperbole in there, but that&#x27;s Winston being Winston.&quot;

On 18 December 2023, Reporters Without Borders Asia-Pacific Bureau Director Cédric Alviani criticised Peters&#x27; attacks on journalists and media organisations, and called on Prime Minister Luxon to reaffirm his government&#x27;s support to press freedom. The media watchdog cited Peters&#x27; remarks that he was at war with the media, his criticism of the Public Interest Journalism Fund, his questioning of the editorial independence of broadcasters TVNZ and Radio New Zealand, and his description of TVNZ journalist Jack Tame as a &quot;dirt merchant.&quot; Alviani expressed concerns that these verbal attacks could imperil the media sector if they were used to support a policy of restricting the right to information.

After Warner Bros. Discovery announced plans to shut down television news service &quot;Newshub&quot; by late June 2024, Peters described the imminent closure of &quot;Newshub&quot; as &quot;obviously devastating not only for those who will lose their jobs, but it is also seriously concerning for the robustness of our media scene.&quot; He also attributed the struggles facing &quot;Newshub&quot; and other New Zealand media outlets to a lack of trust caused by the mainstream media failing to be &quot;unbiased, independent and non-political.&quot;

==Honours and awards==
On 21 May 1998, Peters was appointed to the Privy Council of the United Kingdom and gained the style of &quot;The Right Honourable&quot;.

In 2007, Peters was bestowed with the chiefly Samoan title &quot;Vaovasamanaia&quot;, meaning &quot;beautiful, handsome, awesome, delighted and joyful&quot;.

==Personal life==
Peters is married to Louise but they have separated. The couple have two children, a son named Joel Peters and a daughter named Bree Peters, who is an actress. His current partner is Jan Trotman.

==See also==
* Populism in New Zealand
* Contents of the United States diplomatic cables leak (New Zealand)
* List of international trips made by Winston Peters as Minister of Foreign Affairs of New Zealand

==References==
==Works cited==
*
*

==External links==
* New Zealand First: Winston Peters biography
* The Beehive: Winston Peters biography
* Winston Peters – personal website



|-




|-


|-
|-
|-




|-
|-
|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1396178" start="0" end="22" title="Winston Peters" label="Winston Raymond Peters"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261068" start="105" end="141" title="deputy prime minister of New Zealand" label="deputy prime minister of New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q180059" start="213" end="230" title="New Zealand First" label="New Zealand First"/>
<link wikidata="Q100718706" start="323" end="344" title="2023 New Zealand general election" label="2023 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="371" end="391" title="Member of Parliament (New Zealand)" label="member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866148" start="478" end="505" title="Minister of Foreign Affairs (New Zealand)" label="minister of foreign affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q96393329" start="511" end="530" title="Minister for Racing (New Zealand)" label="minister for racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866300" start="541" end="558" title="Minister for Rail" label="Minister for Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034424" start="586" end="622" title="New Zealand House of Representatives" label="New Zealand House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q204716" start="631" end="645" title="New Zealand National Party" label="National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q17055243" start="653" end="674" title="1978 New Zealand general election" label="1978 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6950632" start="831" end="849" title="Māori politics" label="Māori conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q17053494" start="901" end="918" title="Māori loan affair" label="Māori loan affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866528" start="951" end="958" title="Ministers of the New Zealand Government" label="Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q991876" start="962" end="987" title="Minister for Māori Development" label="minister of Māori affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q139785" start="993" end="1003" title="Jim Bolger" label="Jim Bolger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5476155" start="1030" end="1045" title="Fourth National Government of New Zealand" label="victory in 1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q162719" start="1189" end="1199" title="Neoliberalism" label="neoliberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3453651" start="1217" end="1227" title="Ruthanasia" label="Ruthanasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q327591" start="1293" end="1304" title="Independent politician" label="independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7688858" start="1329" end="1340" title="1993 Tauranga by-election" label="by-election"/>
<link wikidata="Q65065646" start="1379" end="1387" title="populism in New Zealand" label="populist"/>
<link wikidata="Q8024946" start="1527" end="1542" title="Winebox Inquiry" label="Winebox Inquiry"/>
<link wikidata="Q26988" start="1588" end="1600" title="Cook Islands" label="Cook Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q272051" start="1606" end="1615" title="tax haven" label="tax haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q19845852" start="1662" end="1678" title="Balance of power (parliament)" label="balance of power"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866129" start="1803" end="1812" title="Treasurer of New Zealand" label="treasurer"/>
<link wikidata="Q235996" start="1934" end="1947" title="Jenny Shipley" label="Jenny Shipley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354420" start="2006" end="2016" title="Loyal opposition" label="opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048192" start="2049" end="2061" title="New Zealand Labour Party" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q180383" start="2077" end="2088" title="Helen Clark" label="Helen Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366881" start="2170" end="2191" title="2008 New Zealand general election" label="2008 general election"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2290" end="2299" title="Mixed member proportional representation#Procedures#Threshold" label="threshold"/>
<link wikidata="Q931797" start="2389" end="2410" title="2011 New Zealand general election" label="2011 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q42314738" start="2616" end="2658" title="Sixth Labour Government of New Zealand" label="coalition government with the Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3606816" start="2691" end="2705" title="Jacinda Ardern" label="Jacinda Ardern"/>
<link wikidata="Q4676862" start="2792" end="2813" title="acting prime minister" label="acting prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q772989" start="2869" end="2884" title="maternity leave" label="maternity leave"/>
<link wikidata="Q48771246" start="2934" end="2947" title="2020 New Zealand general election" label="2020 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q123232751" start="3005" end="3030" title="Sixth National Government of New Zealand" label="Sixth National Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q123232751" start="3054" end="3063" title="Sixth National Government of New Zealand" label="coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q74370310" start="3095" end="3112" title="Christopher Luxon" label="Christopher Luxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q17055796" start="3228" end="3241" title="David Seymour" label="David Seymour"/>
<link wikidata="Q744239" start="3326" end="3335" title="Whangārei" label="Whangārei"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122670" start="3399" end="3404" title="Māori people" label="Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q7023293" start="3423" end="3432" title="Ngāti Wai" label="Ngāti Wai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676081" start="3433" end="3436" title="iwi" label="iwi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7022129" start="3450" end="3460" title="Ngāti Hine" label="Ngāti Hine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283558" start="3465" end="3472" title="Ngāpuhi" label="Ngāpuhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975307" start="3492" end="3505" title="Clan MacInnes" label="Clan MacInnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437878" start="3506" end="3523" title="Scottish New Zealanders" label="Scottish ancestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5982592" start="3546" end="3549" title="Ian Peters" label="Ian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6197475" start="3554" end="3557" title="Jim Peters (politician)" label="Jim"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="3579" end="3582" title="Members of Parliament" label="MPs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5983305" start="3687" end="3698" title="Ian Wishart (journalist)" label="Ian Wishart"/>
<link wikidata="Q36451" start="3728" end="3742" title="Māori language" label="Māori language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990604" start="3892" end="3901" title="Whananaki" label="Whananaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q744239" start="3923" end="3955" title="Whangarei Boys&amp;#x27; High School" label="Whangarei Boys&amp;#x27; High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165841" start="3960" end="3982" title="Dargaville High School" label="Dargaville High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q65090583" start="4006" end="4046" title="Auckland College of Education" label="Auckland Teachers&amp;#x27; Training College"/>
<link wikidata="Q37100" start="4101" end="4109" title="Auckland" label="Auckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q625713" start="4190" end="4193" title="BHP" label="BHP"/>
<link wikidata="Q57278" start="4197" end="4206" title="Newcastle, New South Wales" label="Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1577859" start="4235" end="4250" title="Snowy Mountains" label="Snowy Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q492467" start="4337" end="4359" title="University of Auckland" label="University of Auckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015833" start="4408" end="4435" title="New Zealand Young Nationals" label="New Zealand Young Nationals"/>
<link wikidata="Q204716" start="4472" end="4498" title="New Zealand National Party" label="New Zealand National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4977277" start="4527" end="4539" title="Bruce Cliffe" label="Bruce Cliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150443" start="4544" end="4553" title="Paul East" label="Paul East"/>
<link wikidata="Q5476155" start="4600" end="4626" title="Fourth National Government of New Zealand" label="Fourth National Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q798137" start="4833" end="4836" title="Bachelor of Laws" label="LLB"/>
<link wikidata="Q7381679" start="4904" end="4919" title="Russell McVeagh" label="Russell McVeagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016153" start="5013" end="5034" title="1975 New Zealand general election" label="1975 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q204716" start="5068" end="5082" title="New Zealand National Party" label="National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058698" start="5109" end="5123" title="Northern Maori" label="Northern Maori"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063826" start="5171" end="5178" title="deposit (politics)" label="deposit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1959427" start="5224" end="5234" title="Māori seat" label="Māori seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7023293" start="5307" end="5316" title="Ngātiwai" label="Ngāti Wai"/>
<link wikidata="Q7784884" start="5368" end="5385" title="Third Labour Government of New Zealand" label="Labour government"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5591" end="5606" title="Māori protest movement#1975 Land March" label="1975 Land March"/>
<link wikidata="Q466142" start="5614" end="5626" title="Whina Cooper" label="Whina Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q17055243" start="5686" end="5707" title="1978 New Zealand general election" label="1978 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617735" start="5739" end="5749" title="High Court of New Zealand" label="High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q37100" start="5862" end="5870" title="Auckland" label="Auckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6742287" start="5890" end="5905" title="Malcolm Douglas (politician)" label="Malcolm Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q352998" start="5922" end="5935" title="Roger Douglas" label="Roger Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016154" start="6027" end="6031" title="1981 New Zealand general election" label="1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q17055253" start="6040" end="6044" title="1984 New Zealand general election" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q16934070" start="6088" end="6096" title="Tauranga (New Zealand electorate)" label="Tauranga"/>
<link wikidata="Q737739" start="6237" end="6251" title="Robert Muldoon" label="Robert Muldoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6135999" start="6292" end="6301" title="Jim McLay" label="Jim McLay"/>
<link wikidata="Q139785" start="6442" end="6452" title="Jim Bolger" label="Jim Bolger"/>
<link wikidata="Q17053494" start="6584" end="6601" title="Māori loan affair" label="Māori loan affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768409" start="6640" end="6664" title="Te Puni Kōkiri" label="Māori Affairs Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q139785" start="6948" end="6958" title="Jim Bolger" label="Jim Bolger"/>
<link wikidata="Q16981489" start="7002" end="7013" title="frontbencher" label="front bench"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016159" start="7104" end="7117" title="1990 New Zealand general election" label="1990 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q991876" start="7133" end="7158" title="Minister of Māori Affairs" label="Minister of Māori Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5476155" start="7166" end="7192" title="Fourth National Government of New Zealand" label="fourth National government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768409" start="7404" end="7418" title="Te Puni Kōkiri" label="Te Puni Kōkiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3453651" start="7540" end="7550" title="Ruthanasia" label="Ruthanasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q731591" start="7875" end="7886" title="backbencher" label="backbencher"/>
<link wikidata="Q17056660" start="8369" end="8386" title="Peters v Collinge" label="Peters v Collinge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7688858" start="8559" end="8582" title="1993 Tauranga by-election" label="by-election in Tauranga"/>
<link wikidata="Q327591" start="8665" end="8676" title="Independent politician" label="independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016162" start="8756" end="8769" title="1993 New Zealand general election" label="1993 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q180059" start="8802" end="8819" title="New Zealand First" label="New Zealand First"/>
<link wikidata="Q7688619" start="8930" end="8940" title="Tau Henare" label="Tau Henare"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058698" start="8975" end="8989" title="Northern Maori" label="Northern Maori"/>
<link wikidata="Q8024946" start="9204" end="9219" title="Winebox Inquiry" label="Winebox Inquiry"/>
<link wikidata="Q26988" start="9265" end="9277" title="Cook Islands" label="Cook Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q272051" start="9283" end="9292" title="tax haven" label="tax haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q5356412" start="9305" end="9347" title="Electoral reform in New Zealand" label="1992 and 1993 electoral reform referendums"/>
<link wikidata="Q133" start="9386" end="9411" title="mixed-member proportional" label="mixed-member proportional"/>
<link wikidata="Q17055270" start="9443" end="9464" title="1996 New Zealand general election" label="1996 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1959427" start="9644" end="9661" title="Māori electorates" label="Māori electorates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048192" start="9746" end="9752" title="New Zealand Labour Party" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409583" start="9978" end="9987" title="kingmaker" label="kingmaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q180383" start="10084" end="10095" title="Helen Clark" label="Helen Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q6832126" start="10407" end="10419" title="Michael Laws" label="Michael Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866129" start="11017" end="11036" title="Minister of Finance (New Zealand)" label="Minister of Finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q235996" start="11478" end="11491" title="Jenny Shipley" label="Jenny Shipley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150574" start="11586" end="11618" title="Wellington International Airport" label="Wellington International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6792789" start="12030" end="12043" title="Mauri Pacific" label="Mauri Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016166" start="12228" end="12241" title="1999 New Zealand general election" label="1999 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447531" start="12985" end="13008" title="Fifth Labour Government of New Zealand" label="Fifth Labour Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3722381" start="13143" end="13156" title="2002 New Zealand general election" label="2002 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3700346" start="13226" end="13246" title="opposition to immigration" label="reducing immigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q472802" start="13335" end="13353" title="Treaty of Waitangi" label="Treaty of Waitangi"/>
<link wikidata="Q846073" start="14321" end="14342" title="2005 New Zealand general election" label="2005 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327761" start="14717" end="14723" title="Green Party of Aotearoa New Zealand" label="Greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932085" start="15055" end="15067" title="Bob Clarkson" label="Bob Clarkson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419821" start="15822" end="15839" title="Executive Council of New Zealand" label="Executive Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238979" start="16244" end="16253" title="Don Brash" label="Don Brash"/>
<link wikidata="Q631893" start="16494" end="16501" title="The Age" label="The Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q7369522" start="16753" end="16765" title="Ross Meurant" label="Ross Meurant"/>
<link wikidata="Q125096839" start="17221" end="17235" title="SuperGold Card" label="SuperGold Card"/>
<link wikidata="Q7114490" start="18020" end="18030" title="Owen Glenn" label="Owen Glenn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4964026" start="18282" end="18293" title="Brian Henry (lawyer)" label="Brian Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q917338" start="18553" end="18570" title="The Dominion Post (Wellington)" label="The Dominion Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932957" start="18699" end="18712" title="Bob Jones (businessman)" label="Sir Bob Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q7454887" start="19215" end="19235" title="Serious Fraud Office (New Zealand)" label="Serious Fraud Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366881" start="20536" end="20549" title="2008 New Zealand general election" label="2008 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6336063" start="20578" end="20591" title="Simon Bridges" label="Simon Bridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q3512620" start="21689" end="21695" title="TV One (New Zealand)" label="TV ONE"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468759" start="21896" end="21920" title="Foreshore and Seabed Act" label="Foreshore and Seabed Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q931797" start="22299" end="22320" title="2011 New Zealand general election" label="2011 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q472802" start="22785" end="22803" title="Treaty of Waitangi" label="Treaty of Waitangi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449555" start="22832" end="22865" title="Finance and Expenditure Committee" label="Finance and Expenditure Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7021093" start="22899" end="22920" title="2014 New Zealand general election" label="2014 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6386648" start="22970" end="22982" title="Kelvin Davis (politician)" label="Kelvin Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2398210" start="22990" end="23004" title="Te Tai Tokerau" label="Te Tai Tokerau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888545" start="23049" end="23062" title="Mana Movement" label="Mana Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626808" start="23066" end="23079" title="Hone Harawira" label="Hone Harawira"/>
<link wikidata="Q18167309" start="23104" end="23118" title="Internet Party and Mana Movement" label="electoral pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q15987269" start="23128" end="23142" title="Internet Party (New Zealand)" label="Internet Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q60543" start="23200" end="23210" title="Kim Dotcom" label="Kim Dotcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q57783" start="23372" end="23380" title="John Key" label="John Key"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375170" start="23389" end="23400" title="Māori Party" label="Māori Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449555" start="23815" end="23848" title="Finance and Expenditure Committee" label="Finance and Expenditure Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6848669" start="23906" end="23916" title="Mike Sabin" label="Mike Sabin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7059501" start="23947" end="23956" title="Northland (New Zealand electorate)" label="Northland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365839" start="23988" end="24006" title="Far North District" label="Far North District"/>
<link wikidata="Q19875535" start="24375" end="24383" title="Ria Bond" label="Ria Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q18167358" start="24530" end="24551" title="2017 New Zealand general election" label="2017 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q928629" start="24639" end="24663" title="Pike River Mine disaster" label="Pike River Mine disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327761" start="24916" end="24927" title="Green Party of Aotearoa New Zealand" label="Green Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q26845632" start="24932" end="24944" title="Barry Coates" label="Barry Coates"/>
<link wikidata="Q444437" start="24949" end="24962" title="Metiria Turei" label="Metiria Turei"/>
<link wikidata="Q18167139" start="25522" end="25532" title="James Shaw (New Zealand politician)" label="James Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1959427" start="25781" end="25792" title="Māori electorates" label="Māori seats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516341" start="26049" end="26057" title="KiwiBank" label="KiwiBank"/>
<link wikidata="Q41699562" start="26370" end="26379" title="Matt King (politician)" label="Matt King"/>
<link wikidata="Q4384608" start="26894" end="26906" title="Bill English" label="Bill English"/>
<link wikidata="Q3606816" start="27143" end="27157" title="Jacinda Ardern" label="Jacinda Ardern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375170" start="27532" end="27543" title="Māori Party" label="Māori Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q96393329" start="28784" end="28803" title="Minister for Racing (New Zealand)" label="Minister for Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q85739489" start="29308" end="29333" title="Abortion Legislation Act 2020" label="Abortion Legislation Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561087" start="29485" end="29498" title="Andrew Little (New Zealand politician)" label="Andrew Little"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831246" start="29565" end="29578" title="Tracey Martin" label="Tracey Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q125096839" start="30103" end="30117" title="SuperGold Card" label="SuperGold Card"/>
<link wikidata="Q620615" start="30176" end="30186" title="mobile app" label="mobile app"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199207" start="30240" end="30262" title="The New Zealand Herald" label="The New Zealand Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="30602" end="30614" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q17055137" start="30647" end="30677" title="New Zealand free-trade agreements" label="bilateral free-trade agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663713" start="30687" end="30726" title="Russia-Belarus-Kazakhstan Customs Union" label="Russia-Belarus-Kazakhstan Customs Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="30934" end="30959" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q608889" start="31393" end="31409" title="One China Policy" label="One China Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q10282403" start="31585" end="31595" title="surgical mask" label="face masks"/>
<link wikidata="Q87084117" start="31687" end="31698" title="Zhao Lijian" label="Zhao Lijian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100252" start="31766" end="31793" title="China–New Zealand relations" label="China–New Zealand relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q95976070" start="31952" end="31983" title="2020 Hong Kong national security law" label="Hong Kong national security law"/>
<link wikidata="Q3425128" start="32391" end="32413" title="Antarctica New Zealand" label="Antarctica New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136714" start="32693" end="32703" title="Scott Base" label="Scott Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q155979" start="32761" end="32775" title="Alexei Navalny" label="Alexei Navalny"/>
<link wikidata="Q156223" start="32943" end="32957" title="superannuation" label="superannuation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6416051" start="33556" end="33569" title="Paula Bennett" label="Paula Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q540420" start="33574" end="33585" title="Anne Tolley" label="Anne Tolley"/>
<link wikidata="Q79301537" start="33834" end="33853" title="Auckland High Court" label="Auckland High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q48771246" start="34880" end="34913" title="2020 New Zealand general election" label="2020 New Zealand general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112663" start="35153" end="35162" title="caretaker government" label="caretaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q85738447" start="35219" end="35234" title="53rd New Zealand Parliament" label="next Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543207" start="35285" end="35300" title="Grant Robertson" label="Grant Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3798833" start="35331" end="35344" title="Nanaia Mahuta" label="Nanaia Mahuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327759" start="35504" end="35517" title="East Auckland" label="East Auckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q100718706" start="35567" end="35588" title="2023 New Zealand general election" label="2023 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q36451" start="35692" end="35706" title="Māori language" label="Māori language"/>
<link wikidata="Q106201626" start="35814" end="35842" title="COVID-19 vaccination in New Zealand" label="COVID-19 vaccination rollout"/>
<link wikidata="Q25660327" start="35856" end="35864" title="Ihumātao" label="Ihumātao"/>
<link wikidata="Q109850103" start="35917" end="35928" title="Māori wards and constituencies" label="Māori wards"/>
<link wikidata="Q28136847" start="35944" end="35948" title="woke" label="woke"/>
<link wikidata="Q6899806" start="36197" end="36208" title="Mongrel Mob" label="Mongrel Mob"/>
<link wikidata="Q59596" start="36224" end="36240" title="Northland Region" label="Northland Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q744239" start="36279" end="36288" title="Whangārei" label="Whangārei"/>
<link wikidata="Q131354817" start="36414" end="36423" title="Harry Tam" label="Harry Tam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022343" start="36427" end="36443" title="Māori Television" label="Māori Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q106686412" start="36451" end="36467" title="Te Ao Māori News" label="Te Ao Māori News"/>
<link wikidata="Q110903194" start="36876" end="36899" title="2022 Wellington protests" label="Convoy 2022 New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097454" start="37083" end="37095" title="Darroch Ball" label="Darroch Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574301" start="37300" end="37320" title="Speaker of the New Zealand House of Representatives" label="Speaker of the House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7839303" start="37321" end="37335" title="Trevor Mallard" label="Trevor Mallard"/>
<link wikidata="Q41699562" start="37536" end="37545" title="Matt King (politician)" label="Matt King"/>
<link wikidata="Q36451" start="37892" end="37897" title="Māori language" label="Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797815" start="38276" end="38290" title="tough on crime" label="tough on crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641895" start="38454" end="38471" title="Ports of Auckland" label="Ports of Auckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q575932" start="38480" end="38502" title="Royal New Zealand Navy" label="Royal New Zealand Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206994" start="38510" end="38519" title="Devonport, New Zealand" label="Devonport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7059527" start="38528" end="38537" title="Northport, New Zealand" label="Northport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396997" start="38553" end="38581" title="North Island Main Trunk Line" label="North Island Main Trunk Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q3425572" start="38585" end="38598" title="Marsden Point" label="Marsden Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q4980944" start="38657" end="38673" title="Brynderwyn Range" label="Brynderwyn Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q87250803" start="38750" end="38782" title="COVID-19 pandemic in New Zealand" label="COVID-19 pandemic in New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q189125" start="38862" end="38873" title="transgender" label="transgender"/>
<link wikidata="Q44661" start="39071" end="39078" title="New Zealand English" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q23492" start="39082" end="39099" title="official language" label="official language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138309" start="39149" end="39210" title="United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous People" label="United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous People"/>
<link wikidata="Q206687" start="39384" end="39390" title="Nelson, New Zealand" label="Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122670" start="39396" end="39408" title="Māori people" label="Māori people"/>
<link wikidata="Q26988" start="39487" end="39499" title="Cook Islands" label="Cook Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="39504" end="39509" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q74370310" start="39533" end="39550" title="Christopher Luxon" label="Christopher Luxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q125470315" start="39823" end="39841" title="Coalition of chaos" label="Coalition of chaos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821910" start="39976" end="39981" title="Levin, New Zealand" label="Levin"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="40091" end="40099" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q126720956" start="40125" end="40138" title="co-governance" label="co-governance"/>
<link wikidata="Q153785" start="40179" end="40187" title="Aotearoa" label="Aotearoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q100718706" start="40310" end="40331" title="2023 New Zealand general election" label="2023 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201513" start="40698" end="40717" title="University of Otago" label="University of Otago"/>
<link wikidata="Q123232751" start="41424" end="41439" title="Sixth National Government of New Zealand" label="next government"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097454" start="41605" end="41617" title="Darroch Ball" label="Darroch Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q7488117" start="41622" end="41633" title="Shane Jones" label="Shane Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q17055796" start="41723" end="41736" title="David Seymour" label="David Seymour"/>
<link wikidata="Q935741" start="42005" end="42025" title="Electoral Commission" label="Electoral Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q455690" start="42338" end="42354" title="Governor-General of New Zealand" label="Governor-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q17180701" start="42355" end="42370" title="Dame Cindy Kiro" label="Dame Cindy Kiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q116674345" start="42701" end="42724" title="54th New Zealand Parliament" label="54th parliamentary term"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866148" start="42814" end="42841" title="Minister of Foreign Affairs (New Zealand)" label="minister of foreign affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469153" start="43177" end="43198" title="Prime Minister of Fiji" label="Fijian Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q981549" start="43199" end="43214" title="Sitiveni Rabuka" label="Sitiveni Rabuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q124254493" start="43458" end="43468" title="2024 missile strikes in Yemen" label="airstrikes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042087" start="43492" end="43498" title="Houthi" label="Houthi"/>
<link wikidata="Q805" start="43509" end="43514" title="Yemen" label="Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q122962941" start="43584" end="43605" title="2023 Israel–Hamas war" label="2023 Israel–Hamas war"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="44134" end="44144" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q16186720" start="44427" end="44450" title="Subrahmanyam Jaishankar" label="Subrahmanyam Jaishankar"/>
<link wikidata="Q18342668" start="44452" end="44465" title="Retno Marsudi" label="Retno Marsudi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937671" start="44470" end="44489" title="Vivian Balakrishnan" label="Vivian Balakrishnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511734" start="44491" end="44516" title="Chief Minister of Gujarat" label="Chief Minister of Gujarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q48732972" start="44517" end="44536" title="Bhupendrabhai Patel" label="Bhupendrabhai Patel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294509" start="44538" end="44566" title="Minister of Defence (Singapore)" label="Singaporean Defence Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984113" start="44567" end="44577" title="Ng Eng Hen" label="Ng Eng Hen"/>
<link wikidata="Q60760901" start="44582" end="44596" title="Clermont Group" label="Clermont Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756638" start="44603" end="44619" title="Richard Chandler (businessman)" label="Richard Chandler"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="44674" end="44679" title="South Asia" label="South"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="44684" end="44698" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1954843" start="44968" end="44986" title="The Indian Express" label="The Indian Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q15978258" start="45024" end="45033" title="Five Eyes" label="Five Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q119791048" start="45175" end="45195" title="Hardeep Singh Nijjar" label="Hardeep Singh Nijjar"/>
<link wikidata="Q987" start="45658" end="45667" title="New Delhi" label="New Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2664362" start="45836" end="45860" title="Minister of Foreign Affairs of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Chinese Foreign Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q701801" start="45861" end="45868" title="Wang Yi (politician)" label="Wang Yi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100252" start="45964" end="45991" title="China-New Zealand relations" label="China-New Zealand relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547309" start="46076" end="46088" title="Indo-Pacific" label="Indo-Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="46159" end="46168" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q34800" start="46170" end="46178" title="Xinjiang" label="Xinjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q17252" start="46183" end="46188" title="Tibet" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q37660" start="46210" end="46225" title="South China Sea" label="South China Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q127031" start="46230" end="46243" title="Taiwan Strait" label="Taiwan Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="46360" end="46365" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="46367" end="46372" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7409268" start="46413" end="46426" title="Sameh Shoukry" label="Sameh Shoukry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172" start="46431" end="46442" title="Arab League" label="Arab League"/>
<link wikidata="Q123392381" start="46571" end="46610" title="Gaza humanitarian crisis (2023–present)" label="Gaza humanitarian crisis (2023–present)"/>
<link wikidata="Q58085" start="46792" end="46809" title="Radosław Sikorski" label="Radosław Sikorski"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="46813" end="46819" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="46821" end="46827" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="46847" end="46851" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="46880" end="46888" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="46969" end="46978" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112958" start="46996" end="47012" title="Tobias Billström" label="Tobias Billström"/>
<link wikidata="Q22212" start="47269" end="47283" title="Lindsey Graham" label="Lindsey Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821917" start="47359" end="47373" title="Antony Blinken" label="Antony Blinken"/>
<link wikidata="Q108556886" start="47869" end="47874" title="AUKUS" label="AUKUS"/>
<link wikidata="Q108556886" start="48076" end="48090" title="AUKUS Pillar 2" label="AUKUS Pillar 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q42314738" start="48129" end="48155" title="Sixth Labour Government of New Zealand" label="previous Labour Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q219060" start="48407" end="48425" title="State of Palestine" label="State of Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q38799" start="48629" end="48634" title="Hamas" label="Hamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q14476584" start="48680" end="48708" title="Israel–New Zealand relations" label="Israel–New Zealand relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q541217" start="48834" end="48842" title="Bob Carr" label="Bob Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q13527950" start="48857" end="48883" title="Premier of New South Wales" label="Premier of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660943" start="48903" end="48931" title="Minister for Foreign Affairs (Australia)" label="Minister for Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q180383" start="49019" end="49030" title="Helen Clark" label="Helen Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q191783" start="49162" end="49172" title="defamation" label="defamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q125965888" start="49193" end="49212" title="Carr-Peters scandal" label="Carr-Peters scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866167" start="49312" end="49327" title="Minister of Health (New Zealand)" label="Health Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q17054055" start="49332" end="49356" title="Ministry for Pacific Peoples" label="Pacific Peoples Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q18167135" start="49360" end="49370" title="Shane Reti" label="Shane Reti"/>
<link wikidata="Q99835332" start="49396" end="49407" title="Simon Watts" label="Simon Watts"/>
<link wikidata="Q41672227" start="49491" end="49507" title="Tim van de Molen" label="Tim van de Molen"/>
<link wikidata="Q15196319" start="49556" end="49568" title="David Parker (New Zealand politician)" label="David Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q685" start="49605" end="49620" title="Solomon Islands" label="Solomon Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q691" start="49622" end="49638" title="Papua New Guinea" label="Papua New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q686" start="49640" end="49647" title="Vanuatu" label="Vanuatu"/>
<link wikidata="Q33788" start="49649" end="49662" title="New Caledonia" label="New Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q672" start="49667" end="49673" title="Tuvalu" label="Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425954" start="49844" end="49874" title="Prime Minister of the Solomon Islands" label="Solomon Islands Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q6180897" start="49875" end="49890" title="Jeremiah Manele" label="Jeremiah Manele"/>
<link wikidata="Q536063" start="49910" end="49927" title="Manasseh Sogavare" label="Manasseh Sogavare"/>
<link wikidata="Q84082629" start="49942" end="49979" title="2024 Solomon Islands general election" label="2024 Solomon Islands general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q125935907" start="50057" end="50082" title="2024 New Caledonia unrest" label="2024 New Caledonia unrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q846656" start="50183" end="50188" title="UNRWA" label="UNRWA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043568" start="50438" end="50463" title="Prime Minister of Vietnam" label="Vietnamese Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806940" start="50464" end="50479" title="Pham Minh Chinh" label="Pham Minh Chinh"/>
<link wikidata="Q19892487" start="50481" end="50508" title="Minister of Foreign Affairs (Vietnam)" label="Vietnamese Foreign Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q30921853" start="50509" end="50522" title="Bùi Thanh Sơn" label="Bùi Thanh Sơn"/>
<link wikidata="Q862559" start="50524" end="50548" title="Prime Minister of Malaysia" label="Malaysian Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q299574" start="50549" end="50562" title="Anwar Ibrahim" label="Anwar Ibrahim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209571" start="50564" end="50582" title="President of the Philippines" label="Filipino President"/>
<link wikidata="Q983324" start="50583" end="50598" title="Bongbong Marcos" label="Bongbong Marcos"/>
<link wikidata="Q17088037" start="50600" end="50626" title="Secretary of Foreign Affairs (Philippines)" label="Filipino Foreign Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q28925129" start="50627" end="50641" title="Enrique Manalo" label="Enrique Manalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q586047" start="50646" end="50669" title="President of East Timor" label="East Timorese President"/>
<link wikidata="Q11665" start="50670" end="50686" title="José Ramos-Horta" label="José Ramos-Horta"/>
<link wikidata="Q757276" start="50819" end="50840" title="Pacific Islands Forum" label="Pacific Islands Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q30971" start="50842" end="50858" title="French Polynesia" label="French Polynesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q125935907" start="51028" end="51053" title="2024 New Caledonia unrest" label="2024 New Caledonia unrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q274948" start="51092" end="51115" title="Prime Minister of Japan" label="Japanese Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q359480" start="51116" end="51129" title="Fumio Kishida" label="Fumio Kishida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078482" start="51131" end="51154" title="Chief Cabinet Secretary" label="Chief Cabinet Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141271" start="51155" end="51172" title="Yoshimasa Hayashi" label="Yoshimasa Hayashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500838" start="51178" end="51194" title="Minister of Defence (Japan)" label="Defence Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q11518220" start="51195" end="51208" title="Minoru Kihara (politician)" label="Minoru Kihara"/>
<link wikidata="Q105547062" start="51361" end="51404" title="2021 New Caledonian independence referendum" label="2021 New Caledonian independence referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1918937" start="51765" end="51791" title="Melanesian Spearhead Group" label="Melanesian Spearhead Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359409" start="51923" end="51933" title="Micronesia" label="Micronesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q709" start="51945" end="51961" title="Marshall Islands" label="Marshall Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q702" start="51963" end="51993" title="Federated States of Micronesia" label="Federated States of Micronesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q695" start="51998" end="52003" title="Palau" label="Palau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39593532" start="52260" end="52287" title="Prime Minister of the Cook Islands" label="Cook Islands Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766871" start="52288" end="52298" title="Mark Brown (Cook Islands)" label="Mark Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3287203" start="52375" end="52389" title="Cook Islanders" label="Cook Islanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138279" start="52491" end="52507" title="associated state" label="associated state"/>
<link wikidata="Q131621600" start="52603" end="52630" title="Cook Islands–New Zealand relations" label="constitutional relationship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="52877" end="52891" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53095" end="53118" title="Kiribati–New Zealand relations#Aid and economic relations" label="bilateral aid programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q878250" start="53137" end="53155" title="President of Kiribati" label="Kiribati President"/>
<link wikidata="Q23034482" start="53156" end="53169" title="Taneti Maamau" label="Taneti Maamau"/>
<link wikidata="Q55623269" start="53408" end="53435" title="Ministry of Education (Kiribati)" label="Kiribati Education Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q108810773" start="53436" end="53451" title="Alexander Teabo" label="Alexander Teabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="53508" end="53516" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5106890" start="53725" end="53738" title="Chris Hipkins" label="Chris Hipkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q99767964" start="53749" end="53771" title="Ricardo Menéndez March" label="Ricardo Menéndez March"/>
<link wikidata="Q127990" start="53776" end="53806" title="Australian National University" label="Australian National University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53840" end="53852" title="Terence Wood" label="Terence Wood"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54121" end="54142" title="China–Cook Islands relations#2025 partnership agreement" label="partnership agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431423" start="54847" end="54871" title="Minister of Foreign Affairs (Israel)" label="Israeli Foreign Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q966349" start="54872" end="54889" title="Gideon Sa&amp;#x27;ar" label="Gideon Sa&amp;#x27;ar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2664362" start="55302" end="55326" title="Minister of Foreign Affairs (China)" label="Chinese Foreign Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q701801" start="55327" end="55334" title="Wang Yi (politician)" label="Wang Yi"/>
<link wikidata="Q33254" start="55409" end="55419" title="Tasman Sea" label="Tasman Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q200106" start="55558" end="55566" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army" label="military"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468049" start="55848" end="55861" title="Rātana Church" label="Rātana Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234236" start="55869" end="55871" title="pā" label="pā"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015672" start="55887" end="55896" title="Whanganui" label="Whanganui"/>
<link wikidata="Q7488117" start="55951" end="55962" title="Shane Jones" label="Shane Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375170" start="56104" end="56117" title="Te Pāti Māori" label="Te Pāti Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851080" start="56318" end="56330" title="Waitangi Day" label="Waitangi Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q212289" start="56551" end="56567" title="Palmerston North" label="Palmerston North"/>
<link wikidata="Q126720956" start="56623" end="56636" title="co-governance" label="co-governance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="56682" end="56694" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q28136847" start="56977" end="56981" title="woke" label="woke"/>
<link wikidata="Q99767998" start="57067" end="57079" title="Darleen Tana" label="Darleen Tana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="57320" end="57326" title="Nazism" label="Nazism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="57335" end="57344" title="Holocaust" label="Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q6508547" start="57517" end="57541" title="Leader of the Opposition (New Zealand)" label="leader of the opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q5106890" start="57542" end="57555" title="Chris Hipkins" label="Chris Hipkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626518" start="57740" end="57757" title="Radio New Zealand" label="Radio New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q99872114" start="58308" end="58322" title="Rawiri Waititi" label="Rawiri Waititi"/>
<link wikidata="Q486365" start="58710" end="58724" title="Anarcho-punk" label="anarchist punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089523" start="58730" end="58741" title="Chumbawamba" label="Chumbawamba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007661" start="58789" end="58800" title="Tubthumping" label="Tubthumping"/>
<link wikidata="Q41187" start="58914" end="58918" title="Sony" label="Sony"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097593" start="59039" end="59051" title="Chris Bishop" label="Chris Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q124022854" start="59463" end="59520" title="Royal Commission of Inquiry into COVID-19 Lessons Learned" label="Royal Commission of Inquiry into COVID-19 Lessons Learned"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59552" end="59564" title="Tony Blakely (epidemiologist)" label="Tony Blakely"/>
<link wikidata="Q5106890" start="60038" end="60051" title="Chris Hipkins" label="Chris Hipkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q115733291" start="60186" end="60194" title="Liz Gunn" label="Liz Gunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666118" start="60357" end="60370" title="Interislander" label="Interislander"/>
<link wikidata="Q626468" start="60383" end="60394" title="DEV Aratere" label="DEV Aratere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362879" start="60427" end="60433" title="Picton, New Zealand" label="Picton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3788105" start="60491" end="60499" title="KiwiRail" label="KiwiRail"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60900" end="60910" title="Titoki Bay" label="Titoki Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q106670793" start="61051" end="61067" title="Greyhound racing in New Zealand" label="greyhound racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q38571" start="61170" end="61179" title="greyhound" label="greyhound"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866300" start="61256" end="61273" title="Minister for Rail" label="Minister for Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="61349" end="61360" title="nationalist" label="nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q180490" start="61367" end="61375" title="populist" label="populist"/>
<link wikidata="Q171174" start="61425" end="61441" title="direct democracy" label="direct democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558113" start="61674" end="61692" title="anti-establishment" label="anti-establishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689423" start="62127" end="62140" title="tax cut" label="cutting taxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q46607" start="62174" end="62185" title="free market" label="free market"/>
<link wikidata="Q5476119" start="62210" end="62223" title="Fourth Labour Government of New Zealand" label="fourth Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q5476155" start="62228" end="62243" title="Fourth National Government of New Zealand" label="fourth National"/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="62289" end="62302" title="privatisation" label="privatisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q902410" start="62308" end="62320" title="deregulation" label="deregulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q737739" start="62395" end="62402" title="Robert Muldoon" label="Muldoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q156223" start="62436" end="62450" title="superannuation" label="superannuation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3700346" start="62662" end="62699" title="opposition to immigration" label="opposed to high levels of immigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1819197" start="63332" end="63354" title="Statistics New Zealand" label="Statistics New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q29467330" start="63484" end="63499" title="Asian New Zealanders" label="Asian community"/>
<link wikidata="Q826031" start="63551" end="63559" title="dog meat" label="dog meat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048192" start="64041" end="64053" title="New Zealand Labour Party" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q846073" start="64100" end="64113" title="2005 New Zealand general election" label="2005 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186424" start="64240" end="64244" title="TVNZ" label="TVNZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q180383" start="65101" end="65112" title="Helen Clark" label="Helen Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q58291" start="65265" end="65279" title="Murray McCully" label="Murray McCully"/>
<link wikidata="Q4352603" start="65423" end="65437" title="Gerry Brownlee" label="Gerry Brownlee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375170" start="65509" end="65520" title="Te Pāti Māori" label="Māori Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q18098181" start="65531" end="65541" title="Marama Fox" label="Marama Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q5106549" start="65563" end="65578" title="Chris Finlayson" label="Chris Finlayson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5522915" start="65677" end="65690" title="Gareth Morgan (economist)" label="Gareth Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q60543" start="65746" end="65756" title="Kim Dotcom" label="Kim Dotcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6336063" start="65769" end="65782" title="Simon Bridges" label="Simon Bridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q207756" start="65831" end="65839" title="Tauranga" label="Tauranga"/>
<link wikidata="Q288838" start="65981" end="65996" title="ACT New Zealand" label="ACT New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q17055796" start="66034" end="66047" title="David Seymour" label="David Seymour"/>
<link wikidata="Q123232751" start="66255" end="66280" title="Sixth National Government of New Zealand" label="Sixth National Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q42314738" start="66338" end="66361" title="Sixth Labour Government of New Zealand" label="Sixth Labour Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483612" start="66464" end="66471" title="cuckold" label="cuckold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1913135" start="66474" end="66480" title="puppet" label="puppet"/>
<link wikidata="Q653" start="66541" end="66550" title="Chihuahua (dog breed)" label="chihuahua"/>
<link wikidata="Q32112" start="66737" end="66749" title="Boxing" label="boxing match"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="66778" end="66785" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q541217" start="67573" end="67581" title="Bob Carr" label="Bob Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660943" start="67601" end="67628" title="Minister for Foreign Affairs (Australia)" label="Minister of Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q13527950" start="67633" end="67659" title="Premier of New South Wales" label="Premier of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q108556886" start="67679" end="67684" title="AUKUS" label="AUKUS"/>
<link wikidata="Q180383" start="67733" end="67744" title="Helen Clark" label="Helen Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626518" start="67794" end="67797" title="Radio New Zealand" label="RNZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q125965888" start="67919" end="67944" title="Carr–Peters scandal" label="sue Peters for defamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888194" start="68002" end="68008" title="Brexit" label="Brexit"/>
<link wikidata="Q21812812" start="68088" end="68115" title="2016 United Kingdom European Union membership referendum" label="that year&amp;#x27;s referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="68297" end="68303" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="68308" end="68315" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q104721252" start="68536" end="68545" title="Reform UK" label="Reform UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q318471" start="68553" end="68565" title="Nigel Farage" label="Nigel Farage"/>
<link wikidata="Q22079776" start="68586" end="68605" title="Vote Leave" label="Vote Leave campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q18205126" start="68613" end="68624" title="Arron Banks" label="Arron Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q22079692" start="68653" end="68661" title="Leave.EU" label="Leave.EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q3606816" start="68812" end="68826" title="Jacinda Ardern" label="Jacinda Ardern"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="69098" end="69110" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q58291" start="69172" end="69186" title="Murray McCully" label="Murray McCully"/>
<link wikidata="Q28053994" start="69201" end="69248" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 2334" label="United Nations Security Council Resolution 2334"/>
<link wikidata="Q36678" start="69375" end="69384" title="West Bank" label="West Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="69420" end="69451" title="United Nations Security Council" label="United Nations Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626518" start="70191" end="70208" title="Radio New Zealand" label="Radio New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q486296" start="70480" end="70492" title="Islamophobia" label="Islamophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q62066211" start="70507" end="70536" title="Christchurch mosque shootings" label="Christchurch mosque shootings"/>
<link wikidata="Q104821313" start="70663" end="70680" title="The Kashmir Files" label="The Kashmir Files"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="70703" end="70706" title="Motion picture content rating system#New Zealand" label="R16"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352932" start="70743" end="70764" title="Office of Film and Literature Classification" label="Classification Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q152997" start="70829" end="70845" title="Islam in New Zealand" label="Muslim community"/>
<link wikidata="Q102420923" start="70895" end="70907" title="David Shanks" label="David Shanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="71312" end="71324" title="9/11 attacks" label="9/11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q62066211" start="71333" end="71362" title="Christchurch mosque shootings" label="Christchurch mosque shootings"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="71616" end="71641" title="Homosexual Law Reform Act 1986#Passage" label="Homosexual Law Reform Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q11584886" start="71788" end="71811" title="Marriage (Definition of Marriage) Amendment Act 2013" label="Marriage Amendment Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q17055796" start="72084" end="72097" title="David Seymour" label="David Seymour"/>
<link wikidata="Q18167358" start="72111" end="72144" title="2017 New Zealand general election" label="2017 New Zealand general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1959427" start="72181" end="72192" title="Māori electorates" label="Māori seats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375170" start="72324" end="72335" title="Māori Party" label="Māori Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q48771246" start="72352" end="72385" title="2020 New Zealand general election" label="2020 New Zealand general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q36451" start="72452" end="72466" title="Māori language" label="Māori language"/>
<link wikidata="Q109850103" start="72484" end="72514" title="Māori wards and constituencies" label="Māori wards and constituencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q100718706" start="72556" end="72589" title="2023 New Zealand general election" label="2023 New Zealand general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138309" start="72725" end="72786" title="United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous People" label="United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous People"/>
<link wikidata="Q126720956" start="72800" end="72813" title="co-governance" label="co-governance"/>
<link wikidata="Q153785" start="72839" end="72847" title="Aotearoa" label="Aotearoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q26988" start="72972" end="72984" title="Cook Islands" label="Cook Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="72989" end="72994" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q21170721" start="73107" end="73119" title="David Letele" label="David Letele"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="73358" end="73367" title="Apartheid" label="Apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="73437" end="73441" title="Nazi" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5106890" start="73568" end="73581" title="Chris Hipkins" label="Chris Hipkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q492467" start="73624" end="73646" title="University of Auckland" label="University of Auckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4080972" start="73679" end="73688" title="safe zone" label="safe zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q111951548" start="73710" end="73718" title="Pasifika New Zealanders" label="Pasifika"/>
<link wikidata="Q28136847" start="73789" end="73793" title="woke" label="woke"/>
<link wikidata="Q47131" start="73858" end="73870" title="Ku Klux Klan" label="Ku Klux Klan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="73875" end="73884" title="Apartheid" label="Apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q125535991" start="74008" end="74030" title="Treaty Principles Bill" label="Treaty Principles Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5106890" start="74133" end="74146" title="Chris Hipkins" label="Chris Hipkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396630" start="74216" end="74226" title="Peter Buck (anthropologist)" label="Peter Buck"/>
<link wikidata="Q201495" start="74228" end="74239" title="Maui Pomare" label="Maui Pomare"/>
<link wikidata="Q4251161" start="74244" end="74257" title="James Carroll (New Zealand politician)" label="James Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q19876266" start="74286" end="74322" title="Principles of the Treaty of Waitangi" label="Principles of the Treaty of Waitangi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235723" start="74417" end="74427" title="Māori King Movement" label="Māori King"/>
<link wikidata="Q888020" start="74428" end="74441" title="Tūheitia Paki" label="Tūheitia Paki"/>
<link wikidata="Q931797" start="74706" end="74739" title="2011 New Zealand general election" label="2011 New Zealand general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186424" start="74821" end="74825" title="TVNZ" label="TVNZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626518" start="74830" end="74847" title="Radio New Zealand" label="Radio New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199207" start="74870" end="74892" title="The New Zealand Herald" label="The New Zealand Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q917338" start="74900" end="74925" title="The Post (New Zealand newspaper)" label="&amp;quot;Dominion Post&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413590" start="74930" end="74951" title="The Press (Christchurch)" label="&amp;quot;The Press&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q19519125" start="75253" end="75262" title="Jack Tame" label="Jack Tame"/>
<link wikidata="Q123232751" start="75385" end="75410" title="Sixth National Government of New Zealand" label="Sixth National Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q42314738" start="75544" end="75561" title="Sixth Labour Government of New Zealand" label="Labour Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q472802" start="75661" end="75679" title="Treaty of Waitangi" label="Treaty of Waitangi"/>
<link wikidata="Q36451" start="75691" end="75703" title="te reo Māori" label="te reo Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q17056081" start="75783" end="75801" title="New Zealand On Air" label="New Zealand On Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292797" start="76241" end="76257" title="mainstream media" label="mainstream media"/>
<link wikidata="Q7441360" start="76355" end="76367" title="Sean Plunket" label="Sean Plunket"/>
<link wikidata="Q116158570" start="76396" end="76420" title="The Platform (radio station)" label="&amp;quot;The Platform&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q74370310" start="76451" end="76468" title="Christopher Luxon" label="Christopher Luxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q41424038" start="77145" end="77158" title="Nicola Willis" label="Nicola Willis"/>
<link wikidata="Q154330" start="77361" end="77386" title="Reporters Without Borders" label="Reporters Without Borders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186424" start="77795" end="77799" title="TVNZ" label="TVNZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626518" start="77804" end="77821" title="Radio New Zealand" label="Radio New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q19519125" start="77862" end="77871" title="Jack Tame" label="Jack Tame"/>
<link wikidata="Q107074885" start="78074" end="78096" title="Warner Bros. Discovery" label="Warner Bros. Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q16823702" start="78156" end="78163" title="Newshub" label="Newshub"/>
<link wikidata="Q683120" start="78688" end="78723" title="Member of Her Majesty&amp;#x27;s Most Honourable Privy Council" label="Privy Council of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="78754" end="78774" title="The Right Honourable#New Zealand" label="The Right Honourable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247662" start="78821" end="78841" title="Faʻamatai" label="chiefly Samoan title"/>
<link wikidata="Q98931498" start="79088" end="79099" title="Bree Peters" label="Bree Peters"/>
<link wikidata="Q65065646" start="79172" end="79195" title="Populism in New Zealand" label="Populism in New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165127" start="79198" end="79264" title="Contents of the United States diplomatic cables leak (New Zealand)" label="Contents of the United States diplomatic cables leak (New Zealand)"/>
<link wikidata="Q125982191" start="79267" end="79363" title="List of international trips made by Winston Peters as Minister of Foreign Affairs of New Zealand" label="List of international trips made by Winston Peters as Minister of Foreign Affairs of New Zealand"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="335156" wikidata="Q931528" url="?curid=335156" title="Robert Helpmann">
<text>Sir Robert Murray Helpmann (né Helpman, 9 April 1909 – 28 September 1986) was an Australian ballet dancer, actor, director, and choreographer. After early work in Australia he moved to Britain in 1932, where he joined the Vic-Wells Ballet (now The Royal Ballet) under its creator, Ninette de Valois. He became one of the company&#x27;s leading men, partnering Alicia Markova and later Margot Fonteyn. When Frederick Ashton, the company&#x27;s chief choreographer, was called up for military service in the Second World War, Helpmann took over from him while continuing as a principal dancer.

Helpmann, from the outset of his career was an actor as well as a dancer, and in the 1940s he turned increasingly to acting in plays, at the Old Vic and in the West End. Most of his roles were in Shakespeare plays but he also appeared in works by Shaw, Coward, Sartre and others. As a director his range was wide, from Shakespeare to opera, musicals and pantomime.

Helpmann became co-director of the Australian Ballet, in 1965, for whom he created several new ballets. He became sole director in 1975 but disagreements with the company&#x27;s board led to his dismissal a year later. He directed for Australian Opera and acted in stage plays into the 1980s. Although primarily a stage artist, he appeared in fifteen films between 1942 (&quot;One of Our Aircraft is Missing&quot;) and 1984 (&quot;Second Time Lucky&quot;), including &quot;The Red Shoes&quot;, &quot;The Tales of Hoffmann&quot;, as the Devil in a film version of Igor Stravinsky&#x27;s ballet-drama &quot;The Soldier&#x27;s Tale&quot; (&quot;L&#x27;Histoire du soldat&quot;) and as the Child Catcher in &quot;Chitty Chitty Bang Bang&quot;.

Helpmann died in Sydney and was given a state funeral in St Andrew&#x27;s Cathedral. The Prime Minister, Bob Hawke, gave a tribute in the Parliament of Australia, and a motion of condolence was passed – a rare tribute for a non-politician. Helpmann is commemorated in the Helpmann Awards for Australian performing arts, established in his honour in 2001.

==Life and career==
===Early years===
Helpmann was born in Mount Gambier, South Australia, the eldest of the three children of James Murray Helpman (1881–1927), a stock and station agent and auctioneer, and his wife, Mary, &quot;née&quot; Gardiner (1883–1970). Mary Helpman had a passion for the theatre, and her enthusiasm was passed on to all three of her children. Helpmann&#x27;s younger brother Max (1914–1987) and their sister Sheila (1916–1994) both made their own careers on stage, television and screen.

After being what his biographer Kathrine Sorley Walker calls &quot;an uninterested and recalcitrant scholar&quot; at Prince Alfred College, Adelaide, Helpmann was taken on as a student apprentice by Anna Pavlova when she was on tour in Australia in 1926. He was trained by Alexis Dolinoff, her leading male dancer. He then joined the theatrical producers J. C. Williamson Ltd, as principal dancer for musicals, revues, and pantomimes, beginning with Franz Lehár&#x27;s &quot;Frasquita&quot; in 1927. He later appeared in &quot;Katinka&quot;, &quot;The Merry Widow&quot;, &quot;The New Moon&quot;, &quot;Queen High&quot;, &quot;This Year of Grace&quot; and &quot;Tip-Toes&quot;, appearing with stars such as Gladys Moncrieff, Marie Burke and Maisie Gay. Sorley Walker writes, &quot;His vitality and bravura presentation of dances stopped various shows&quot;.

Robert Helpmann cited Melbourne eccentric, beautician, radio broadcaster, actor and dancer Stephanie Deste as one of the influences over his dancing and acting career.

===Vic-Wells Ballet===
The English actress Margaret Rawlings, who was touring Australia, was impressed by Helpmann. She encouraged him to pursue a career in Britain, and provided him with an introduction to Ninette de Valois, director of the Vic-Wells Ballet (later named the Sadler&#x27;s Wells Ballet). Helpmann left Australia in 1932, and did not return until 1955. De Valois accepted him into her company. He impressed her – she later wrote &quot;Everything about him proclaims the artist born&quot; – although she noted not only his strengths but also his weaknesses: &quot;talented, enthusiastic, extremely intelligent, great facility, witty, cute as a monkey, quick as a squirrel, a sense of theatre and his own possible achievements therein&quot; but &quot;academically technically weak, lacking in concentration, too fond of a good time and too busy having it&quot;. In the mid-1930s, probably at Rawlings&#x27;s suggestion, he added a second &quot;n&quot; to his surname, to give it a more foreign and exotic air.
In April 1934 de Valois created a new ballet, &quot;The Haunted Ballroom&quot;, with Helpmann and Alicia Markova in the leading roles. &quot;The Times&quot; commented that of the soloists Helpmann &quot;had the greatest opportunities, and made fine use of them&quot;. He co-starred with Markova in &quot;Swan Lake&quot;, danced in operas, and appeared at the Open Air Theatre, Regent&#x27;s Park. In 1935 he was leading dancer in the revue &quot;Stop Press&quot;, with music by Irving Berlin. At Sadler&#x27;s Wells he danced the principal role in another new de Valois ballet, &quot;The Rake&#x27;s Progress&quot;, and in 1936 Frederick Ashton choreographed a highly romantic ballet, &quot;Apparitions&quot;, to music by Liszt, featuring Helpmann and the teenaged Margot Fonteyn. Sorley Walker writes that he and Fonteyn were a &quot;perfectly matched partnership&quot;, exemplified by &quot;their superb rendering of the Aurora pas de deux in &quot;The Sleeping Beauty&quot;&quot;. As well as romantic leading roles, Helpmann became known for his gift for comedy. Sorley Walker singles out his roles in &quot;Coppélia&quot;, Ashton&#x27;s &quot;A Wedding Bouquet&quot; and de Valois&#x27;s &quot;The Prospect Before Us&quot;. Character roles included the doddery Red King in de Valois&#x27; &quot;Checkmate&quot;, which he first danced at the age of 28 and last danced in 1986 when he was 77.

Helpmann&#x27;s non-ballet work in the later 1930s included his Oberon in Tyrone Guthrie&#x27;s production of &quot;A Midsummer Night&#x27;s Dream&quot; at the Old Vic, which also starred Vivien Leigh as Titania and Ralph Richardson as Bottom. The drama critic of &quot;The Times&quot; wrote:
:It will be useless in future for Mr. Robert Helpmann to pretend that he is exclusively a dancer of the first rank. Certainly his dancing gives strength to his Oberon; he glides into imagined invisibility; but that is not all: his verse sings with his thought, his Oberon flashes with power, and presides, as Oberons do rarely, over the whole magic of the wood.

The doyen of London critics, James Agate, pronounced Helpmann&#x27;s Oberon to be, in its way, &quot;the best I have ever seen or ever shall see&quot;. While at the Old Vic Helpmann met the director Michael Benthall; they formed a lifelong personal partnership and frequently worked together in the theatre.

===1940s===
During the Second World War Sadler&#x27;s Wells Ballet became a prominent contributor to public morale, giving London seasons interspersed with a demanding programme of provincial tours. Helpmann&#x27;s workload often required him to dance leads in three performances in one day, and when Ashton was called up for active service in 1941, Helpmann took on the additional role of choreographer to the company. Ashton, in his enforced absence from the company, observed Helpmann&#x27;s rise to pre-eminence with feelings of envy, and their relationship became edgy on Ashton&#x27;s part. The ballets that Helpmann created for the wartime company were &quot;Comus&quot; (1942, based on Milton), &quot;The Birds&quot; (1942, to Respighi&#x27;s &quot;Gli uccelli&quot;), &quot;Miracle in the Gorbals&quot; (1944, a story of redemption with a plot by Benthall and music by Arthur Bliss), and a version of &quot;Hamlet&quot; set to Tchaikovsky&#x27;s music. While on leave from the RAF in 1943, Ashton created a new ballet for Helpmann, &quot;The Quest&quot;, a patriotic tale of Saint George, with music by William Walton, who commented that Helpmann in the lead &quot;looked more like the Dragon than St George.&quot; The music has survived but the ballet has not.
Helpmann returned to Hamlet in 1944 in the title role of the original play, with the Old Vic company. After the laudatory reviews for his Oberon, those for his Hamlet were more mixed. Ivor Brown thought it &quot;eager, intelligent and exciting&quot;, Agate called Helpmann&#x27;s prince &quot;most heart-breaking&quot; and the young Peter Brook found Helpmann&#x27;s fast-paced performance highly exciting, but other critics thought it a lightweight interpretation, and opinions varied about the quality of Helpmann&#x27;s verse-speaking. During the war Helpmann played his first film roles: the supercilious traitor De Jong in &quot;One of Our Aircraft is Missing&quot; (1942) and the comically fussy Bishop of Ely in Laurence Olivier&#x27;s &quot;Henry V&quot; (1944).

At the end of the war David Webster was appointed chief executive of the Royal Opera House, tasked with reopening it for opera and ballet after its wartime closure. He invited de Valois and her company to base themselves there to complement the new opera company he was setting up. In due course the companies became The Royal Ballet and The Royal Opera. Helpmann and Fonteyn led the ballet company in the opening gala performance of &quot;The Sleeping Beauty&quot;. The first new work staged at the reopened house was &quot;Adam Zero&quot; (1946), with a libretto by Benthall and music by Bliss, choreographed by and starring Helpmann as an Everyman figure. The work was well received and was revived the following year, but has not held a place in the repertoire.

In 1947, together with Benthall, Helpmann took over the artistic direction of the Duchess Theatre in the West End of London. They presented a revival of John Webster&#x27;s tragedy &quot;The White Devil&quot; with Helpmann as the villainous Flamineo and Rawlings as his equally villainous sister. This was well received but their next production, a revival of Leonid Andreyev&#x27;s &quot;He Who Gets Slapped&quot;, quickly folded. In the same year Helpmann worked on the film &quot;The Red Shoes&quot;, which he and Leonid Massine choreographed and appeared in. Helpmann joined the Shakespeare Memorial Theatre Company at Stratford-upon-Avon for the 1948 season, playing the title role in &quot;King John&quot;, Shylock in &quot;The Merchant of Venice&quot; and alternating with Paul Scofield in a new production of &quot;Hamlet&quot;.

===1950s===
In 1950 Helpmann directed an opera for the first time – the Covent Garden production of &quot;Madama Butterfly&quot;, with Elisabeth Schwarzkopf in the title role. The production outlasted its director: after many revivals its final performances at the Royal Opera House were in 1993. The following year he joined Olivier and Vivien Leigh at the St James&#x27;s Theatre, where they presented Shakespeare&#x27;s &quot;Antony and Cleopatra&quot; and Shaw&#x27;s &quot;Caesar and Cleopatra&quot;. Helpmann played Octavius Caesar in the first and Apollodorus in the second. When the productions were taken to Broadway at the end of the year he played the same roles. He appeared in another Shaw play the following year, as the male lead, the Doctor, opposite Katharine Hepburn as Epifania, in &quot;The Millionairess&quot;. Between these plays Helpmann acted in the Powell and Pressburger film &quot;The Tales of Hoffmann&quot;, conducted by Sir Thomas Beecham and choreographed by Ashton. Helpmann played all four of the villains in the various stories within the opera, his singing voice dubbed by the Welsh bass Bruce Dargavel.

In 1953 Helpmann returned to the Old Vic, directing a new production of &quot;Murder in the Cathedral&quot; with Robert Donat as Becket. On Coronation night in June 1953 Helpmann returned to Covent Garden as a guest artist to dance Prince Siegfried in &quot;Swan Lake&quot;. The following year he again directed and choreographed an opera there, &quot;The Golden Cockerel&quot;, with a cast including Mattiwilda Dobbs, Hugues Cuénod and Geraint Evans. The following year brought two contrasting directing engagements: the first was &quot;The Tempest&quot; at the Old Vic, with Michael Hordern as Prospero, Richard Burton as Caliban and Claire Bloom as Miranda. Then followed Noël Coward&#x27;s musical &quot;After the Ball&quot;, based on Oscar Wilde&#x27;s &quot;Lady Windermere&#x27;s Fan&quot;. Helpmann discovered that the combination of Coward and Wilde was not a success: &quot;Everything that Noël sent up, Wilde was sentimental about, and everything that Wilde sent up Noël was sentimental about. It was two different points of view and it didn&#x27;t work.&quot;

In May 1955 Helpmann returned to Australia, leading a tour of the country by the Old Vic company, with Hepburn as a guest artist. He played Petruchio in &quot;The Taming of the Shrew&quot;, Angelo in &quot;Measure for Measure&quot; and Shylock. At the Old Vic in 1956 he directed John Neville and Claire Bloom in &quot;Romeo and Juliet&quot;, a production later given on Broadway. He joined the company as an actor later in the year, playing Shylock, Launce in &quot;The Two Gentlemen of Verona&quot;, Saturnius in &quot;Titus Andronicus&quot; and the title role in &quot;Richard III&quot;.

During 1957 Helpmann played the title role in Jean-Paul Sartre&#x27;s &quot;Nekrassov&quot;, and then took over the lead part of Sebastien in Coward&#x27;s comedy &quot;Nude with Violin&quot; in London. The role had been created by John Gielgud, who had been succeeded, not altogether satisfactorily, by Michael Wilding. Helpmann&#x27;s vitality revived the spirits of the company, and the play continued its run into the following year. Helpmann toured Australia in the piece in 1958–59, after he had returned to ballet for a season at Covent Garden in &quot;The Rake&#x27;s Progress&quot;, &quot;Hamlet&quot;, &quot;Coppélia&quot;, &quot;Miracle in the Gorbals&quot; and &quot;Petrushka&quot;. His performance in the last of these was not well received: in the role of a lovelorn puppet, he was seen as too overtly human and intelligent.

===1960s===
At the start of the 1960s Helpmann worked mostly in non-ballet theatre, forgoing the opportunity to create the role of the Widow Simone in Ashton&#x27;s &quot;La fille mal gardée&quot; in favour of directing Vivien Leigh and Mary Ure in Jean Giraudoux&#x27;s play &quot;Duel of Angels&quot; on Broadway. In 1962 he performed again for Australian audiences in another Old Vic company, this time headed by Vivien Leigh, which appeared in the Far East, South America and Australia. In 1963 he choreographed his sixth work for The Royal Ballet, the short-lived and critically damned &quot;Elektra&quot;, with music by Malcolm Arnold and featuring Nadia Nerina, David Blair, Monica Mason and Derek Rencher. He also supervised a new production of &quot;Swan Lake&quot; for the company, with important new choreographic contributions from Ashton. In the same year he played Prince Tuan in the film &quot;55 Days at Peking&quot;.

In 1962 Peggy van Praagh, formerly of Sadler&#x27;s Wells, launched a new company, the Australian Ballet, which, Sorely Walker writes, steadily gained ground as &quot;a company full of lively young Australian talent, helped along by top-level international stars like Erik Bruhn, Rudolf Nureyev, and Sonia Arova.&quot; Van Praagh approached Helpmann to create a new work for the company and he suggested a story based around the native Australian lyrebird. He was keen to promote Australian talent, and recruited Sidney Nolan to design the costumes and scenery and Malcolm Williamson to compose the score. The work, titled &quot;The Display&quot;, was premiered at the Adelaide Festival in March 1964, with Kathleen Gorham in the leading role, to an enthusiastic reception. he appeared in a TV special &quot;Half an Hour with Robert Helpmann&quot;.

Back in London, Helpmann directed and choreographed the first British production of Lerner and Loewe&#x27;s musical &quot;Camelot&quot; in 1964. He had been approached by its authors to play Merlin in the original Broadway production, but nothing came of the suggestion. For the London production he sought to recapture, more than the American production had done, the sprit of &quot;The Once and Future King&quot;, the book on which the show was based. The musical received tepid reviews, but Helpmann&#x27;s production, with designs by John Truscott, was praised as a &quot;dazzling&quot; and &quot;gorgeous spectacle&quot;; the show ran for well over a year.

The success of &quot;The Display&quot; led to Helpmann&#x27;s appointment as co-director of the Australian Ballet in 1965. His biographer Christopher Sexton comments that Helpmann and van Praag &quot;complemented each other with their different personalities and skills: she the pedagogue, teacher and administrator; he the restless &#x27;jet-setting&#x27; star who spent six months of the year overseas and attracted international names to perform with the company&quot;. His ballets for the company during the rest of the 1960s were &quot;Yugen&quot; (1965); an expanded version of &quot;Elektra&quot; (1966) and &quot;Sun Music&quot; (1968).

Helpmann made two more films during the 1960s. In 1966, he played Weng in &quot;The Quiller Memorandum&quot; and in 1968 he played the Child Catcher in &quot;Chitty Chitty Bang Bang&quot;; on the set of the latter film, he was the opposite of his character, as he loved children and was very kind and caring toward the child actors, often protecting them from the director&#x27;s temper and profanity. The role remains his most well-known and acclaimed performance. One critic observed, &quot;He will eternally frighten children as the demented child catcher&quot;; others called Helpmann&#x27;s performance &quot;the most sinister presence I have ever seen on film&quot;, and &quot;a devastating turn&quot; that would give children nightmares.

In 1968 Helpmann was appointed artistic director designate of the Adelaide Festival of 1970, and spent much time seeking out the performers for it. As well as showcasing Australian talent he aimed to attract internationally prestigious performers.

===1970s===
Under Helpmann&#x27;s direction the line-up for the 1970 Adelaide Festival was, by common consent, exceptionally impressive. Among those appearing were the Royal Shakespeare Company, led by Judi Dench and Donald Sinden, in &quot;The Winter&#x27;s Tale&quot; and &quot;Twelfth Night&quot;; Benjamin Britten and Peter Pears brought the English Opera Group; there were art exhibitions from Pompeii and Mexico. Dance was represented not only by the Australian Ballet, but also by the Royal Thai Ballet, the Balinese Dance Company and the Georgian State Dance Company. Nureyev was guest artist with the Australian Ballet in a revival of Helpmann&#x27;s &quot;Hamlet&quot;, new to the company&#x27;s repertoire and greatly admired. Nureyev also presented his version of Marius Petipa&#x27;s classic ballet &quot;Don Quixote&quot;, dancing the romantic lead, Basilio, with Helpmann in the title role of the deluded knight. This was the first time the two dancers had worked together; they took to each other with enthusiasm and continued their fruitful professional relationship. Nureyev continued to play Helpmann&#x27;s old role of Hamlet in revivals of the 1942 ballet, and the two starred in a film of &quot;Don Quixote&quot; with the Australian company in 1973, shown internationally and subsequently published on DVD.

By the 1970s the combination of Helpmann and Ashton in comic drag as the Ugly Sisters in Ashton&#x27;s &quot;Cinderella&quot; had become a much-loved institution at Covent Garden in various revivals since its 1948 premiere. In 1972 Helpmann succeeded in getting Ashton to join him for a production by the Australian Ballet, but despite Helpmann&#x27;s urging, Ashton never created a new work for the company, although he restaged his &quot;La fille mal gardée&quot; for them.

Helpmann&#x27;s biographer Elizabeth Salter comments that 1974 was &quot;a year of disaster&quot; for both directors of the Australian Ballet. Van Praag was forced by arthritis to retire, and Helpmann&#x27;s partner, Michael Benthall, died. The two men had lived together in London since the 1940s, and although both had extracurricular affairs they remained devoted to each other, and Helpmann felt the loss deeply.

1974 was also the year of the last ballet created by Helpmann, the plotless &quot;Perisynthyon&quot;. He commissioned scores from two Australian composers in succession, but finding neither satisfactory he turned at the last minute to Sibelius&#x27;s First Symphony. The late changes caused inadequate preparation time for the dancers, and the piece was not well received. The following year disagreements between Helpmann and the board of the Australian Ballet came to a head. He was outspoken about the inadequacy of the company&#x27;s budget, and refused to cut costs, on the grounds that doing do would be artistically and technically damaging. He made it publicly clear that he felt the board had become &quot;dominated by money-men who had no experience or understanding of artistic matters&quot;. The board decided that he must go, and tried to ease him out quietly. He did not cooperate, and made it known that he had been dismissed: &quot;I want the public and the dancers to know that I didn&#x27;t decide to leave them. I would have stayed with them until I dropped dead.&quot;

In 1977 Peter Wright, director of the Sadler&#x27;s Wells Royal Ballet, invited Helpmann to appear with the company in two of his old starring roles: the Red King in &quot;Checkmate&quot; and Dr Coppélius in &quot;Coppélia&quot;. British ballet audiences had seen little of him in leading roles for some years, and his return was greeted with enthusiasm. The ballet critic of &quot;The Times&quot; described his Coppélius as &quot;a legend come to life&quot;, and his &quot;Financial Times&quot; colleague wrote of Helpmann&#x27;s &quot;riotous and wonderful control&quot;, concluding, &quot;British ballet owes Helpmann a vast debt – his present performances in &quot;Coppélia&quot; and &quot;Checkmate&quot; increase it still further&quot;.

===1980s===
In 1981 Helpmann staged another revival of his ballet &quot;Hamlet&quot;, this time featuring Anthony Dowell. The production was given first at Covent Garden and was later taken to New York. In Sydney, Helpmann directed and choreographed Handel&#x27;s opera &quot;Alcina&quot;, and in the US he directed Lilli Palmer in a one-woman show about Sarah Bernhardt, &quot;Sarah in America&quot;.

In New Zealand, Helpmann supervised the 1981 world premiere of the musical &quot;Aloha&quot; he had co-authored with Hawaiian composer Eaton Magoon Jr, staged by the Hamilton Operatic Society at the Founders Theatre directed by Robert Young, with Derek Williams as orchestrator and musical director. A cast recording produced by Carl Doy was made of the show at Mandrill Studios. In 1983 there was a Hawaiian production of the show, followed in 1985 by a Michael Edgley revival production at His Majesty&#x27;s Theatre, Auckland, directed by Joe Layton with Derek Williams rehired as Musical Director. New Zealand-born singer Derek Metzger starred in all &quot;Aloha&quot; productions.

The following year Helpmann appeared with Diana Rigg in Harvey Schmidt&#x27;s musical, &quot;Colette&quot;, which opened in Seattle but folded before reaching Broadway. He then made his last British appearance in an acting role, playing Cardinal Pirelli in a revival of Sandy Wilson&#x27;s &quot;Valmouth&quot; at the Chichester Festival. Irving Wardle wrote in &quot;The Times&quot;, &quot;It is not a large part, but Helpmann&#x27;s hooded smiles and baleful oeuillades, his capacity to express elegant corruption to his beringed finger-tips, lodge one imperishable image.&quot;

In 1983 Helpmann directed Gounod&#x27;s opera &quot;Roméo et Juliette&quot; in Sydney, and later in the year appeared there as the elderly Bosie in Justin Fleming&#x27;s play about Oscar Wilde, &quot;The Cobra&quot;, with Mark Lee as Bosie&#x27;s young self. In 1984, together with Googie Withers and John McCallum, he toured in Ted Willis&#x27;s play &quot;Stardust&quot;, and joined his sister Sheila to record two episodes of the Australian soap opera &quot;A Country Practice&quot;, which were shown in 1985. Early in that year he was in the US directing a revival of the operetta &quot;The Mery Widow&quot; for the San Diego Opera. In June, at the Sydney Opera House, he directed Joan Sutherland in Bellini&#x27;s &quot;I Puritani&quot;. His last stage appearances were as the Red King in &quot;Checkmate&quot;, with the Australian Ballet, in Melbourne and Sydney in May 1986.

===Death===
Helpmann died of emphysema in Sydney on 28 September 1986. He was given the rare tribute of a state funeral, held on 2 October at St Andrew&#x27;s Cathedral, Sydney. Tributes were paid in both Houses of the Parliament of Australia. In the Senate all senators present stood in silence. This was noted as a rarity, and it was put on record that &quot;it is only in exceptional circumstances that motions of condolence are moved for distinguished Australians who have not sat in the Parliament&quot;. Senator Stan Collard said:

:He always regarded himself as an Australian, although much of his life was spent away from these shores ... His love of the theatre and his ability to use it as a medium of communication and expression knew no bounds. He put this country on the map in the cultural arena... He was always looking for new challenges and was never content to rely on past successes... He was one of our great ambassadors.
In the House of Representatives the Prime Minister, Bob Hawke, said, &quot;No one should underestimate Sir Robert Helpmann&#x27;s role in the development of the growing maturity of Australia&#x27;s art and culture. ... He demonstrated to the world the diversity of this nation&#x27;s talents and capabilities.&quot;
In London a memorial service was held at St Paul&#x27;s, Covent Garden (known as &quot;the actors&#x27; church&quot;); Ashton represented Princess Margaret, Fonteyn gave the address, a tribute was read from de Valois, and the British ballet and theatre were represented by some of their best-known members.

==Honours, reputation and legacy==
In 1954 Helpmann was appointed to the Royal Order of the Polar Star (Sweden) and in 1957 he was created a Knight of the Cedar (Lebanon). He was appointed CBE in 1964, named as Australian of the Year for 1965, and was created a Knight Bachelor in 1968.

In &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot;, de Valois wrote in an obituary tribute:
:To work with Robert Helpmann was always an inspiration. There was at work an alert intelligence with an acute sense of perception. ... Bobby had a sense of humour that surmounted everything. Sometimes it was expressed by word of mouth, sometimes by an outburst of &quot;mime&quot;; at other times by just a look – and the latter could prove to be the most potent of all, for his timing on such occasions was as faultless as it was fatal.
An unsigned obituary in &quot;The Times&quot; caused upset by calling Helpmann &quot;A homosexual of the proselytising kind, [who] could turn young men on the borderline his way.&quot; It was quickly pointed out that Helpmann kept his professional and private lives firmly separate. An assessment in &quot;The Guardian&quot; ranked him as capable in &quot;princely&quot; roles in classic ballets, but &quot;peerless&quot; in dramatic parts, and best of all in comic roles. The &quot;Australian Dictionary of Biography&quot; (ADB) describes Helpmann as &quot;the complete man of the theatre&quot;, but adds that in some people&#x27;s view he worked in too many fields to achieve supremacy in any one of them. Malcolm Williamson observed, &quot;he never became a Gielgud, Olivier or Redgrave, or an Ashton, Balanchine or Petit because he was the most pluralistic of the lot&quot;; the ADB quotes the dancer Moira Shearer: &quot;he wasn&#x27;t a great dancer – he wasn&#x27;t a great actor – but he was most certainly a great mime, the perfect bridge between the two&quot;. &quot;The New York Times&quot; said of him:
:While some critics question whether he would measure up to today&#x27;s rigid standards for great classical dancers, Sir Robert was a dancer who could act and an actor who could dance. His personality and talent played a vital part in building the fledgling British ballet.

The Helpmann Academy in South Australia was named in his honour; it is a partnership of the major visual and performing arts education and training institutions in South Australia offering award courses for people seeking professional careers in the arts. The Helpmann Awards were instituted 2001, and recognise distinguished artistic achievement and excellence in Australia&#x27;s live performing arts sectors. The Sir Robert Helpmann Theatre is named after him at his birthplace in Mount Gambier. Onstage, Helpmann has been commemorated in the play &quot;LyreBird (Tales of Helpmann)&quot;, by Tyler Coppin.

==Ballets choreographed by Helpmann==
* &quot;Business a la Russe&quot;. Rawlings/Toyne Drama Company, Criterion Theatre, Sydney, April 1932
* &quot;Danse, La&quot; (with Wendy Toye). Royal Academy of Dancing Production Club, Rudolf Steiner Hall, London, 23 March 1939; Ballet de la Jeunesse Anglais, Cambridge Theatre, London, 9 May 1939
* &quot;Comus&quot;. Music by Henry Purcell arranged by Constant Lambert, Sadler&#x27;s Wells Ballet, New Theatre, London, 14 January 1942
* &quot;Hamlet&quot;. Music by Tchaikovsky (Fantasy Overture), Sadler&#x27;s Wells Ballet, New Theatre, London, 19 May 1942
* &quot;The Birds&quot;. Music by Respighi, Sadler&#x27;s Wells Ballet, New Theatre, London, 24 November 1942
* &quot;Miracle in the Gorbals&quot;. Music by Arthur Bliss, Sadler&#x27;s Wells Ballet, Princes Theatre, London, 26 October 1944
* &quot;Adam Zero&quot;. Music by Bliss, Sadler&#x27;s Wells Ballet, ROHCG, 10 April 1946 (revised 16 December 1947)
* &quot;Elektra&quot;. Music by Malcolm Arnold, Royal Ballet, ROHCG, 26 March 1963. Revised version, Australian Ballet, Her Majesty&#x27;s Theatre, Adelaide, 15 March 1966
* &quot; The Display&quot;. Music by Malcolm Williamson, Australian Ballet, Her Majesty&#x27;s Theatre, Adelaide, 14 March 1964
* &quot;Yugen&quot;. Music by Yuzo Toyama, Australian Ballet, Her Majesty&#x27;s Theatre, Adelaide, 18 February 1965
* &quot;Sun Music&quot;. Music by Peter Sculthorpe, Australian Ballet, Her Majesty&#x27;s Theatre, Sydney, 2 August 1968
* &quot;Perisynthyon&quot;. Music by Jean Sibelius (Symphony No 1), Australian Ballet, Her Majesty&#x27;s Theatre, Adelaide, 21 March 1974

==Filmography==
==See also==
* List of dancers

==Notes, references and sources==
===Notes===
===References===
===Sources===
====Books====
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

====Journals====
* 

==External links==
* The Helpmann Awards The Australian Entertainment Industry Association&#x27;s annual awards are named in Helpmann&#x27;s honour.
* – Australia Dancing
* Helpmann files in the NLA PROMPT collection / National Library of Australia
* A Dash of Helpmann – NLA News
* Frederick Ashton&#x27;s &quot;Cinderella&quot; ballet
* Josef Weinberger: The Creation of The Merry Widow Ballet
* – Australia Dancing</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q931528" start="0" end="26" title="Robert Helpmann" label="Sir Robert Murray Helpmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q931528" start="31" end="38" title="Robert Helpmann" label="Helpman"/>
<link wikidata="Q323283" start="222" end="238" title="Vic-Wells Ballet" label="Vic-Wells Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q234436" start="281" end="298" title="Ninette de Valois" label="Ninette de Valois"/>
<link wikidata="Q179196" start="360" end="374" title="Alicia Markova" label="Alicia Markova"/>
<link wikidata="Q231776" start="385" end="399" title="Margot Fonteyn" label="Margot Fonteyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q711073" start="406" end="422" title="Frederick Ashton" label="Frederick Ashton"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="506" end="522" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q868806" start="730" end="741" title="the Old Vic" label="the Old Vic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359589" start="753" end="761" title="West End theatre" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="789" end="800" title="Shakespeare" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q19185" start="840" end="844" title="George Bernard Shaw" label="Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q298388" start="846" end="852" title="Noël Coward" label="Coward"/>
<link wikidata="Q9364" start="854" end="860" title="Sartre" label="Sartre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872164" start="994" end="1011" title="Australian Ballet" label="Australian Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916790" start="1194" end="1210" title="Australian Opera" label="Australian Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089824" start="1336" end="1366" title="One of Our Aircraft is Missing" label="One of Our Aircraft is Missing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443605" start="1390" end="1407" title="Second Time Lucky" label="Second Time Lucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q625780" start="1432" end="1445" title="The Red Shoes (1948 film)" label="The Red Shoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249349" start="1459" end="1480" title="The Tales of Hoffmann (film)" label="The Tales of Hoffmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q35230" start="1491" end="1500" title="the Devil" label="the Devil"/>
<link wikidata="Q25208273" start="1504" end="1518" title="The Soldier&amp;#x27;s Tale (film)" label="a film version"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314" start="1522" end="1537" title="Igor Stravinsky" label="Igor Stravinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620751" start="1564" end="1587" title="The Soldier&amp;#x27;s Tale" label="The Soldier&amp;#x27;s Tale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3604059" start="1645" end="1658" title="Child Catcher" label="Child Catcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637791" start="1668" end="1691" title="Chitty Chitty Bang Bang" label="Chitty Chitty Bang Bang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088015" start="1757" end="1783" title="St Andrew&amp;#x27;s Cathedral, Sydney" label="St Andrew&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q269372" start="1805" end="1814" title="Bob Hawke" label="Bob Hawke"/>
<link wikidata="Q382118" start="1838" end="1861" title="Parliament of Australia" label="Parliament of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16842899" start="1972" end="1987" title="Helpmann Awards" label="Helpmann Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q327348" start="2115" end="2145" title="Mount Gambier, South Australia" label="Mount Gambier, South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617874" start="2219" end="2242" title="stock and station agent" label="stock and station agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q19829108" start="2602" end="2624" title="Kathrine Sorley Walker" label="Kathrine Sorley Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243805" start="2687" end="2718" title="Prince Alfred College" label="Prince Alfred College, Adelaide"/>
<link wikidata="Q151874" start="2769" end="2781" title="Anna Pavlova" label="Anna Pavlova"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680143" start="2925" end="2945" title="J. C. Williamson" label="J. C. Williamson Ltd"/>
<link wikidata="Q191917" start="3020" end="3031" title="Franz Lehár" label="Franz Lehár"/>
<link wikidata="Q6377617" start="3097" end="3104" title="Katinka (operetta)" label="Katinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q478202" start="3118" end="3133" title="The Merry Widow" label="The Merry Widow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753681" start="3147" end="3159" title="The New Moon" label="The New Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7786414" start="3197" end="3215" title="This Year of Grace" label="This Year of Grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3529261" start="3232" end="3240" title="Tip-Toes" label="Tip-Toes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5566439" start="3277" end="3293" title="Gladys Moncrieff" label="Gladys Moncrieff"/>
<link wikidata="Q19059397" start="3295" end="3306" title="Marie Burke" label="Marie Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q18528878" start="3311" end="3321" title="Maisie Gay" label="Maisie Gay"/>
<link wikidata="Q62096576" start="3520" end="3535" title="Stephanie Deste" label="Stephanie Deste"/>
<link wikidata="Q6759828" start="3641" end="3658" title="Margaret Rawlings" label="Margaret Rawlings"/>
<link wikidata="Q323283" start="3840" end="3856" title="Vic-Wells Ballet" label="Vic-Wells Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q65089122" start="4674" end="4694" title="The Haunted Ballroom" label="The Haunted Ballroom"/>
<link wikidata="Q179196" start="4720" end="4734" title="Alicia Markova" label="Alicia Markova"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="4763" end="4772" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q199786" start="4926" end="4935" title="Swan Lake" label="Swan Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817506" start="4981" end="5017" title="Open Air Theatre, Regent&amp;#x27;s Park" label="Open Air Theatre, Regent&amp;#x27;s Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q918727" start="5056" end="5061" title="revue" label="revue"/>
<link wikidata="Q128746" start="5100" end="5113" title="Irving Berlin" label="Irving Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352949" start="5118" end="5137" title="Sadler&amp;#x27;s Wells" label="Sadler&amp;#x27;s Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q711073" start="5250" end="5266" title="Frederick Ashton" label="Frederick Ashton"/>
<link wikidata="Q41309" start="5344" end="5349" title="Liszt" label="Liszt"/>
<link wikidata="Q231776" start="5387" end="5401" title="Margot Fonteyn" label="Margot Fonteyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q838051" start="5573" end="5592" title="The Sleeping Beauty (ballet)" label="The Sleeping Beauty"/>
<link wikidata="Q831852" start="5733" end="5741" title="Coppélia" label="Coppélia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1610339" start="5921" end="5930" title="Checkmate (ballet)" label="Checkmate"/>
<link wikidata="Q330059" start="6092" end="6106" title="Tyrone Guthrie" label="Tyrone Guthrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q104871" start="6134" end="6164" title="A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream" label="A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q129429" start="6206" end="6218" title="Vivien Leigh" label="Vivien Leigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q381285" start="6234" end="6250" title="Ralph Richardson" label="Ralph Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11716750" start="6703" end="6714" title="James Agate" label="James Agate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6828584" start="6873" end="6889" title="Michael Benthall" label="Michael Benthall"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="7006" end="7022" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157862" start="7677" end="7683" title="Comus (Milton)" label="Milton"/>
<link wikidata="Q243837" start="7718" end="7733" title="Ottorino Respighi" label="Respighi&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7718087" start="7740" end="7751" title="The Birds (Respighi)" label="Gli uccelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q6872473" start="7766" end="7788" title="Miracle in the Gorbals" label="Miracle in the Gorbals"/>
<link wikidata="Q508953" start="7861" end="7873" title="Arthur Bliss" label="Arthur Bliss"/>
<link wikidata="Q41567" start="7899" end="7905" title="Hamlet" label="Hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q692249" start="7919" end="7943" title="Hamlet (Tchaikovsky)" label="Tchaikovsky&amp;#x27;s music"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="7969" end="7972" title="RAF" label="RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q48438" start="8067" end="8079" title="Saint George" label="Saint George"/>
<link wikidata="Q310939" start="8095" end="8109" title="William Walton" label="William Walton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6099327" start="8438" end="8448" title="Ivor Brown" label="Ivor Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q49760" start="8587" end="8598" title="Peter Brook" label="Peter Brook"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089824" start="8888" end="8918" title="One of Our Aircraft is Missing" label="One of Our Aircraft is Missing"/>
<link wikidata="Q55245" start="8973" end="8989" title="Laurence Olivier" label="Laurence Olivier"/>
<link wikidata="Q268055" start="9003" end="9010" title="Henry V (1944 film)" label="Henry V"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240901" start="9048" end="9061" title="David Webster (opera manager)" label="David Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q55018" start="9099" end="9116" title="Royal Opera House" label="Royal Opera House"/>
<link wikidata="Q323283" start="9343" end="9359" title="The Royal Ballet" label="The Royal Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4266459" start="9364" end="9379" title="The Royal Opera" label="The Royal Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q4680005" start="9551" end="9560" title="Adam Zero" label="Adam Zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q13407143" start="9668" end="9676" title="Everyman" label="Everyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311299" start="9875" end="9890" title="Duchess Theatre" label="Duchess Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359589" start="9898" end="9906" title="West End theatre" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q225904" start="9946" end="9958" title="John Webster" label="John Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117565" start="9980" end="9995" title="The White Devil" label="The White Devil"/>
<link wikidata="Q310866" start="10153" end="10168" title="Leonid Andreyev" label="Leonid Andreyev"/>
<link wikidata="Q625780" start="10276" end="10289" title="The Red Shoes (1948 film)" label="The Red Shoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q359383" start="10310" end="10324" title="Leonid Massine" label="Leonid Massine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146254" start="10376" end="10412" title="Royal Shakespeare Company" label="Shakespeare Memorial Theatre Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q189288" start="10416" end="10435" title="Stratford-upon-Avon" label="Stratford-upon-Avon"/>
<link wikidata="Q661222" start="10489" end="10498" title="King John (play)" label="King John"/>
<link wikidata="Q206400" start="10523" end="10545" title="The Merchant of Venice" label="The Merchant of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q223988" start="10573" end="10586" title="Paul Scofield" label="Paul Scofield"/>
<link wikidata="Q19005" start="10737" end="10753" title="Madama Butterfly" label="Madama Butterfly"/>
<link wikidata="Q57288" start="10766" end="10787" title="Elisabeth Schwarzkopf" label="Elisabeth Schwarzkopf"/>
<link wikidata="Q7593475" start="10989" end="11012" title="St James&amp;#x27;s Theatre" label="St James&amp;#x27;s Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q606830" start="11060" end="11080" title="Antony and Cleopatra" label="Antony and Cleopatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q19185" start="11091" end="11095" title="George Bernard Shaw" label="Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501409" start="11109" end="11129" title="Caesar and Cleopatra (play)" label="Caesar and Cleopatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="11248" end="11256" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q56016" start="11398" end="11415" title="Katharine Hepburn" label="Katharine Hepburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7751488" start="11438" end="11455" title="The Millionairess (play)" label="The Millionairess"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400831" start="11505" end="11527" title="Powell and Pressburger" label="Powell and Pressburger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249349" start="11539" end="11560" title="The Tales of Hoffmann (film)" label="The Tales of Hoffmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q313714" start="11581" end="11599" title="Sir Thomas Beecham" label="Sir Thomas Beecham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947367" start="11849" end="11872" title="Murder in the Cathedral" label="Murder in the Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q116983" start="11884" end="11896" title="Robert Donat" label="Robert Donat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3797766" start="11911" end="11927" title="Coronation of Elizabeth II" label="Coronation night"/>
<link wikidata="Q199786" start="12029" end="12038" title="Swan Lake" label="Swan Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q579026" start="12123" end="12142" title="The Golden Cockerel" label="The Golden Cockerel"/>
<link wikidata="Q180896" start="12172" end="12188" title="Mattiwilda Dobbs" label="Mattiwilda Dobbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q663698" start="12190" end="12203" title="Hugues Cuénod" label="Hugues Cuénod"/>
<link wikidata="Q3103853" start="12208" end="12221" title="Geraint Evans" label="Geraint Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q86440" start="12309" end="12320" title="The Tempest" label="The Tempest"/>
<link wikidata="Q956867" start="12348" end="12363" title="Michael Hordern" label="Michael Hordern"/>
<link wikidata="Q151973" start="12377" end="12391" title="Richard Burton" label="Richard Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q235622" start="12407" end="12419" title="Claire Bloom" label="Claire Bloom"/>
<link wikidata="Q298388" start="12446" end="12457" title="Noël Coward" label="Noël Coward"/>
<link wikidata="Q4690612" start="12479" end="12493" title="After the Ball (musical)" label="After the Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q30875" start="12510" end="12521" title="Oscar Wilde" label="Oscar Wilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469224" start="12535" end="12561" title="Lady Windermere&amp;#x27;s Fan" label="Lady Windermere&amp;#x27;s Fan"/>
<link wikidata="Q332387" start="13003" end="13026" title="The Taming of the Shrew" label="The Taming of the Shrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q665446" start="13050" end="13069" title="Measure for Measure" label="Measure for Measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q721323" start="13124" end="13136" title="John Neville (actor)" label="John Neville"/>
<link wikidata="Q232042" start="13311" end="13338" title="The Two Gentlemen of Verona" label="The Two Gentlemen of Verona"/>
<link wikidata="Q272169" start="13365" end="13381" title="Titus Andronicus" label="Titus Andronicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q652011" start="13416" end="13427" title="Richard III (play)" label="Richard III"/>
<link wikidata="Q9364" start="13482" end="13498" title="Jean-Paul Sartre" label="Jean-Paul Sartre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3337889" start="13512" end="13521" title="Nekrassov" label="Nekrassov"/>
<link wikidata="Q7068357" start="13605" end="13621" title="Nude with Violin" label="Nude with Violin"/>
<link wikidata="Q204685" start="13668" end="13680" title="John Gielgud" label="John Gielgud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385992" start="13740" end="13755" title="Michael Wilding" label="Michael Wilding"/>
<link wikidata="Q942236" start="14115" end="14124" title="Petrushka" label="Petrushka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798800" start="14448" end="14467" title="La fille mal gardée" label="La fille mal gardée"/>
<link wikidata="Q264759" start="14514" end="14522" title="Mary Ure" label="Mary Ure"/>
<link wikidata="Q309974" start="14526" end="14540" title="Jean Giraudoux" label="Jean Giraudoux"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400400" start="14559" end="14573" title="Duel of Angels" label="Duel of Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q313554" start="14903" end="14917" title="Malcolm Arnold" label="Malcolm Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400484" start="14932" end="14944" title="Nadia Nerina" label="Nadia Nerina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231449" start="14946" end="14957" title="David Blair (dancer)" label="David Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900010" start="14959" end="14971" title="Monica Mason" label="Monica Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q15430932" start="14976" end="14989" title="Derek Rencher" label="Derek Rencher"/>
<link wikidata="Q244115" start="15186" end="15203" title="55 Days at Peking" label="55 Days at Peking"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374255" start="15220" end="15236" title="Peggy van Praagh" label="Peggy van Praagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872164" start="15299" end="15316" title="Australian Ballet" label="Australian Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320382" start="15480" end="15490" title="Erik Bruhn" label="Erik Bruhn"/>
<link wikidata="Q84217" start="15492" end="15506" title="Rudolf Nureyev" label="Rudolf Nureyev"/>
<link wikidata="Q7561688" start="15512" end="15523" title="Sonia Arova" label="Sonia Arova"/>
<link wikidata="Q214096" start="15659" end="15667" title="lyrebird" label="lyrebird"/>
<link wikidata="Q381031" start="15725" end="15737" title="Sidney Nolan" label="Sidney Nolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q644392" start="15777" end="15795" title="Malcolm Williamson" label="Malcolm Williamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7730355" start="15841" end="15852" title="The Display" label="The Display"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681709" start="15881" end="15898" title="Adelaide Festival" label="Adelaide Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q6376722" start="15919" end="15934" title="Kathleen Gorham" label="Kathleen Gorham"/>
<link wikidata="Q119980505" start="16020" end="16053" title="Half an Hour with Robert Helpmann" label="Half an Hour with Robert Helpmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820298" start="16146" end="16162" title="Lerner and Loewe" label="Lerner and Loewe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028491" start="16184" end="16191" title="Camelot (musical)" label="Camelot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195086" start="16446" end="16470" title="The Once and Future King" label="The Once and Future King"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117915" start="16600" end="16613" title="John Truscott" label="John Truscott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170124" start="17451" end="17473" title="The Quiller Memorandum" label="The Quiller Memorandum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3604059" start="17506" end="17519" title="Child Catcher" label="Child Catcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637791" start="17529" end="17552" title="Chitty Chitty Bang Bang" label="Chitty Chitty Bang Bang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146254" start="18534" end="18559" title="Royal Shakespeare Company" label="Royal Shakespeare Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q28054" start="18568" end="18578" title="Judi Dench" label="Judi Dench"/>
<link wikidata="Q432316" start="18583" end="18596" title="Donald Sinden" label="Donald Sinden"/>
<link wikidata="Q743194" start="18607" end="18629" title="The Winter&amp;#x27;s Tale" label="The Winter&amp;#x27;s Tale"/>
<link wikidata="Q221211" start="18646" end="18659" title="Twelfth Night" label="Twelfth Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q150767" start="18667" end="18683" title="Benjamin Britten" label="Benjamin Britten"/>
<link wikidata="Q449274" start="18688" end="18699" title="Peter Pears" label="Peter Pears"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054298" start="18712" end="18731" title="English Opera Group" label="English Opera Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q43332" start="18765" end="18772" title="Pompeii" label="Pompeii"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474490" start="18912" end="18940" title="Georgian State Dance Company" label="Georgian State Dance Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q312320" start="19142" end="19155" title="Marius Petipa" label="Marius Petipa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239463" start="19184" end="19195" title="Don Quixote (ballet)" label="Don Quixote"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410369" start="19757" end="19761" title="Drag (clothing)" label="drag"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120428" start="19805" end="19815" title="Cinderella (Ashton)" label="Cinderella"/>
<link wikidata="Q72410651" start="20200" end="20216" title="Elizabeth Salter" label="Elizabeth Salter"/>
<link wikidata="Q163596" start="20826" end="20856" title="Symphony No. 1 (Sibelius)" label="Sibelius&amp;#x27;s First Symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q7177792" start="21689" end="21701" title="Peter Wright (dancer)" label="Peter Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904531" start="21719" end="21751" title="Sadler&amp;#x27;s Wells Royal Ballet" label="Sadler&amp;#x27;s Wells Royal Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q183399" start="22155" end="22170" title="Financial Times" label="Financial Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q573159" start="22531" end="22545" title="Anthony Dowell" label="Anthony Dowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302" start="22675" end="22681" title="Handel" label="Handel"/>
<link wikidata="Q275627" start="22701" end="22707" title="Alcina" label="Alcina"/>
<link wikidata="Q60953" start="22741" end="22753" title="Lilli Palmer" label="Lilli Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4605" start="22780" end="22795" title="Sarah Bernhardt" label="Sarah Bernhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q10550541" start="23027" end="23043" title="Founders Theatre" label="Founders Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q117391370" start="23075" end="23089" title="Derek Williams (musician)" label="Derek Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q5049564" start="23130" end="23144" title="cast recording" label="cast recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q5040051" start="23157" end="23165" title="Carl Doy" label="Carl Doy"/>
<link wikidata="Q28180556" start="23190" end="23206" title="Mandrill Studios" label="Mandrill Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q5337954" start="23283" end="23297" title="Michael Edgley" label="Michael Edgley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180109" start="23370" end="23380" title="Joe Layton" label="Joe Layton"/>
<link wikidata="Q51337383" start="23454" end="23467" title="Derek Metzger" label="Derek Metzger"/>
<link wikidata="Q232876" start="23557" end="23567" title="Diana Rigg" label="Diana Rigg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587936" start="23571" end="23585" title="Harvey Schmidt" label="Harvey Schmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="23639" end="23646" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q654213" start="23785" end="23797" title="Sandy Wilson" label="Sandy Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q55636922" start="23811" end="23819" title="Valmouth (musical)" label="Valmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095994" start="23833" end="23852" title="Chichester Festival" label="Chichester Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q6074854" start="23854" end="23867" title="Irving Wardle" label="Irving Wardle"/>
<link wikidata="Q180278" start="24123" end="24129" title="Gounod" label="Gounod"/>
<link wikidata="Q918714" start="24149" end="24166" title="Roméo et Juliette" label="Roméo et Juliette"/>
<link wikidata="Q460660" start="24236" end="24241" title="Lord Alfred Douglas" label="Bosie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3190438" start="24245" end="24259" title="Justin Fleming (author)" label="Justin Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q30875" start="24278" end="24289" title="Oscar Wilde" label="Oscar Wilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278743" start="24319" end="24327" title="Mark Lee (Australian actor)" label="Mark Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q449070" start="24379" end="24393" title="Googie Withers" label="Googie Withers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182039" start="24398" end="24411" title="John McCallum (actor)" label="John McCallum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3517055" start="24426" end="24436" title="Ted Willis" label="Ted Willis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359414" start="24558" end="24576" title="A Country Practice" label="A Country Practice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354562" start="24717" end="24732" title="San Diego Opera" label="San Diego Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q45178" start="24750" end="24768" title="Sydney Opera House" label="Sydney Opera House"/>
<link wikidata="Q207269" start="24782" end="24797" title="Joan Sutherland" label="Joan Sutherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q170209" start="24801" end="24808" title="Vincenzo Bellini" label="Bellini"/>
<link wikidata="Q470886" start="24822" end="24832" title="I Puritani" label="I Puritani"/>
<link wikidata="Q188605" start="25009" end="25018" title="emphysema" label="emphysema"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088015" start="25122" end="25156" title="St Andrew&amp;#x27;s Cathedral, Sydney" label="St Andrew&amp;#x27;s Cathedral, Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q382118" start="25199" end="25222" title="Parliament of Australia" label="Parliament of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q783330" start="25231" end="25237" title="Australian Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7597591" start="25498" end="25510" title="Stan Collard" label="Stan Collard"/>
<link wikidata="Q783401" start="25929" end="25953" title="House of Representatives (Australia)" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q269372" start="25974" end="25983" title="Bob Hawke" label="Bob Hawke"/>
<link wikidata="Q385521" start="26279" end="26308" title="St Paul&amp;#x27;s, Covent Garden" label="St Paul&amp;#x27;s, Covent Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q153815" start="26376" end="26393" title="Princess Margaret" label="Princess Margaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q961142" start="26619" end="26648" title="Royal Order of the Polar Star" label="Royal Order of the Polar Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q93864" start="26687" end="26706" title="National Order of the Cedar" label="Knight of the Cedar"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="26735" end="26738" title="CBE" label="CBE"/>
<link wikidata="Q782788" start="26757" end="26779" title="Australian of the Year" label="Australian of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q833163" start="26808" end="26823" title="Knight Bachelor" label="Knight Bachelor"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="26843" end="26862" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="27655" end="27667" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q672680" start="27832" end="27866" title="Australian Dictionary of Biography" label="Australian Dictionary of Biography"/>
<link wikidata="Q266166" start="28254" end="28267" title="Moira Shearer" label="Moira Shearer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="28426" end="28444" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q5710291" start="28744" end="28760" title="Helpmann Academy" label="Helpmann Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168291" start="28849" end="28874" title="performing arts education" label="performing arts education"/>
<link wikidata="Q16842899" start="29000" end="29015" title="Helpmann Awards" label="Helpmann Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q7859979" start="29336" end="29348" title="Tyler Coppin" label="Tyler Coppin"/>
<link wikidata="Q441587" start="29522" end="29532" title="Wendy Toye" label="Wendy Toye"/>
<link wikidata="Q9695" start="29720" end="29733" title="Henry Purcell" label="Henry Purcell"/>
<link wikidata="Q731407" start="29746" end="29762" title="Constant Lambert" label="Constant Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q7730355" start="30491" end="30502" title="The Display" label="The Display"/>
<link wikidata="Q323475" start="30640" end="30651" title="Yuzo Toyama" label="Yuzo Toyama"/>
<link wikidata="Q924162" start="30761" end="30777" title="Peter Sculthorpe" label="Peter Sculthorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q45682" start="30885" end="30898" title="Jean Sibelius" label="Jean Sibelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q6615651" start="31019" end="31034" title="List of dancers" label="List of dancers"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="335157" wikidata="Q891094" url="?curid=335157" title="Memory-mapped I/O and port-mapped I/O">
<text>Memory-mapped I/O (MMIO) and port-mapped I/O (PMIO) are two complementary methods of performing input/output (I/O) between the central processing unit (CPU) and peripheral devices in a computer (often mediating access via chipset). An alternative approach is using dedicated I/O processors, commonly known as channels on mainframe computers, which execute their own instructions.

Memory-mapped I/O uses the same address space to address both main memory and I/O devices. The memory and registers of the I/O devices are mapped to (associated with) address values, so a memory address may refer to either a portion of physical RAM or to memory and registers of the I/O device. Thus, the CPU instructions used to access the memory (e.g. ) can also be used for accessing devices. Each I/O device either monitors the CPU&#x27;s address bus and responds to any CPU access of an address assigned to that device, connecting the system bus to the desired device&#x27;s hardware register, or uses a dedicated bus.

To accommodate the I/O devices, some areas of the address bus used by the CPU must be reserved for I/O and must not be available for normal physical memory; the range of addresses used for I/O devices is determined by the hardware. The reservation may be permanent, or temporary (as achieved via bank switching). An example of the latter is found in the Commodore 64, which uses a form of memory mapping to cause RAM or I/O hardware to appear in the codice_1–codice_2 range.

Port-mapped I/O often uses a special class of CPU instructions designed specifically for performing I/O, such as the codice_3 and codice_4 instructions found on microprocessors based on the x86 architecture. Different forms of these two instructions can copy one, two or four bytes (codice_5, codice_6 and codice_7, respectively) between the EAX register or one of that register&#x27;s subdivisions on the CPU and a specified I/O port address which is assigned to an I/O device. I/O devices have a separate address space from general memory, either accomplished by an extra &quot;I/O&quot; pin on the CPU&#x27;s physical interface, or an entire bus dedicated to I/O. Because the address space for I/O is isolated from that for main memory, this is sometimes referred to as isolated I/O. On the x86 architecture, index/data pair is often used for port-mapped I/O.

== Overview ==
Different CPU-to-device communication methods, such as memory mapping, do not affect the direct memory access (DMA) for a device, because, by definition, DMA is a memory-to-device communication method that bypasses the CPU.

Hardware interrupts are another communication method between the CPU and peripheral devices, however, for a number of reasons, interrupts are always treated separately. An interrupt is device-initiated, as opposed to the methods mentioned above, which are CPU-initiated. It is also unidirectional, as information flows only from device to CPU. Lastly, each interrupt line carries only one bit of information with a fixed meaning, namely &quot;an event that requires attention has occurred in a device on this interrupt line&quot;.

I/O operations can slow memory access if the address and data buses are shared. This is because the peripheral device is usually much slower than main memory. In some architectures, port-mapped I/O operates via a dedicated I/O bus, alleviating the problem.

One merit of memory-mapped I/O is that, by discarding the extra complexity that port I/O brings, a CPU requires less internal logic and is thus cheaper, faster, easier to build, consumes less power and can be physically smaller; this follows the basic tenets of reduced instruction set computing, and is also advantageous in embedded systems. The other advantage is that, because regular memory instructions are used to address devices, all of the CPU&#x27;s addressing modes are available for the I/O as well as the memory, and instructions that perform an ALU operation directly on a memory operand (loading an operand from a memory location, storing the result to a memory location, or both) can be used with I/O device registers as well. In contrast, port-mapped I/O instructions are often very limited, often providing only for simple load-and-store operations between CPU registers and I/O ports, so that, for example, to add a constant to a port-mapped device register would require three instructions: read the port to a CPU register, add the constant to the CPU register, and write the result back to the port.

As 16-bit processors have become obsolete and replaced with 32-bit and 64-bit in general use, reserving ranges of memory address space for I/O is less of a problem, as the memory address space of the processor is usually much larger than the required space for all memory and I/O devices in a system. Therefore, it has become more frequently practical to take advantage of the benefits of memory-mapped I/O. However, even with address space being no longer a major concern, neither I/O mapping method is universally superior to the other, and there will be cases where using port-mapped I/O is still preferable.

=== x86 ===
Memory-mapped I/O is preferred in IA-32 and x86-64 based architectures because the instructions that perform port-based I/O are limited to one register: EAX, AX, and AL are the only registers that data can be moved into or out of, and either a byte-sized immediate value in the instruction or a value in register DX determines which port is the source or destination port of the transfer. Since any general-purpose register can send or receive data to or from memory and memory-mapped I/O devices, memory-mapped I/O uses fewer instructions and can run faster than port I/O. AMD did not extend the port I/O instructions when defining the x86-64 architecture to support 64-bit ports, so 64-bit transfers cannot be performed using port I/O.

On newer Intel platforms beginning with 2008 5 series, I/O devices on the chipset directly communicate via a dedicated Direct Media Interface (DMI) bus.

== Memory barriers ==
Since the caches mediate accesses to memory addresses, data written to different addresses may reach the peripherals&#x27; memory or registers out of the program order, i.e. if software writes data to an address and then writes data to another address, the cache write buffer does not guarantee that the data will reach the peripherals in that order. Any program that does not include cache-flushing instructions after each write in the sequence may see unintended IO effects if a cache system optimizes the write order. Writes to memory can often be reordered to reduce redundancy or to make better use of memory access cycles without changing the final state of what got stored; whereas, the same optimizations might completely change the meaning and effect of writes to memory-mapped I/O regions.

Lack of foresight in the choice of memory-mapped I/O regions led to many of the RAM-capacity barriers in older generations of computers. Designers rarely expected machines to grow to make full use of an architecture&#x27;s theoretical RAM capacity, and thus often used some of the high-order bits of the address-space as selectors for memory-mapped I/O functions. For example, the 640 KB barrier in the IBM PC and derivatives is due to reserving the region between 640 and 1024 KB (64k segments 10 through 16) for the Upper Memory Area. This choice initially made little impact, but it eventually limited the total amount of RAM available within the 20-bit available address space. The 3 GB barrier and PCI hole are similar manifestations of this with 32-bit address spaces, exacerbated by details of the x86 boot process and MMU design. 64-bit architectures often technically have similar issues, but these only rarely have practical consequences.

== Examples ==
A simple system built around an 8-bit microprocessor might provide 16-bit address lines, allowing it to address up to 64 kibibytes (KiB) of memory. On such a system, the first 32 KiB of address space may be allotted to random access memory (RAM), another 16 KiB to read-only memory (ROM) and the remainder to a variety of other devices such as timers, counters, video display chips, sound generating devices, etc.

The hardware of the system is arranged so that devices on the address bus will only respond to particular addresses which are intended for them, while all other addresses are ignored. This is the job of the address decoding circuitry, and that establishes the memory map of the system. As a result, system&#x27;s memory map may look like in the table on the right. This memory map contains gaps, which is also quite common in actual system architectures.

Assuming the fourth register of the video controller sets the background colour of the screen, the CPU can set this colour by writing a value to the memory location A003 using its standard memory write instruction. Using the same method, graphs can be displayed on a screen by writing character values into a special area of RAM within the video controller. Prior to cheap RAM that enabled bit-mapped displays, this character cell method was a popular technique for computer video displays (see Text user interface).

== Basic types of address decoding ==
Address decoding types, in which a device may decode addresses completely or incompletely, include the following:

; Complete (exhaustive) decoding
: 1:1 mapping of unique addresses to one hardware register (physical memory location). Involves checking every line of the address bus.
; Incomplete (partial) decoding
: &quot;n&quot;:1 mapping of n unique addresses to one hardware register. Partial decoding allows a memory location to have more than one address, allowing the programmer to reference a memory location using n different addresses. It may also be done to simplify the decoding hardware by using simpler and often cheaper logic that examines only some address lines, when not all of the CPU&#x27;s address space is needed. Commonly, the decoding itself is programmable, so the system can reconfigure its own memory map as required, though this is a newer development and generally in conflict with the intent of being cheaper.
:Synonyms: foldback, multiply mapped, partially mapped, address aliasing.
; Linear decoding
: Address lines are used directly without any decoding logic. This is done with devices such as RAMs and ROMs that have a sequence of address inputs, and with peripheral chips that have a similar sequence of inputs for addressing a bank of registers. Linear addressing is rarely used alone (only when there are few devices on the bus, as using purely linear addressing for more than one device usually wastes a lot of address space) but instead is combined with one of the other methods to select a device or group of devices within which the linear addressing selects a single register or memory location.

== Port I/O via device drivers ==
In Windows-based computers, memory can also be accessed via specific drivers such as DOLLx8KD which gives I/O access in 8-, 16- and 32-bit on most Windows platforms starting from Windows 95 up to Windows 7. Installing I/O port drivers will ensure memory access by activating the drivers with simple DLL calls allowing port I/O and when not needed, the driver can be closed to prevent unauthorized access to the I/O ports.

Linux provides the utility to allow reading from and writing to MMIO addresses. The Linux kernel also allows tracing MMIO access from kernel modules (drivers) using the kernel&#x27;s &quot;mmiotrace&quot; debug facility. To enable this, the Linux kernel should be compiled with the corresponding option enabled. &quot;mmiotrace&quot; is used for debugging closed-source device drivers.

== See also ==
* Programmed input–output
* mmap, not to be confused with memory-mapped I/O
* Memory-mapped file
* Early examples of computers with port-mapped I/O
** PDP-8
** Nova
* PDP-11, an early example of a computer architecture using memory-mapped I/O
** Unibus, a memory and I/O bus used by the PDP-11
* Bank switching
* Ralf Brown&#x27;s Interrupt List
* Coprocessor
* Direct memory access
* Advanced Configuration and Power Interface (ACPI)
* Speculative execution CPU vulnerabilities

== Notes ==
== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q891094" start="0" end="17" title="Memory-mapped I/O and port-mapped I/O" label="Memory-mapped I/O"/>
<link wikidata="Q891094" start="19" end="23" title="Memory-mapped I/O and port-mapped I/O" label="MMIO"/>
<link wikidata="Q891094" start="29" end="44" title="Memory-mapped I/O and port-mapped I/O" label="port-mapped I/O"/>
<link wikidata="Q891094" start="46" end="50" title="Memory-mapped I/O and port-mapped I/O" label="PMIO"/>
<link wikidata="Q219320" start="96" end="108" title="input/output" label="input/output"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="127" end="150" title="central processing unit" label="central processing unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q178648" start="161" end="178" title="peripheral device" label="peripheral device"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="185" end="193" title="computer" label="computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q182656" start="222" end="229" title="chipset" label="chipset"/>
<link wikidata="Q844006" start="309" end="317" title="channel I/O" label="channels"/>
<link wikidata="Q177234" start="321" end="339" title="mainframe computer" label="mainframe computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q272683" start="366" end="377" title="instruction (computer science)" label="instruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q891094" start="381" end="398" title="Memory-mapped I/O and port-mapped I/O" label="Memory-mapped I/O"/>
<link wikidata="Q367204" start="413" end="426" title="address space" label="address space"/>
<link wikidata="Q66221" start="443" end="454" title="main memory" label="main memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q219320" start="459" end="469" title="I/O device" label="I/O device"/>
<link wikidata="Q187466" start="487" end="495" title="register (computing)" label="register"/>
<link wikidata="Q66221" start="617" end="629" title="physical memory" label="physical RAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2377054" start="921" end="931" title="system bus" label="system bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351510" start="961" end="978" title="hardware register" label="hardware register"/>
<link wikidata="Q806652" start="1302" end="1316" title="bank switching" label="bank switching"/>
<link wikidata="Q99775" start="1360" end="1372" title="Commodore 64" label="Commodore 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295" start="1419" end="1422" title="random-access memory" label="RAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q891094" start="1482" end="1497" title="Memory-mapped I/O and port-mapped I/O" label="Port-mapped I/O"/>
<link wikidata="Q182933" start="1672" end="1675" title="x86" label="x86"/>
<link wikidata="Q182933" start="1824" end="1836" title="EAX register" label="EAX register"/>
<link wikidata="Q178048" start="2127" end="2130" title="computer bus" label="bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q210813" start="2450" end="2470" title="direct memory access" label="direct memory access"/>
<link wikidata="Q220764" start="2595" end="2604" title="interrupt" label="interrupt"/>
<link wikidata="Q8805" start="2975" end="2978" title="bit" label="bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q189376" start="3638" end="3671" title="RISC" label="reduced instruction set computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q193040" start="3701" end="3716" title="embedded system" label="embedded system"/>
<link wikidata="Q192903" start="3934" end="3937" title="Arithmetic logic unit" label="ALU"/>
<link wikidata="Q194368" start="4500" end="4506" title="16-bit" label="16-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q225147" start="4557" end="4563" title="32-bit" label="32-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q252132" start="4568" end="4574" title="64-bit" label="64-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q262238" start="5156" end="5161" title="IA-32" label="IA-32"/>
<link wikidata="Q272629" start="5166" end="5172" title="x86-64" label="x86-64"/>
<link wikidata="Q128896" start="5696" end="5699" title="AMD" label="AMD"/>
<link wikidata="Q272629" start="5759" end="5765" title="x86-64" label="x86-64"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665543" start="5906" end="5914" title="Intel 5 Series" label="5 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195515" start="5980" end="6002" title="Direct Media Interface" label="Direct Media Interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q165596" start="6047" end="6053" title="Cache (computing)" label="caches"/>
<link wikidata="Q8038418" start="6300" end="6312" title="write buffer" label="write buffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q875051" start="6422" end="6436" title="Memory barrier" label="cache-flushing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7219" end="7233" title="640 KB barrier" label="640 KB barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323962" start="7356" end="7373" title="Upper Memory Area" label="Upper Memory Area"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7524" end="7536" title="3 GB barrier" label="3 GB barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q17148462" start="7541" end="7549" title="PCI hole" label="PCI hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q182933" start="7643" end="7646" title="x86" label="x86"/>
<link wikidata="Q518020" start="7664" end="7667" title="Memory management unit" label="MMU"/>
<link wikidata="Q270159" start="7835" end="7840" title="8-bit" label="8-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297" start="7841" end="7855" title="microprocessor" label="microprocessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q8799" start="7924" end="7932" title="kibibyte" label="kibibyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295" start="8022" end="8042" title="random access memory" label="random access memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q160710" start="8068" end="8084" title="read-only memory" label="read-only memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q367037" start="8425" end="8451" title="address decoder" label="address decoding circuitry"/>
<link wikidata="Q719484" start="8478" end="8488" title="memory map" label="memory map"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295" start="9047" end="9050" title="Random access memory" label="RAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194708" start="9064" end="9083" title="bitmap" label="bit-mapped displays"/>
<link wikidata="Q184752" start="9169" end="9188" title="Text user interface" label="Text user interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q178048" start="9501" end="9512" title="address bus" label="address bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q127046" start="10235" end="10243" title="Aliasing (computing)" label="aliasing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328317" start="11732" end="11755" title="Programmed input–output" label="Programmed input–output"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935626" start="11758" end="11762" title="mmap" label="mmap"/>
<link wikidata="Q657179" start="11808" end="11826" title="Memory-mapped file" label="Memory-mapped file"/>
<link wikidata="Q911888" start="11881" end="11886" title="PDP-8" label="PDP-8"/>
<link wikidata="Q4134229" start="11890" end="11894" title="Data General Nova" label="Nova"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327833" start="11897" end="11903" title="PDP-11" label="PDP-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071236" start="11976" end="11982" title="Unibus" label="Unibus"/>
<link wikidata="Q806652" start="12026" end="12040" title="Bank switching" label="Bank switching"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349048" start="12043" end="12075" title="Ralf Brown&amp;#x27;s Interrupt List" label="Ralf Brown&amp;#x27;s Interrupt List"/>
<link wikidata="Q859595" start="12078" end="12089" title="Coprocessor" label="Coprocessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q210813" start="12092" end="12112" title="Direct memory access" label="Direct memory access"/>
<link wikidata="Q379523" start="12115" end="12157" title="Advanced Configuration and Power Interface" label="Advanced Configuration and Power Interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q65045107" start="12167" end="12208" title="Speculative execution CPU vulnerabilities" label="Speculative execution CPU vulnerabilities"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="335162" wikidata="Q629525" url="?curid=335162" title="Bonaparte's gull">
<text>Bonaparte&#x27;s gull (Chroicocephalus philadelphia) is a member of the gull family Laridae found mainly in northern North America. At in length, it is one of the smallest species of gull. Its plumage is mainly white with grey upperparts. During breeding season, Bonaparte&#x27;s gull gains a slaty-black hood. The sexes are similar in appearance.

== Taxonomy and etymology ==

When George Ord first described Bonaparte&#x27;s gull in 1815, he gave it the scientific name &quot;Sterna philadelphia&quot;, and the English name &#x27;Banded-tail Tern&#x27;; the description clearly identifies it as a bird in first-winter plumage, while &quot;The slender and tern-like form of the bill probably induced Mr. Ord to put it in &quot;Sterna&quot;&quot;. Most later taxonomists assigned it to the genus &quot;Larus&quot;, a longtime catch-all for most of the gull species. However, in 1858, George Newbold Lawrence moved the species to the genus &quot;Chroicocephalus&quot;, and some taxonomists followed suit. Subsequent molecular DNA studies have shown that this species fits neatly into a clade with other &quot;Chroicocephalus&quot; &quot;hooded&quot; gulls, and that it is in a close-to-basal position in that grouping. Based on these studies, the American Ornithologists&#x27; Union, which had previously assigned the species to the genus &quot;Larus&quot;, restored it to &quot;Chroicocephalus&quot; in 2008. It is monotypic across its range.

The species is named after Charles Lucien Bonaparte, a French ornithologist (and nephew to the former French emperor Napoleon Bonaparte) who spent eight years in America, contributing to the understanding of the taxonomy and nomenclature of birds there and elsewhere. Its genus name, &quot;Chroicocephalus&quot;, is a combination of the Greek words , an adjective form of meaning &quot;colour&quot;, and meaning &quot;head&quot;. This refers to the dark heads that most gulls in this genus show during the breeding season. The specific epithet &quot;philadelphia&quot; is a Latinized adjective meaning &quot;from Philadelphia&quot;, a reference to the location from which the type specimen was collected.

== Description ==
Bonaparte&#x27;s gull is among the smallest of the gull species; only little gull and Saunders&#x27;s gull are smaller. Adults range from in length, with a wingspan of and a weight of . There is no difference in plumage or bare part colour between the sexes, though males tend to be heavier than females. Bonaparte&#x27;s gull is smaller-bodied, smaller-headed, and smaller-billed than the other common hooded gulls of North America. The adult has grey upperparts and white underparts, with, unlike other &quot;Chroicocephalus&quot; gulls, the grey extending up the rear of the neck to just below the head; its wingtips are black and white striped above with the outer four primary feathers white with a black tip, and the other primary feathers grey with a black tip; the whole wing is very pale below. In breeding plumage, it has a slaty black hood, which it loses in non-breeding plumage. Its short, thin bill is black, and its legs are pinkish-red in winter, orangish-red in summer.

The juvenile plumage, usually only seen on the breeding grounds, is scalloped brown on the back, and patchy brown on the head; they moult into first-winter plumage in August mostly before migrating south. First year birds are more like the adults with a grey back, but retain a brown bar across the forewing, blackish tips to the secondary feathers, and a black tip to the tail; they have the same plumage in winter and the following summer, but the summer plumage is paler due to wear and fading. Fewer than 5 percent of Bonaparte&#x27;s gulls acquire a dark hood in their first summer, and on those that do, the hood is duller than on breeding adults. Two-year old birds mostly gain full adult plumage, but a few retain signs of immaturity such as brown spots on the forewing and dark tips to some of the tail feathers.

The most similar potential confusion species is the Old World black-headed gull, which each being a regular, though scarce or rare, winter visitor within the wintering range of the other. They can best be distinguished by the smaller size of Bonaparte&#x27;s gull, its slenderer, darker bill, pale grey rear of the neck, pinker legs, and in flight, by the conspicuously whiter underwing, lacking the dark uderside of the primary feathers of black-headed gull. Little gull can also be confused in immature plumages; it is even smaller than Bonaparte&#x27;s gull, and the dark bar on the forewing of year-old birds is black, not dark brown. Adult little gulls, with their uniform pale grey upperwing and blackish underwing, are far less likely to be confused.

== Distribution and habitat ==
Bonaparte&#x27;s gull breeds in boreal forest across southern Alaska and much of interior western Canada, as far east as central Quebec and south to within of the Canada – United States border. It avoids dense stands of conifers, instead choosing more open areas, such as the treed edges of bogs, fens, marshes, ponds, or islands. It typically nests within of open water. It winters along the coasts of North America, and in the Great Lakes.

===Vagrancy===
It is a rare but annual visitor to western Europe and the Azores, where it generally associates with black-headed gulls. In Great Britain, the number of records increased from averages of six per year at the start of the 21st century to around 12 per year by 2018–2022; the reason for this increase is unknown. Individuals often return to particular sites over a number of years; one at Bamburgh in Northumberland returned for its 12th autumn in 2024. In 2017 a breeding pair was found in northwestern Iceland. Bonaparte&#x27;s gull is an occasional non-breeding vagrant to the Hawaiian Islands, and vagrants have also been recorded west to Japan and south to Brazil and Senegal.

== Behaviour ==
They are migratory and most move southeast or southwest to coastal waters, also the Great Lakes. They are graceful in flight, more like terns than most other gulls.

=== Feeding ===
Like most gulls, Bonaparte&#x27;s gull has a varied diet, with prey items changing over the course of the year, and from year to year. During the breeding season, it is largely insectivorous. It is known to quickly congregate in large numbers to take advantage of termite dispersal flights, circling over the emerging swarm and hovering briefly to take the insects in flight. It also gathers in large numbers to feed on the eggs of spawning salmon, alighting on the water and, if necessary, diving to take drifting eggs. During migration and into the winter, insects are first supplemented, then replaced by other food items, including fish, small crustaceans, mollusks, euphausiids, marine worms, and other invertebrates. At least one immature bird has been recorded as having fed on walnut meat. Bonaparte&#x27;s gulls are known to engage in kleptoparasitism, and have been observed stealing earthworms from foraging dunlins and black-bellied plovers.

=== Breeding ===

Bonaparte&#x27;s gulls begin breeding at two years of age; they are thought to be monogamous. The breeding season begins in mid-June. Courting pairs perform swooping display flights, calling loudly and diving at each other, and then drop down to perch on a branch. Crouched and facing each other, with neck and crown feathers erected and wings slightly raised, they scream at each other with bills opened wide, bobbing up and down as they do so. This display can continue for several minutes before ending abruptly; afterwards, the birds may sit quietly together for some time before separating again.

They raise a single per year, nesting singly or in loose colonies of , with nests spaced at least apart. Unlike most other gulls, Bonaparte&#x27;s gulls typically nest in trees — almost exclusively conifers, most often black spruce, but also northern whitecedar, tamarack and jack pine. Both sexes help to build the nest, which is a platform of small sticks, sometimes with lichen, moss or marsh vegetation added, measuring about in diameter. Most nests are placed above the ground, and within of open water, though they have been found low as , as high as , and as far as from open water. They are only rarely placed on the ground, except in the far north where trees are absent. Adults are aggressive in defending their nests, chasing away even large potential predators such as hawks, common ravens and humans. There is some evidence that human activity in the area of their nests may cause decreased productivity — they are known to travel as far as a kilometre (about a half mile) to mob people, — but, contrarily, some choose to nest near human habitation.
The female lays a clutch of , with most nests containing . The eggs are , slightly glossy and smooth, measuring and weighing . They range in colour from pale to medium green, olive or buff, and may be variably marked with spots, blotches, or scrawls of brown, grey, violet, or black; these markings may be fine and evenly distributed over the entire surface of the egg, or thick and concentrated towards the egg&#x27;s larger end. The eggs are incubated by both parents for . Studies have shown that breeding populations can be significantly impacted by bad weather. In one multi-year study in Churchill, Manitoba, more than half of the eggs laid in observed nests were blown out of those nests during storms; only 42% of eggs survived to hatching.

Hatchling Bonaparte&#x27;s gulls are semi-precocial, emerging from their eggs covered with natal down feathers, and with eyes already opened. The down is yellowish-buff, greyer on the flanks and belly, and somewhat pinkish on the breast, with dark brown mottling on the upperparts and head. The bill is blue-black with a pinkish base, and the legs and feet are pinkish-buff. Young birds typically leave the nest within of hatching, jumping out and following their parents to the nearest open water. Both parents tend the young. The time it takes the young to fledge is unknown. Bonaparte&#x27;s gulls may live to 18 years.

=== Voice ===

Bonaparte&#x27;s gull has a voice described as nasal and raspy, with calls variously transcribed as or .

== Conservation ==
Because of its extremely large range and its increasing population, Bonaparte&#x27;s gull is listed as a species of least concern by the International Union for Conservation of Nature. In North America, it is protected by the Migratory Bird Treaty Act. Because it occurs in Europe and Africa only as a vagrant, it is not protected by the Agreement on the Conservation of African-Eurasian Migratory Waterbirds.

The species is known to be preyed upon by peregrine falcons.

Like many birds, it hosts a number of internal and external parasites. The linguatulid species &quot;Reighardia sternae&quot;, a tiny, worm-like crustacean, is sometimes found in the gull&#x27;s air sacs. The acanthocephala worm &quot;Corynosoma bipapillum&quot; is sometimes found in the bird&#x27;s posterior gut, as is the intestinal worm &quot;Echinostomum spinulosum&quot;. &quot;Gigantobilharzia lawayi&quot;, a schistosome (or blood fluke) may be carried in the capillaries. Externally, it is known to carry several species of lice, including &quot;Actornithophilus funebre&quot;, &quot;Degeeriella atrimarginata&quot;, &quot;Degeeriella punctata&quot;, &quot;Menopon&quot; species, and &quot;Philopterus gonothorax&quot;.

==References==
==External links==
* 
* 
* 
* Bonaparte&#x27;s gull - &quot;Larus philadelphia&quot; - USGS Patuxent Bird Identification InfoCenter
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q629525" start="0" end="21" title="Bonaparte&amp;#x27;s gull" label="Bonaparte&amp;#x27;s gull"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="117" end="130" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385674" start="384" end="394" title="George Ord" label="George Ord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887740" start="803" end="808" title="Larus" label="Larus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41530" start="885" end="908" title="George Newbold Lawrence" label="George Newbold Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q135851" start="946" end="961" title="Chroicocephalus" label="Chroicocephalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q379061" start="1186" end="1191" title="basal (phylogenetics)" label="basal"/>
<link wikidata="Q465985" start="1247" end="1282" title="American Ornithologists&amp;#x27; Union" label="American Ornithologists&amp;#x27; Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q310890" start="1416" end="1425" title="monotypic" label="monotypic"/>
<link wikidata="Q157521" start="1472" end="1496" title="Charles Lucien Bonaparte" label="Charles Lucien Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q44703" start="1507" end="1520" title="ornithologist" label="ornithologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="1562" end="1580" title="Napoleon Bonaparte" label="Napoleon Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="1782" end="1787" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q908437" start="1972" end="1988" title="specific epithet (zoology)" label="specific epithet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806983" start="2019" end="2028" title="Latinisation of names" label="Latinized"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="2058" end="2070" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707858" start="2121" end="2134" title="type specimen" label="type specimen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699803" start="2220" end="2224" title="gull" label="gull"/>
<link wikidata="Q164467" start="2239" end="2250" title="little gull" label="little gull"/>
<link wikidata="Q22062067" start="2255" end="2275" title="Saunders&amp;#x27;s gull" label="Saunders&amp;#x27;s gull"/>
<link wikidata="Q381084" start="3289" end="3294" title="moulting" label="moult"/>
<link wikidata="Q25634" start="4042" end="4059" title="black-headed gull" label="black-headed gull"/>
<link wikidata="Q164467" start="4440" end="4451" title="Little gull" label="Little gull"/>
<link wikidata="Q69564" start="4802" end="4815" title="boreal forest" label="boreal forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="4832" end="4838" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="4868" end="4874" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="4899" end="4905" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681353" start="5061" end="5064" title="bog" label="bog"/>
<link wikidata="Q514050" start="5067" end="5070" title="fen" label="fen"/>
<link wikidata="Q25263" start="5286" end="5292" title="Azores" label="Azores"/>
<link wikidata="Q25634" start="5329" end="5346" title="black-headed gull" label="black-headed gull"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="5352" end="5365" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q805983" start="5615" end="5623" title="Bamburgh" label="Bamburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="5730" end="5737" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q192626" start="5806" end="5822" title="Hawaiian Islands" label="Hawaiian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="5869" end="5874" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="5888" end="5894" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041" start="5899" end="5906" title="Senegal" label="Senegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q216507" start="5934" end="5943" title="bird migration" label="migratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347" start="6009" end="6020" title="Great Lakes" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q33140745" start="6061" end="6066" title="terns" label="terns"/>
<link wikidata="Q677088" start="6284" end="6297" title="insectivorous" label="insectivorous"/>
<link wikidata="Q546583" start="6371" end="6378" title="termite" label="termite"/>
<link wikidata="Q131747027" start="6539" end="6547" title="spawning" label="spawning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796766" start="6548" end="6554" title="salmon" label="salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q29498" start="6778" end="6788" title="euphausiid" label="euphausiid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479109" start="6951" end="6967" title="kleptoparasitism" label="kleptoparasitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q26650" start="7026" end="7032" title="dunlin" label="dunlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q18835" start="7038" end="7058" title="black-bellied plover" label="black-bellied plover"/>
<link wikidata="Q6901585" start="7162" end="7172" title="monogamy in animals" label="monogamous"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368963" start="7740" end="7748" title="bird colony" label="colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137226" start="7759" end="7764" title="bird nest" label="nests"/>
<link wikidata="Q218425" start="7902" end="7914" title="Picea mariana" label="black spruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q147468" start="7925" end="7944" title="Thuja occidentalis" label="northern whitecedar"/>
<link wikidata="Q734085" start="7946" end="7954" title="Larix laricina" label="tamarack"/>
<link wikidata="Q806838" start="7959" end="7968" title="Pinus banksiana" label="jack pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q43142" start="8057" end="8063" title="lichen" label="lichen"/>
<link wikidata="Q170430" start="8446" end="8454" title="predator" label="predator"/>
<link wikidata="Q846664" start="8464" end="8468" title="hawk" label="hawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q25357" start="8471" end="8483" title="common raven" label="common raven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588716" start="8672" end="8675" title="Mobbing (animal behavior)" label="mob"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750820" start="8764" end="8770" title="clutch (eggs)" label="clutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q954226" start="9190" end="9199" title="avian incubation" label="incubated"/>
<link wikidata="Q744553" start="9340" end="9359" title="Churchill, Manitoba" label="Churchill, Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9533" end="9547" title="bird#Parental care and fledging" label="semi-precocial"/>
<link wikidata="Q953515" start="9587" end="9597" title="natal down" label="natal down"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914884" start="10055" end="10061" title="fledge" label="fledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q211005" start="10376" end="10389" title="least concern" label="least concern"/>
<link wikidata="Q48268" start="10397" end="10443" title="International Union for Conservation of Nature" label="International Union for Conservation of Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740106" start="10486" end="10511" title="Migratory Bird Treaty Act" label="Migratory Bird Treaty Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q321961" start="10598" end="10668" title="Agreement on the Conservation of African-Eurasian Migratory Waterbirds" label="Agreement on the Conservation of African-Eurasian Migratory Waterbirds"/>
<link wikidata="Q30535" start="10713" end="10729" title="peregrine falcon" label="peregrine falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q222975" start="10808" end="10819" title="Linguatulida" label="linguatulid"/>
<link wikidata="Q6554401" start="10834" end="10852" title="Reighardia sternae" label="Reighardia sternae"/>
<link wikidata="Q178235" start="10942" end="10956" title="acanthocephala" label="acanthocephala"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095142" start="11151" end="11162" title="Schistosomatidae" label="schistosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q103142" start="11202" end="11213" title="capillaries" label="capillaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q3764933" start="11267" end="11271" title="bird louse" label="lice"/>
<link wikidata="Q13654726" start="11289" end="11305" title="Actornithophilus" label="Actornithophilus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18095959" start="11400" end="11407" title="Menopon" label="Menopon"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="335164" wikidata="Q7565141" url="?curid=335164" title="Source-code compatibility">
<text>Source-code compatibility (source-compatible) means that a program can run on computers (or operating systems), independently of binary-code compatibility and that the source code is needed for portability.

The source code must be compiled before running, unless the computer used has an interpreter for the language at hand. The term is also used for assembly language compatibility, where the source is a human-readable form of machine code that must be converted into numerical (i.e. executable) machine code by an assembler. This is different from binary-code compatibility, where no recompilation (or assembly) is needed.

Source compatibility is a major issue in the developing of computer programs. For example, most Unix systems are source-compatible, as long as one uses only standard libraries. Microsoft Windows systems are source-compatible across one major family (the Windows NT family, from NT 3.1 through Windows 11, or the family that includes Windows 95, Windows 98, and Windows Me), with partial source compatibility between the two families.

== See also ==
* Backward compatibility
* Source upgrade

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7565141" start="0" end="25" title="Source-code compatibility" label="Source-code compatibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="78" end="87" title="central processing unit" label="computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="92" end="108" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q13912071" start="129" end="154" title="binary-code compatibility" label="binary-code compatibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q128751" start="168" end="179" title="source code" label="source code"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080428" start="194" end="205" title="Software portability" label="portability"/>
<link wikidata="Q47506" start="232" end="240" title="compiler" label="compiled"/>
<link wikidata="Q183065" start="289" end="300" title="Interpreter (computing)" label="interpreter"/>
<link wikidata="Q165436" start="353" end="370" title="assembly language" label="assembly language"/>
<link wikidata="Q372222" start="408" end="422" title="human-readable" label="human-readable"/>
<link wikidata="Q55813" start="431" end="443" title="machine code" label="machine code"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="519" end="528" title="Assembly language#Assembler" label="assembler"/>
<link wikidata="Q13912071" start="553" end="578" title="binary-code compatibility" label="binary-code compatibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="725" end="729" title="Unix" label="Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q188860" start="795" end="804" title="library (computing)" label="libraries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="806" end="823" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q486487" start="883" end="893" title="Windows NT" label="Windows NT"/>
<link wikidata="Q748319" start="907" end="913" title="Windows NT 3.1" label="NT 3.1"/>
<link wikidata="Q107269746" start="922" end="932" title="Windows 11" label="Windows 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q83370" start="962" end="972" title="Windows 95" label="Windows 95"/>
<link wikidata="Q483132" start="974" end="984" title="Windows 98" label="Windows 98"/>
<link wikidata="Q484892" start="990" end="1000" title="Windows Me" label="Windows Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q844605" start="1081" end="1103" title="Backward compatibility" label="Backward compatibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q7565166" start="1106" end="1120" title="Source upgrade" label="Source upgrade"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="335165" wikidata="Q389096" url="?curid=335165" title="Gavin Douglas">
<text>Gavin Douglas (c. 1474 – September 1522) was a Scottish bishop, makar and translator. Although he had an important political career, he is chiefly remembered for his poetry. His main pioneering achievement was the &quot;Eneados&quot;, a full and faithful vernacular translation of the &quot;Aeneid&quot; of Virgil into Scots, and the first successful example of its kind in any Anglic language. Other extant poetry of his includes &quot;Palice of Honour&quot;, and possibly &quot;King Hart&quot;.

==Life and career==
===Early life===
Gavin (or Gawin, Gawane, Gawain) Douglas was born c. 1474–76, at Tantallon Castle, East Lothian, the third son of Archibald, 5th Earl of Angus by his second wife Elizabeth Boyd. A Vatican register records that Gavin Douglas was 13 in 1489, suggesting he was born in 1476. An application had been lodged to award Gavin the right to hold a Church canonry or prebend and enjoy its income. Another appeal to Rome concerning church appointments made in February 1495 states his age as 20.

He was a student at St Andrews University in 1489–94, and thereafter, it is supposed, at Paris. He chiefly studied Aristotle&#x27;s Logic, Physics, Natural Philosophy, and Metaphysics. in 1492 he received his bachelor&#x27;s degree, and in 1496 was named among the &quot;Licentiati&quot;, or Masters of Arts, which was regarded at the time as an advanced academic degree. In 1496 he obtained the living of Monymusk, Aberdeenshire, and later he became parson of Lynton (modern East Linton) and rector of Hauch (modern Prestonkirk), in East Lothian. About 1501 he was preferred to the deanery or provostship of the collegiate church of St Giles, Edinburgh, which he held with his parochial charges.

===Early career===
Until the Battle of Flodden in September 1513, Gavin Douglas appears to have been occupied with his ecclesiastical duties and literary work. Indeed, all the extant writings by which he has earned his place as a poet and translator belong to this period. After the disaster at Flodden he was completely absorbed in public business.

Before the crisis of 1513, Douglas was a friend and correspondent of many of the internationally renowned men of his age, including Polydore Vergil, John Major, Cardinal Wolsey and Henry, 3rd Lord Sinclair. Because of his powerful family connections and role in high public life, he is the best-documented of the early Scottish makars. Indeed, of poets in the British Isles before him, only the biography of Chaucer is as well documented or understood. All his literary work was composed before his 40th year while he was Provost of St Giles in Edinburgh. Douglas&#x27;s literary work was composed in a highly polished Middle Scots, often aureate in style. After the &quot;Eneados&quot; he is not known to have produced any further poetry, despite being at the height of his artistic powers when it was completed in 1513, six weeks before the Battle of Flodden. No more than four of works by him are known to exist; &quot;The Palice of Honour&quot;, &quot;Conscience&quot;, his major translation the &quot;Eneados&quot;, and possibly &quot;King Hart&quot;.
While Provost of St Giles, in 1510 Gavin applied to the Pope for permission to celebrate the marriages of couples who were related within the limits and degrees proscribed by the Church. Gavin argued that these marriages helped to make peace in Scotland, and the long delay in receiving a dispensation from Rome in each case, which was a formality, was inconvenient and unnecessary. Gavin asked to be allowed to conduct ten such marriages over four years.

===Career during the minority of James V===
After the Battle of Flodden, during the minority of James V of Scotland, the Douglas family assumed a pivotal role in public affairs. Three weeks after the Battle of Flodden Gavin Douglas, still Provost of St Giles, was admitted a burgess of Edinburgh. His father, the &quot;Great Earl&quot;, was then the civil provost of the capital. The Earl died soon afterwards in January 1514 in Wigtownshire, where he had gone as justiciar. As his son had been killed at Flodden, the succession fell to Gavin&#x27;s nephew, Archibald Douglas, 6th Earl of Angus.

The marriage of the young Earl of Angus to James IV&#x27;s widow, Margaret Tudor, on 6 August 1514 did much to identify the Douglases with the English party in Scotland, as against the French party led by the Duke of Albany, and incidentally to determine the political career of his uncle Gavin. During the first weeks of the Queen&#x27;s sorrow after the battle, Gavin, with one or two colleagues of the council, acted as personal adviser, and it may be taken for granted that he supported the pretensions of the young earl. His own hopes of preferment had been strengthened by the death of many of the higher clergy at Flodden.

The first outcome for Gavin from the new family connection was his appointment to the Abbacy of Aberbrothwick by the Queen Regent, as Margaret Tudor was before her marriage, probably in June 1514. Soon after the marriage of Angus to Margaret she nominated him Archbishop of St Andrews, in succession to William Elphinstone, archbishop-designate. But John Hepburn, prior of St Andrews, having obtained the vote of the chapter, expelled him, and was himself in turn expelled by Andrew Forman, Bishop of Moray, who had been nominated by the Pope. In the interval, Douglas&#x27;s rights in Aberbrothwick had been transferred to James Beaton, Archbishop of Glasgow, and he was now without title or temporality. The breach between the Queen&#x27;s party and Albany&#x27;s had widened, and the Queen&#x27;s advisers had begun an intrigue with England, to the end that the royal widow and her young son should be removed to Henry&#x27;s court. In those deliberations Gavin Douglas took an active part, and for this reason stimulated the opposition which successfully thwarted his preferment.

Gavin Douglas became heavily involved in affairs of state, seeking a dominant role as one of the Lords of Council and bidding to attain one or more of the many sees, including the archbishopric of St Andrews, left vacant in the destructive aftermath of the Scottish defeat. He finally obtained the bishopric of Dunkeld in 1516, but only after a bitter struggle.

In 1517, in his more settled public position, Douglas was one of the leading members of the embassy to Francis I which negotiated the Treaty of Rouen, but his role in the volatile politics of the period, mainly centring on control over the minority of James V, was deeply contentious. By late 1517 he had managed to earn the enduring hostility of the Queen Mother, a former ally, and in subsequent years became manifestly involved in political manœuvring against the Regent Albany. At the same time he remained ambitious for the St Andrews archbishopric, which fell vacant once again in 1521. His career was cut short when he died suddenly during a brief period in exile in London.

===Bishop of Dunkeld===

In January 1515 on the death of George Brown, Bishop of Dunkeld, Douglas&#x27;s hopes revived. The queen nominated him to the now vacant seat, which he ultimately obtained, though not without trouble. For John Stewart, 2nd Earl of Atholl had forced his brother, Andrew Stewart, prebendary of Craig, upon the chapter, and had put him in possession of the bishop&#x27;s palace. The queen appealed to the pope and was seconded by her brother of England, with the result that the Pope&#x27;s sanction was obtained on 18 February 1515. Some of the correspondence of Douglas and his friends incident to this transaction was intercepted. When Albany came from France and assumed the regency, these documents and the &quot;purchase&quot; of the bishopric from Rome contrary to statute were made the basis of an attack on Douglas, who was imprisoned in Edinburgh Castle, thereafter in St Andrews Castle (under the charge of his old opponent, Prior Hepburn), and later in Dunbar Castle, and again in Edinburgh. Papal intervention procured his release after nearly a year&#x27;s imprisonment. The Queen, meanwhile, had retired to England. After July 1516 Douglas appears to have been in possession of his see and to have patched up a diplomatic peace with Albany.

On 17 May 1517 the Bishop of Dunkeld proceeded with Albany to France to conduct the negotiations which ended in the Treaty of Rouen. He was back in Scotland towards the end of June. Albany&#x27;s longer absence in France permitted the party faction of the nobles to come to a head in a plot by James Hamilton, 1st Earl of Arran to seize the Earl of Angus, the Queen&#x27;s husband. The issue of this plot was the well-known fight of &quot;Cleanse the Causeway&quot;, in which Gavin Douglas&#x27;s part stands out in picturesque relief. The triumph over the Hamiltons had an unsettling effect upon the Earl of Angus. He made free with the Queen&#x27;s rents and abducted Lord Traquair&#x27;s daughter. The Queen set about obtaining a divorce and used her influence for the return of Albany as a means of undoing her husband&#x27;s power. Albany&#x27;s arrival in November 1521, with a large body of French men-at-arms, compelled Angus, with the bishop and others, to flee to the Borders. From this retreat Gavin Douglas was sent by the earl to the English court, to ask for aid against the French party and against the Queen, who was reported to be the mistress of the Regent. Meanwhile, Douglas was deprived of his bishopric and forced, for safety, to remain in England, where he effected nothing in the interests of his nephew. The declaration of war by England against Scotland, in answer to the recent Franco-Scottish negotiations, prevented his return. His case was further complicated by the libellous animosity of James Beaton, Archbishop of Glasgow (whose life he had saved in the &quot;Cleanse the Causeway&quot; incident), who was anxious to put himself forward and thwart Douglas in the election to the archbishopric of St Andrews, left vacant by the death of Forman.

==Death==
In 1522 Douglas was stricken by the plague which raged in London, and died at the house of his friend Lord Dacre. During the closing years of exile he was on intimate terms with the historian Polydore Vergil, and one of his last acts was to arrange to give Polydore a corrected version of Major&#x27;s account of Scottish affairs. Douglas was buried in the church of the Savoy, where a monumental brass (removed from its proper site after the fire in 1864) still records his death and interment.

For Douglas&#x27;s career see, in addition to the public records and general histories, John Sage&#x27;s &quot;Life&quot; in Thomas Ruddiman&#x27;s edition, and that by John Small in the first volume of his edition &quot;The Poetical Works of Gavin Douglas&quot; (1874).

== Memorials ==
A Victorian brass plaque to Douglas exists in St Giles Cathedral in Edinburgh (placed on one of the southern columns).

There is a bin commemorating Gavin Douglas in Queen&#x27;s Park, Glasgow.

==Works==
===&quot;Palice of Honour&quot;===
&quot;The Palice of Honour&quot;, dated 1501, is a dream-allegory extending to over 2000 lines, composed in nine-line stanzas. It is his earliest work. In its descriptions of the various courts on their way to the palace, and of the poet&#x27;s adventures – first, when he incautiously slanders the court of Venus, and later when after his pardon he joins in the procession and passes to see the glories of the palace – the poem carries on the literary traditions of the courts of love, as shown especially in the &quot;Romaunt of the Rose&quot; and &quot;The Hous of Fame&quot;. The poem is dedicated to James IV, not without some lesson in commendation of virtue and honour.

No manuscript of the poem is extant. The earliest surviving edition (c. 1553) was printed at London by William Copland (died 1569). An Edinburgh edition, from the press of Henry Charteris (died 1599), followed in 1579. From certain indications in the latter and the evidence of some odd leaves discovered by David Laing, it has been concluded that there was an earlier Edinburgh edition, which has been ascribed to Thomas Davidson, printer, and dated c. 1540.

===&quot;Eneados&quot;===

Douglas&#x27;s major literary achievement is the &quot;Eneados&quot;, a Scots translation of Virgil&#x27;s &quot;Aeneid&quot;, completed in 1513, and the first full translation of a major poem from classical antiquity into any modern Germanic language. His translation, which is faithful throughout, includes the 13th book by Mapheus Vegius. Each of the 13 books is introduced additionally by an original verse prologue. These deal with various matters, sometimes semi-autobiographical, in a variety of styles.

===Other accredited works===
Two other poems are accredited to Gavin Douglas, &quot;King Hart&quot; and &quot;Conscience&quot;.

&quot;Conscience&quot; is a short four-stanza poem. Its subject is the &quot;conceit&quot; that men first clipped away the &quot;con&quot; from &quot;conscience&quot; to leave &quot;science&quot; and &quot;na mair&quot;; then they lost &quot;sci&quot; and had nothing but &quot;ens&quot;: &quot;that schrew, Riches and geir.&quot;

&quot;King Hart&quot; is a poem of doubtful accreditation. Like &quot;The Palice of Honor&quot;, it is a later allegory, and as such, of high literary merit. Its subject is human life told in the allegory of King Hart (&quot;Heart&quot;) in his castle, surrounded by his five servitors (the senses), Queen, Plesance, Foresight and other courtiers. The poem runs to over 900 lines and is written in eight-line stanzas. The text is preserved in the Maitland folio manuscript in the Pepysian library, Cambridge. It is not known to have been printed before 1786, when it appeared in Pinkerton&#x27;s &quot;Ancient Scottish Poems&quot;.

===Modern editions===
*&quot;Gavin Douglas&#x27;s Translation of the Aeneid&quot;, edited by Gordon Kendal, 2 volumes, London, MHRA, 2011
*&quot;Virgil&#x27;s Aeneid&quot; translated into Scottish Verse by Gavin Douglas, Bishop of Dunkeld, edited by David F.C. Coldwell, 4 Volumes, Edinburgh, Blackwood for The Scottish Text Society, 1957–64
*&quot;Gavin Douglas: A selection from his Poetry&quot;, edited by Sydney Goodsir Smith, Edinburgh, Oliver &amp; Boyd for The Saltire Society, 1959
*&quot;Selections from Gavin Douglas&quot;, edited by David F. C. Coldwell, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1964
*&quot;The Shorter Poems of Gavin Douglas&quot;, edited by Priscilla J Bawcutt, Edinburgh, Blackwood for The Scottish Text Society, 1967 (reprint 2003)
*&quot;The palis of honoure [by] Gawyne Dowglas&quot;, Amsterdam, Theatrum Orbis Terrarum; New York, Da Capo Press, 1969
*&quot;The Palyce of Honour&quot; by Gavin Douglas, edited by David J. Parkinson, 2nd edition, Michigan, Medieval Institute Publications, 2018.
*&quot;The Makars: the poems of Henryson, Dunbar, and Douglas&quot;, edited, introduced, and annotated by J.A. Tasioulas, Edinburgh, Canongate Books, 1999

==See also==
*Scottish literature

==References==
===Notes===
===Sources===
*Balfour Paul, Sir James (1904). &quot;Scots Peerage&quot;. 9 vols. Edinburgh: David Douglas.
* Bawcutt, Priscilla (1976). &quot;Gavin Douglas: A Critical Study&quot;. Edinburgh: Edinburgh UP.
* ——— (1994). &quot;New Light on Gavin Douglas&quot;. In MacDonald, A. A.; Lynch, Michael; Cowan, Ian B. (eds.), &quot;The Renaissance in Scotland&quot;. Leiden: Brill. pp. 95–106.

==Further reading==


* Ellis, Henry, ed., &quot;Original Letters Illustrative of English History&quot;, 3rd Series, vol. 1 (London: Richard Bentley, 1846), pp. 293–303. Letters from Douglas to Cardinal Wolsey.
* Hubbard, Tom (1991), &quot;Chosyn Carbukkill: Virgil&#x27;s Northern Legacy&quot;, in Hubbard, Tom (2022), &quot;Invitation to the Voyage: Scotland, Europe and Literature&quot;, Rymour, pp. 13–16, 
* Maxwell, Sir Herbert. &quot;A History of the House of Douglas&quot;. 2 vols. (London: Freemantle, 1902)
* Nicholson, Ranald. &quot;Scotland: The Later Middle Ages&quot; (Edinburgh: Oliver and Boyd, 1978)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q389096" start="0" end="13" title="Gavin Douglas" label="Gavin Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125354" start="64" end="69" title="makar" label="makar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5376714" start="220" end="227" title="Eneados" label="Eneados"/>
<link wikidata="Q60220" start="291" end="297" title="Aeneid" label="Aeneid"/>
<link wikidata="Q14549" start="319" end="324" title="Scots language" label="Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329170" start="378" end="393" title="Anglic language" label="Anglic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q57803" start="600" end="616" title="Tantallon Castle" label="Tantallon Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q633145" start="649" end="677" title="Archibald Douglas, 5th Earl of Angus" label="Archibald, 5th Earl of Angus"/>
<link wikidata="Q216273" start="1040" end="1061" title="St Andrews University" label="St Andrews University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6906978" start="1426" end="1434" title="Monymusk" label="Monymusk"/>
<link wikidata="Q955464" start="1471" end="1477" title="parson" label="parson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009895" start="1496" end="1507" title="East Linton" label="East Linton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242053" start="1537" end="1548" title="Prestonkirk Parish Church" label="Prestonkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q207257" start="1554" end="1566" title="East Lothian" label="East Lothian"/>
<link wikidata="Q756215" start="1614" end="1625" title="Provost (religion)" label="provostship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509716" start="1633" end="1650" title="collegiate church" label="collegiate church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547466" start="1654" end="1662" title="St Giles Cathedral" label="St Giles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1300742" start="1747" end="1764" title="Battle of Flodden" label="Battle of Flodden"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1837" end="1851" title="ecclesiastical" label="ecclesiastical"/>
<link wikidata="Q741149" start="2201" end="2216" title="Polydore Vergil" label="Polydore Vergil"/>
<link wikidata="Q579194" start="2218" end="2228" title="John Major (philosopher)" label="John Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q206512" start="2230" end="2245" title="Cardinal Wolsey" label="Cardinal Wolsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679962" start="2250" end="2274" title="Lord Sinclair" label="Henry, 3rd Lord Sinclair"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125354" start="2397" end="2402" title="makar" label="makar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5683" start="2477" end="2484" title="Chaucer" label="Chaucer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547466" start="2602" end="2610" title="St. Giles&amp;#x27; Cathedral" label="St Giles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3327000" start="2688" end="2700" title="Middle Scots" label="Middle Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q4822188" start="2708" end="2715" title="aureate" label="aureate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1300742" start="3637" end="3654" title="Battle of Flodden" label="Battle of Flodden"/>
<link wikidata="Q137814" start="3679" end="3698" title="James V of Scotland" label="James V of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1300742" start="3783" end="3800" title="Battle of Flodden" label="Battle of Flodden"/>
<link wikidata="Q48784578" start="3858" end="3865" title="burgess (title)" label="burgess"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252809" start="3933" end="3946" title="Provost (civil)" label="civil provost"/>
<link wikidata="Q550606" start="4012" end="4024" title="Wigtownshire" label="Wigtownshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1714329" start="4047" end="4056" title="justiciar" label="justiciar"/>
<link wikidata="Q633149" start="4141" end="4177" title="Archibald Douglas, 6th Earl of Angus" label="Archibald Douglas, 6th Earl of Angus"/>
<link wikidata="Q137906" start="4223" end="4231" title="James IV of Scotland" label="James IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q523140" start="4246" end="4260" title="Margaret Tudor" label="Margaret Tudor"/>
<link wikidata="Q591453" start="4389" end="4403" title="John Stewart, Duke of Albany" label="Duke of Albany"/>
<link wikidata="Q4664212" start="4897" end="4920" title="Abbot of Arbroath" label="Abbacy of Aberbrothwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q21177706" start="5071" end="5095" title="Archbishop of St Andrews" label="Archbishop of St Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q8008579" start="5114" end="5133" title="William Elphinstone" label="William Elphinstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6239017" start="5161" end="5173" title="John Hepburn (churchman)" label="John Hepburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2847762" start="5287" end="5300" title="Andrew Forman" label="Andrew Forman"/>
<link wikidata="Q19921364" start="5302" end="5317" title="Bishop of Moray" label="Bishop of Moray"/>
<link wikidata="Q2381189" start="5435" end="5447" title="James Beaton" label="James Beaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q946465" start="5449" end="5470" title="Archbishop of Glasgow" label="Archbishop of Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="5727" end="5732" title="Henry VIII of England" label="Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178407" start="5993" end="6009" title="Court of Session (Scotland)" label="Lords of Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q866196" start="6056" end="6059" title="Episcopal see" label="see"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361738" start="6093" end="6103" title="St Andrew&amp;#x27;s Cathedral, St Andrews" label="St Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086395" start="6207" end="6214" title="Dunkeld Cathedral" label="Dunkeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q129857" start="6362" end="6371" title="Francis I of France" label="Francis I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7837214" start="6393" end="6408" title="Treaty of Rouen (1517)" label="Treaty of Rouen"/>
<link wikidata="Q170079" start="6499" end="6507" title="Minor (law)" label="minority"/>
<link wikidata="Q137814" start="6511" end="6518" title="James V of Scotland" label="James V"/>
<link wikidata="Q523140" start="6610" end="6622" title="Margaret Tudor" label="Queen Mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q591453" start="6726" end="6739" title="John Stewart, Duke of Albany" label="Regent Albany"/>
<link wikidata="Q5537306" start="6999" end="7011" title="George Brown (bishop of Dunkeld)" label="George Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591356" start="7013" end="7030" title="Bishop of Dunkeld" label="Bishop of Dunkeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701828" start="7172" end="7204" title="John Stewart, 2nd Earl of Atholl" label="John Stewart, 2nd Earl of Atholl"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758646" start="7229" end="7243" title="Andrew Stewart (d. 1541)" label="Andrew Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q212065" start="7811" end="7827" title="Edinburgh Castle" label="Edinburgh Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287936" start="7843" end="7860" title="St Andrews Castle" label="St Andrews Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2969165" start="7929" end="7942" title="Dunbar Castle" label="Dunbar Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7837214" start="8337" end="8352" title="Treaty of Rouen (1517)" label="Treaty of Rouen"/>
<link wikidata="Q336796" start="8515" end="8548" title="James Hamilton, 1st Earl of Arran" label="James Hamilton, 1st Earl of Arran"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130585" start="8660" end="8680" title="Cleanse the Causeway" label="Cleanse the Causeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q211113" start="9199" end="9206" title="Scottish Borders" label="Borders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2381189" start="9741" end="9753" title="James Beaton" label="James Beaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q946465" start="9755" end="9776" title="Archbishop of Glasgow" label="Archbishop of Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q217519" start="10046" end="10052" title="Bubonic plague" label="plague"/>
<link wikidata="Q7788806" start="10112" end="10122" title="Thomas Dacre, 2nd Baron Dacre" label="Lord Dacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q741149" start="10202" end="10217" title="Polydore Vergil" label="Polydore Vergil"/>
<link wikidata="Q579194" start="10299" end="10304" title="John Major (philosopher)" label="Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886295" start="10367" end="10386" title="Savoy Palace" label="church of the Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16859526" start="10595" end="10604" title="John Sage (bishop)" label="John Sage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7793672" start="10632" end="10647" title="Thomas Ruddiman" label="Thomas Ruddiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6258198" start="10676" end="10686" title="John Small (librarian)" label="John Small"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547466" start="10841" end="10859" title="St Giles Cathedral" label="St Giles Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q851650" start="11506" end="11520" title="courts of love" label="courts of love"/>
<link wikidata="Q18534971" start="11816" end="11831" title="William Copland" label="William Copland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11885" end="11900" title="Henry Charteris (bookseller)" label="Henry Charteris"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236288" start="12021" end="12032" title="David Laing (Scottish antiquary)" label="David Laing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7788870" start="12128" end="12143" title="Thomas Davidson (printer)" label="Thomas Davidson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="12294" end="12300" title="Virgil" label="Virgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q60220" start="12314" end="12320" title="Aeneid" label="Aeneid"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="12399" end="12418" title="classical antiquity" label="classical antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q21200" start="12435" end="12452" title="Germanic language" label="Germanic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372875" start="12527" end="12541" title="Maffeo Vegio" label="Mapheus Vegius"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446354" start="13753" end="13769" title="John Pinkerton" label="Pinkerton&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14114" end="14139" title="The Scottish Text Society" label="The Scottish Text Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7659945" start="14216" end="14236" title="Sydney Goodsir Smith" label="Sydney Goodsir Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7406142" start="14271" end="14290" title="The Saltire Society" label="The Saltire Society"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14508" end="14533" title="The Scottish Text Society" label="The Scottish Text Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q2180995" start="14990" end="15009" title="Scottish literature" label="Scottish literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q6129303" start="15053" end="15076" title="James Balfour Paul" label="Balfour Paul, Sir James"/>
<link wikidata="Q7527252" start="15840" end="15860" title="Herbert Maxwell" label="Maxwell, Sir Herbert"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="335166" wikidata="Q167211" url="?curid=335166" title="Alan García">
<text>Alan Gabriel Ludwig García Pérez (; 23 May 1949 – 17 April 2019) was a Peruvian politician who served as President of Peru for two non-consecutive terms from 1985 to 1990 and from 2006 to 2011. He was the second leader of the Peruvian Aprista Party and to date the only party member ever to have served as President. Mentored by the founder of the APRA, Víctor Raúl Haya de la Torre, he served in the Constituent Assembly of 1978–1979. Elected to the Peruvian Congress in 1980, he rose to the position of General Secretary of the APRA in 1982, and was subsequently elected to the presidency in 1985 in a landslide victory at the age of 35 years.

García&#x27;s first presidential term was marked by a severe economic crisis, social unrest and violence. At the conclusion of his first presidency, he was accused and investigated for corruption and illicit enrichment. In 1992, he filed for asylum following president Alberto Fujimori&#x27;s self-coup, and exiled himself with his family in Colombia and France for the next nine years. In the aftermath of Fujimori&#x27;s downfall, he made a political comeback as he ran for the presidency in 2001, although he lost in the second round to Alejandro Toledo. In 2006, he was elected to the presidency for a second term, a feat considered an unexpected political resurrection based on the negative legacy of his first term.

Throughout García&#x27;s second term, Peru experienced a steady economy, becoming the fastest growing country in Latin America in 2008, surpassing China in terms of rising GDP. The economic success of his presidency would be acclaimed as a triumph by world leaders, and poverty was reduced from 48% to 28% nationally. In addition, Peru signed free trade agreements with the United States and China during García&#x27;s presidency, but accusations of corruption would persist throughout his term and beyond. He was succeeded by his former 2006 run-off rival Ollanta Humala in 2011. He withdrew from party politics after failing to advance to the second round of the 2016 general election, placing fifth in his bid for a record third presidential term under the Popular Alliance coalition between his party and the Christian People&#x27;s Party, which included former rival Lourdes Flores as one of his running mates.

On 17 April 2019, García died from a self-inflicted gunshot to the head as police officers under a prosecutor&#x27;s orders were preparing to arrest him over matters relating to the Odebrecht scandal. He was transferred to a hospital in serious condition, where he remained for more than three hours in an operating room, during which he suffered three cardiorespiratory arrests before his death.

García is considered one of the most controversial yet talented politicians of Peru&#x27;s contemporary history. He was known as an immensely charismatic orator.

==Early life==
Born in the Maison de Santé Clinic of the Barranco District into a middle-class family, García met his father for the first time when he was five due to his father&#x27;s imprisonment at El Sexto Prison for being a member of the Peruvian Aprista Party. His mother founded the party&#x27;s base in the Camaná Province of the Arequipa Region. From a very young age, he accompanied his father to party meetings and became acquainted with future leaders of the American Popular Revolutionary Alliance (APRA), such as Luis Alva Castro and Mercedes Cabanillas. At 14, he was already an immensely talented orator when he first gave a speech in honour of party founder Víctor Raúl Haya de la Torre, whom he admired and followed until his death.

García studied law, first at the Pontifical Catholic University of Peru and later earning a bachelor&#x27;s degree from the National University of San Marcos in 1971. A year later, he left Peru for Spain, where he pursued a doctoral degree in constitutional law under the guidance of Manuel Fraga. For years García claimed to have earned the degree; in 2014, however, documents from the university proved he never finished the work for it. In 1974, he moved to France with other members of the APRA to study at the Sorbonne Nouvelle University Paris 3 and the Institut des Hautes Etudes de l´Amérique latine (IHEAL). After earning a diploma in sociology from IHEAL, he was called by Víctor Raúl Haya de la Torre to come back to Peru in order to run for the Constituent Assembly election in 1978. García was elected a Member of the Assembly, where he impressed his colleagues with his oratory and skillful rhetoric. As APRA&#x27;s Secretary of Organization, he was assigned to conduct the party&#x27;s public affairs in the wake of Haya de la Torre&#x27;s death in 1979.

From his first marriage, García had one daughter, Carla, who is also active in Peruvian politics since 2014. With his second wife Pilar Nores, from whom he separated in 2010, García had four children. He also had another child from an extramarital affair with economist Roxanne Cheesman.

Already recognized as a young leader with a bright future in the country, he was elected to Congress in 1980. Two years later, he was elected General Secretary of the Peruvian Aprista Party. He was elected to serve as president of the Republic in the 1985 general elections.

==First presidency (1985–1990)==

García won the presidential election on 14 April 1985 with 45% of the votes. Since he did not receive the 50% of the votes required for a first-round victory, a run-off was scheduled between him and Alfonso Barrantes (the former mayor of Lima) of the United Left party. Barrantes, however, withdrew and decided not to enter the run-off, saying he did not want to prolong the country&#x27;s political uncertainty. García was thus declared President on 1 June and officially took power on 28 July 1985. For the first time in its sixty-year history, the APRA party came to power in Peru. Aged 36, García was dubbed &quot;Latin America&#x27;s Kennedy&quot;, becoming the region&#x27;s youngest president at the time, and the second youngest president in Peruvian history (the youngest was Juan Crisostomo Torrico in 1842, aged 34).

His economic policy was based on APRA&#x27;s initial anti-imperialist values with García distancing Peru from international markets, resulting in lower investment in the country. Despite his initial popularity among voters, García&#x27;s term in office was marked by bouts of hyperinflation, which reached 7,649% in 1990 and had a cumulative total of 2,200,200% over the five years, which destabilized the Peruvian economy. Foreign debt under García&#x27;s administration increased to $19 billion by 1989. Owing to this chronic inflation, the Peruvian currency, the sol, was replaced by the inti in February 1985 (before his presidency began), which itself was replaced by the nuevo sol (&quot;new sun&quot;) in July 1991, at which time the new sol had a cumulative value of one billion (1,000,000,000) old soles.

According to studies by the National Institute of Statistics and Informatics and the United Nations Development Programme, around the start of his presidency, 41.6% of Peruvians lived in poverty. During his presidency, this percentage increased by 13% (to 55%) in 1991. García also made an attempt to nationalise the banking and insurance industries. The International Monetary Fund and the financial community recoiled after García&#x27;s administration unilaterally declared a limit on debt repayment equal to 10% of the Gross National Product, thereby isolating Peru from international financial markets.

His presidency was marked by world-record hyperinflation with the annual rate exceeding 13,000 percent per year. The administration devastated the local economy as well as all governmental institutions. Hunger, corruption, injustice, abuse of power, partisan elitism, and social unrest raised to dramatic levels spreading throughout the whole nation due to García&#x27;s misdeeds and incompetence, spurring terrorism. The economic turbulence exacerbated social tensions and contributed in great part to the rise of the violent Maoist rebel movement known as the Shining Path, which launched the internal conflict in Peru and began attacking electrical towers, causing a number of blackouts in Lima. The period also saw the emergence of the Túpac Amaru Revolutionary Movement (MRTA). The García administration unsuccessfully sought a military solution to the growing terrorism, allegedly committing human rights violations, which are still under investigation. These include the Accomarca massacre, where 47 campesinos were gunned down by armed forces in August 1985; the Cayara massacre (May 1988), in which some thirty people were killed and dozens disappeared; and the summary execution of more than 200 inmates during prison riots in Lurigancho, San Juan Bautista (El Frontón) and Santa Bárbara in 1986. According to an official inquiry, an estimated 1,600 forced disappearances took place during García&#x27;s presidency. His own personal involvement in these events is not clear. García was allegedly tied to the paramilitary Rodrigo Franco Command, which is accused of carrying out political murders in Peru during García&#x27;s presidency. A U.S. declassified report, written in late 1987, said that García&#x27;s party, APRA, and top government officials were running a paramilitary group, responsible for the attempted bombing of the &quot;El Diario&quot; newspaper, then linked to Shining Path, had sent people to train in North Korea and may have been involved in executions. According to investigative journalist Lucy Komisar, the report made it clear that it believed García had given the orders.

Alan García&#x27;s historical economic failures were used by economists Rudi Dornbusch and Sebastian Edwards to coin the term macroeconomic populism. Because of García&#x27;s unpopularity by the end of his first term, at García&#x27;s farewell speech on 28 July 1990, he was booed by the entire opposition forces and was almost prevented from speaking. The opposition force would slam their folders in their desks to interrupt García. Some opposition members even left the congress. The anecdotical event was televised. 

Later that same day, the board of the Chamber of Deputies requested the creation of a special committee to investigate García&#x27;s presidency, accusing him of massive corruption and illicit enrichment. The committee attacked García with numerous proven accusations involving embezzlement, misappropriation and bribery, based -among other trustworthy sources- on a U.S. congressional investigation that linked García with the BCCI scandal and had found millions of illicitly-obtained dollars in BCCI as well as other banks. 

In 1991, New York District Attorney Robert Morgenthau charged García officially. Later in 1992, then-U.S. Senator John Kerry presided over the BCCI scandal report, which concluded García was not only guilty of corruption, but directly involved in an international racketeering network with activities that included drug and arms trafficking. Finally, the Peruvian Supreme Court declared null all the probes and constitutional accusations gathered against García, allowing him to return to Peru after a 9-year self-imposed exile.

==Exile==
On 5 April 1992, Alberto Fujimori conducted a self-coup, through which he dissolved the Peruvian Congress unconstitutionally and intervened in the Judiciary and other public institutions. Due to these actions, various politicians were persecuted and prevented from leaving their homes. García had been serving as Senator for life since 1990, although he was unable to perform his duty due to the accusations of the Chamber of Deputies. On 18 October 1991, the Senate debated the proposal made by the lower house to indict García for alleged crimes of illicit enrichment and against the public faith, allegedly committed when he was performing public functions. The full Senate decided to suspend former President Alan García from the exercise of his functions as senator for life and put him on trial for alleged illicit enrichment during his presidential term with 38 votes in favor and 17 against. He was able to return to the Senate in March 1992, after the Supreme Court dropped all constitutional charges against him. According to Jorge Del Castillo in 2008, Alberto Fujimori ordered Vladimiro Montesinos to capture and assassinate García on the day of the coup. According to his own testimony, García escaped his home while military tanks took over the bloc where he lived.

After weeks of hiding in a construction site, he was able to enter the residence of the Colombian Ambassador at the end of May, where he requested political asylum. The request was granted on 1 June, by the government of President César Gaviria. The former president left Peru through a pass that allowed him to board a Colombian Air Force jet that transferred him to Bogotá, along with then congressman Jorge Del Castillo.
García arrived at Catam military airport and in statements to the press promised to fight against the dictatorship of Alberto Fujimori. The regime opened judicial processes to investigate illicit enrichment and for various accusations of corruption; after that, the extradition of García was requested from the Colombian government, which was denied.

In 1994, the Human Rights Commission of the Organization of American States denounced the Fujimori government for violation of the rights to liberty, security and due defense of Alan García and asked the Peruvian government to nullify the processes initiated.

In April 1995, Congress lifted Alan García&#x27;s parliamentary immunity in response to accusations of him having received bribes from the Italian consortium Tralima for the construction of the Lima Metro. Based on this, the Civil Sector of the Supreme Court once again made a request to the Government of Colombia for García&#x27;s extradition, which was denied because García went to live in Paris for the rest of his exile.

During the years between 1993 and 2001, Alan García did not actively participate in Peruvian politics, except in the publication of some works on his first presidency, and a literary work entitled &quot;El Mundo de Maquiavelo&quot; (The World of Machiavelli). He continued denouncing the human rights violations committed by the Fujimori administration. On rare occasions, Alan García appeared on Peruvian television and radio from Bogotá, Colombia.

In 2001, the Supreme Court declared the allegations that were imputed to him at the end of his first term had been annulled.

== Return to politics ==

=== 2001 Peruvian national election ===
Alan García returned to Lima on January 27, 2001, at 5:35pm. His return caused so much anticipation that a huge crowd of supporters was waiting for him at the airport chanting his name and showing support with hundreds of signs with the words &quot;ALAN VUELVE&quot;. That same day at 8:30pm a rally was called in the Plaza San Martin de Lima where Garcia gave a speech in front of a large crowd. Some say there were around 20,000 people that night. Garcia ran for president in the new elections called by the interim president Valentín Paniagua, and in a 60-day election campaign he finished in second place in the first round behind Alejandro Toledo, qualifying him for the second round. Toledo&#x27;s popularity remained stable, while Garcia&#x27;s popularity was based on his innovative proposals on the issue of the agrarian bank, not continuing with a neoliberal model, etc. However, it was not enough to acquire more endorsements and support from Peruvian voters and Alejandro Toledo won the general elections in the second round with 53.1% of the vote against Garcia&#x27;s 46.9%. After the 2001 election, Garcia, as leader of the APRA party, became Leader of the Opposition.

=== 2006 Peruvian national election ===
García officially started his campaign for the April 2006 presidential election in Lima on 20 April 2005. Ollanta Humala won the first round with 32.50% of the valid votes, followed by García, who got 24.32% (against Lourdes Flores&#x27; 23.81%). As no candidate won a majority, a run-off election was held on 4 June 2006 between Humala and García. Preliminary official results gave García an advantage over his run-off opponent, who conceded defeat.

On 28 April 2006, prior to the run-off, García had become involved in a dispute with Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez. For the second time in Peruvian presidential election, Chávez declared his support for Ollanta Humala, García&#x27;s opponent, and referred to García as a &quot;robber&quot;, a &quot;bandit&quot;, and &quot;the Carlos Andrés Pérez of Peru&quot;. In response, García stated that Chávez was &quot;not acting as a statesman&quot; and challenged Chávez to a debate to be hosted by CNN. García called on the Organization of American States to intervene in the matter.

On 31 May 2006, a few days before the run-off election, García&#x27;s economic adviser Enrique Cornejo told the media that if García won in the second round, his government would renew a US$422 million aid package with the International Monetary Fund. Anoop Singh, the IMF&#x27;s Western Hemisphere Director, responded positively by saying he was &quot;impressed by the vision of the president-elected for Peru, especially his commitment to applying prudent economic policy.&quot;

==Second presidency (2006–2011)==
On 28 July 2006, García was sworn in as president, after winning approximately 53% of the nationwide vote in the elections held on 4 June against Ollanta Humala. He would spend the majority of his second term attempting to improve his reputation compared to his first term.

He won in the capital city, Lima, and the northern coast, a geographical base of the APRA party, but lost in the southern region (mostly impoverished but including major cities such as Cuzco and Arequipa) and the rainforest areas, considered Humala&#x27;s strongholds. A third of the voters said that voting for him was &quot;voting for the lesser of two evils&quot;: although many Peruvians had a very negative impression of García after his first term, they were frightened by rumours that Humala would create a government based on Fidel Castro&#x27;s Cuba and would turn Hugo Chávez, President of Venezuela, into the virtual ruler of Peru, due to Chavez&#x27;s patronage of Humala&#x27;s party. These fears were accompanied by declarations of militarization, the re-introduction of the death penalty and criminalization and disrespect for LGBT communities. Humala denied these rumours, but his conflicting statements about his government&#x27;s vision and Chávez&#x27;s strong campaigning for him created enough suspicions among voters to cost him the ballotage. With 36 seats, APRA was the second largest bloc in the 120-seat unicameral Congress which was sworn in a couple of days before the President. With 45 seats, Humala&#x27;s Union for Peru Party, although divided into three factions, was the largest bloc.

On 28 June, one month before García was sworn in, his party provided 25 of the 79 votes, nearly a third, ratifying the Peru–United States Trade Promotion Agreement in the Peruvian Congress. This was a month prior to the new legislature that would include the Union for Peru congressmen, who opposed the agreement with the USA. The U.S. Congress ratified the agreement on 4 December 2007; it came into effect on 1 February 2009.

In his first speech as president, García declared he would appoint a Finance Minister who was neither &quot;an orthodox market liberal&quot; nor a person &quot;excessively in favour of state intervention in the economy&quot;. The position of prime minister was given to Jorge Del Castillo. According to the BBC, in private interviews García had stated his interest in a possible future trade agreement with Brazil, and considered himself &quot;an admirer&quot; of Brazilian President Lula da Silva.

In press conferences with the foreign press, García acknowledged that the support Humala received in the election &quot;could not be ignored&quot;. García, in a recognition of future domestic politics with a UPP-controlled Congress, was quoted as saying &quot;Mr. Humala is an important political figure, and a President should consult with different political factions&quot;. However, Humala said he wouldn&#x27;t salute the winner personally, adding that &quot;he and his party will constitute the principal opposition bloc, not to fight Mr. García, but to defend the interests of the State and watch the government&quot;.
President Chávez of Venezuela responded to García&#x27;s comments on his show &quot;Aló Presidente&quot; by stating that it was García who owed him an apology, saying: &quot;the only way relations between the two countries can be restored is if Peru&#x27;s elected President [García] gives an explanation and offers an apology to the Venezuelan people. He started throwing stones&quot;. Chávez questioned the legitimacy of the election, citing 1.2 million invalid ballots and a margin of victory of 600,000 votes, although offering no evidence for his comments. García, invited to meet Brazilian president Lula da Silva, responded to Chávez: &quot;Accept your defeat in silence. Don&#x27;t ask me to apologize for something arising from interference and remarks that are unacceptable under international law.&quot; Differences with Chávez were left behind after the two ended their dispute at the second South American Community of Nations Summit.

On 20 July 2006, García named Luis Carranza, a former executive at Spain-based Banco Bilbao Vizcaya Argentaria and Central Bank director and deputy finance chief from August 2004 to August 2005 in Alejandro Toledo&#x27;s government, as finance minister. The appointment was welcomed by some critics of García&#x27;s fiscal policies during his first administration. However, Mario Huamán Rivera, the President of the Confederación General de Trabajadores del Perú (General Workers Confederation of Peru), the country&#x27;s largest trade union, attacked the appointment, stating that &quot;it looks as though Alan García is not going to fulfill his promise to change economic policy&quot;.

On the day before his inauguration, García formally named his cabinet, including former Secretary-General of the APRA party and re-elected Congressman Jorge del Castillo as prime minister, Luis Carranza as minister of finance and economy, and José Antonio García Belaúnde as foreign affairs minister. García was inaugurated as president on 28 July 2006.

During his campaign, García had declared that he supported the death penalty for rapists of minors; he reiterated this stance while in office, pushing a law on the issue, which would modify the criminal code. Although the issue seemed to be stalled, García widened the range of his proposal for the death penalty by including terrorists in the list of those who could receive it.

García faced his first major political defeat of his second term in office on 11 January 2007, when his proposal to introduce the death penalty as a punishment for captured Shining Path rebels was rejected by the congress in a vote of 49 to 26. García had promised to introduce the death penalty for Shining Path rebels during the 2006 Presidential election. Following the defeat of the proposal, he suggested a national referendum on the issue, but it was blocked by Congress. Legislators who voted against the bill stated that it would be a breach of the American Convention on Human Rights, to which Peru is a signatory. Approximately 3,000 supporters of the proposal marched in Lima, holding up photos of victims of attacks by the Shining Path.

On 5 June 2009, García ordered police and military forces to stop Amazonian indigenous protesters from blocking roads in the Bagua region. They had been demonstrating against the signing by Alan García of special decrees that allowed foreign corporations to enter Indigenous lands for oil drilling, mining and logging. As a result of the protests and armed military incursion, more than 100 native civilians and 14 policemen were killed. The government claimed, in a redacted television commercial, that several policemen were killed after being taken prisoner, while protesters claimed the bodies of the murdered Native Amazonians had been dumped into the river.

With the passage of time, studies of human rights violations in Peru have discovered a close relationship between García and forces within Peru who promote impunity for human rights violators, through his involvement in appointing judges who would be sympathetic to perpetrators of human rights violations. García was also supportive of efforts to punish judges who handed down indictments of perpetrators. García himself was in the presidency during many gross violations of human rights and was quite hostile to human rights organizations and to judicial actors who sought justice for victims of human rights violations. During his presidency, García sought to tilt the legal playing field in favour of the military and against victims. He also tried to make life difficult for NGOs seeking to help victims: he offered extensive resources to defendants and military officers, while creating new laws that would make it difficult for human rights NGOs to do their jobs, receive necessary resources, and pursue the advancement of judicial action that attempted to bring human rights violators to justice.

===Foreign affairs===


After being elected, in the months prior to his inauguration, García sought to heal Peru&#x27;s relationship with Chile, strained by the differences between the governments of Alejandro Toledo and Ricardo Lagos and severely impaired by former President Alberto Fujimori&#x27;s extradition affair. García&#x27;s intentions were well received by Michelle Bachelet, President of Chile, as she and García met and struck some preliminary agreements. These conversations eventually led to the final draft of a landmark economic agreement with Chile a month after García was sworn in.

On 9 November 2006, three months after being inaugurated, García signed 12 commercial agreements with President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva of Brazil, strengthening the relationship between the two countries. As part of the IIRSA programme and continuing integration efforts – including the August 2006 negotiations between Petrobras and Petroperú – these new agreements sought to further bilateral cooperation. García offered Peruvian hydropower to meet Brazil&#x27;s growing energy needs, although further details were not disclosed.

==Post-presidency (2011–2019)==
García, as he offered during the 2011 electoral campaign, made himself available to the new Head of State to serve the interests of Peru in the manner required.

In addition, he also dedicated himself to writing opinion articles, mainly on his internal and external vision, primarily aimed at reducing poverty in Peru, increasing foreign investment and issues related to the growth of the Peruvian economy with social sensitivity.

The salary increase for ministers carried out in February 2014 was harshly criticized by the former president, who during his government cut the salary of his Cabinet members by half, which, according to official spokesmen, caused a talent drain of the state apparatus. Through his Twitter account, he described the measure as &quot;the great deal.&quot;

García ran for a third term as president in the 2016 Peruvian general election as the candidate of the criticized Popular Alliance coalition which included APRA&#x27;s old rival, the Christian People&#x27;s Party with Lourdes Flores as his first running mate. The election&#x27;s first round polls gave García 5.83% of the popular vote, preventing him from participating in the runoff election. Pedro Pablo Kuczynski was ultimately elected.

=== Mega-commission ===
In 2013, a mega-commission was formed which lasted five years to investigate the alleged irregularities of the second government of Alan García, with the nationalist Sergio Tejada as head. Of the eight cases that the mega-commission analyzed, in none of them was the commission able to continue the investigations against the former president because he presented an amparo action against the commission, alleging the violation of due process. Consequently, the judiciary annulled everything that had been done with regard to García, thus preventing the investigation from continuing.

=== Odebrecht scandal ===
The Peruvian press reported that in May 2012, after leaving office, García was paid US$100,000 to give a speech to Brazilian business leaders in São Paulo, money which was later characterized in the media as, and suspected by Peruvian prosecutors to be, a kickback from the Brazilian construction company Odebrecht. Because García reported and paid taxes on each payment he received, and multiple organizations were willing to pay him to have him as speaker, his defense and lawyers were optimistic that they could show that the payments did not constitute bribery.

In 2016 and 2017, five of García&#x27;s former ministers were accused of corruption by the Peruvian justice system: Yehude Simon (Prime Minister), Rosario Fernández (Minister of Justice), Mercedes Cabanillas (Minister of the Interior), Ántero Flores Aráoz (Minister of Defence), and Luis Nava Guibert (Minister of Production).

In November 2018, García was banned from leaving Peru by the courts due to the Odebrecht scandal investigation. He entered the residence of the Uruguayan ambassador on 17 November, requesting asylum. Thus, on 18 November, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Peru reported that the ambassador of the Eastern Republic of Uruguay had communicated the entry of the former president to his residence and the request for diplomatic asylum. The Minister of Relations Uruguayan Foreign Ministry, Rodolfo Nin Novoa, reported that Uruguay had decided to process the asylum application. On 20 November, the Peruvian Foreign Ministry delivered a diplomatic note to the Uruguayan ambassador, Carlos Barros, on the request for diplomatic asylum presented by Alan García, expressing the position of the Peruvian government and denying the existence of political persecution. However, on 3 December his request was denied, and he subsequently left the ambassador&#x27;s residence. On January 4, 2019, García appeared before the prosecutor&#x27;s office as a witness to testify in the investigation carried out against Miguel Atala (former vice president of PetroPerú), for having received a bribe from the Odebrecht company.

The scandal also led to arrests, where possible, of all of the other living former presidents of Peru who had served since 2000: Pedro Pablo Kuczynski, Ollanta Humala, and Alejandro Toledo.

== Suicide ==
On 17 April 2019, García shot himself in the head while hiding in his bedroom as he was being presented with a ten-day preliminary arrest warrant related to investigations for corruption and bribes his presidential secretary allegedly received from Odebrecht. Initial reports stated that officers had violated protocol, allowing García to be alone with the excuse that he was going to talk with his lawyer. He was taken to the Casimiro Ulloa hospital and underwent an emergency surgical procedure, during which he experienced three cardiac arrests. After four hours, his death was announced by the heads of the American Popular Revolutionary Alliance (APRA) political party and Nidia Vílchez, with the cause being a &quot;massive&quot; cerebral hemorrhage and cardiorespiratory arrest. According to police sources, García had shot himself with his Colt Anaconda revolver, which had been given to him as a gift by the Peruvian Navy during his second term, and was among nine other firearms that the former president was licensed to own.

A few hours after his death was announced, García&#x27;s body was taken in a wooden casket to the APRA headquarters in Lima, where a memorial service was held on the same day. President Martín Vizcarra declared a three-day mourning period.

Various Peruvian and foreign authorities and personalities expressed their condolences to the family for the death of the former president. On social media, public opinion was more polarized.

==Public image==
García was 2008 &quot;Latin Business Chronicle&quot;″s &quot;leader of the year&quot; at a time when Peru was ranked as Latin America&#x27;s third-best country for business.

==Awards and recognitions==
** Grand Collar of the Order of the Condor of the Andes - 2010
** Grand Collar of the National Order of Merit - 2011
** Grand Collar of the National Order of Merit - 2010
** Collar of the Order of Isabella the Catholic - 2008
** Recipient of the Grand Order of Mugunghwa - 2009
===Honorary doctorate===
* Doctor Honoris Causa - University of Delhi (1987)

==Published works==
García was the author of several books on Peruvian and Latin American affairs. Most of them may be found in the National Library of Peru. His published works include the following: 
* 1981
* 1982
* 1987
* 1990
* 1991
* 1992
* 1994
* 1997
* 1997
* 1999
* 2000
* 2003
* 2005
* 2011
* 2012
* 2012
* 2013
* 2013
*2014 
*2015 
*2019 

==Electoral history==
==See also==
*List of heads of state and government who committed suicide
*First presidency of Alan García
*Second presidency of Alan García

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==

*Office of the President of the Republic of Peru official website
* APRA&#x27;s official site
*&quot;Latin Business Chronicle&quot;, &quot;Leader of the Year 2008: Alan García&quot;, 23 December 2008
* Extended biography by CIDOB Foundation 
*Peru Election 2006 profile. &quot;The University of British Columbia&quot;
*&quot;Exiled García back in Peru&quot;, BBC News Online, 28 January 2001
*cverdad.org (A brief report made by the &quot;Peruvian Commission of Truth&quot; involving Alan García)
*&quot;Extract from article discussing García&#x27;s 2006 election victory&quot;, 23 June 2006
*&quot;Welcome to Washington, Mr. Peruvian President: Alan García Perez’s Regional Foreign Policy&quot; , Analysis by the Council on Hemispheric Affairs, 5 October 2006



|-
|-


|-


|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q167211" start="0" end="32" title="Alan García" label="Alan Gabriel Ludwig García Pérez"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="71" end="75" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q5708511" start="105" end="122" title="President of Peru" label="President of Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q855669" start="226" end="248" title="American Popular Revolutionary Alliance" label="Peruvian Aprista Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q270818" start="306" end="315" title="List of Presidents of Peru" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q379977" start="354" end="382" title="Víctor Raúl Haya de la Torre" label="Víctor Raúl Haya de la Torre"/>
<link wikidata="Q17067786" start="401" end="434" title="Constituent Assembly of Peru" label="Constituent Assembly of 1978–1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357543" start="451" end="468" title="Peruvian Congress" label="Peruvian Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2497946" start="472" end="476" title="1980 Peruvian general election" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370849" start="594" end="598" title="1985 Peruvian general election" label="1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q111169667" start="847" end="865" title="illicit enrichment" label="illicit enrichment"/>
<link wikidata="Q133040" start="916" end="932" title="Alberto Fujimori" label="Alberto Fujimori"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620240" start="1141" end="1145" title="2001 Peruvian general election" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q207426" start="1187" end="1203" title="Alejandro Toledo" label="Alejandro Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760317" start="1208" end="1212" title="2006 Peruvian general election" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="1483" end="1496" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="1517" end="1522" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q200435" start="1713" end="1723" title="free trade" label="free trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q57254" start="1927" end="1941" title="Ollanta Humala" label="Ollanta Humala"/>
<link wikidata="Q7171198" start="2035" end="2056" title="2016 Peruvian general election" label="2016 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q23042225" start="2130" end="2146" title="Popular Alliance (Peru)" label="Popular Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234101" start="2183" end="2212" title="Christian People&amp;#x27;s Party (Peru)" label="Christian People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q257395" start="2242" end="2256" title="Lourdes Flores" label="Lourdes Flores"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2469" end="2486" title="Operation Car Wash#Peru" label="Odebrecht scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q808823" start="2905" end="2922" title="Barranco District" label="Barranco District"/>
<link wikidata="Q65377095" start="3050" end="3065" title="El Sexto Prison" label="El Sexto Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q855669" start="3092" end="3114" title="Peruvian Aprista Party" label="Peruvian Aprista Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784851" start="3164" end="3179" title="Camaná Province" label="Camaná Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q205068" start="3187" end="3202" title="Arequipa Region" label="Arequipa Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q855669" start="3320" end="3359" title="American Popular Revolutionary Alliance" label="American Popular Revolutionary Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3266597" start="3376" end="3392" title="Luis Alva Castro" label="Luis Alva Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q9031674" start="3397" end="3416" title="Mercedes Cabanillas" label="Mercedes Cabanillas"/>
<link wikidata="Q12859263" start="3462" end="3468" title="orator" label="orator"/>
<link wikidata="Q379977" start="3524" end="3552" title="Víctor Raúl Haya de la Torre" label="Víctor Raúl Haya de la Torre"/>
<link wikidata="Q200601" start="3634" end="3672" title="Pontifical Catholic University of Peru" label="Pontifical Catholic University of Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q270145" start="3725" end="3758" title="National University of San Marcos" label="National University of San Marcos"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="3799" end="3804" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q276043" start="3885" end="3897" title="Manuel Fraga" label="Manuel Fraga"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="4062" end="4068" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q571293" start="4116" end="4152" title="Sorbonne Nouvelle University Paris 3" label="Sorbonne Nouvelle University Paris 3"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4161" end="4208" title=":fr:Institut des Hautes Etudes de l´Amérique latine" label="Institut des Hautes Etudes de l´Amérique latine"/>
<link wikidata="Q21201" start="4245" end="4254" title="sociology" label="sociology"/>
<link wikidata="Q379977" start="4284" end="4312" title="Víctor Raúl Haya de la Torre" label="Víctor Raúl Haya de la Torre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5707797" start="4358" end="4395" title="1978 Peruvian Constituent Assembly election" label="Constituent Assembly election in 1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q81009" start="4506" end="4514" title="rhetoric" label="rhetoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q63398474" start="4722" end="4727" title="Carla García" label="Carla"/>
<link wikidata="Q629129" start="4907" end="4919" title="Extramarital sex" label="extramarital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357543" start="5053" end="5061" title="Congress of the Republic of Peru" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q855669" start="5128" end="5150" title="American Popular Revolutionary Alliance" label="Peruvian Aprista Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370849" start="5212" end="5234" title="1985 Peruvian general election" label="1985 general elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q2615108" start="5470" end="5487" title="Alfonso Barrantes Lingán" label="Alfonso Barrantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888221" start="5522" end="5533" title="United Left (Peru)" label="United Left"/>
<link wikidata="Q855669" start="5822" end="5826" title="American Popular Revolutionary Alliance" label="APRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="5889" end="5902" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="5910" end="5917" title="John F. Kennedy" label="Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021556" start="6056" end="6079" title="Juan Crisostomo Torrico" label="Juan Crisostomo Torrico"/>
<link wikidata="Q185565" start="6376" end="6390" title="hyperinflation" label="hyperinflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900936" start="6620" end="6637" title="chronic inflation" label="chronic inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606309" start="6666" end="6669" title="Peruvian sol (1863–1985)" label="sol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531048" start="6691" end="6695" title="Peruvian inti" label="inti"/>
<link wikidata="Q204656" start="6777" end="6786" title="Peruvian nuevo sol" label="nuevo sol"/>
<link wikidata="Q793736" start="6943" end="6991" title="INEI" label="National Institute of Statistics and Informatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q161718" start="7000" end="7036" title="United Nations Development Programme" label="United Nations Development Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q178564" start="7216" end="7227" title="nationalization" label="nationalise"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="7270" end="7297" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q6803767" start="7438" end="7460" title="Gross National Product" label="Gross National Product"/>
<link wikidata="Q167651" start="8051" end="8057" title="Maoist" label="Maoist"/>
<link wikidata="Q207854" start="8086" end="8098" title="Shining Path" label="Shining Path"/>
<link wikidata="Q852133" start="8119" end="8144" title="internal conflict in Peru" label="internal conflict in Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q829088" start="8264" end="8298" title="Túpac Amaru Revolutionary Movement" label="Túpac Amaru Revolutionary Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4672685" start="8502" end="8520" title="Accomarca massacre" label="Accomarca massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q838811" start="8531" end="8541" title="Peasant" label="campesinos"/>
<link wikidata="Q76515992" start="8595" end="8610" title="Cayara massacre" label="Cayara massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q580861" start="8691" end="8737" title="Peruvian prison massacres" label="the summary execution of more than 200 inmates"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383156" start="8792" end="8802" title="El Frontón" label="El Frontón"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288449" start="8884" end="8904" title="forced disappearance" label="forced disappearance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7357335" start="9055" end="9077" title="Rodrigo Franco Command" label="Rodrigo Franco Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q846498" start="9178" end="9190" title="classified information" label="declassified"/>
<link wikidata="Q207320" start="9302" end="9314" title="paramilitary" label="paramilitary"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9373" end="9382" title="El Diario (Peru)" label="El Diario"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="9457" end="9468" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3266012" start="9549" end="9561" title="Lucy Komisar" label="Lucy Komisar"/>
<link wikidata="Q653517" start="9707" end="9721" title="Rudi Dornbusch" label="Rudi Dornbusch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7442638" start="9726" end="9743" title="Sebastian Edwards" label="Sebastian Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q30590789" start="9761" end="9783" title="macroeconomic populism" label="macroeconomic populism"/>
<link wikidata="Q806677" start="10584" end="10588" title="Bank of Credit and Commerce International" label="BCCI"/>
<link wikidata="Q521095" start="10720" end="10737" title="Robert Morgenthau" label="Robert Morgenthau"/>
<link wikidata="Q22316" start="10798" end="10808" title="John Kerry" label="John Kerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5789494" start="11039" end="11061" title="Supreme Court of Peru" label="Peruvian Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q133040" start="11241" end="11257" title="Alberto Fujimori" label="Alberto Fujimori"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893606" start="11270" end="11279" title="1992 Peruvian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="self-coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357543" start="11312" end="11329" title="Congress of the Republic of Peru" label="Peruvian Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2786200" start="11537" end="11553" title="Senator for life" label="Senator for life"/>
<link wikidata="Q5789494" start="12185" end="12198" title="Supreme Court of Peru" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q365435" start="12260" end="12278" title="Jorge Del Castillo" label="Jorge Del Castillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164400" start="12313" end="12333" title="Vladimiro Montesinos" label="Vladimiro Montesinos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604387" start="12576" end="12613" title="List of diplomatic missions of Colombia" label="residence of the Colombian Ambassador"/>
<link wikidata="Q332020" start="12736" end="12749" title="César Gaviria" label="César Gaviria"/>
<link wikidata="Q500407" start="12825" end="12844" title="Colombian Air Force" label="Colombian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2841" start="12873" end="12879" title="Bogotá" label="Bogotá"/>
<link wikidata="Q365435" start="12909" end="12927" title="Jorge Del Castillo" label="Jorge Del Castillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q123759" start="13325" end="13356" title="Organization of American States" label="Organization of American States"/>
<link wikidata="Q139738" start="13736" end="13746" title="Lima Metro" label="Lima Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q5789494" start="13787" end="13800" title="Supreme Court of Peru" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="13936" end="13941" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399" start="14216" end="14227" title="Niccolò Machiavelli" label="Machiavelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q81638" start="15141" end="15158" title="Valentín Paniagua" label="Valentín Paniagua"/>
<link wikidata="Q207426" start="15248" end="15264" title="Alejandro Toledo" label="Alejandro Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q162719" start="15471" end="15481" title="neoliberal" label="neoliberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620240" start="15712" end="15725" title="2001 Peruvian general election" label="2001 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760317" start="15885" end="15917" title="2006 Peruvian general election" label="April 2006 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q57254" start="15944" end="15958" title="Ollanta Humala" label="Ollanta Humala"/>
<link wikidata="Q257395" start="16055" end="16069" title="Lourdes Flores" label="Lourdes Flores"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="16375" end="16384" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q8440" start="16396" end="16407" title="Hugo Chávez" label="Hugo Chávez"/>
<link wikidata="Q295790" start="16620" end="16639" title="Carlos Andrés Pérez" label="Carlos Andrés Pérez"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="16786" end="16789" title="CNN" label="CNN"/>
<link wikidata="Q123759" start="16812" end="16843" title="Organization of American States" label="Organization of American States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="17096" end="17123" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17125" end="17136" title="Anoop Singh (economist)" label="Anoop Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q57254" start="17535" end="17549" title="Ollanta Humala" label="Ollanta Humala"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582862" start="17849" end="17854" title="Cuzco" label="Cuzco"/>
<link wikidata="Q159273" start="17859" end="17867" title="Arequipa" label="Arequipa"/>
<link wikidata="Q9444" start="17877" end="17887" title="rainforest" label="rainforest"/>
<link wikidata="Q11256" start="18198" end="18210" title="Fidel Castro" label="Fidel Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="18218" end="18222" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q8440" start="18238" end="18249" title="Hugo Chávez" label="Hugo Chávez"/>
<link wikidata="Q615255" start="18719" end="18728" title="Two-round system" label="ballotage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357543" start="18805" end="18813" title="Congress of Peru" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306078" start="18901" end="18915" title="Union for Peru" label="Union for Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639380" start="19103" end="19147" title="Peru–United States Trade Promotion Agreement" label="Peru–United States Trade Promotion Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357543" start="19155" end="19172" title="Peruvian Congress" label="Peruvian Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="19315" end="19328" title="U.S. Congress" label="U.S. Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q365435" start="19683" end="19701" title="Jorge Del Castillo" label="Jorge Del Castillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="19720" end="19723" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q37181" start="19897" end="19910" title="Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva" label="Lula da Silva"/>
<link wikidata="Q8850" start="20622" end="20636" title="Aló Presidente" label="Aló Presidente"/>
<link wikidata="Q4230" start="21442" end="21477" title="South American Community of Nations" label="South American Community of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3266635" start="21517" end="21530" title="Luis Carranza" label="Luis Carranza"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="21554" end="21559" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q806189" start="21566" end="21597" title="Banco Bilbao Vizcaya Argentaria" label="Banco Bilbao Vizcaya Argentaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q207426" start="21684" end="21700" title="Alejandro Toledo" label="Alejandro Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992753" start="21903" end="21949" title="Confederación General de Trabajadores del Perú" label="Confederación General de Trabajadores del Perú"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="22018" end="22029" title="trade union" label="trade union"/>
<link wikidata="Q365435" start="22328" end="22346" title="Jorge del Castillo" label="Jorge del Castillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q58098" start="22420" end="22448" title="José Antonio García Belaúnde" label="José Antonio García Belaúnde"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454" start="22595" end="22608" title="death penalty" label="death penalty"/>
<link wikidata="Q207854" start="23086" end="23098" title="Shining Path" label="Shining Path"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357543" start="23126" end="23134" title="Congress of Peru" label="congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760317" start="23244" end="23270" title="2006 Peruvian national election" label="2006 Presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q469076" start="23470" end="23505" title="American Convention on Human Rights" label="American Convention on Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366082" start="23788" end="23793" title="Bagua Province" label="Bagua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363781" start="24277" end="24294" title="Indigenous peoples in Brazil" label="Native Amazonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1863792" start="24842" end="24868" title="human rights organizations" label="human rights organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q79913" start="25108" end="25111" title="NGO" label="NGO"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="25572" end="25577" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q207426" start="25634" end="25650" title="Alejandro Toledo" label="Alejandro Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q331" start="25655" end="25668" title="Ricardo Lagos" label="Ricardo Lagos"/>
<link wikidata="Q133040" start="25711" end="25727" title="Alberto Fujimori" label="Alberto Fujimori"/>
<link wikidata="Q320" start="25802" end="25819" title="Michelle Bachelet" label="Michelle Bachelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q37181" start="26149" end="26174" title="Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva" label="Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="26178" end="26184" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075391" start="26259" end="26264" title="IIRSA" label="IIRSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q210047" start="26359" end="26368" title="Petrobras" label="Petrobras"/>
<link wikidata="Q2506390" start="26373" end="26382" title="Petroperú" label="Petroperú"/>
<link wikidata="Q170196" start="26471" end="26481" title="hydropower" label="hydropower"/>
<link wikidata="Q7171198" start="27440" end="27470" title="2016 Peruvian general election" label="2016 Peruvian general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q23042225" start="27506" end="27522" title="Popular Alliance (Peru)" label="Popular Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234101" start="27575" end="27604" title="Christian People&amp;#x27;s Party (Peru)" label="Christian People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q257395" start="27610" end="27624" title="Lourdes Flores" label="Lourdes Flores"/>
<link wikidata="Q615255" start="27770" end="27776" title="Runoff (election)" label="runoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q381027" start="27787" end="27808" title="Pedro Pablo Kuczynski" label="Pedro Pablo Kuczynski"/>
<link wikidata="Q708420" start="28225" end="28238" title="Recurso de amparo" label="amparo action"/>
<link wikidata="Q14743875" start="28726" end="28734" title="Kickback (bribery)" label="kickback"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="28744" end="28750" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q94849" start="28775" end="28784" title="Odebrecht" label="Odebrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q366" start="29110" end="29120" title="corruption" label="corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q470923" start="29153" end="29165" title="Yehude Simon" label="Yehude Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2378206" start="29184" end="29201" title="Rosario Fernández" label="Rosario Fernández"/>
<link wikidata="Q9031674" start="29225" end="29244" title="Mercedes Cabanillas" label="Mercedes Cabanillas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4771421" start="29273" end="29292" title="Ántero Flores Aráoz" label="Ántero Flores Aráoz"/>
<link wikidata="Q22006014" start="29320" end="29337" title="Luis Nava Guibert" label="Luis Nava Guibert"/>
<link wikidata="Q564811" start="29557" end="29563" title="Asylum seeker" label="asylum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344343" start="29852" end="29869" title="Rodolfo Nin Novoa" label="Rodolfo Nin Novoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q94849" start="30554" end="30571" title="Novonor" label="Odebrecht company"/>
<link wikidata="Q210603" start="30607" end="30621" title="extradition request" label="where possible"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30643" end="30675" title="President of Peru#Living former presidents of Peru" label="living former presidents of Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q381027" start="30703" end="30724" title="Pedro Pablo Kuczynski" label="Pedro Pablo Kuczynski"/>
<link wikidata="Q57254" start="30726" end="30740" title="Ollanta Humala" label="Ollanta Humala"/>
<link wikidata="Q207426" start="30746" end="30762" title="Alejandro Toledo" label="Alejandro Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q202837" start="31311" end="31325" title="cardiac arrest" label="cardiac arrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q855669" start="31390" end="31429" title="American Popular Revolutionary Alliance" label="American Popular Revolutionary Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368943" start="31515" end="31534" title="cerebral hemorrhage" label="cerebral hemorrhage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112001" start="31627" end="31640" title="Colt Anaconda" label="Colt Anaconda"/>
<link wikidata="Q952444" start="31696" end="31709" title="Peruvian Navy" label="Peruvian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q24030720" start="32002" end="32017" title="Martín Vizcarra" label="Martín Vizcarra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6496299" start="32289" end="32313" title="Latin Business Chronicle" label="Latin Business Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q94127" start="32493" end="32525" title="Order of the Condor of the Andes" label="Order of the Condor of the Andes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3885450" start="32556" end="32579" title="National Order of Merit (Ecuador)" label="National Order of Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3885457" start="32610" end="32633" title="National Order of Merit (Paraguay)" label="National Order of Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q931502" start="32658" end="32688" title="Order of Isabella the Catholic" label="Order of Isabella the Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q624463" start="32716" end="32740" title="Grand Order of Mugunghwa" label="Grand Order of Mugunghwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q665105" start="32798" end="32817" title="University of Delhi" label="University of Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901492" start="32958" end="32982" title="National Library of Peru" label="National Library of Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q48772090" start="33212" end="33271" title="List of heads of state and government who committed suicide" label="List of heads of state and government who committed suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2877491" start="33273" end="33304" title="First presidency of Alan García" label="First presidency of Alan García"/>
<link wikidata="Q6123835" start="33306" end="33338" title="Second presidency of Alan García" label="Second presidency of Alan García"/>
<link wikidata="Q4704926" start="33744" end="33759" title="BBC News Online" label="BBC News Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q289146" start="33824" end="33852" title="Truth and Reconciliation Commission (Peru)" label="Peruvian Commission of Truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176564" start="34099" end="34129" title="Council on Hemispheric Affairs" label="Council on Hemispheric Affairs"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="335169" wikidata="Q283943" url="?curid=335169" title="Sæmundr fróði">
<text>Sæmundr Sigfússon, better known as Sæmundr fróði (&quot;Sæmundr the Learned&quot;; 1056–1133), was an Icelandic priest and scholar.

==Biography==
Sæmundr is known to have studied abroad. Previously it has generally been held that he studied in France, but modern scholars rather believe his studies were carried out in Franconia. In Iceland he founded a long-lived school at Oddi. He was a member of the Oddaverjar clan and was the father of Loftur Sæmundsson.

Sæmundr wrote a work, probably in Latin, on the history of Norwegian kings. The work is now lost but was used as a source by later authors, including Snorri Sturluson. The poem &quot;Nóregs konungatal&quot; summarizes Sæmundr&#x27;s work. The authorship of the Poetic Edda, or, more plausibly, just the editor&#x27;s role in the compilation, was traditionally attributed to Sæmundr - Bishop Brynjulf asked in 1641 &quot;Where now are those huge treasuries of all human knowledge written by Saemund the Wise, and above all that most noble Edda&quot;? - but is not accepted today. It has been demonstrated by Svend Ellehøj that Sæmundr wrote in Latin a work that influenced highly on Nóregs konungatal, and the Saga of Óláfr Tryggvason by Oddr Snorrason.

==Icelandic folklore==
In Icelandic folklore, Sæmundr is a larger-than-life character who repeatedly tricks the Devil into doing his bidding. For example, in one famous story Sæmundr made a pact with the Devil that the Devil should carry him home to Iceland from Europe in the form of a seal. Sæmundr escaped a diabolical end when, on arrival, he hit the seal on the head with the Bible, and stepped safely ashore.

Although the above is a commonly told story about Sæmundr and his association with the Black School (&quot;Svartiskóli&quot; or &quot;Svartaskóli&quot; ), there are several others. In one account, Sæmundr sailed abroad to learn the Dark Arts, but there was no schoolmaster present. Every time the students requested information regarding the arts, books about the subject would be provided the next morning or otherwise be written up on the walls. Above the entrance to the school, it was written: &quot;You may come in; your soul is lost.&quot; There was also a law that forbade anyone to study at the school for more than three years. Whenever the students left in a given year, they had to leave at the same time. The devil would keep the last one remaining, and so they always drew lots to determine who would be the last one to leave. On more than one occasion the lot fell on Sæmundr, and so he remained longer than the law permitted. One day, Bishop Jón was traveling through Rome and passed nearby. He found out that Sæmundr was trapped in the Black School, so he offered him advice on how to escape as long as he returned to Iceland and behaved as a good Christian. Sæmundr agreed, but as he and Bishop Jón were leaving the school, the Devil reached up and grabbed Bishop Jón&#x27;s cloak. Bishop Jón escaped, but the Devil trapped Sæmundr and made him a deal—if Sæmundr could hide for three days, he would be able to return to Iceland. Ultimately, Sæmundr was successful in hiding, and he presumably returned.

Another account explains that when Sæmundr left the Black School, he sewed a leg of mutton into his cloak, and he followed the rushing group out of the doors. When Sæmundr was near the exit, the Devil reached up to grab his cloak but only grabbed the leg that was sewn into the clothing. Sæmundr then dropped the cloak and ran, saying: &quot;He grabbed, but I slipped away!&quot;.

==References==
===Sources===
*


==Further reading==
*
==External links== </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q283943" start="0" end="17" title="Sæmundr fróði" label="Sæmundr Sigfússon"/>
<link wikidata="Q283943" start="35" end="48" title="Sæmundr fróði" label="Sæmundr fróði"/>
<link wikidata="Q150907" start="320" end="329" title="Franconia" label="Franconia"/>
<link wikidata="Q145366" start="376" end="380" title="Oddi" label="Oddi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584240" start="405" end="415" title="Oddaverjar family clan" label="Oddaverjar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481458" start="443" end="460" title="Loftur Sæmundsson" label="Loftur Sæmundsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="497" end="502" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469365" start="511" end="537" title="kings&amp;#x27; sagas" label="history of Norwegian kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585442" start="555" end="559" title="Lost literary work" label="lost"/>
<link wikidata="Q102323" start="613" end="629" title="Snorri Sturluson" label="Snorri Sturluson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780953" start="646" end="663" title="Nóregs konungatal" label="Nóregs konungatal"/>
<link wikidata="Q205874" start="724" end="735" title="Poetic Edda" label="Poetic Edda"/>
<link wikidata="Q712642" start="847" end="862" title="Bishop Brynjulf" label="Bishop Brynjulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039796" start="1243" end="1261" title="Icelandic folklore" label="Icelandic folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q6674" start="1329" end="1334" title="Devil" label="Devil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506690" start="1407" end="1426" title="pact with the Devil" label="pact with the Devil"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="335170" wikidata="Q741149" url="?curid=335170" title="Polydore Vergil">
<text>Polydore Vergil or Virgil (Italian: Polidoro Virgili, commonly Latinised as Polydorus Vergilius; – 18 April 1555), widely known as Polydore Vergil of Urbino, was an Italian humanist scholar, historian, priest and diplomat, who spent much of his life in England. He is particularly remembered for his works the &quot;Proverbiorum libellus&quot; (1498), a collection of Latin proverbs; &quot;De inventoribus rerum&quot; (1499), a history of discoveries and origins; and the &quot;Anglica Historia&quot; (drafted by 1513; printed in 1534), an influential history of England. He has been dubbed the &quot;Father of English History&quot;.

Vergil is sometimes referred to in contemporary documents as Polydore Vergil Castellensis or Castellen, leading some to assume that he was a kinsman of his patron, Cardinal Adriano Castellesi. However, it is more likely that the alias simply indicates that he was in Castellesi&#x27;s service.

==Biography==
===Early life in Italy===
Vergil was born in about 1470 either at Urbino, or more probably at Fermignano, within the Duchy of Urbino. His father, Giorgio di Antonio, owned a dispensary. His grandfather, Antonio Virgili, &quot;a man well skilled in medicine and astrology&quot;, had taught philosophy at the University of Paris; as did Polydore&#x27;s own brother, Giovanni-Matteo Virgili, at Ferrara and Padua. Another brother, Girolamo, was a merchant trading with England. The niece of Polydore Vergil, Faustina, married Lorenzo Borgogelli, count of Fano, from whom descend the family of Borgogelli Virgili.

Polydore was educated at the University of Padua, and possibly at Bologna. He was ordained by 1496. He was probably in the service of Guidobaldo da Montefeltro, Duke of Urbino, before 1498, as in the dedication of his &quot;Proverbiorum Libellus&quot; (April 1498) he styles himself Guido&#x27;s client. His second book, &quot;De Inventoribus Rerum&quot;, was dedicated to Guido&#x27;s tutor, Lodovico Odassio, in August 1499.

At some point prior to 1502 Polydore entered the service of Pope Alexander VI.

===Move to England===

In 1502, Vergil travelled to England as the deputy of Cardinal Adriano Castellesi in the office of Collector of Peter&#x27;s Pence, and, in practice, the Cardinal&#x27;s agent in a variety of affairs. In October 1504 he was enthroned Bishop of Bath and Wells as proxy for Adriano; and in 1508 he himself was installed as Archdeacon of Wells. He probably spent little time in Wells, but was active as the Chapter&#x27;s representative in London. He also donated a set of hangings for the quire of Wells Cathedral. He held other ecclesiastical sinecures, including, from 1503, the living of Church Langton, Leicestershire; from 1508 prebends in Lincoln and Hereford Cathedrals; and from 1513 the prebend of Oxgate in St Paul&#x27;s Cathedral.

As an established author, and a representative of Italian humanist learning, Vergil was received in England as a minor celebrity, and was welcomed at court by King Henry VII, who was more interested in humanist scholars than his predecessors. He recognized the advantages humanism would offer to legitimise his claim to the throne, which was still vulnerable to challenge after his victory at the Battle of Bosworth Field, and the role that diffusion of humanist education would take in establishing a more educated, bureaucratic government than the feudal aristocracy. It was at the King&#x27;s behest that Vergil began work on his &quot;Anglica Historia&quot;, a new history of England, probably as early as 1505, retelling the history of the Wars of the Roses to emphasise that the war ended with the new monarch&#x27;s reign. 

On 22 October 1510, he was naturalised English.

Early in 1515 – through the intrigues of Andrea Ammonio, who sought the subcollectorship for himself – an ill-judged letter from Vergil was intercepted by the authorities. It contained what was read as implied criticism of both Thomas Wolsey and Henry VIII, and as a result Vergil was imprisoned in April in the Tower of London. His supporters and advocates included Pope Leo X, who wrote to the King on his behalf. From prison Vergil wrote to Wolsey, begging that the approaching Christmas season – a time which witnessed the restitution of a world – might also see his pardon: his letter&#x27;s tone has been described as &quot;almost blasphemous&quot;. He was released before Christmas 1515, but never regained his subcollectorship.

===Return visits to Italy and death===
Although Vergil lived predominantly in England from 1502 onwards, he paid several return visits to Urbino, in 1513–14, 1516–17 and 1533–34. In 1534, Francesco Maria, Duke of Urbino, in recognition of his literary achievements, admitted Vergil and his family to the ranks of the nobility.

In 1546 Vergil resigned the Archdeaconry of Wells to the Crown, perhaps in anticipation of his retirement to Italy. He was licensed to return to Urbino in 1550, and probably left England for the last time in the summer of 1553. He died in Urbino on 18 April 1555.

==Works==
===Perotti&#x27;s &quot;Cornucopiae&quot;===
Vergil published his first work in 1496. This was an edition of Niccolò Perotti’s &quot;Cornucopiae latinae linguae&quot;, a commentary on Martial&#x27;s &quot;Epigrams&quot;.

===&quot;Proverbiorum Libellus&quot; (&quot;Adagia&quot;)===
Vergil&#x27;s &quot;Proverbiorum Libellus&quot; (Venice, 1498), retitled in later editions as &quot;Adagiorum Liber&quot;, and often known as the &quot;Adagia&quot;, was a collection of Latin proverbs. It was the first such collection printed, preceding the similar &quot;Adagia&quot; of Erasmus by two years. The initial controversy between the two authors that arose from their rival claims for priority (Erasmus still believed as late as 1533 that his work had been the earlier) gave place to a sincere friendship. The first edition of Vergil&#x27;s work contained 306 proverbs taken from classical sources. A second, expanded, edition appeared in 1521: it contained a further series of 431 Biblical proverbs, and was dedicated to Wolsey&#x27;s follower, Richard Pace. This edition is preceded by an interesting letter sent in June 1519, which gives the names of many of Vergil&#x27;s English friends, including Thomas More, William Warham, Thomas Linacre and Cuthbert Tunstall.

The &quot;Adagia&quot; ran through about 20 editions down to 1550.

===&quot;De Inventoribus Rerum&quot;===
Vergil&#x27;s &quot;De Inventoribus Rerum&quot; was published in 1499, having been written in only three months. It was a history of origins and inventions, describing in three books the &quot;first begetters&quot; of all human activities. Book I investigated the origin of the gods and the word &quot;God&quot;, along with such matters as the creation, marriage, religion and learning. Book II covered, among other topics, the origins of law, time, military science, money, precious metals and art. Book III covered, again among other topics, the origins of agriculture, architecture, towns, theatres, tools and materials, maritime navigation, commerce and prostitution.

For the edition of 1521, Vergil added five more books, devoted to the &quot;initia institorum rei Christianae&quot;, i.e. the origins of Christian rites and institutions. He probably thought that this addition would be a popular one, but it was also a concession towards critics who had labelled the &quot;De Inventoribus&quot; a work of heretics and depravity. The work nonetheless included criticisms of monks, priestly celibacy, indulgences, and of the policies and constitutional status of the papacy. As a consequence it was placed on the &quot;Index Librorum Prohibitorum&quot; (papal list of prohibited books) in 1564: an expurgated text, sanctioned by Gregory XIII, was published in 1576.

&quot;De Inventoribus&quot; was, however, exceedingly popular, and was quickly translated into French (1521), German (1537), English (1546) and Spanish (1551). Thirty Latin editions had been published by the time Vergil died in 1555; and the work eventually ran to around 70 Latin editions, and another 35 translations. The English edition of 1546 was an abridgement made by Thomas Langley, which also proved highly successful and was reprinted several times.

The work is notable for the immense industry that went into its compilation, and the range of ancient and modern writers on which Vergil was able to draw.

===&quot;Gildas …de calamitate, excidio et conquestu Britanniae&quot;===
In 1525 Vergil published an edition of Gildas&#x27; 6th-century history, &quot;De Excidio et Conquestu Britanniae&quot;, probably at Antwerp. He dedicated it to Cuthbert Tunstall, Bishop of London. This was the first critical edition of a British historical text. In publishing it, Vergil reflected a growing interest in post-classical texts among German and Italian scholars. This interest sprang mainly from self-conscious nationalism which makes it curious at least that a foreigner chose a text about Britain. Vergil did, however, have a motive; this project provided a background for his anti-Arthurian position. Tunstall supplied one of the source manuscripts (hence the dedication), and the work of editing was undertaken by Vergil and Robert Ridley. Their editing was for the most part conscientious, although they rearranged certain words in the interests of clarity, and also suppressed a few anti-clerical passages.

===&quot;Dialogus de Prodigiis&quot;===
Vergil&#x27;s &quot;Dialogus de Prodigiis&quot; was written in 1526–27, and printed in 1531. It was dedicated to Francesco Maria, Duke of Urbino. This treatise, in three books, takes the form of a Latin dialogue between Vergil and his Cambridge friend Robert Ridley on the subject of the natural and the supernatural, and whether credence should be given to such alleged phenomena as prodigious events and portents. The setting for the dialogue is the open air, at Vergil&#x27;s country house near London. Vergil&#x27;s role is to state the problems and supply the historical illustrations; his friend&#x27;s to explain, rationalise and depreciate as best he can.

The &quot;De Prodigiis&quot; also achieved great popularity, and was translated into Italian (1543), English (1546) and Spanish (1550).

===&quot;Anglica Historia&quot;===
Vergil&#x27;s history of England, the &quot;Anglica Historia&quot;, was begun at the instigation of King Henry VII, perhaps as early as 1506. This first version was completed in 1512–13. However, the work was not published until 1534; and four distinct versions can therefore be identified:

# Manuscript written in 1512–13: covering events up to 1513 (MS)
# First edition, Basel, 1534, folio; covering events up to 1509 (A)
# Second edition, Basel, 1546, folio: covering events up to 1509 (B)
# Third edition, Basel, 1555, folio: covering events up to 1537 (C)

The manuscript version is now held in the Vatican Library. Comprising two volumes, it was presented to the ducal library at Urbino in 1613 by Vergil&#x27;s grand-nephew. Although he stated in prefatory notes that the manuscript was written in Vergil&#x27;s hand – an assessment fully supported by the palaeographic evidence – it was at one time sometimes attributed to Federico Veterani. This misunderstanding arose from a colophon in the second volume, in a different hand, stating that &quot;I, Federico Veterani, wrote the whole work&quot;. A possible explanation is that Vergil left it in the care of Veterani, who inscribed the colophon to associate it with his other treasures so that it would not be lost or damaged during the Papal invasion in Urbino in 1516. Further isolated notes in Veterani&#x27;s hand, nearly all directions to a binder or printer, are found throughout the manuscript. The most plausible interpretation of the evidence is that Vergil intended to present a fine manuscript (rather than a printed book) to Henry VIII, and commissioned the work from Veterani, the most famous copyist of the day. However, no such copy by Veterani is known to have survived.

The manuscript version of the work was divided into 25 books. Books I–VII described the early history of England up to the Norman conquest; Book VIII dealt with the reigns of William I and William II; and the following books covered one reign per book, ending in book XXV which dealt with the beginning of Henry VIII&#x27;s reign to 1513.

In 1534 the first printed version of the work appeared, a folio with decorations from John Bebel&#x27;s press in Basel. While this edition was broadly similar to the manuscript, it incorporated substantial changes, and it seems that Vergil effectively made a fresh start using the manuscript as a guideline. The rewriting appears to have taken place between 1521 and 1524 (based on one reference to his having been archdeacon of Wells for fourteen years; and another allusion to &quot;this day, which is 1524&quot;). Book VII of the manuscript was now split into two parts, the new book VIII running from the death of Cnut to 1066; while the reigns of the first two Norman kings, previously covered in a single book, were also divided between two books. The work had therefore gained two books, but now ended with book XXVI in 1509, no longer extending into the reign of Henry VIII.

The second edition appeared in 1546. This version also ended in 1509, but was much revised. The revisions included rewordings for political reasons, a greater emphasis on the civic history of London, and stylistic improvements of the Latin for European readers.

The third edition was published in 1555, the year of Vergil&#x27;s death. In this case the revisions were minor and largely stylistic. However, Vergil added a new book (XXVII) giving an account of Henry VIII&#x27;s reign to 1537, and which included a highly critical portrait of Wolsey. Vergil claimed that most of his work on the last book was done contemporaneously, and that the work was interrupted by a visit to Italy. This must refer to his visit of 1533–34, and the entire period from 1530 to 1537 is in fact treated cursorily. Denys Hay finds it reasonable to suppose that at first Vergil planned this book to describe events up to 1530, but that he postponed the publication of it due to the political uncertainties in England, enabling him to extend the terminal date.

Vergil drew on an impressively wide range of sources for his work, including published books and oral testimony. He claimed to have been diligent in collecting materials, and to have drawn on the work of foreign as well as English historians. For this reason, he remarked, the English, Scots and French would find things reported in his pages far differently from the way they were used to hearing them within their own countries. In his search for information he applied to James IV of Scotland for a list of the Scottish kings and their annals; but not even his friendship with Gavin Douglas could make him accept the historical theories of the latter, who traced the pedigree of the Scots down from the banished son of an Athenian king and Scota, daughter of the Egyptian Pharaoh.

Vergil opened the &quot;Anglica Historia&quot; with a passage heavily influenced by Caesar&#x27;s &quot;Commentarii de Bello Gallico&quot;:
Britannia omnis...diuiditur in partes quatuor: quarum unam incolunt Angli, aliam Scoti, tertiam Vualli, quartam Cornubienses. Hi omnes uel lingua; uel moribus seu institutis inter se differunt.
In an early English translation, this is rendered as:
The whole Countrie of Britaine...is divided into iiij partes; wherof the one is inhabited of Englishmen, the other of Scottes, the third of Wallshemen, and the fowerth of Cornishe people. Which all differ emonge them selves, either in tongue, either in manners, or ells in lawes and ordinaunces.

===Other works===
Vergil published a &quot;Commentariolum in Dominicam Precem&quot; (&quot;Commentary on the Lord&#x27;s Prayer&quot;) at Basel in 1525, accompanying an edition of the &quot;De Inventoribus Rerum&quot;. His comments owed much to Erasmus&#x27; &quot;Precatio Dominica in septem portiones distributa&quot; (1523).

At Erasmus&#x27; request, Vergil worked on a translation from the Greek of Dio Chrysostom&#x27;s &quot;De Perfecto Monacho&quot;, which he published in 1533. It was reprinted in 1541 and 1550.

In 1545, he published his last work, the &quot;Dialogorum libri&quot;, a collection of Latin dialogues, divided into three parts as &quot;De patientia&quot;, &quot;De vita perfecta&quot;, and &quot;De veritate et mendacio&quot;.

==Commemoration==
Vergil was buried in Urbino Cathedral, in the chapel of St Andrew which he himself had endowed. In 1613, it was agreed that a memorial stone should be set over his tomb. This was eventually put in place in 1631, with an inscription stating that his fame would &quot;live for ever in the world&quot;. However, it is believed to have been lost when the cathedral was severely damaged by an earthquake in 1789.

Vergil&#x27;s family home and alleged birthplace in Urbino (now a property of the University of Urbino) is marked by a plaque; and there is also a bust of him in the city, unveiled in 2000.

Vergil is among the worthies whose portraits were painted in &quot;c&quot;.1618–19 on the frieze in what is now the Upper Reading Room of the Bodleian Library, Oxford.

==Reputation and legacy==
In continental Europe, Vergil is principally remembered for the &quot;De Inventoribus Rerum&quot; and the &quot;Adagia&quot;: these are the works which secured his reputation before he ever came to England, and which he himself regarded as his masterpieces, writing &quot;I, Polydore, was the first of the Romans to treat of these two matters&quot;. The &quot;De Inventoribus&quot; receives a mention, for example, in Cervantes&#x27; &quot;Don Quixote&quot; (1605–15).

In England, however, Vergil is more often remembered as author of the &quot;Anglica Historia&quot;. The work is an important primary source in its own right for the period 1460–1537, and as a secondary source continued to exert an influence on English historiography into the 19th century. It provided the chronicler Edward Hall with much of his sense of 15th-century English history, and so fed into the history plays of William Shakespeare.

A particularly controversial element of Vergil&#x27;s work in England was the scepticism he expressed – first in his edition of Gildas, and then in the &quot;Anglica Historia&quot; – towards the traditional account of the early history of Britain derived from Geoffrey of Monmouth, and in particular towards the question of the historicity of King Arthur. This criticism touched a patriotic nerve with the antiquary John Leland, who responded forcefully, first in an unpublished tract, written perhaps in 1536, the &quot;Codrus sive Laus et Defensio Gallofridi Arturii contra Polydorum Vergilium&quot; (&quot;Codrus&quot;, a reference to Vergil, was a type-name drawn from Juvenal for an offensive hack-poet); and afterwards in a longer published treatment, the &quot;Assertio inclytissimi Arturii regis Britannia&quot; (1544). Although Leland was critical of Vergil&#x27;s views in the &quot;Assertio&quot;, he treated his opponent with respect, acknowledging his intelligence and his mastery of Latin style.

On another contentious issue, Vergil came down in favour of the claims of the University of Cambridge to be a more ancient foundation than the University of Oxford. When this was mentioned in a debate in the House of Commons in 1628, the Oxonian Edward Littleton sneered, &quot;What have we to do with Polydore Vergil? One Vergil was a poet, the other a liar.&quot;

Other English readers also reacted vehemently to what seemed to be criticisms of their national history. John Bale in 1544 accused Vergil of &quot;polutynge our Englyshe chronycles most shamefullye with his Romishe lyes and other Italyshe beggerye&quot;. An anonymous contemporary described him as &quot;that most rascall dogge knave in the worlde&quot;, claiming that &quot;he had the randsackings of all the Englishe lybraryes, and when he had extracted what he pleased he burnt those famous velome manuscripts, and made himself father to other mens workes&quot;. This charge of burning manuscripts was widely reported. John Caius in 1574, for example, asserted that Vergil had &quot;committed as many of our ancient and manuscript historians to the flames as would have filled a waggon, that the faults of his own work might pass undiscovered&quot;. William Lambarde in 1576 commented that &quot;as [Vergil] was by office Collector of the Peter pence to the Popes gain and lucre, so sheweth he himselfe throughout by profession, a covetous gatherer of lying Fables, fained to advaunce the Popish Religion, Kingdome, and Myter&quot;. Henry Peacham in 1622 again accused Vergil of having &quot;burned and embezeled the best and most ancient Records and Monuments of our Abbeies, Priories, and Cathedrall Churches, under colour … of making search for all such monuments, manusc. records, Legier bookes, &amp;c. as might make for his purpose&quot;.

However, one of Peacham&#x27;s contemporaries, the Leicestershire antiquary William Burton, cast Vergil in a more positive light, describing him as &quot;a man of singular invention, good judgement, and good reading, and a true lover of antiquities&quot;. In the 19th century, Vergil&#x27;s importance to English historiography finally began to be acknowledged, as &quot;historians of Tudor England realized the scope of his achievement in the &quot;Anglica Historia&quot;&quot;.

==Modern editions/translations of works==
===&quot;De inventoribus rerum&quot;===
* An English translation of Books 1–9 (with some abridgements), originally published in London in 1663.
* An English translation of Books 1–8, based on the 1546 Lyon edition.
* Parallel Latin and English texts of Books 1–3, collating early editions to 1553–55.

===&quot;Anglica Historia&quot;===
*
* Latin text and English translation.
* Latin text and English translation
* Latin text and English translation of a portion of the &quot;Anglica Historia&quot;, from the manuscript in the Vatican

==References==
==Bibliography==
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q741149" start="0" end="15" title="Polydore Vergil" label="Polydore Vergil"/>
<link wikidata="Q741149" start="19" end="25" title="Polydore Vergil" label="Virgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="27" end="34" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q741149" start="131" end="156" title="Polydore Vergil" label="Polydore Vergil of Urbino"/>
<link wikidata="Q846933" start="173" end="181" title="Renaissance humanism" label="humanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="253" end="260" title="Kingdom of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q11755949" start="611" end="626" title="History of England" label="English History"/>
<link wikidata="Q741149" start="696" end="724" title="Polydore Vergil" label="Polydore Vergil Castellensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q741149" start="728" end="737" title="Polydore Vergil" label="Castellen"/>
<link wikidata="Q775146" start="808" end="826" title="Adriano Castellesi" label="Adriano Castellesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2759" start="1010" end="1016" title="Urbino" label="Urbino"/>
<link wikidata="Q190623" start="1038" end="1048" title="Fermignano" label="Fermignano"/>
<link wikidata="Q649202" start="1061" end="1076" title="Duchy of Urbino" label="Duchy of Urbino"/>
<link wikidata="Q209842" start="1251" end="1270" title="University of Paris" label="University of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q13362" start="1336" end="1343" title="Ferrara" label="Ferrara"/>
<link wikidata="Q617" start="1348" end="1353" title="Padua" label="Padua"/>
<link wikidata="Q13142" start="1496" end="1500" title="Fano" label="Fano"/>
<link wikidata="Q193510" start="1584" end="1603" title="University of Padua" label="University of Padua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891" start="1621" end="1628" title="Bologna" label="Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q969797" start="1689" end="1714" title="Guidobaldo da Montefeltro" label="Guidobaldo da Montefeltro"/>
<link wikidata="Q649202" start="1716" end="1730" title="Duke of Urbino" label="Duke of Urbino"/>
<link wikidata="Q108316" start="2043" end="2060" title="Pope Alexander VI" label="Pope Alexander VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q775146" start="2149" end="2167" title="Adriano Castellesi" label="Adriano Castellesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049175" start="2198" end="2216" title="Peter&amp;#x27;s Pence" label="Peter&amp;#x27;s Pence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225095" start="2320" end="2344" title="Bishop of Bath and Wells" label="Bishop of Bath and Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q6561934" start="2407" end="2426" title="List of Archdeacons of Wells" label="Archdeacon of Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q207707" start="2573" end="2578" title="Choir (architecture)" label="quire"/>
<link wikidata="Q519614" start="2582" end="2597" title="Wells Cathedral" label="Wells Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q923724" start="2628" end="2636" title="sinecure" label="sinecure"/>
<link wikidata="Q663840" start="2675" end="2689" title="East Langton" label="Church Langton"/>
<link wikidata="Q12640328" start="2717" end="2725" title="Prebendary" label="prebends"/>
<link wikidata="Q390169" start="2729" end="2736" title="Lincoln Cathedral" label="Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q429379" start="2741" end="2759" title="Hereford Cathedral" label="Hereford Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q173882" start="2801" end="2825" title="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Cathedral" label="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q846933" start="2886" end="2894" title="Renaissance humanism" label="humanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q675493" start="2992" end="3001" title="Henry VII of England" label="Henry VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q222013" start="3225" end="3249" title="Battle of Bosworth Field" label="Battle of Bosworth Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q127751" start="3573" end="3590" title="Wars of the Roses" label="Wars of the Roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q841440" start="3687" end="3698" title="Naturalization" label="naturalised"/>
<link wikidata="Q3615677" start="3750" end="3764" title="Andrea Ammonio" label="Andrea Ammonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q206512" start="3937" end="3950" title="Thomas Wolsey" label="Thomas Wolsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="3955" end="3965" title="Henry VIII of England" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q62378" start="4021" end="4036" title="Tower of London" label="Tower of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q49237" start="4076" end="4086" title="Pope Leo X" label="Pope Leo X"/>
<link wikidata="Q555015" start="4634" end="4649" title="Francesco Maria I della Rovere" label="Francesco Maria"/>
<link wikidata="Q649202" start="4651" end="4665" title="Duke of Urbino" label="Duke of Urbino"/>
<link wikidata="Q326037" start="5158" end="5173" title="Niccolò Perotti" label="Niccolò Perotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098" start="5233" end="5240" title="Martial" label="Martial"/>
<link wikidata="Q346677" start="5604" end="5610" title="Adagia" label="Adagia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43499" start="5620" end="5627" title="Erasmus" label="Erasmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3922143" start="5729" end="5737" title="Scientific priority" label="priority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245672" start="6090" end="6102" title="Richard Pace" label="Richard Pace"/>
<link wikidata="Q42544" start="6247" end="6258" title="Thomas More" label="Thomas More"/>
<link wikidata="Q744845" start="6260" end="6274" title="William Warham" label="William Warham"/>
<link wikidata="Q730540" start="6276" end="6290" title="Thomas Linacre" label="Thomas Linacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q725592" start="6295" end="6312" title="Cuthbert Tunstall" label="Cuthbert Tunstall"/>
<link wikidata="Q22765" start="7646" end="7673" title="Index Librorum Prohibitorum" label="Index Librorum Prohibitorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q83029" start="7756" end="7768" title="Pope Gregory XIII" label="Gregory XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q7791708" start="8169" end="8183" title="Thomas Langley (priest)" label="Thomas Langley"/>
<link wikidata="Q352995" start="8523" end="8529" title="Gildas" label="Gildas"/>
<link wikidata="Q604203" start="8563" end="8597" title="De Excidio et Conquestu Britanniae" label="De Excidio et Conquestu Britanniae"/>
<link wikidata="Q12892" start="8617" end="8624" title="Antwerp" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q725592" start="8645" end="8662" title="Cuthbert Tunstall" label="Cuthbert Tunstall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587771" start="8664" end="8680" title="Bishop of London" label="Bishop of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q87167" start="9138" end="9148" title="manuscript" label="manuscript"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9227" end="9240" title="Robert Ridley" label="Robert Ridley"/>
<link wikidata="Q478004" start="9387" end="9400" title="Anti-clericalism" label="anti-clerical"/>
<link wikidata="Q555015" start="9565" end="9580" title="Francesco Maria I della Rovere" label="Francesco Maria"/>
<link wikidata="Q649202" start="9582" end="9596" title="Duke of Urbino" label="Duke of Urbino"/>
<link wikidata="Q675493" start="10394" end="10403" title="Henry VII of England" label="Henry VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q772267" start="10676" end="10681" title="Folio (printing)" label="folio"/>
<link wikidata="Q213678" start="10894" end="10909" title="Vatican Library" label="Vatican Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q179957" start="11153" end="11166" title="Palaeography" label="palaeographic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11221" end="11238" title="Federico Veterani" label="Federico Veterani"/>
<link wikidata="Q372474" start="11275" end="11283" title="Colophon (publishing)" label="colophon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2759" start="11586" end="11610" title="Papal invasion in Urbino" label="Papal invasion in Urbino"/>
<link wikidata="Q37594" start="12212" end="12221" title="William the Conqueror" label="William I"/>
<link wikidata="Q102005" start="12226" end="12236" title="William II of England" label="William II"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12463" end="12473" title="John Bebel" label="John Bebel"/>
<link wikidata="Q78" start="12490" end="12495" title="Basel" label="Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q134128" start="12995" end="12999" title="Cnut the Great" label="Cnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q83418" start="13043" end="13049" title="Normans" label="Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259853" start="14059" end="14068" title="Denys Hay" label="Denys Hay"/>
<link wikidata="Q209815" start="14401" end="14415" title="Oral tradition" label="oral testimony"/>
<link wikidata="Q137906" start="14779" end="14799" title="James IV of Scotland" label="James IV of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q389096" start="14884" end="14897" title="Gavin Douglas" label="Gavin Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q780194" start="15029" end="15042" title="King of Athens" label="Athenian king"/>
<link wikidata="Q124419473" start="15047" end="15052" title="Scota" label="Scota"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="15070" end="15078" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Egyptian"/>
<link wikidata="Q37110" start="15079" end="15086" title="Pharaoh" label="Pharaoh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="15173" end="15179" title="Julius Caesar" label="Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q106199" start="15193" end="15221" title="Commentarii de Bello Gallico" label="Commentarii de Bello Gallico"/>
<link wikidata="Q42406" start="15570" end="15580" title="English people" label="Englishmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q181634" start="15595" end="15602" title="Scottish people" label="Scottes"/>
<link wikidata="Q188353" start="15617" end="15627" title="Welsh people" label="Wallshemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q222175" start="15648" end="15663" title="Cornish people" label="Cornishe people"/>
<link wikidata="Q334457" start="16178" end="16192" title="Dio Chrysostom" label="Dio Chrysostom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2754576" start="16566" end="16582" title="Urbino Cathedral" label="Urbino Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119752" start="17036" end="17056" title="University of Urbino" label="University of Urbino"/>
<link wikidata="Q82133" start="17287" end="17303" title="Bodleian Library" label="Bodleian Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q5682" start="17758" end="17767" title="Miguel de Cervantes" label="Cervantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q480" start="17780" end="17791" title="Don Quixote" label="Don Quixote"/>
<link wikidata="Q112754" start="17935" end="17949" title="primary source" label="primary source"/>
<link wikidata="Q905511" start="18002" end="18018" title="secondary source" label="secondary source"/>
<link wikidata="Q50675" start="18062" end="18076" title="historiography" label="historiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q713043" start="18127" end="18138" title="Edward Hall" label="Edward Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2284425" start="18215" end="18228" title="Shakespearean history" label="history plays"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="18232" end="18251" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q188344" start="18514" end="18534" title="Geoffrey of Monmouth" label="Geoffrey of Monmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517710" start="18582" end="18593" title="historicity" label="historicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q45792" start="18597" end="18608" title="King Arthur" label="King Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398356" start="18670" end="18681" title="John Leland (antiquary)" label="John Leland"/>
<link wikidata="Q193800" start="18927" end="18934" title="Juvenal" label="Juvenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="19343" end="19366" title="University of Cambridge" label="University of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="19408" end="19428" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="19473" end="19489" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="19503" end="19510" title="Oxonian" label="Oxonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5344161" start="19511" end="19527" title="Edward Littleton, 1st Baron Littleton of Mounslow" label="Edward Littleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="19588" end="19594" title="Virgil" label="Vergil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234985" start="19737" end="19746" title="John Bale" label="John Bale"/>
<link wikidata="Q378274" start="20126" end="20132" title="vellum" label="velome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227536" start="20254" end="20264" title="John Caius" label="John Caius"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568771" start="20485" end="20501" title="William Lambarde" label="William Lambarde"/>
<link wikidata="Q19288563" start="20768" end="20781" title="Henry Peacham (born 1578)" label="Henry Peacham"/>
<link wikidata="Q8006197" start="21157" end="21171" title="William Burton (antiquary, died 1645)" label="William Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346592" start="21821" end="21829" title="Parallel text" label="Parallel"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="335173" wikidata="Q1245672" url="?curid=335173" title="Richard Pace">
<text>Richard Pace (c. 148228 June 1536) was an English clergyman and diplomat of the Tudor period.

== Life ==
He was born in Hampshire and educated at Winchester College under Thomas Langton. He attended the universities of Padua and Oxford. In 1509, he accompanied Cardinal Christopher Bainbridge, Archbishop of York, to Rome, and he remained in the service of the Archbishop until that man&#x27;s death by poisoning in 1514; he was instrumental in bringing the murderer to justice. In 1515, upon his return to England, he entered the service of Cardinal Wolsey where he was employed in diplomacy and espionage. In 1515, Pace became Wolsey&#x27;s secretary and in 1516 a secretary of state, although he continued to engage in lengthy correspondence with the Cardinal on his orders. He was also collated Archdeacon of Dorset in 1514. holding the post until 1523.

In 1515, Wolsey sent Pace to urge the Swiss to attack France. He was engaged in a lengthy negotiation with Emperor Maximillian I regarding Henry&#x27;s support of the Emperor&#x27;s activities against the French in northern Italy, but upon Wolsey&#x27;s instructions, used the 100,000 florins deposited on his behalf in Antwerp to pay for Swiss soldiers. Maximillian wanted use of the funds, which he claimed had been promised to him by Henry, to levy troops in Switzerland and parts of the Austrian territories. Pace refused to act without direct orders from Henry, despite Maximillian&#x27;s cajolery, demands, and frustration. Following the Battle of Marignano, Pace was captured by the French and imprisoned for some time, but released in early spring.

In 1519, Pace returned to Germany (Holy Roman Empire) to discuss with the Prince-Electors the impending election of Maximillan&#x27;s grandson Charles V to the imperial throne. He was made dean of St Paul&#x27;s in 1519, holding the office until 1536. He was present at the Field of the Cloth of Gold in 1520, and in 1521 he went to Venice with the object of winning the support of the republic for Wolsey, who was anxious at this time to become pope. At the end of 1526 he was recalled to England, having been appointed Dean of Exeter (1522?–1527) and Dean of Salisbury (1523–1536) in his absence.

In February 1536, it was reported that Pace&#x27;s and he died in 1536. During his latter years co-adjutors were appointed to help with his ecclesiastical duties.

==Works==
His chief literary work was &quot;De Fructu Qui ex Doctrina Precipitur&quot; (Basel, 1517).

He is claimed as the author of &quot;Julius exclusus de coelis&quot; (&quot;Julius excluded from Heaven&quot;), a satire on Pope Julius II, which was wrongly credited to Erasmus.

==Fictional portrayals==
In the Showtime television series &quot;The Tudors&quot; (2007), Pace, played by Matt Ryan, is depicted as being accused of spying, and imprisoned in the Tower of London, wherein he is seen to succumb to madness.

==References==
==Sources==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1245672" start="0" end="12" title="Richard Pace" label="Richard Pace"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="42" end="49" title="England" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q193391" start="64" end="72" title="diplomat" label="diplomat"/>
<link wikidata="Q101978" start="80" end="92" title="Tudor dynasty" label="Tudor period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059517" start="147" end="165" title="Winchester College" label="Winchester College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425715" start="172" end="186" title="Thomas Langton" label="Thomas Langton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918" start="204" end="216" title="University" label="universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q193510" start="220" end="225" title="University of Padua" label="Padua"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="230" end="236" title="University of Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258968" start="271" end="293" title="Christopher Bainbridge" label="Christopher Bainbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363910" start="295" end="313" title="Archbishop of York" label="Archbishop of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="318" end="322" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q206512" start="543" end="558" title="Cardinal Wolsey" label="Cardinal Wolsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q591522" start="668" end="686" title="Secretary of State (England)" label="secretary of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785765" start="800" end="820" title="Archdeacon of Dorset" label="Archdeacon of Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="898" end="903" title="Switzerland" label="Swiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="914" end="920" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q150726" start="975" end="988" title="Maximilian I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Maximillian I"/>
<link wikidata="Q330" start="1504" end="1523" title="Battle of Marignano" label="Battle of Marignano"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="1644" end="1651" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="1653" end="1670" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q22722" start="1692" end="1706" title="Prince-Elector" label="Prince-Elector"/>
<link wikidata="Q32500" start="1761" end="1770" title="Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Charles V"/>
<link wikidata="Q5246665" start="1807" end="1829" title="dean of St Paul&amp;#x27;s" label="dean of St Paul&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030061" start="1892" end="1918" title="Field of the Cloth of Gold" label="Field of the Cloth of Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="1951" end="1957" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5246621" start="2139" end="2153" title="Dean of Exeter" label="Dean of Exeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5246658" start="2171" end="2188" title="Dean of Salisbury" label="Dean of Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q6309784" start="2522" end="2547" title="Julius exclusus de coelis" label="Julius exclusus de coelis"/>
<link wikidata="Q80516" start="2609" end="2623" title="Pope Julius II" label="Pope Julius II"/>
<link wikidata="Q43499" start="2655" end="2662" title="Erasmus" label="Erasmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q326731" start="2730" end="2740" title="The Tudors" label="The Tudors"/>
<link wikidata="Q522373" start="2771" end="2780" title="Matt Ryan (actor)" label="Matt Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q62378" start="2844" end="2859" title="Tower of London" label="Tower of London"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="335174" wikidata="Q1042181" url="?curid=335174" title="Xerces blue">
<text>The Xerces blue (&quot;Glaucopsyche xerces&quot;) is a recently extinct species of butterfly in the gossamer-winged butterfly family, Lycaenidae. The species lived in coastal sand dunes of the Sunset District of the San Francisco Peninsula in California. The Xerces blue is believed to be the first American butterfly species to become extinct due to loss of habitat caused by urban development. The last Xerces blue was seen in 1941 or 1943 on land that is now part of the Golden Gate National Recreation Area.

==Name==
The specific name derives from the French spelling of &quot;Xerxes&quot;, the Greek name of the Persian kings Xerxes I and Xerxes II of the fifth century BC. An endangered invertebrate conservation group known as the Xerces Society is named after the Xerces blue.

== Taxonomy ==
Genetic analysis of museum specimens published in 2021 confirmed that the Xerces blue represented a distinct species within the genus &quot;Glaucopsyche&quot;, with its closest relatives being &quot;Glaucopsyche australis&quot; &quot;and Glaucopsyche pseudoxerces,&quot; with this group most closely related to &quot;Glaucopsyche lygdamus&quot; (the silvery blue).

==Extinction and ecology==
The species was first described and documented in 1852. It was characterized by blue wings with white spots. The butterflies fed on vegetation belonging to the genus &quot;Lotus&quot; and &quot;Lupinus&quot;. The loss of the &quot;Lotus&quot; plant that the butterfly fed on while in its larval stages is believed to be one reason for the extinction of the Xerces blue. The plant could not survive in the disturbed soils due to human development and was no longer available to the Xerces blue. &quot;Lupinus&quot;, the Xerces blue&#x27;s other vegetative food source, was not suitable for the larval stages. 

Preserved specimens are found in California Academy of Sciences, Bohart museum, and the Harvard Museum of Natural History.

==Reestablishment efforts==
Efforts are on to reestablish related butterflies in the Xerces blue&#x27;s former habitat. The Palos Verdes blue (&quot;Glaucopsyche lygdamus palosverdesensis&quot;), which is considered a Los Angeles cousin of the Xerces, is being reared in labs. A new Xerces-like subspecies of the silvery blue (&quot;Glaucopsyche lygdamus&quot;), which the Xerces blue was thought to be a subspecies of has been discovered as well, and is being analyzed as a potential way to revive the Xerces blue.

==References==
==External links==
* Xerces.org – An invertebrate conservation society</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1042181" start="4" end="15" title="Xerces blue" label="Xerces blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q796140" start="55" end="71" title="Holocene extinction" label="recently extinct"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="72" end="79" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q11946202" start="83" end="92" title="butterfly" label="butterfly"/>
<link wikidata="Q158717" start="134" end="144" title="Lycaenidae" label="Lycaenidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1827082" start="216" end="239" title="San Francisco Peninsula" label="San Francisco Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="243" end="253" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q552431" start="351" end="366" title="loss of habitat" label="loss of habitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456206" start="474" end="510" title="Golden Gate National Recreation Area" label="Golden Gate National Recreation Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="600" end="605" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q129165" start="632" end="640" title="Xerxes I of Persia" label="Xerxes I"/>
<link wikidata="Q272043" start="645" end="654" title="Xerxes II of Persia" label="Xerxes II"/>
<link wikidata="Q43806" start="694" end="706" title="invertebrate" label="invertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q8043780" start="739" end="753" title="Xerces Society" label="Xerces Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757760" start="942" end="954" title="Glaucopsyche" label="Glaucopsyche"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1001" end="1023" title="Glaucopsyche australis" label="Glaucopsyche australis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1040" end="1065" title="Glaucopsyche pseudoxerces" label="Glaucopsyche pseudoxerces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906463" start="1119" end="1140" title="Glaucopsyche lygdamus" label="Glaucopsyche lygdamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3645698" start="1367" end="1372" title="Lotus (genus)" label="Lotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q156811" start="1389" end="1396" title="Lupinus" label="Lupinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q129270" start="1483" end="1489" title="Larva" label="larval"/>
<link wikidata="Q129270" start="1788" end="1793" title="larva" label="larva"/>
<link wikidata="Q965731" start="1838" end="1868" title="California Academy of Sciences" label="California Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q3641620" start="1870" end="1883" title="Bohart Museum of Entomology" label="Bohart museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001855" start="1893" end="1926" title="Harvard Museum of Natural History" label="Harvard Museum of Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305730" start="2053" end="2070" title="Palos Verdes blue" label="Palos Verdes blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="2147" end="2158" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906463" start="2262" end="2283" title="Glaucopsyche lygdamus" label="Glaucopsyche lygdamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q14630565" start="2421" end="2427" title="De-extinction" label="revive"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="335177" wikidata="Q356002" url="?curid=335177" title="Anterior pituitary">
<text>The anterior pituitary (also called the adenohypophysis or pars anterior) is a major organ of the endocrine system. The anterior pituitary is the glandular, anterior lobe that together with the posterior pituitary (or neurohypophysis) makes up the pituitary gland (hypophysis) which, in humans, is located at the base of the brain, protruding off the bottom of the hypothalamus. 

The anterior pituitary regulates several physiological processes, including stress, growth, reproduction, and lactation. Proper functioning of the anterior pituitary and of the organs it regulates can often be ascertained via blood tests that measure hormone levels.

==Structure==

The pituitary gland sits in a protective bony enclosure called the sella turcica (&quot;Turkish chair/saddle&quot;). It is composed of three lobes: the anterior, intermediate, and posterior lobes. In many animals, these lobes are distinct. However, in humans, the intermediate lobe is but a few cell layers thick and indistinct; as a result, it is often considered part of the anterior pituitary. In all animals, the fleshy, glandular anterior pituitary is distinct from the neural composition of the pars nervosa of the posterior pituitary.

The anterior pituitary is composed of three regions, the pars distalis, pars tubercles, and pars intermedia.
===Pars distalis===
The pars distalis (distal part) comprises the majority of the anterior pituitary and is where the bulk of pituitary hormone production occurs. The pars distalis contains two types of cells, including chromophobe cells and chromophil cells. The chromophils can be further divided into acidophils (alpha cells) and basophils (beta cells). These cells all together produce hormones of the anterior pituitary and release them into the blood stream.

Nota bene: The terms &quot;basophil&quot; and &quot;acidophil&quot; are used by some books, whereas others prefer not to use these terms. This is due to the possible confusion with white blood cells, where one may also find basophils and acidophils.
===Pars tuberalis===

The pars tuberalis (tubular part) forms a part of a highly vascularised sheath extending up from the pars distalis, which joins with the pituitary stalk (also known as the infundibular stalk or infundibulum), arising from the posterior lobe. (The pituitary stalk connects the hypothalamus to the posterior pituitary.) The function of the pars tuberalis is poorly understood. However, it has been seen to be important in receiving the endocrine signal in the form of TSHB (a β subunit of TSH), informing the pars tuberalis of the photoperiod (length of day). The expression of this subunit is regulated by the secretion of melatonin in response to light information transmitted to the pineal gland. Earlier studies have shown localization of melatonin receptors in this region.

Principal cells of the pars tuberalis are low columnar in form, with the cytoplasm containing numerous lipid droplets, glycogen granules, and occasional colloid droplets. A sparse population of functional gonadotrophs are present (indicated by immunoreactivity for ACTH, FSH, and LH).

===Pars intermedia===
The pars intermedia (intermediate part) sits between the pars distalis and the posterior pituitary, forming the boundary between the anterior and posterior pituitaries. It is very small and indistinct in humans.

===Development===
The anterior pituitary is derived from the ectoderm, more specifically from that of Rathke&#x27;s pouch, part of the developing hard palate in the embryo. Rathke&#x27;s pouch is also ectodermal in origin.

The pouch eventually loses its connection with the pharynx, giving rise to the anterior pituitary. The anterior wall of Rathke&#x27;s pouch proliferates, filling most of the pouch to form the pars distalis and the pars tuberalis. The posterior wall of the anterior pituitary forms the pars intermedia. Its formation from the soft tissues of the upper palate contrasts with the posterior pituitary, which originates from neuroectoderm.

==Function==
The anterior pituitary contains five types of endocrine cell, and they are defined by the hormones they secrete: somatotropes (GH); lactotropes (PRL); gonadotropes (LH and FSH); corticotropes (ACTH) and thyrotropes (TSH). It also contains non-endocrine folliculostellate cells which are thought to stimulate and support the endocrine cell populations.

Hormones secreted by the anterior pituitary are trophic hormones (Greek: trophe, &quot;nourishment&quot;). Trophic hormones directly affect growth either as hyperplasia or hypertrophy on the tissue it is stimulating. Tropic hormones are named for their ability to act directly on target tissues or other endocrine glands to release hormones, causing numerous cascading physiological responses.


===Role in the endocrine system===

===Hypothalamic control===
Hormone secretion from the anterior pituitary gland is regulated by hormones secreted by the hypothalamus. Neuroendocrine cells in the hypothalamus project axons to the median eminence, at the base of the brain. At this site, these cells can release substances into small blood vessels that travel directly to the anterior pituitary gland (the hypothalamo-hypophyseal portal vessels).

===Other mechanisms===
Aside from hypothalamic control of the anterior pituitary, other systems in the body have been shown to regulate the anterior pituitary&#x27;s function. GABA can either stimulate or inhibit the secretion of luteinizing hormone (LH) and growth hormone (GH) and can stimulate the secretion of thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH). Prostaglandins are now known to inhibit adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) and also to stimulate TSH, GH and LH release. Clinical evidence supports the experimental findings of the excitatory and inhibitory effects GABA has on GH secretion, dependent on GABA&#x27;s site of action within the hypothalamic-pituitary axis.

===Effects of the anterior pituitary===
:;Thermal homeostasis
The homeostatic maintenance of the anterior pituitary is crucial to our physiological well being. Increased plasma levels of TSH induce hyperthermia through a mechanism involving increased metabolism and cutaneous vasodilation. Increased levels of LH also result in hypothermia but through a decreased metabolism action. ACTH increase metabolism and induce cutaneous vasoconstriction, increased plasma levels also result in hyperthermia and prolactin decreases with decreasing temperature values. follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) also may cause hypothermia if increased beyond homeostatic levels through an increased metabolic mechanism only.

:;Gonadal function
Gonadotropes, primarily luteinising hormone (LH) secreted from the anterior pituitary stimulates the ovulation cycle in female mammals, whilst in the males, LH stimulates the synthesis of androgen which drives the ongoing will to mate together with a constant production of sperm.

:;HPA axis
Main article &quot;Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis&quot;

The anterior pituitary plays a role in stress response. Corticotropin releasing hormone (CRH) from the hypothalamus stimulates ACTH release in a cascading effect that ends with the production of glucocorticoids from the adrenal cortex.

===Behavioral effects===
:;Development: The release of GH, LH, and FSH are required for correct human development, including gonadal development.

:;Breast-feeding: Release of the hormone prolactin is essential for lactation.

:;Stress: Operating through the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis (HPA), the anterior pituitary gland has a large role in the neuroendocrine system&#x27;s stress response. Stress induces a release of corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) and vasopressin from the hypothalamus, which activates the release of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) from the anterior pituitary gland. Then, this acts on the adrenal cortex to produce glucocorticoids such as cortisol. These glucocorticoids act back on the anterior pituitary gland and the hypothalamus with negative feedback to slow the production of CRH and ACTH. Increased cortisol under stress conditions can cause the following: metabolic effects (mobilization of glucose, fatty acids, and amino acids), bone re-absorption (calcium mobilization), activation of the sympathetic nervous system response (fight or flight), anti-inflammatory effects, and inhibition of reproduction/growth. When the anterior pituitary gland is removed (hypophysectomy) in rats, their avoidance learning mechanisms were slowed, but injections of ACTH restored their performance. In addition, stress may delay the release of reproductive hormones such as luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH). This shows that the anterior pituitary gland is involved in behavioral functions as well as being part of a larger pathway for stress responses. It is also known that (HPA) hormones are related to certain skin diseases and skin homeostasis. There is evidence linking hyperactivity of HPA hormones to stress-related skin diseases and skin tumors.

:;Aging: Operating through the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis, the anterior pituitary gland also affects the reproductive system. The hypothalamus releases gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH), which stimulates the release of luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone. Then the gonads produce estrogen and testosterone. The decrease in release of gonadotropins (LH and FSH) caused by normal aging may be responsible for impotence and frailty in elderly men because of the eventual decrease in production of testosterone. This lower level of testosterone can have other effects, such as reduced libido, well-being and mood, muscle and bone strength, and metabolism.

:;Tactile responding: It has been shown that infant mice who were stroked with a paintbrush (simulating motherly care) had more release and binding of growth hormone (GH) from the anterior pituitary gland.

:;Circadian rhythms: Light information received by the eyes is transmitted to the pineal gland via the circadian pacemaker (the suprachiasmatic nucleus). Diminishing light stimulates the release of melatonin from the pineal gland which can also affect the secretion levels in the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis. Melatonin can lower levels of LH and FSH, which will decrease levels of estrogen and testosterone. In addition, melatonin may affect production of prolactin.

==Clinical significance==

===Increased activity===

Hyperpituitarism is the condition where the pituitary secretes excessive amounts of hormones. This hypersecretion often results in the formation of a pituitary adenoma (tumour), which are benign apart from a tiny fraction. There are mainly three types of anterior pituitary tumors and their associated disorders. For example, acromegaly results from excessive secretion of growth hormone (GH) often being released by a pituitary adenoma. This disorder can cause disfigurement and possibly death and can lead to gigantism, a hormone disorder shown in &quot;giants&quot; such as André the Giant, where it occurs before the epiphyseal plates in bones close in puberty. The most common type of pituitary tumour is a prolactinoma which hypersecretes prolactin. A third type of pituitary adenoma secretes excess ACTH, which in turn, causes an excess of cortisol to be secreted and is the cause of Cushing&#x27;s disease.

===Decreased activity===

Hypopituitarism is characterized by a decreased secretion of hormones released by the anterior pituitary. For example, hypo-secretion of GH prior to puberty can be a cause of dwarfism. In addition, secondary adrenal insufficiency can be caused by hypo-secretion of ACTH which, in turn, does not signal the adrenal cortex to produce a sufficient amount of cortisol. This is a life-threatening condition. Hypopituitarism could be caused by the destruction or removal of the anterior pituitary tissue through traumatic brain injury, tumor, tuberculosis, or syphilis, among other causes. This disorder used to be referred to as Simmonds&#x27; disease but now according to the Diseases Database it is called Sheehan syndrome. If the hypopituitarism is caused by the blood loss associated with childbirth, the disorder is referred to as Sheehan syndrome.

==History==

===Etymology===
The anterior pituitary is also known as the adenohypophysis, meaning &quot;glandular undergrowth&quot;, from the Greek &quot;adeno-&quot; (&quot;gland&quot;), &quot;hypo&quot; (&quot;under&quot;), and &quot;physis&quot; (&quot;growth&quot;).

==Additional images==
==See also==

* Triple bolus test
* Hypothalamic–pituitary–somatic axis

==References==
==Further reading==
* Marieb, E. 2004. Human Anatomy and Physiology. Benjamin Cummings: New York.
* Wheater, P., Burkitt, H., Daniels, V. 1987. Functional Histology. Churchill Livingstone: New York.

==External links==
* Embryology at unc.edu
* The Pituitary Network Association -- www.pituitary.org
* Secretion of hormones from the Anterior Pituitary Gland</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q356002" start="4" end="22" title="Anterior pituitary" label="anterior pituitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q356002" start="40" end="55" title="Anterior pituitary" label="adenohypophysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q356002" start="59" end="72" title="Anterior pituitary" label="pars anterior"/>
<link wikidata="Q712378" start="85" end="90" title="Organ (anatomy)" label="organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q11078" start="98" end="114" title="endocrine system" label="endocrine system"/>
<link wikidata="Q9647" start="146" end="155" title="glandular" label="glandular"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="157" end="170" title="Anatomical terms of location#Usage in human anatomy" label="anterior lobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503735" start="194" end="213" title="posterior pituitary" label="posterior pituitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q156871" start="248" end="263" title="pituitary gland" label="pituitary gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="287" end="292" title="human" label="human"/>
<link wikidata="Q492038" start="325" end="330" title="Human brain" label="brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q164386" start="365" end="377" title="hypothalamus" label="hypothalamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q521" start="422" end="435" title="physiological" label="physiological"/>
<link wikidata="Q123414" start="457" end="463" title="stress (medicine)" label="stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347178" start="465" end="471" title="Human development (biology)" label="growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q11990" start="473" end="485" title="reproduction" label="reproduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q719426" start="491" end="500" title="lactation" label="lactation"/>
<link wikidata="Q886837" start="607" end="617" title="blood test" label="blood test"/>
<link wikidata="Q11364" start="632" end="639" title="hormone" label="hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q156871" start="668" end="683" title="pituitary gland" label="pituitary gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772886" start="731" end="744" title="sella turcica" label="sella turcica"/>
<link wikidata="Q9404" start="1139" end="1145" title="neural" label="neural"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503735" start="1165" end="1177" title="pars nervosa" label="pars nervosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503735" start="1185" end="1204" title="posterior pituitary" label="posterior pituitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113900" start="1536" end="1552" title="chromophobe cell" label="chromophobe cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113897" start="1558" end="1574" title="chromophil" label="chromophil cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q4674118" start="1620" end="1630" title="acidophils" label="acidophils"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867826" start="1649" end="1658" title="basophil cell" label="basophils"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350662" start="2191" end="2206" title="pituitary stalk" label="pituitary stalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q18032201" start="2520" end="2524" title="TSHB" label="TSHB"/>
<link wikidata="Q259028" start="2583" end="2594" title="photoperiod" label="photoperiod"/>
<link wikidata="Q180912" start="2676" end="2685" title="melatonin" label="melatonin"/>
<link wikidata="Q198654" start="2738" end="2750" title="pineal gland" label="pineal gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q185690" start="3097" end="3101" title="ACTH" label="ACTH"/>
<link wikidata="Q200774" start="3103" end="3106" title="Follicle-stimulating hormone" label="FSH"/>
<link wikidata="Q50265477" start="3112" end="3114" title="Lutenizing Hormone" label="LH"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433379" start="3144" end="3159" title="pars intermedia" label="pars intermedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q272474" start="3414" end="3422" title="ectoderm" label="ectoderm"/>
<link wikidata="Q615264" start="3455" end="3474" title="Rathke&amp;#x27;s pouch" label="Rathke&amp;#x27;s pouch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345983" start="3499" end="3510" title="hard palate" label="hard palate"/>
<link wikidata="Q272474" start="3554" end="3564" title="ectodermal" label="ectodermal"/>
<link wikidata="Q174778" start="3628" end="3635" title="pharynx" label="pharynx"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271432" start="3997" end="4010" title="neuroectoderm" label="neuroectoderm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015605" start="4139" end="4150" title="somatotropic cell" label="somatotrope"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016161" start="4158" end="4168" title="prolactin cell" label="lactotrope"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099316" start="4177" end="4189" title="gonadotropic cell" label="gonadotropes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5173293" start="4204" end="4216" title="corticotropic cell" label="corticotrope"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304865" start="4229" end="4239" title="thyrotropic cell" label="thyrotrope"/>
<link wikidata="Q48997534" start="4279" end="4301" title="folliculostellate cell" label="folliculostellate cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7845624" start="4427" end="4442" title="trophic hormone" label="trophic hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916173" start="4596" end="4610" title="Tropic hormone" label="Tropic hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q324663" start="4683" end="4698" title="endocrine gland" label="endocrine gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q164386" start="4931" end="4943" title="hypothalamus" label="hypothalamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q10599959" start="4945" end="4965" title="Neuroendocrine cells" label="Neuroendocrine cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q178999" start="4994" end="4999" title="axons" label="axons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337712" start="5007" end="5022" title="median eminence" label="median eminence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531242" start="5182" end="5220" title="Hypophyseal portal system" label="hypothalamo-hypophyseal portal vessels"/>
<link wikidata="Q210021" start="5400" end="5404" title="GABA" label="GABA"/>
<link wikidata="Q50265477" start="5454" end="5473" title="luteinizing hormone" label="luteinizing hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q29956617" start="5483" end="5497" title="growth hormone" label="growth hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q211544" start="5538" end="5565" title="thyroid-stimulating hormone" label="thyroid-stimulating hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q209717" start="5573" end="5586" title="Prostaglandin" label="Prostaglandin"/>
<link wikidata="Q185690" start="5613" end="5640" title="adrenocorticotropic hormone" label="adrenocorticotropic hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q29956617" start="5800" end="5802" title="Growth hormone" label="GH"/>
<link wikidata="Q211544" start="6082" end="6085" title="Thyroid-stimulating hormone" label="TSH"/>
<link wikidata="Q242165" start="6093" end="6105" title="hyperthermia" label="hyperthermia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057" start="6146" end="6156" title="metabolism" label="metabolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074" start="6161" end="6170" title="cutaneous" label="cutaneous"/>
<link wikidata="Q14859627" start="6171" end="6183" title="vasodilation" label="vasodilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q50265477" start="6205" end="6207" title="Luteinizing hormone" label="LH"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036696" start="6223" end="6234" title="hypothermia" label="hypothermia"/>
<link wikidata="Q185690" start="6278" end="6282" title="ACTH" label="ACTH"/>
<link wikidata="Q242165" start="6381" end="6393" title="hyperthermia" label="hyperthermia"/>
<link wikidata="Q66590068" start="6398" end="6407" title="prolactin" label="prolactin"/>
<link wikidata="Q200774" start="6454" end="6482" title="follicle-stimulating hormone" label="follicle-stimulating hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036696" start="6504" end="6515" title="hypothermia" label="hypothermia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099316" start="6622" end="6633" title="Gonadotrope" label="Gonadotrope"/>
<link wikidata="Q50265477" start="6646" end="6665" title="luteinising hormone" label="luteinising hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q83864" start="6723" end="6738" title="ovulation cycle" label="ovulation cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="6749" end="6755" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q62614" start="6810" end="6818" title="androgen" label="androgen"/>
<link wikidata="Q17145" start="6896" end="6901" title="sperm" label="sperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369123" start="6934" end="6969" title="Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis" label="Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q386664" start="7033" end="7064" title="Corticotropin releasing hormone" label="Corticotropin releasing hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q185690" start="7104" end="7108" title="ACTH" label="ACTH"/>
<link wikidata="Q19065" start="7197" end="7211" title="adrenal cortex" label="adrenal cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q66590068" start="7402" end="7411" title="prolactin" label="prolactin"/>
<link wikidata="Q719426" start="7429" end="7438" title="lactation" label="lactation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369123" start="7473" end="7508" title="hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis" label="hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335366" start="7569" end="7590" title="neuroendocrine system" label="neuroendocrine system"/>
<link wikidata="Q386664" start="7643" end="7674" title="corticotropin-releasing hormone" label="corticotropin-releasing hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q21124841" start="7685" end="7696" title="vasopressin" label="vasopressin"/>
<link wikidata="Q164386" start="7706" end="7718" title="hypothalamus" label="hypothalamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q185690" start="7751" end="7778" title="adrenocorticotropic hormone" label="adrenocorticotropic hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q19065" start="7844" end="7858" title="adrenal cortex" label="adrenal cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q422549" start="7870" end="7885" title="glucocorticoids" label="glucocorticoids"/>
<link wikidata="Q190875" start="7894" end="7902" title="cortisol" label="cortisol"/>
<link wikidata="Q422549" start="7910" end="7925" title="glucocorticoids" label="glucocorticoids"/>
<link wikidata="Q164386" start="7975" end="7987" title="hypothalamus" label="hypothalamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q62527" start="7993" end="8010" title="negative feedback" label="negative feedback"/>
<link wikidata="Q190875" start="8061" end="8069" title="cortisol" label="cortisol"/>
<link wikidata="Q37525" start="8154" end="8161" title="glucose" label="glucose"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="8180" end="8191" title="amino acids" label="amino acids"/>
<link wikidata="Q187215" start="8255" end="8281" title="sympathetic nervous system" label="sympathetic nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q933496" start="8422" end="8436" title="hypophysectomy" label="hypophysectomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18192505" start="8453" end="8471" title="avoidance learning" label="avoidance learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q50265477" start="8622" end="8641" title="luteinizing hormone" label="luteinizing hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q200774" start="8651" end="8679" title="follicle-stimulating hormone" label="follicle-stimulating hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703595" start="9065" end="9100" title="hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis" label="hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895" start="9148" end="9167" title="reproductive system" label="reproductive system"/>
<link wikidata="Q318896" start="9195" end="9225" title="gonadotropin-releasing hormone" label="gonadotropin-releasing hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q50265477" start="9266" end="9285" title="luteinizing hormone" label="luteinizing hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q200774" start="9295" end="9323" title="follicle-stimulating hormone" label="follicle-stimulating hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q213456" start="9334" end="9340" title="gonads" label="gonads"/>
<link wikidata="Q277954" start="9349" end="9357" title="estrogen" label="estrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318776" start="9362" end="9374" title="testosterone" label="testosterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q409770" start="9403" end="9415" title="gonadotropin" label="gonadotropin"/>
<link wikidata="Q184674" start="9476" end="9485" title="impotence" label="impotence"/>
<link wikidata="Q177171" start="9490" end="9497" title="Frailty syndrome" label="frailty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318776" start="9597" end="9609" title="testosterone" label="testosterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q178066" start="9650" end="9656" title="libido" label="libido"/>
<link wikidata="Q29956617" start="9873" end="9887" title="growth hormone" label="growth hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q198654" start="10011" end="10023" title="pineal gland" label="pineal gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121352" start="10032" end="10051" title="circadian clock" label="circadian pacemaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156516" start="10057" end="10080" title="suprachiasmatic nucleus" label="suprachiasmatic nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q180912" start="10127" end="10136" title="melatonin" label="melatonin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703595" start="10209" end="10244" title="hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis" label="hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q277954" start="10318" end="10326" title="estrogen" label="estrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q66590068" start="10393" end="10402" title="prolactin" label="prolactin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3801524" start="10458" end="10474" title="Hyperpituitarism" label="Hyperpituitarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q864296" start="10608" end="10625" title="pituitary adenoma" label="pituitary adenoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q189580" start="10784" end="10794" title="acromegaly" label="acromegaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q501829" start="10969" end="10978" title="gigantism" label="gigantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q44368" start="11035" end="11050" title="André the Giant" label="André the Giant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347293" start="11079" end="11096" title="epiphyseal plates" label="epiphyseal plates"/>
<link wikidata="Q954831" start="11170" end="11182" title="prolactinoma" label="prolactinoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q66590068" start="11203" end="11212" title="prolactin" label="prolactin"/>
<link wikidata="Q190875" start="11305" end="11313" title="cortisol" label="cortisol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947304" start="11349" end="11371" title="Cushing&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Cushing&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q922411" start="11400" end="11415" title="Hypopituitarism" label="Hypopituitarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q194101" start="11575" end="11583" title="dwarfism" label="dwarfism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8282" start="11598" end="11629" title="Addison&amp;#x27;s Disease" label="secondary adrenal insufficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q190875" start="11755" end="11763" title="cortisol" label="cortisol"/>
<link wikidata="Q922411" start="11803" end="11818" title="Hypopituitarism" label="Hypopituitarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="11937" end="11949" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q41083" start="11954" end="11962" title="syphilis" label="syphilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q535876" start="12024" end="12046" title="Simmonds&amp;#x27; disease" label="Simmonds&amp;#x27; disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q213103" start="12072" end="12089" title="Diseases Database" label="Diseases Database"/>
<link wikidata="Q535876" start="12103" end="12119" title="Sheehan syndrome" label="Sheehan syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="12392" end="12397" title="Ancient Greek" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5150911" start="12560" end="12577" title="Triple bolus test" label="Triple bolus test"/>
<link wikidata="Q39047677" start="12580" end="12615" title="Hypothalamic–pituitary–somatic axis" label="Hypothalamic–pituitary–somatic axis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="335178" wikidata="Q8008579" url="?curid=335178" title="William Elphinstone">
<text>William Elphinstone (143125 October 1514) was a Scottish statesman, Bishop of Aberdeen and founder of the University of Aberdeen.

==Biography==
He was born in Glasgow. His father, also William Elphinstone, later became the first Dean of the Faculty of Arts at the University of Glasgow. It has been suggested that his mother may have been Margaret Douglas, daughter of Sir William Douglas, the first laird of Drumlanrig. William Elphinstone junior was educated at the High School of Glasgow and then the University of Glasgow, taking the degree of M.A. in 1452. After practising for a short time as a lawyer in the church courts, he was ordained a priest, becoming rector of St Michael&#x27;s Church, Trongate, Glasgow, in 1465. Four years later he went to continue his studies at the University of Paris, where he became reader in Canon law, and then, proceeding to Orléans, became lecturer in the university there.

Before 1474 he had returned to Scotland, and was made academic rector of the university, and official of the see of Glasgow. Further promotion followed, but soon more important duties were entrusted to Elphinstone, who was made Bishop of Ross in 1481. He was a member of the Parliament of Scotland, and was sent by James III of Scotland on diplomatic missions to Louis XI of France and Edward IV of England. In 1483 he was appointed Bishop of Aberdeen, although his consecration was delayed for four years; and he was sent on missions to England, both before and after the death of Richard III of England in 1485.

Although he regularly attended the meetings of parliament he continued with his episcopal duties, and maintained the fabric of the cathedral. Early in 1488 he was made Lord High Chancellor, but on the king&#x27;s death in the following June he left office, and retired to Aberdeen. As a diplomat, his services were quickly required by the new king, James IV of Scotland, in whose interests he visited the kings of England and France, and the German king, Maximilian I, Holy Roman Emperor.Having been made Keeper of the Privy Seal of Scotland in 1492, and having arranged a dispute between the Scots and the Dutch, Elphinstone&#x27;s later years were mainly spent in the foundation of the University of Aberdeen. The papal bull was obtained in 1494, and the royal charter which made Aberdeen the seat of a university is dated 1498. A small endowment was provided by the king. The university, modelled on that of Paris and intended principally as a law school, soon became the most famous and popular of the Scots seats of learning, largely due to the prestige of Elphinstone and his friend, Hector Boece, the first rector. The building of the college of the Holy Virgin in Nativity, now King&#x27;s College, was completed in 1506. Elphinstone also built the central tower of St Machar&#x27;s Cathedral, and funded the building of the first stone bridge over the River Dee. Continuing to participate in public affairs he opposed the policy of hostility towards England which led to the Battle of Flodden in September 1513. He died in Edinburgh.

In 1503, Elphinstone was involved with the merchants James Merchamestoun and James Hommyll, and Italian financer Jerome Frescobaldi buying silverware and furnishings for the king&#x27;s marriage to Margaret Tudor. Elphinstone was partly responsible for the introduction of printing into Scotland, and for the production of the &quot;Breviarium Aberdonense&quot;. He may have written some of the lives in this collection, and gathered together materials concerning the history of Scotland.

==References==
==Sources==
* Thomas, John. &quot;The Elphinstone monument at King&#x27;s College Aberdeen. Its construction in the sixteenth century and reconstruction (1909–31) by Henry Wilson&quot;, &quot;Aberdeen University Review&quot;, Vol. LIV, 4, No. 188 Autumn 1992, pp. 315–333.

==Further reading==
* Hector Boece, &quot;Murthiacensium et Aberdonensium episcoporum vitae&quot;, edited and translated by J. Moir (Aberdeen, 1894)
* &quot;Fasli Aberdonenses&quot;, edited by C. Innes (Aberdeen, 1854)
* Alexander Gardyne, &quot;Theatre of Scottish Worthies and Lyf of W. Elphinston&quot;, edited by David Laing (Aberdeen, 1878).</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8008579" start="0" end="19" title="William Elphinstone" label="William Elphinstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="48" end="56" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Scottish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1836986" start="68" end="86" title="Bishop of Aberdeen" label="Bishop of Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q270532" start="106" end="128" title="University of Aberdeen" label="University of Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="160" end="167" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q192775" start="265" end="286" title="University of Glasgow" label="University of Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309175" start="410" end="420" title="Drumlanrig" label="Drumlanrig"/>
<link wikidata="Q386695" start="469" end="491" title="High School of Glasgow" label="High School of Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3147441" start="666" end="672" title="Rector (ecclesiastical)" label="rector"/>
<link wikidata="Q7845502" start="702" end="710" title="Trongate" label="Trongate"/>
<link wikidata="Q209842" start="786" end="805" title="University of Paris" label="University of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341605" start="833" end="842" title="Canon law (Catholic Church)" label="Canon law"/>
<link wikidata="Q6548" start="868" end="875" title="Orléans" label="Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q13334" start="900" end="916" title="University of Orléans" label="university there"/>
<link wikidata="Q212071" start="973" end="988" title="academic rector" label="academic rector"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006673" start="1028" end="1031" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Glasgow" label="see"/>
<link wikidata="Q964570" start="1147" end="1161" title="Bishop of Ross (Scotland)" label="Bishop of Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650523" start="1194" end="1216" title="Parliament of Scotland" label="Parliament of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q222616" start="1234" end="1255" title="James III of Scotland" label="James III of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q8058" start="1282" end="1300" title="Louis XI of France" label="Louis XI of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q160341" start="1305" end="1325" title="Edward IV of England" label="Edward IV of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1836986" start="1352" end="1370" title="Bishop of Aberdeen" label="Bishop of Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q133028" start="1501" end="1523" title="Richard III of England" label="Richard III of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2380110" start="1665" end="1674" title="St Machar&amp;#x27;s Cathedral" label="cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158810" start="1702" end="1722" title="Lord Chancellor of Scotland" label="Lord High Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q137906" start="1883" end="1903" title="James IV of Scotland" label="James IV of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q150726" start="1989" end="2021" title="Maximilian I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Maximilian I, Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3699746" start="2039" end="2075" title="Keeper of the Privy Seal of Scotland" label="Keeper of the Privy Seal of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q189867" start="2250" end="2260" title="papal bull" label="papal bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422253" start="2291" end="2304" title="royal charter" label="royal charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q209842" start="2445" end="2450" title="University of Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321960" start="2481" end="2491" title="law school" label="law school"/>
<link wikidata="Q652097" start="2624" end="2636" title="Hector Boece" label="Hector Boece"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410877" start="2720" end="2739" title="King&amp;#x27;s College, Aberdeen" label="King&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2380110" start="2808" end="2834" title="St Machar&amp;#x27;s Cathedral" label="St Machar&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q964949" start="2895" end="2904" title="River Dee, Aberdeenshire" label="River Dee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1300742" start="3018" end="3035" title="Battle of Flodden" label="Battle of Flodden"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="3066" end="3075" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q101081788" start="3155" end="3168" title="James Hommyll" label="James Hommyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q101096653" start="3191" end="3209" title="Jerome Frescobaldi" label="Jerome Frescobaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q523140" start="3276" end="3290" title="Margaret Tudor" label="Margaret Tudor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4054692" start="3405" end="3439" title="Aberdeen Breviary" label="&amp;quot;Breviarium Aberdonense&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q652097" start="3879" end="3891" title="Hector Boece" label="Hector Boece"/>
<link wikidata="Q4718921" start="4078" end="4095" title="Alexander Gardyne" label="Alexander Gardyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236288" start="4174" end="4185" title="David Laing (Scottish antiquary)" label="David Laing"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="335179" wikidata="Q84217" url="?curid=335179" title="Rudolf Nureyev">
<text>Rudolf Khametovich Nureyev (17 March 19386 January 1993) was a Soviet-born ballet dancer and choreographer. Nureyev is widely regarded as the preeminent male ballet dancer of his generation as well as one of the greatest ballet dancers of all time.

Nureyev was born on a Trans-Siberian train near Irkutsk, Siberia, Soviet Union, to a Tatar family. He began his early career with the company that in the Soviet era was called the Kirov Ballet (now called by its original name, the Mariinsky Ballet) in Leningrad. He defected from the Soviet Union to the West in 1961, despite KGB efforts to stop him. This was the first defection of a Soviet artist during the Cold War, and it created an international sensation. He went on to dance with The Royal Ballet in London and from 1983 to 1989 served as director of the Paris Opera Ballet. Nureyev was also a choreographer serving as the chief choreographer of the Paris Opera Ballet. He produced his own interpretations of numerous classical works, including &quot;Swan Lake&quot;, &quot;Giselle&quot; and &quot;La Bayadère&quot;.

== Early life ==
Nureyev&#x27;s grandfather, Nurakhmet Fazlievich Fazliev, and his father, Khamit Fazleevich Nureyev (1903–1985), were from Asanovo in the Sharipov volost of the Ufa District of the Ufa Governorate (now the Ufa District of the Republic of Bashkortostan). His mother, Farida Agliullovna Nureyeva (Agliullova) (1907–1987), was born in the village of Tatarskoye Tyugulbaevo, Kuznechikhinsky volost, Kazan Governorate (now Alkeyevsky District of the Republic of Tatarstan).

Nureyev was born on a Trans-Siberian train near Irkutsk, Siberia, while his mother Farida was travelling to Vladivostok, where his father Khamet, a Red Army political commissar, was stationed. He was raised as the only son with three older sisters in a Tatar Muslim family.&lt;ref name=&quot;nureyev.org/&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; In his autobiography, Nureyev noted about his Tatar heritage: &quot;My mother was born in the beautiful ancient city of Kazan. We are Muslims. Father was born in a small village near Ufa, the capital of the Republic of Bashkiria. Thus, on both sides our relatives are Tatars and Bashkirs. I cannot define exactly what it means to me to be a Tatar, and not a Russian, but I feel this difference in myself. Our Tatar blood flows somehow faster and is always ready to boil&quot;.

==Career==
===Education at Vaganova Academy===
When his mother took Nureyev and his sisters into a performance of the ballet &quot;Song of the Cranes&quot;, he fell in love with dance. As a child, he was encouraged to dance in Bashkir folk performances and his precocity was soon noticed by teachers who encouraged him to train in Leningrad (now Saint Petersburg). On a tour stop in Moscow with a local ballet company, Nureyev auditioned for the Bolshoi ballet company and was accepted. However, he felt that the Mariinsky Ballet school was the best, so he left the local touring company and bought a ticket to Leningrad.

Owing to the disruption of Soviet cultural life caused by World War II, Nureyev was unable to enroll in a major ballet school until 1955, aged 17, when he was accepted by the Vaganova Academy of Russian Ballet of Leningrad, the associate school of the Mariinsky Ballet. The ballet master Alexander Ivanovich Pushkin took an interest in him professionally and allowed Nureyev to live with him and his wife.

===Principal with Kirov Ballet===
Upon his graduation in 1958, Nureyev joined the Kirov Ballet (now Mariinsky). He moved immediately beyond the corps level, and was given solo roles as a principal dancer from the outset. Nureyev regularly partnered with Natalia Dudinskaya, the company&#x27;s senior ballerina and wife of its director, Konstantin Sergeyev. Dudinskaya, who was 26 years his senior, first chose him as her partner in the ballet &quot;Laurencia&quot;.

Before long, Nureyev became one of the Soviet Union&#x27;s best-known dancers. From 1958 to 1961, in his three years with the Kirov, he danced 15 roles, usually opposite his partner, Ninel Kurgapkina, with whom he was very well paired, although she was almost a decade older than he was. Nureyev and Kurgapkina were invited to dance at a gathering at Khrushchev&#x27;s dacha, and in 1959 they were allowed to travel outside the Soviet Union, dancing in Vienna at the International Youth Festival. Not long after, he was told by the Ministry of Culture that he would not be allowed to go abroad again. In one memorable incident, Nureyev interrupted a performance of &quot;Don Quixote&quot; for 40 minutes, insisting on dancing in tights and not in the customary trousers. He relented in the end, but his preferred dress code was adopted in later performances.

===Defection at Paris airport===

By the late 1950s, Nureyev had become a sensation in the Soviet Union. Though Nureyev&#x27;s rebellious character and non-conformist attitude made him an unlikely candidate for the tour with the Kirov Ballet, it became more essential he join the tour which the Soviet government considered crucial to its ambitions to demonstrate its &quot;cultural supremacy&quot; over the West. 

Furthermore, tensions were growing between Nureyev and the Kirov&#x27;s artistic director Konstantin Sergeyev, who was also the husband of Nureyev&#x27;s former dance partner Natalia Dudinskaya. After a representative of the French tour organisers saw Nureyev dance in Leningrad in 1960, the French organisers urged Soviet authorities to let him dance in Paris, and he was allowed to go.

In Paris, his performances electrified audiences and critics. Oliver Merlin in &quot;Le Monde&quot; wrote,

I will never forget his arrival running across the back of the stage, and his catlike way of holding himself opposite the ramp. He wore a white sash over an ultramarine costume, had large wild eyes and hollow cheeks under a turban topped with a spray of feathers, bulging thighs, immaculate tights. This was already Nijinsky in &quot;Firebird&quot;.

Nureyev was seen to have broken the rules about mingling with foreigners and reportedly frequented gay bars in Paris, which alarmed the Kirov&#x27;s management and the KGB agents observing him. The KGB wanted to send him back to the Soviet Union. On 16 June 1961 when the Kirov company gathered at Le Bourget Airport in Paris to fly to London, Sergeyev took Nureyev aside and told him that he must return to Moscow for a special performance in the Kremlin, rather than go on to London with the rest of the company. Nureyev became suspicious and refused.

Next he was told that his mother had fallen severely ill and he needed to go home immediately to see her. Nureyev refused again, believing that on return to the USSR he was likely to be imprisoned. With the help of French police and a Parisian socialite friend, Clara Saint, who had been engaged to Vincent Malraux, the son of the French Minister of Culture, André Malraux, Nureyev escaped his KGB minders and asked for asylum. Sergeyev and the KGB tried to dissuade him, but he chose to stay in Paris.

Within a week, he was signed by the Grand Ballet du Marquis de Cuevas and performed &quot;The Sleeping Beauty&quot; with Nina Vyroubova.

On a tour of Denmark he met Erik Bruhn, soloist at the Royal Danish Ballet. Bruhn became his lover, his closest friend and his protector until Bruhn&#x27;s death in 1986. He and Bruhn both appeared as guest dancers with the newly formed Australian Ballet at Her Majesty&#x27;s Theatre, Sydney in December 1962.

Soviet authorities made Nureyev&#x27;s father, mother, and dance teacher Pushkin write letters to him, urging him to return, without effect. Although he petitioned the Soviet government for many years to be allowed to visit his mother, he was not allowed to do so until 1987, when his mother was dying and Mikhail Gorbachev consented to the visit.

In 1989, he was invited to dance the role of &quot;James&quot; in &quot;La Sylphide&quot; with the Mariinsky Ballet at the Mariinsky Theatre in Leningrad. The visit gave him the opportunity to see many of the teachers and colleagues he had not seen since his defection.

===The Royal Ballet===
====Principal dancer====

Dame Ninette de Valois offered him a contract to join The Royal Ballet as Principal Dancer. During his time at the company, however, many critics became enraged as Nureyev made substantial changes to the productions of &quot;Swan Lake&quot; and &quot;Giselle&quot;. Nureyev stayed with the Royal Ballet until 1970, when he was promoted to Principal Guest Artist, enabling him to concentrate on his increasing schedule of international guest appearances and tours. He continued to perform regularly with The Royal Ballet until committing his future to the Paris Opera Ballet in the 1980s.

====Fonteyn and Nureyev====
Nureyev&#x27;s first appearance with prima ballerina Dame Margot Fonteyn was in a ballet matinée organised by The Royal Ballet: &quot;Giselle&quot;, 21 February 1962. The event was held in aid of the Royal Academy of Dance, a classical ballet teaching organisation of which she was president. He danced &quot;Poème Tragique&quot;, a solo choreographed by Frederick Ashton, and the &quot;Black Swan&quot; &quot;pas de deux&quot; from &quot;Swan Lake&quot;. They were so well received that Fonteyn and Nureyev proceeded to form a partnership that endured for many years. They premiered &quot;Romeo and Juliet&quot; for the company in 1965. Fans of the duo would tear up their programmes to make confetti to throw at the dancers. Nureyev and Fonteyn sometimes did more than 20 curtain calls. A film of this performance was made in 1966 and is available on DVD.

On 11 July 1967, Fonteyn and Nureyev, after performing in San Francisco, were arrested on nearby roofs, having fled during a police raid on a home in the Haight-Ashbury district. They were bailed out, and charges of disturbing the peace and visiting a place where marijuana was used were dropped later that day for lack of sufficient evidence.

===Other international appearances===
Among many appearances in North America, Nureyev developed a long-lasting connection with the National Ballet of Canada, appearing as a guest artist on many occasions. In 1972, he staged a spectacular new production of &quot;Sleeping Beauty&quot; for the company, with his own additional choreography augmenting that of Petipa. The production toured widely in the U.S. and Canada after its initial run in Toronto, one performance of which was televised live and subsequently issued on video.

Among the National Ballet&#x27;s ballerinas, Nureyev most frequently partnered with Veronica Tennant and Karen Kain. In 1975 Nureyev worked extensively with American Ballet Theatre resurrecting &quot;Le Corsaire&quot; with Gelsey Kirkland. He recreated &quot;Sleeping Beauty,&quot; &quot;Swan Lake,&quot; and &quot;Ramonda&quot; with Cynthia Gregory. Gregory and Brun joined Nureyev in a pas des trois from the little-known August Bournonville ballet &quot;La Ventana.&quot;

===Director of the Paris Opera Ballet===
In January 1982, Austria granted Nureyev citizenship, ending more than twenty years of statelessness. In 1983, he was appointed director of the Paris Opera Ballet, where, as well as directing, he continued to dance and to promote younger dancers. He remained there as a dancer and chief choreographer until 1989. Among the dancers he mentored were Sylvie Guillem, Isabelle Guérin, Manuel Legris, Elisabeth Maurin, Élisabeth Platel, Charles Jude, and Monique Loudières.

His artistic directorship of the Paris Opera Ballet was a great success, lifting the company out of a dark period. His version of &quot;Sleeping Beauty&quot; remains in the repertoire and was revived and filmed with his protégé Manuel Legris in the lead.

Despite advancing illness towards the end of his tenure, he worked tirelessly, staging new versions of old standbys and commissioning some of the most ground-breaking choreographic works of his time. His own &quot;Romeo and Juliet&quot; was a popular success. When he was sick towards the end of his life, he worked on a final production of &quot;La Bayadère&quot; which closely follows the Mariinsky Ballet version he danced as a young man.

===Final years===

When AIDS appeared in France&#x27;s news around 1982, Nureyev took little notice. The dancer tested positive for HIV in 1984, but for several years he simply denied that anything was wrong with his health. However, by the late 1980s his diminished capabilities disappointed his admirers who had fond memories of his outstanding prowess and skill. Nureyev began a marked decline only in the summer of 1991 and entered the final phase of the disease in the spring of 1992.

In March 1992, living with advanced AIDS, he visited Kazan and appeared as a conductor in front of the audience at Musa Cälil Tatar Academic Opera and Ballet Theater, which now presents the Rudolf Nureyev Festival in Tatarstan. Returning to Paris, with a high fever, he was admitted to the hospital Notre Dame du Perpétuel Secours in Levallois-Perret, a suburb northwest of Paris, and was operated on for pericarditis, an inflammation of the membranous sac around the heart. At that time, what inspired him to fight his illness was the hope that he could fulfill an invitation to conduct Prokofiev&#x27;s &quot;Romeo and Juliet&quot; at an American Ballet Theatre benefit on 6 May 1992 at the Metropolitan Opera House in New York. He did so and was elated at the reception.

In July 1992, Nureyev showed renewed signs of pericarditis but determined to forswear further treatment. His last public appearance was on 8 October 1992, at the premiere at Palais Garnier of a new production of &quot;La Bayadère&quot; that he choreographed after Marius Petipa for the Paris Opera Ballet. Nureyev had managed to obtain a photocopy of Ludwig Minkus&#x27; original score when in Russia in 1989. The ballet was a personal triumph although the gravity of his condition was evident. The French Culture Minister, Jack Lang, presented him that evening on stage with France&#x27;s highest cultural award, the &quot;Commandeur de l&#x27;Ordre des Arts et des Lettres&quot;.

==Death==

Nureyev re-entered the hospital Notre Dame du Perpétuel Secours in Levallois-Perret on 20 November 1992 and remained there until his death from AIDS complications at age 54 on 6 January 1993. His funeral was held in the marble foyer of the Paris Garnier Opera House. Many paid tribute to his brilliance as a dancer. One such tribute came from Oleg Vinogradov of the Mariinsky Ballet, stating: &quot;What Nureyev did in the West, he could never have done here.&quot;

Nureyev&#x27;s grave, at the Russian cemetery in Sainte-Geneviève-des-Bois near Paris, features a tomb draped in a mosaic of an Oriental carpet, a Kelim. Nureyev was an avid collector of beautiful carpets and antique textiles. As his coffin was lowered into the ground, music from the last act of &quot;Giselle&quot; was played and his ballet shoes were cast into the grave along with white lilies.

===Tributes===

After so many years of having been denied a place in the Mariinsky Ballet&#x27;s history, Nureyev&#x27;s reputation was restored. His name was re-entered in the history of the Mariinsky, even though he danced there for only three years. Some of his personal effects were placed on display at the theatre museum in what is now St. Petersburg. A rehearsal room was named in his honour at the famed Vaganova Academy. As of October 2013, the Centre National du Costume de Scène has a permanent collection of Nureyev&#x27;s costumes &quot;that offers visitors a sense of his exuberant, vagabond personality and passion for all that was rare and beautiful.&quot; In 2015, he was inducted into the Legacy Walk.

Since his death in 1993, the Paris Opera has instituted a tradition of presenting an evening of dance homage to Nureyev every 10 years. Because he was born in March, these performances have been given on 20 March 2003, 6 March 2013 and 18 March 2023. Peers of Nureyev who speak about and remember him, like Mikhail Baryshnikov, are often deeply touched.

On 7 November 2018, a monument honouring Nureyev was unveiled at the square near the Musa Cälil Tatar Academic Opera and Ballet Theater in Kazan. The monument was designed by Zurab Tsereteli and its unveiling ceremony was attended by President of Tatarstan Rustam Minnikhanov, state adviser of the Republic of Tatarstan Mintimer Shaimiev and mayor of Kazan Ilsur Metshin. At a speech in the unveiling event, Minnikhanov stated &quot;I think, not only for the Republic, Rudolf Nureyev is an international value. Such people are born once in a hundred years.&quot;

==Repertoire==
A selected list of ballet performances, ballet productions and original ballets.
==Dance partnerships==

Yvette Chauviré of the Paris Opera Ballet often danced with Nureyev; he described her as a &quot;legend&quot;. (Chauviré attended his funeral with French dancer and actress Leslie Caron.)

At the Royal Ballet, Nureyev and Margot Fonteyn became long-standing dance partners. Nureyev once said of Fonteyn, who was 19 years older than him, that they danced with &quot;one body, one soul&quot;. Together Nureyev and Fonteyn premiered Sir Frederick Ashton&#x27;s ballet &quot;Marguerite and Armand&quot;, a ballet danced to Liszt&#x27;s Piano Sonata in B minor, which became their signature piece. Kenneth MacMillan was forced to allow them to premiere his &quot;Romeo and Juliet&quot;, which was intended for two other dancers, Lynn Seymour and Christopher Gable. Films exist of their partnership in &quot;Les Sylphides&quot;, &quot;Swan Lake&quot;, &quot;Romeo and Juliet&quot;, and other roles. They continued to dance together for many years after Nureyev&#x27;s departure from the Royal Ballet. Their last performance together was in &quot;Baroque Pas de Trois&quot; on 16 September 1988 when Fonteyn was 69, Nureyev was aged 50, with Carla Fracci, aged 52, also starring.

He celebrated another long-time partnership with Eva Evdokimova. They first appeared together in &quot;La Sylphide&quot; (1971) and in 1975 he selected her as his &quot;Sleeping Beauty&quot; in his staging for London Festival Ballet. Evdokimova remained his partner of choice for many guest appearances and tours across the globe with &quot;Nureyev and Friends&quot; for more than fifteen years.

During his American stage debut in 1962, Nureyev also partnered with Sonia Arova at New York City&#x27;s Brooklyn Academy of Music. In collaboration with Ruth Page&#x27;s Chicago Opera Ballet, they performed the grand pas de deux from &quot;Don Quixote&quot;.

==Legacy==
===As an influence===

 Nureyev was above all a stickler for classical technique, and his mastery of it made him a model for an entire generation of dancers. If the standard of male dancing rose so visibly in the West after the 1960s, it was largely because of Nureyev&#x27;s inspiration.

Nureyev&#x27;s influence on the world of ballet changed the perception of male dancers; in his own productions of the classics the male roles received much more choreography. Another important influence was his crossing the borders between classical ballet and modern dance by performing both. Today it is normal for dancers to receive training in both styles, but Nureyev was the originator and excelled in modern and classical dance. He went out of his way to work with modern dance great, Martha Graham, and she created a work specially for him. While Gene Kelly had done much to combine modern and classical styles in film, he came from a more Modern Dance influenced &quot;popular dance&quot; environment, while Nureyev made great strides in gaining acceptance of Modern Dance in the &quot;Classical Ballet&quot; sphere.

Nureyev&#x27;s charisma, commitment and generosity were such that he did not just pass on his knowledge. He personified the school of life for a dancer. Several dancers, who were principals with the Paris Opera Ballet under his direction, went on to become ballet directors themselves inspired to continue Nureyev&#x27;s work and ideas. Manuel Legris was director of the Vienna State Ballet and now directs La Scala Theatre Ballet, Laurent Hilaire was ballet director of the Stanislavski Theatre of Moscow and is now director of Bavarian State Ballet at Munich, and Charles Jude was ballet director of the Grand Théâtre de Bordeaux.

Mikhail Baryshnikov, the other great dancer who like Nureyev defected to the West, holds Nureyev in high regard. Baryshnikov said in an interview that Nureyev was an unusual man in all respects, instinctive, intelligence, constant curiosity, and extraordinary discipline, that was his goal of life and of course love in performing.

===Technique and quest for perfection===
Nureyev had a late start to ballet and had to perfect his technique to be a success. John Tooley wrote that Nureyev grew up very poor and had to make up for three to five years in ballet education at a high-level ballet school, giving him a decisive impetus to acquire the maximum of technical skills and to become the best dancer working on perfection during his whole career. The challenge for all dancers whom Nureyev worked with was to follow suit and to share his total commitment for dance. Advocates to describe the Nureyev phenomenon precisely are John Tooley, former general director of the London&#x27;s Royal Opera House, Pierre Bergé, former president of Opéra Bastille, venue of the Paris Opera Ballet (in addition to the Palais Garnier) and Manuel Legris, principal dancer with the Paris Opera Ballet nominated by Nureyev in New York.

Nureyev put it like this: &quot;I approach dancing from a different angle than those who begin dancing at eight or nine. Those who have studied from the beginning never question anything.&quot; Nureyev entered the Vaganova Ballet Academy at the age of 17 staying there for only three years compared to dancers who usually become principal dancers after entering the Vaganova school at nine and go through the full nine years of dance education. Nureyev was a contemporary of Vladimir Vasiliev, who was the premiere dancer at the Bolshoi. Later, Nureyev was a predecessor to Mikhail Baryshnikov at the Kirov Ballet, now the Mariinsky Theater. Unlike Vasiliev and Baryshnikov, Nureyev did not build his reputation on success in international ballet competitions, but rather through his performances and popular image.

Paradoxically, both Nureyev and Mikhail Baryshnikov became masters of perfection in dance. Dance and life was one and the same, Pierre Bergé said about Nureyev: &quot;He was a dancer like any other dancer. It is extraordinary to have 19 points out of 20. It is extremely rare to have 20 out of 20. However, to have 21 out of 20 is even much rarer. And this was the situation with Nureyev.&quot; Legris said: &quot;Rudolf Nureyev was a high-speed train (he was a TGV).&quot; Working with Nureyev involved having to surpass oneself and &quot;stepping on it.&quot;

==Personal life==

Nureyev did not have much patience with rules, limitations and hierarchical order and had at times a volatile temper. He was apt to throw tantrums in public when frustrated. His impatience mainly showed itself when the failings of others interfered with his work.

He socialised with Ringo Starr, Gore Vidal, Freddie Mercury, Jackie Kennedy Onassis, Mick Jagger, Liza Minnelli, Andy Warhol, Lee Radziwill and Talitha Pol, Jessye Norman, Tamara Toumanova and occasionally visited the New York discotheque Studio 54 in the late 1970s, but developed an intolerance for celebrities.
He kept up old friendships in and out of the ballet world for decades, and was considered to be a loyal and generous friend.

Most ballerinas with whom Nureyev danced, including Antoinette Sibley, Cynthia Gregory, Gelsey Kirkland and Annette Page, paid tribute to him as a considerate partner. He was known as extremely generous to many ballerinas, who credit him with helping them during difficult times. In particular, the Canadian ballerina Lynn Seymour – distressed when she was denied the opportunity to premiere MacMillan&#x27;s &quot;Romeo and Juliet&quot; – says that Nureyev often found projects for her even when she was suffering from weight problems and depression and thus had trouble finding roles.

Depending on the source, Nureyev is described as either bisexual, as he did have heterosexual relationships as a younger man, or homosexual. He had a turbulent personal life, with numerous bathhouse visits and anonymous pick-ups. Nureyev met Erik Bruhn, the celebrated Danish dancer, after Nureyev defected to the West in 1961. Nureyev was a great admirer of Bruhn, having seen filmed performances of the Dane on tour in the Soviet Union with the American Ballet Theatre, although stylistically the two dancers were very different. Bruhn and Nureyev became a couple and the two remained together on and off, with a very volatile relationship for 25 years, until Bruhn&#x27;s death in 1986.

In 1978, Nureyev met the 23-year-old American dancer and classical arts student Robert Tracy and a two-and-a-half-year love affair began. Tracy later became Nureyev&#x27;s secretary and live-in companion for over 14 years in a long-term open relationship until death. According to Tracy, Nureyev said that he had a relationship with three women in his life, he had always wanted a son, and once had plans to father one with Nastassja Kinski.

==Awards and honours==


==Film, television and musical roles==

In 1962, Nureyev made his screen debut in a film version of &quot;Les Sylphides&quot;. He decided against an acting career to branch into modern dance with the Dutch National Ballet in 1968. Nureyev also made his debut in 1962 on network television in America partnered with Maria Tallchief dancing the pas de deux from August Bournonville&#x27;s &quot;Flower Festival in Genzano&quot; on &quot;The Bell Telephone Hour&quot;.

In 1972, Sir Robert Helpmann invited him to tour Australia with Nureyev&#x27;s production of &quot;Don Quixote.&quot; 
In 1973, a film version of &quot;Don Quixote&quot; was directed by Nureyev and Helpmann and features Nureyev as &quot;Basilio&quot;, Lucette Aldous as &quot;Kitri&quot;, Helpmann as &quot;Don Quixote&quot; and artists of the Australian Ballet.

In 1972, Nureyev was a guest in David Winters&#x27; television special &quot;The Special London Bridge Special&quot;. In 1973 he appeared in a cameo for The Morecambe &amp; Wise Show Christmas Special.

In 1977, Nureyev played Rudolph Valentino in Ken Russell&#x27;s film &quot;Valentino.&quot;

In 1978, he appeared as a guest star on the television series &quot;The Muppet Show&quot; where he danced in a parody called &quot;Swine Lake&quot;, sang &quot;Baby, It&#x27;s Cold Outside&quot; in a sauna duet with Miss Piggy, and sang and tap-danced in the show&#x27;s finale, &quot;Top Hat, White Tie and Tails&quot;. His appearance is credited with making Jim Henson&#x27;s series become one of the most sought after programs to appear in.

In 1979, Rudolf Nureyev collaborated with Stanley Dorfman to direct a stage and television special performance of Giselle, with music composed by Adolphe Adam. Dorfman also took on the role of producer. The ballet was recorded in a studio setting and remains the only filmed performance of the unabridged version featuring Nureyev. Nureyev portrayed the character of Prince Albrecht, while Lynn Seymour took on the role of Giselle. Monica Mason from The Royal Ballet performed as Myrtha, the Queen of the ghostly Wilis. The Ballet of the Bavarian State Opera played a significant part in the production, and The New World Philharmonic was conducted by David Coleman.

In 1983, he had a non-dancing role in the movie &quot;Exposed&quot; with Nastassja Kinski.

In 1989, he toured the United States and Canada for 24 weeks with a revival of the Broadway musical &quot;The King and I&quot;.

=== Documentary films ===
* &quot;Rudolf Noureev au travail à la barre&quot; (&quot;Rudolf Noureev Exercising at the Barre&quot;) (1970) (4 min 13)
* &quot;Nureyev&quot; (1981), by Thames Television. Includes a candid interview, as well as access to him in the studio.
*&quot;Nureyev&quot; (1991). Directed by Patricia Foy, the 90-minute documentary chronicles the ups and downs of Nureyev&#x27;s career, and his professional relationship with Margot Fonteyn, his rumoured depression and his overall effect on modern dance.
*&quot;Rudolf Nureyev – As He Is&quot; (1991). Directed by Nikolai Boronin, the 47-minute Soviet documentary about Nureyev also includes a long interview with Nureyev during his visit to Leningrad in 1990.
* &quot;Nureyev: From Russia With Love&quot; (2007), by John Bridcut
*&quot;Rudolf Nureyev: Rebellious Demon&quot; (2012). Directed by Tatyana Malova, the Russian documentary explores the life of Nureyev. The documentary was released on the 80th birth anniversary of Nureyev.
* &quot;Rudolf Nureyev – Dance To Freedom&quot; (2015), Richard Curson Smith
* &quot;Rudolf Nureev. The Island of his Dream&quot; (2016) () by Evgeniya Tirdatova
*&quot;Nureyev: Lifting the Curtain&quot; (2018). Directed by David and Jacqui Morris, the documentary looks into the extraordinary life of Nureyev, with archive interviews and dance sequences.

==Posthumous representation ==

=== Ballet ===

* &quot;Nureyev&quot; (2017), a ballet production of the Bolshoi Theater, directed by Kirill Serebrennikov and Yuri Posokhov. The premiere, scheduled for July 11, 2017, was suddenly canceled by theater director Vladimir Urin three days before the opening, reportedly by the intervention over &quot;gay propaganda&quot; by Culture Minister Vladimir Medinsky, and finally opened on December 9 and 10, 2017. It was permanently dropped from the theatre&#x27;s repertroire in April 2023, due to the signing into law of LGBT censorship.

===Books===
* Novel based on Nureyev&#x27;s life.

===Film===
*&quot;The White Crow&quot; (2018). Directed by Ralph Fiennes, Oleg Ivenko plays Nureyev as an adult. The film culminates in his defection at Le Bourget Airport when he was 23 years old. Earlier scenes narrate Nureyev&#x27;s life: from his birth aboard the train, to childhood lessons in his native Tatar dance, his &quot;ruthless dedication&quot; to the art form, his rigorous training and early ballet performances at the Mariinsky Theater. The film shows his strong individualist tendency and aloof demeanour, at times appearing arrogant and even cruel.

===Music===
* &quot;Dancing Star&quot;, a 2024 song by English synth-pop duo Pet Shop Boys, recounts Nureyev&#x27;s life and career.

==See also==
* List of dancers
* List of Eastern Bloc defectors
* List of Russian ballet dancers

==Notes==
==References==
===Sources===
*
*
*
*

== External links ==


* Website of the Rudolf Nureyev Foundation
* Frank A. Florentine Papers Relating to Rudolf Nureyev at the Library of Congress
* 
*Rudolph Nureyev FBI Records: The Vault, U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation

===Reviews and interviews===
* &quot;Balanchine-Robbins Work for Nureyev From Moliere; The Casts&quot;, &quot;The New York Times&quot;, Anna Kisselgoff, 9 April 1979
* Mikhail Baryshnikov speaks about Rudolf Nureyev, interview by David Makhateli, D&amp;D Art Productions (1 min 55)
* &quot;The Boston Phoenix&quot; review of Nureyev&#x27;s &quot;Don Quixote&quot;, 1982
*BBC Interviews with Nureyev
*&quot;New York Sun&quot; review of PBS&#x27;s &quot;Nureyev: The Russian Years&quot; 
* Lord of the dance – Rudolf Nureyev at the National Film Theatre, London, 1–31 January 2003</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q84217" start="0" end="26" title="Rudolf Nureyev" label="Rudolf Khametovich Nureyev"/>
<link wikidata="Q58767" start="272" end="286" title="Trans-Siberian Railway" label="Trans-Siberian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6576" start="298" end="305" title="Irkutsk" label="Irkutsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q35565" start="335" end="340" title="Tatars" label="Tatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503773" start="430" end="442" title="Kirov Ballet" label="Kirov Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="502" end="511" title="Leningrad" label="Leningrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q28241" start="516" end="524" title="Eastern Bloc emigration and defection" label="defected"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="534" end="546" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q80919" start="576" end="579" title="KGB" label="KGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="660" end="668" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q323283" start="738" end="754" title="The Royal Ballet" label="The Royal Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q805232" start="813" end="831" title="Paris Opera Ballet" label="Paris Opera Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q199786" start="1009" end="1018" title="Swan Lake" label="Swan Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q827436" start="1032" end="1039" title="Giselle" label="Giselle"/>
<link wikidata="Q674967" start="1056" end="1067" title="La Bayadère" label="La Bayadère"/>
<link wikidata="Q4071152" start="1216" end="1223" title="Asanovo, Republic of Bashkortostan" label="Asanovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390649" start="1274" end="1289" title="Ufa Governorate" label="Ufa Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092754" start="1299" end="1311" title="Ufimsky District" label="Ufa District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5710" start="1319" end="1344" title="Republic of Bashkortostan" label="Republic of Bashkortostan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425322" start="1488" end="1505" title="Kazan Governorate" label="Kazan Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2988077" start="1511" end="1530" title="Alkeyevsky District" label="Alkeyevsky District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5481" start="1538" end="1559" title="Republic of Tatarstan" label="Republic of Tatarstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q58767" start="1585" end="1605" title="Trans-Siberian Railway" label="Trans-Siberian train"/>
<link wikidata="Q959" start="1671" end="1682" title="Vladivostok" label="Vladivostok"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="1711" end="1719" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484689" start="1816" end="1828" title="Volga Tatars" label="Tatar Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q900" start="2010" end="2015" title="Kazan" label="Kazan"/>
<link wikidata="Q911" start="2073" end="2076" title="Ufa" label="Ufa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5710" start="2097" end="2118" title="Republic of Bashkiria" label="Republic of Bashkiria"/>
<link wikidata="Q485348" start="2169" end="2177" title="Bashkirs" label="Bashkirs"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="2699" end="2708" title="Leningrad" label="Leningrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q138908" start="2814" end="2821" title="Bolshoi Theatre" label="Bolshoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503773" start="2881" end="2897" title="Mariinsky Ballet" label="Mariinsky Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357677" start="3166" end="3200" title="Vaganova Academy of Russian Ballet" label="Vaganova Academy of Russian Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4384709" start="3279" end="3306" title="Alexander Ivanovich Pushkin" label="Alexander Ivanovich Pushkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655207" start="3652" end="3670" title="Natalia Dudinskaya" label="Natalia Dudinskaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352511" start="3734" end="3753" title="Konstantin Sergeyev" label="Konstantin Sergeyev"/>
<link wikidata="Q4255213" start="3847" end="3856" title="Laurencia (ballet)" label="Laurencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q253424" start="4048" end="4064" title="Ninel Kurgapkina" label="Ninel Kurgapkina"/>
<link wikidata="Q35314" start="4216" end="4226" title="Khrushchev" label="Khrushchev"/>
<link wikidata="Q160169" start="4234" end="4239" title="dacha" label="dacha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="4318" end="4324" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239463" start="4536" end="4547" title="Don Quixote (ballet)" label="Don Quixote"/>
<link wikidata="Q12461" start="5615" end="5623" title="Le Monde" label="Le Monde"/>
<link wikidata="Q219660" start="5795" end="5806" title="ultramarine" label="ultramarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043639" start="6088" end="6095" title="gay bar" label="gay bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q80919" start="6157" end="6160" title="KGB" label="KGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q738719" start="6287" end="6305" title="Le Bourget Airport" label="Le Bourget Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q133274" start="6437" end="6444" title="Kremlin" label="Kremlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q151164" start="6903" end="6916" title="André Malraux" label="André Malraux"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183811" start="7084" end="7117" title="Grand Ballet du Marquis de Cuevas" label="Grand Ballet du Marquis de Cuevas"/>
<link wikidata="Q838051" start="7138" end="7157" title="The Sleeping Beauty (ballet)" label="The Sleeping Beauty"/>
<link wikidata="Q18708693" start="7169" end="7183" title="Nina Vyroubova" label="Nina Vyroubova"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320382" start="7214" end="7224" title="Erik Bruhn" label="Erik Bruhn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5252864" start="7241" end="7260" title="Royal Danish Ballet" label="Royal Danish Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872164" start="7423" end="7440" title="Australian Ballet" label="Australian Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="7804" end="7821" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Mikhail Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053812" start="7919" end="7930" title="La Sylphide" label="La Sylphide"/>
<link wikidata="Q207028" start="7970" end="7987" title="Mariinsky Theatre" label="Mariinsky Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="7991" end="8000" title="Leningrad" label="Leningrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q234436" start="8172" end="8189" title="Ninette de Valois" label="Ninette de Valois"/>
<link wikidata="Q323283" start="8221" end="8237" title="The Royal Ballet" label="The Royal Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q805232" start="8722" end="8740" title="Paris Opera Ballet" label="Paris Opera Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q231776" start="8837" end="8856" title="Dame Margot Fonteyn" label="Dame Margot Fonteyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q827436" start="8918" end="8925" title="Giselle" label="Giselle"/>
<link wikidata="Q374332" start="8984" end="9006" title="Royal Academy of Dance" label="Royal Academy of Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q711073" start="9139" end="9155" title="Frederick Ashton" label="Frederick Ashton"/>
<link wikidata="Q199786" start="9223" end="9232" title="Swan Lake" label="Swan Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q911487" start="9374" end="9390" title="Romeo and Juliet (Prokofiev)" label="Romeo and Juliet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195599" start="9558" end="9570" title="curtain call" label="curtain call"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027700" start="9797" end="9811" title="Haight-Ashbury" label="Haight-Ashbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7922454" start="10603" end="10619" title="Veronica Tennant" label="Veronica Tennant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6369754" start="10624" end="10634" title="Karen Kain" label="Karen Kain"/>
<link wikidata="Q448812" start="10943" end="10962" title="August Bournonville" label="August Bournonville"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="11053" end="11060" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q223050" start="11123" end="11136" title="statelessness" label="statelessness"/>
<link wikidata="Q805232" start="11180" end="11198" title="Paris Opera Ballet" label="Paris Opera Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q264574" start="11384" end="11398" title="Sylvie Guillem" label="Sylvie Guillem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3154936" start="11400" end="11415" title="Isabelle Guérin" label="Isabelle Guérin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860542" start="11417" end="11430" title="Manuel Legris" label="Manuel Legris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3587915" start="11450" end="11466" title="Élisabeth Platel" label="Élisabeth Platel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320885" start="11486" end="11503" title="Monique Loudières" label="Monique Loudières"/>
<link wikidata="Q838051" start="11642" end="11657" title="The Sleeping Beauty (ballet)" label="Sleeping Beauty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860542" start="11734" end="11747" title="Manuel Legris" label="Manuel Legris"/>
<link wikidata="Q30668084" start="11976" end="11992" title="Romeo and Juliet (Nureyev)" label="Romeo and Juliet"/>
<link wikidata="Q674967" start="12109" end="12120" title="La Bayadère" label="La Bayadère"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503773" start="12153" end="12169" title="Mariinsky Ballet" label="Mariinsky Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="12229" end="12233" title="AIDS" label="AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3644190" start="12324" end="12332" title="HIV-positive people" label="positive"/>
<link wikidata="Q15787" start="12337" end="12340" title="HIV" label="HIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q900" start="12749" end="12754" title="Kazan" label="Kazan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5481" start="12913" end="12922" title="Tatarstan" label="Tatarstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q166640" start="13030" end="13046" title="Levallois-Perret" label="Levallois-Perret"/>
<link wikidata="Q501561" start="13101" end="13113" title="pericarditis" label="pericarditis"/>
<link wikidata="Q49481" start="13284" end="13293" title="Prokofiev" label="Prokofiev"/>
<link wikidata="Q911487" start="13307" end="13323" title="Romeo and Juliet (Prokofiev)" label="Romeo and Juliet"/>
<link wikidata="Q463443" start="13336" end="13359" title="American Ballet Theatre" label="American Ballet Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q10583424" start="13389" end="13413" title="Metropolitan Opera" label="Metropolitan Opera House"/>
<link wikidata="Q187840" start="13645" end="13659" title="Palais Garnier" label="Palais Garnier"/>
<link wikidata="Q674967" start="13689" end="13700" title="La Bayadère" label="La Bayadère"/>
<link wikidata="Q312320" start="13735" end="13748" title="Marius Petipa" label="Marius Petipa"/>
<link wikidata="Q805232" start="13757" end="13775" title="Paris Opera Ballet" label="Paris Opera Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q434821" start="13822" end="13835" title="Ludwig Minkus" label="Ludwig Minkus"/>
<link wikidata="Q379229" start="13995" end="14004" title="Jack Lang (French politician)" label="Jack Lang"/>
<link wikidata="Q6620231" start="14095" end="14105" title="Commandeur" label="Commandeur"/>
<link wikidata="Q716909" start="14116" end="14145" title="Ordre des Arts et des Lettres" label="Ordre des Arts et des Lettres"/>
<link wikidata="Q187840" start="14405" end="14430" title="Palais Garnier" label="Paris Garnier Opera House"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350299" start="14508" end="14523" title="Oleg Vinogradov" label="Oleg Vinogradov"/>
<link wikidata="Q631270" start="14681" end="14706" title="Sainte-Geneviève-des-Bois Cemetery" label="Sainte-Geneviève-des-Bois"/>
<link wikidata="Q585358" start="14779" end="14784" title="Kelim" label="Kelim"/>
<link wikidata="Q827436" start="14935" end="14942" title="Giselle" label="Giselle"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="15374" end="15388" title="St. Petersburg" label="St. Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q526929" start="15486" end="15521" title="Centre National du Costume de Scene" label="Centre National du Costume de Scène"/>
<link wikidata="Q17031265" start="15739" end="15750" title="Legacy Walk" label="Legacy Walk"/>
<link wikidata="Q295420" start="16060" end="16079" title="Mikhail Baryshnikov" label="Mikhail Baryshnikov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358703" start="16283" end="16298" title="Zurab Tsereteli" label="Zurab Tsereteli"/>
<link wikidata="Q983503" start="16365" end="16383" title="Rustam Minnikhanov" label="Rustam Minnikhanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q368896" start="16428" end="16445" title="Mintimer Shaimiev" label="Mintimer Shaimiev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969340" start="16465" end="16478" title="Ilsur Metshin" label="Ilsur Metshin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671993" start="16792" end="16807" title="Yvette Chauviré" label="Yvette Chauviré"/>
<link wikidata="Q230023" start="16965" end="16977" title="Leslie Caron" label="Leslie Caron"/>
<link wikidata="Q231776" start="17014" end="17028" title="Margot Fonteyn" label="Margot Fonteyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q711073" start="17222" end="17242" title="Sir Frederick Ashton" label="Sir Frederick Ashton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6760827" start="17263" end="17284" title="Marguerite and Armand" label="Marguerite and Armand"/>
<link wikidata="Q41309" start="17311" end="17316" title="Liszt" label="Liszt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031890" start="17324" end="17347" title="Piano Sonata (Liszt)" label="Piano Sonata in B minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q661555" start="17385" end="17402" title="Kenneth MacMillan" label="Kenneth MacMillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q911487" start="17450" end="17466" title="Romeo and Juliet (Prokofiev)" label="Romeo and Juliet"/>
<link wikidata="Q15455687" start="17516" end="17528" title="Lynn Seymour" label="Lynn Seymour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2966587" start="17533" end="17550" title="Christopher Gable" label="Christopher Gable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630831" start="17594" end="17607" title="Les Sylphides" label="Les Sylphides"/>
<link wikidata="Q466733" start="17927" end="17939" title="Carla Fracci" label="Carla Fracci"/>
<link wikidata="Q124958" start="18015" end="18029" title="Eva Evdokimova" label="Eva Evdokimova"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053812" start="18069" end="18080" title="La Sylphide" label="La Sylphide"/>
<link wikidata="Q838051" start="18135" end="18150" title="Sleeping Beauty (ballet)" label="Sleeping Beauty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342859" start="18176" end="18198" title="London Festival Ballet" label="London Festival Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7561688" start="18432" end="18443" title="Sonia Arova" label="Sonia Arova"/>
<link wikidata="Q72912" start="18468" end="18493" title="Brooklyn Academy of Music" label="Brooklyn Academy of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q3453630" start="18517" end="18526" title="Ruth Page (ballerina)" label="Ruth Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963321" start="18534" end="18554" title="Chicago Ballet" label="Chicago Opera Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q487604" start="19417" end="19430" title="Martha Graham" label="Martha Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q73089" start="19480" end="19490" title="Gene Kelly" label="Gene Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7928345" start="20123" end="20142" title="Vienna State Ballet" label="Vienna State Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q512529" start="20159" end="20182" title="La Scala Theatre Ballet" label="La Scala Theatre Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808109" start="20184" end="20199" title="Laurent Hilaire" label="Laurent Hilaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q195208" start="20227" end="20257" title="Stanislavski and Nemirovich-Danchenko Moscow Academic Music Theatre" label="Stanislavski Theatre of Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q568401" start="20281" end="20302" title="Bavarian State Ballet" label="Bavarian State Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541186" start="20358" end="20383" title="Grand Théâtre de Bordeaux" label="Grand Théâtre de Bordeaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q295420" start="20386" end="20405" title="Mikhail Baryshnikov" label="Mikhail Baryshnikov"/>
<link wikidata="Q6261021" start="20845" end="20856" title="John Tooley" label="John Tooley"/>
<link wikidata="Q55018" start="21374" end="21391" title="Royal Opera House" label="Royal Opera House"/>
<link wikidata="Q770037" start="21393" end="21405" title="Pierre Bergé" label="Pierre Bergé"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860542" start="21515" end="21528" title="Manuel Legris" label="Manuel Legris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2533597" start="22085" end="22102" title="Vladimir Vasiliev (dancer)" label="Vladimir Vasiliev"/>
<link wikidata="Q295420" start="22184" end="22203" title="Mikhail Baryshnikov" label="Mikhail Baryshnikov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632" start="23293" end="23304" title="Ringo Starr" label="Ringo Starr"/>
<link wikidata="Q167821" start="23306" end="23316" title="Gore Vidal" label="Gore Vidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q15869" start="23318" end="23333" title="Freddie Mercury" label="Freddie Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q165421" start="23335" end="23357" title="Jackie Kennedy Onassis" label="Jackie Kennedy Onassis"/>
<link wikidata="Q128121" start="23359" end="23370" title="Mick Jagger" label="Mick Jagger"/>
<link wikidata="Q14441" start="23372" end="23385" title="Liza Minnelli" label="Liza Minnelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603" start="23387" end="23398" title="Andy Warhol" label="Andy Warhol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081523" start="23400" end="23413" title="Lee Radziwill" label="Lee Radziwill"/>
<link wikidata="Q500157" start="23418" end="23429" title="Talitha Pol" label="Talitha Pol"/>
<link wikidata="Q240937" start="23431" end="23444" title="Jessye Norman" label="Jessye Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276981" start="23446" end="23462" title="Tamara Toumanova" label="Tamara Toumanova"/>
<link wikidata="Q607212" start="23513" end="23522" title="Studio 54" label="Studio 54"/>
<link wikidata="Q4775603" start="23766" end="23783" title="Antoinette Sibley" label="Antoinette Sibley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5200072" start="23785" end="23800" title="Cynthia Gregory" label="Cynthia Gregory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499824" start="23802" end="23817" title="Gelsey Kirkland" label="Gelsey Kirkland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4769104" start="23822" end="23834" title="Annette Page" label="Annette Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q15455687" start="24032" end="24044" title="Lynn Seymour" label="Lynn Seymour"/>
<link wikidata="Q661555" start="24106" end="24122" title="Kenneth MacMillan" label="MacMillan&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320382" start="24544" end="24554" title="Erik Bruhn" label="Erik Bruhn"/>
<link wikidata="Q164714" start="24571" end="24577" title="Danish people" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q463443" start="24749" end="24772" title="American Ballet Theatre" label="American Ballet Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q55631858" start="25073" end="25085" title="Robert Tracy (dancer)" label="Robert Tracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q76711" start="25417" end="25433" title="Nastassja Kinski" label="Nastassja Kinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630831" start="25567" end="25580" title="Les Sylphides" label="Les Sylphides"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075518" start="25661" end="25682" title="Dutch National Ballet" label="Dutch National Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q264400" start="25776" end="25791" title="Maria Tallchief" label="Maria Tallchief"/>
<link wikidata="Q448812" start="25821" end="25840" title="August Bournonville" label="August Bournonville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174174" start="25854" end="25880" title="Flower Festival in Genzano" label="Flower Festival in Genzano"/>
<link wikidata="Q7716400" start="25896" end="25919" title="The Bell Telephone Hour" label="The Bell Telephone Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q931528" start="25941" end="25956" title="Robert Helpmann" label="Robert Helpmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239463" start="26027" end="26038" title="Don Quixote (ballet)" label="Don Quixote"/>
<link wikidata="Q6696526" start="26180" end="26194" title="Lucette Aldous" label="Lucette Aldous"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872164" start="26272" end="26289" title="Australian Ballet" label="Australian Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436141" start="26324" end="26337" title="David Winters (choreographer)" label="David Winters"/>
<link wikidata="Q39048295" start="26369" end="26402" title="The Special London Bridge Special" label="The Special London Bridge Special"/>
<link wikidata="Q188692" start="26519" end="26536" title="Rudolph Valentino" label="Rudolph Valentino"/>
<link wikidata="Q55249" start="26540" end="26551" title="Ken Russell" label="Ken Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132963" start="26570" end="26579" title="Valentino (1977 film)" label="Valentino"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120540" start="26656" end="26671" title="The Muppet Show" label="The Muppet Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642334" start="26748" end="26776" title="Baby, It&amp;#x27;s Cold Outside" label="Baby, It&amp;#x27;s Cold Outside"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267970" start="26804" end="26814" title="Miss Piggy" label="Miss Piggy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7824557" start="26873" end="26901" title="Top Hat, White Tie and Tails" label="Top Hat, White Tie and Tails"/>
<link wikidata="Q191037" start="26948" end="26958" title="Jim Henson" label="Jim Henson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7599567" start="27075" end="27090" title="Stanley Dorfman" label="Stanley Dorfman"/>
<link wikidata="Q189544" start="27179" end="27191" title="Adolphe Adam" label="Adolphe Adam"/>
<link wikidata="Q15455687" start="27423" end="27435" title="Lynn Seymour" label="Lynn Seymour"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900010" start="27465" end="27477" title="Monica Mason" label="Monica Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q323283" start="27483" end="27499" title="The Royal Ballet" label="The Royal Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q681931" start="27571" end="27591" title="Bavarian State Opera" label="Bavarian State Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498130" start="27755" end="27762" title="Exposed (1983 film)" label="Exposed"/>
<link wikidata="Q76711" start="27774" end="27790" title="Nastassja Kinski" label="Nastassja Kinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q6431690" start="27899" end="27913" title="The King and I" label="The King and I"/>
<link wikidata="Q541667" start="28103" end="28120" title="Thames Television" label="Thames Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="28633" end="28642" title="Leningrad" label="Leningrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q138908" start="29390" end="29405" title="Bolshoi Theater" label="Bolshoi Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974774" start="29419" end="29439" title="Kirill Serebrennikov" label="Kirill Serebrennikov"/>
<link wikidata="Q15640324" start="29544" end="29557" title="Vladimir Urin" label="Vladimir Urin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121094" start="29672" end="29689" title="Vladimir Medinsky" label="Vladimir Medinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q4184937" start="29847" end="29862" title="Russian gay propaganda law" label="LGBT censorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q48792950" start="29934" end="29948" title="The White Crow" label="The White Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q28493" start="29975" end="29988" title="Ralph Fiennes" label="Ralph Fiennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q28728092" start="29990" end="30001" title="Oleg Ivenko" label="Oleg Ivenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q35565" start="30226" end="30231" title="Tatars" label="Tatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q171995" start="30396" end="30409" title="individualist" label="individualist"/>
<link wikidata="Q124414312" start="30505" end="30517" title="Nonetheless" label="Dancing Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q1298934" start="30548" end="30557" title="synth-pop" label="synth-pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q485625" start="30562" end="30575" title="Pet Shop Boys" label="Pet Shop Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q6615651" start="30634" end="30649" title="List of dancers" label="List of dancers"/>
<link wikidata="Q28467" start="30652" end="30682" title="List of Eastern Bloc defectors" label="List of Eastern Bloc defectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q11793467" start="30685" end="30715" title="List of Russian ballet dancers" label="List of Russian ballet dancers"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="30894" end="30913" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="31106" end="31124" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q4767165" start="31132" end="31147" title="Anna Kisselgoff" label="Anna Kisselgoff"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="335180" wikidata="Q256308" url="?curid=335180" title="Original Six">
<text>The Original Six () are the teams that composed the National Hockey League (NHL) between 1942 and 1967. The six teams are the Boston Bruins, Chicago Black Hawks, Detroit Red Wings, Montreal Canadiens, New York Rangers, and Toronto Maple Leafs. After serving as the league&#x27;s only teams for 25 seasons, they were joined by six new franchises in the 1967 NHL expansion.

The Six are not the original teams of the NHL. The Canadiens and Maple Leafs are the two members of this group that are charter members (1917–18 season) of the NHL. However, in addition to the 25 seasons as the only teams, the Original Six are considered a set for having joined the league by 1926, and thus being the NHL&#x27;s oldest active franchises by a margin of at least 41 seasons versus any other team. 

The Original Six have the most combined Stanley Cup titles among NHL franchises; the Canadiens hold the most wins at 24. The Maple Leafs, who won the last Stanley Cup of the Original Six era, are the only Original Six franchise to have not returned to the Stanley Cup Finals since the 1967 expansion. As of completion of the 2024 Stanley Cup Finals, the other five Original Six teams have won 21 of the 56 Stanley Cups awarded since the 1967 expansion.

==Teams==
==Background==

The NHL consisted of 10 teams during the 1920s, but the league experienced a period of retrenchment during the Great Depression, losing the Pittsburgh Pirates/Philadelphia Quakers, Ottawa Senators/St. Louis Eagles, and Montreal Maroons in succession to financial pressures. The New York/Brooklyn Americans, one of the league&#x27;s original expansion franchises, along with the Bruins and Maroons, lasted longer but played as wards of the league from 1936 onward. World War II and its own economic strains severely depleted the league&#x27;s Canadian player base since Canada entered the war in September 1939, and many players left for military service. The Americans suspended operations in the fall of 1942, which left the NHL with just six teams.

Despite various outside efforts to initiate expansion after the war, including attempted revivals of the Maroons and Americans franchises, the league&#x27;s membership remained at six teams for the next 25 seasons. This was the longest static period without expansion, team moves or contraction in the history of the league, and also featured the longest period without any team changing arenas. The next longest streak, from the 2000 expansion to Saint Paul, Minnesota, and Columbus, Ohio, to the 2011 move of the Atlanta Thrashers to Winnipeg, is not even half as long; only two other periods (1982–1991 and 2011–2017) lasted longer than five seasons. The 25 seasons is also the second-longest period without expansion, team moves or contraction in North American sports history, behind only Major League Baseball (MLB), which saw only stadium changes between the move of the original Baltimore Orioles to New York in 1903 and the Boston Braves moving to Milwaukee in 1953, a span of 50 seasons.

==Criticisms==
The Original Six era has been criticized for having a playoff format that was too easy, since the top four teams in the regular season advanced to the playoffs. At least, the playoff system was too easy for the top three teams in the league: Montreal, Toronto, and Detroit. The standings were very static. Montreal missed the playoffs only once between 1943 and 1967 (in 1948), and Toronto missed the postseason four times, while Detroit missed three times, which left the three remaining teams to compete for the final playoff berth. Montreal won 10 of the 25 Stanley Cup titles awarded during the Original Six era, Toronto won nine, and Detroit won five. Chicago won only one Stanley Cup during that era (in 1961), and Boston and New York won no Cups.

It was not a coincidence that two of the dominant teams were based in Canada, and the third was based in an American city that borders Canada. The league had a rule that gave each team exclusive rights to negotiate contracts with promising local players within of its home ice. A player who was not within the 50-mile limit was free to field offers from any team. Once a player agreed to an NHL sponsorship-level contract, the NHL club could assign him to its sponsored junior squad, its &quot;sponsorship list.&quot;

Since the Toronto and the Montreal metropolitan areas contained abundant ice hockey prospects, that put them at a major recruiting advantage over Boston, New York, and Chicago, which had very few such prospects in their territories. Detroit had Southwestern Ontario as part of its territory and so it did not have the major advantage of the Canadian teams, but it was better positioned than the other American ones.

In practice, all six teams recruited players from Canada by sponsoring minor league, junior, and amateur teams. As a result, the league was almost entirely composed of Canadians, who had come up through the junior and minor professional leagues. The league boasted a small amount of good American players during the 1940s including the All-Star goalkeepers Frank Brimsek and Mike Karakas, defenceman John Mariucci, and forward Cully Dahlstrom. At the beginning of the Original Six era, the Chicago Black Hawks were owned by Major Frederic McLaughlin, a fiercely patriotic man who tried to stock his roster with as many American players as possible. However, he died in 1944, and his estate sold the team to a group controlled by the Norris family, which also owned the Red Wings. After that time, the Black Hawks had only a few American-born players just like the other American-based teams, while the Canadian teams had very few. The only American-born Maple Leafs player during the entire era was Gerry Foley, who was born in Ware, Massachusetts, but grew up in Garson, Ontario, and played just four games for Toronto, although he played two full seasons for the New York Rangers. The Canadiens&#x27; only American-born skater was Norm Dussault, a forward who was born in Springfield, Massachusetts, but grew up in Sherbrooke, Quebec. An American goaltender, John Aiken, also played exactly half a game for Montreal on March 13, 1958; he was a Boston Bruins team employee who filled in for his team&#x27;s opponent as an emergency replacement when Jacques Plante was injured during the second period of a game at the Boston Garden. The family of the Detroit-born Charlie Burns moved to Toronto when he was a child; he was a four-year regular with Detroit and Boston from 1958 to 1963.

Very few American-developed NHL players emerged in the 1950s and 1960s. Tommy Williams was the only U.S. citizen to play regularly. Both Williams and Mariucci complained about anti-American bias, and U.S. Olympic team stars John Mayasich and Bill Cleary turned down offers from NHL teams. Although there were several European-born players (such as the Slovak-born Hall of Famer Stan Mikita), who immigrated to Canada as children, the only European-born and trained player of the era was Sweden&#x27;s Ulf Sterner, who briefly played for the Rangers in 1965. The league&#x27;s first black player, Willie O&#x27;Ree, came up during that era; he played for the Bruins between 1958 and 1961 but turned out to be the only black player until the 1970s.

After World War II, all six NHL owners consistently rejected any bids for expansion, namely a bid for the American Hockey League&#x27;s Cleveland Barons team in 1952. In the eyes of many observers, the criteria for entry were changed every time with a desire to defeat any such bid. The owners also reneged on promises to allow the extant but dormant Maroons and Americans franchises to reactivate.

Those phenomena had the impact of limiting player movement, and as a result, the Original Six rosters were very static. Until the lengthening of careers in the 1980s, only one 20-year player in NHL history, Larry Robinson, started his career after 1964, and it is generally accepted that the weakest Calder Trophy winners (rookies of the year) of all time were selected in the 1950s and the 1960s.

==Corruption==
The league tolerated monopolistic practices by the owners. At one point, for instance, Red Wings owner James E. Norris effectively owned the Black Hawks as well and was also the largest stockholder in the Rangers. He also had significant influence over the Bruins by way of mortgages extended to the team to help keep it afloat during the Great Depression, which led some critics to joke that NHL stood for &quot;Norris House League.&quot;

The control of owners over their teams was absolute, with poor labour conditions for the players. Whenever players were sent to the minors, they had their salaries cut, and their relocation costs were not covered. Players were signed by a team as early as 16, and they were then owned by that team for their entire careers, which then directed their development.

A player pension plan had been formed in 1946, but the financials were kept a secret from the players, who had to accept whatever pension payments the owners unilaterally decided. The stark labor conditions led to several players&#x27; disputes, including a 1957 antitrust action and attempted union formation; the owners&#x27; control was further visible when four-time Stanley Cup champion and Red Wings forward Ted Lindsay, a main force agitating for a players&#x27; union in 1957, was sent to the last-place Black Hawks. Subsequent actions in the early 1960s by Toronto players Bob Baun and Carl Brewer finally led to the 1967 formation of the National Hockey League Players&#x27; Association (NHLPA), though inaugural NHLPA executive director Alan Eagleson continued to obfuscate the pension&#x27;s financials while he skimmed money from the plan, exposed only in 1989.

==End of era==

As the more conservative owners left the NHL, a younger guard that was more receptive to expansion entered the league. By 1963, when Rangers governor William M. Jennings first introduced to his peers the idea of expanding the NHL, Major League Baseball (MLB) and the National Football League (NFL) were adding teams, and the American Football League (AFL) was becoming an attractive alternative to the NFL. Jennings proposed the NHL add two new teams on the American West Coast for the 1964–65 season, and based his argument on concerns that the Western Hockey League (WHL) intended to operate as a major league in the near future and possibly compete against the NHL for talent. He also hoped that a West Coast presence would make the NHL truly national and improve the league&#x27;s chances of returning to national television in the United States (its broadcast deal with CBS had expired in 1960). While the governors did not agree to Jennings&#x27; proposal, the topic of expansion arose every time that the owners met from then on. In 1965, the league decided to double in size by adding six teams, and in February 1966, expansion franchises were awarded to Los Angeles, Minnesota, Philadelphia, Pittsburgh, St. Louis, and the San Francisco–Oakland area. The six new clubs would begin play in the 1967–68 season. Thus, with Toronto&#x27;s six-game victory over Montreal in the 1967 Stanley Cup Finals, the Original Six era came to a close.

The first dozen seasons (1967–68 to 1978–79) of the expansion era saw the continued dominance by Original Six teams, including the Bobby Orr-led Bruins in the early 1970s and the Canadiens&#x27; dynasty at the end of that decade. The expansion teams, by comparison, were not as dominant during that same time period. During those dozen seasons, only one expansion team hoisted the Cup, the Philadelphia Flyers (in 1974 and 1975), and only one Stanley Cup Finals series featured two expansion teams (the Flyers&#x27; 1975 win over the Buffalo Sabres). By the early 1980s, after further expansion, a merger with the World Hockey Association (WHA), and changes in conference/division alignment and playoff structure, expansion teams began reaching clear parity with the Original Six. Indeed, the 1979 Stanley Cup Finals between the Canadiens and Rangers would be the last Finals featuring any Original Six team until 1986, when the Canadiens claimed the Cup, as well as the last all-Original Six Finals until Chicago&#x27;s win over Boston in 2013 (that playoff season featured all of the Original Six teams for the first time since 1995–96).

With the exception of Toronto, since the dawn of the expansion era every Original Six team has played in the Stanley Cup Finals at least four times and won the Cup at least once (the Maple Leafs have not competed in a finals series since winning in 1967, the longest active NHL championship drought). The Montreal Canadiens have twice won the Cup by defeating other Original Six clubs in every series of the playoffs – in 1978 (beating Detroit, Toronto, and Boston) and 1979 (beating Toronto, Boston, and New York). Also, the 1991–92 Pittsburgh Penguins are the only team to also win the Cup after beating three of the Original Six (New York and Boston in the Wales Conference playoffs, and Chicago in the finals). Twice, the Eastern Conference champion beat two Original Six teams before being defeated by another in the Stanley Cup Finals – the Carolina Hurricanes in 2002 (beat Montreal and Toronto, lost to Detroit) and the Philadelphia Flyers in 2010 (beat Boston and Montreal, lost to Chicago). In the 2013–14 season, the League moved the Red Wings to the Eastern Conference, leaving Chicago as the only Original Six team in the Western Conference. In the 2015 playoffs, the Tampa Bay Lightning became the first team to face only Original Six franchises in the four-round playoff era, beating Detroit, Montreal, and New York in the Eastern playoffs before falling in the Stanley Cup Finals to Chicago.

The last active player from the Original Six era was Wayne Cashman, who retired with the Boston Bruins in 1983. The final active player and official in any on-ice capacity for the league was linesman John D&#x27;Amico, who retired at the end of the 1986–87 season.

According to &quot;Forbes&quot; in 2015, five of the Original Six teams were the top five most valuable NHL clubs – the Rangers at approximately $1.2 billion, the Canadiens at $1.18 billion, the Maple Leafs at $1.15 billion, the Blackhawks at $925 million, and the Bruins at $750 million. The Red Wings ranked eighth at $600 million.

==Head-to-head records==
===Boston Bruins===
===Chicago Black Hawks===
===Detroit Red Wings===
===Montreal Canadiens===
===New York Rangers===
===Toronto Maple Leafs===
==See also==
* History of the National Hockey League
* History of the National Hockey League (1942–1967)

===Rivalries involving pairs of Original Six teams===
* Blackhawks–Red Wings
* Bruins–Canadiens
* Bruins–Maple Leafs
* Canadiens–Maple Leafs
* Maple Leafs–Red Wings

==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==

==External links==
* How the Original Six Got Their Names
* Boston Bruins head-to-head records
* Chicago Blackhawks head-to-head records
* Detroit Red Wings head-to-head records
* Montreal Canadiens head-to-head records
* New York Rangers head-to-head records
* Toronto Maple Leafs head-to-head records</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q256308" start="4" end="16" title="Original Six" label="Original Six"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="52" end="74" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754513" start="89" end="93" title="1942–43 NHL season" label="1942"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960750" start="98" end="102" title="1966–67 NHL season" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q194121" start="126" end="139" title="Boston Bruins" label="Boston Bruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q209636" start="141" end="160" title="Chicago Black Hawks" label="Chicago Black Hawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q194116" start="162" end="179" title="Detroit Red Wings" label="Detroit Red Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q188143" start="181" end="199" title="Montreal Canadiens" label="Montreal Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q188984" start="201" end="217" title="New York Rangers" label="New York Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q203384" start="223" end="242" title="Toronto Maple Leafs" label="Toronto Maple Leafs"/>
<link wikidata="Q372781" start="352" end="370" title="1967 NHL expansion" label="1967 NHL expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q929805" start="510" end="524" title="1917–18 NHL season" label="1917–18 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q211872" start="827" end="838" title="Stanley Cup" label="Stanley Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4572808" start="937" end="977" title="1967 Stanley Cup Finals" label="last Stanley Cup of the Original Six era"/>
<link wikidata="Q7599548" start="1043" end="1061" title="Stanley Cup Finals" label="Stanley Cup Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q126325279" start="1112" end="1135" title="2024 Stanley Cup Finals" label="2024 Stanley Cup Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="1378" end="1394" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469370" start="1407" end="1425" title="Pittsburgh Pirates (NHL)" label="Pittsburgh Pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065402" start="1426" end="1446" title="Philadelphia Quakers (NHL)" label="Philadelphia Quakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753100" start="1448" end="1463" title="Ottawa Senators (original)" label="Ottawa Senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q642399" start="1464" end="1480" title="St. Louis Eagles" label="St. Louis Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q546280" start="1486" end="1502" title="Montreal Maroons" label="Montreal Maroons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543977" start="1545" end="1572" title="New York Americans" label="New York/Brooklyn Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1731" end="1743" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1725508" start="2449" end="2463" title="2000–01 NHL season" label="2000 expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q206357" start="2467" end="2488" title="Minnesota Wild" label="Saint Paul, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q207507" start="2494" end="2508" title="Columbus Blue Jackets" label="Columbus, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q244039" start="2534" end="2551" title="Atlanta Thrashers" label="Atlanta Thrashers"/>
<link wikidata="Q472741" start="2555" end="2563" title="Winnipeg Jets" label="Winnipeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="2813" end="2834" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q118904989" start="2897" end="2923" title="Baltimore Orioles (1901–1902)" label="original Baltimore Orioles"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="2927" end="2935" title="New York Yankees" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869139" start="2952" end="2965" title="Boston Braves" label="Boston Braves"/>
<link wikidata="Q127777377" start="2976" end="2985" title="Milwaukee Braves" label="Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7203506" start="3087" end="3101" title="playoff format" label="playoff format"/>
<link wikidata="Q27020041" start="3153" end="3167" title="regular season" label="regular season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754513" start="3386" end="3390" title="1942–43 NHL season" label="1943"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960750" start="3395" end="3399" title="1966–67 NHL season" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q4566338" start="3404" end="3408" title="1948 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q4570469" start="3743" end="3747" title="1961 Stanley Cup Finals" label="1961"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024624" start="4317" end="4324" title="Greater Toronto Area" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q656150" start="4333" end="4341" title="Greater Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502890" start="4552" end="4572" title="Southwestern Ontario" label="Southwestern Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443013" start="5081" end="5094" title="Frank Brimsek" label="Frank Brimsek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3313389" start="5099" end="5111" title="Mike Karakas" label="Mike Karakas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644819" start="5124" end="5137" title="John Mariucci" label="John Mariucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143470" start="5151" end="5166" title="Cully Dahlstrom" label="Cully Dahlstrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087074" start="5254" end="5273" title="Frederic McLaughlin" label="Frederic McLaughlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5552739" start="5723" end="5734" title="Gerry Foley" label="Gerry Foley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414325" start="5752" end="5771" title="Ware, Massachusetts" label="Ware, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7028244" start="5788" end="5803" title="Garson, Ontario" label="Garson, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q3343856" start="5957" end="5970" title="Norm Dussault" label="Norm Dussault"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="5998" end="6024" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q139473" start="6041" end="6059" title="Sherbrooke, Quebec" label="Sherbrooke, Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q6634058" start="6085" end="6095" title="John Aiken (ice hockey)" label="John Aiken"/>
<link wikidata="Q194121" start="6170" end="6183" title="Boston Bruins" label="Boston Bruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q538935" start="6274" end="6288" title="Jacques Plante" label="Jacques Plante"/>
<link wikidata="Q894567" start="6343" end="6356" title="Boston Garden" label="Boston Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q860275" start="6389" end="6402" title="Charlie Burns" label="Charlie Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q366130" start="6584" end="6598" title="Tom Williams (ice hockey, born 1940)" label="Tommy Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q959477" start="6736" end="6749" title="John Mayasich" label="John Mayasich"/>
<link wikidata="Q608058" start="6754" end="6765" title="Bill Cleary (hockey)" label="Bill Cleary"/>
<link wikidata="Q154401" start="6864" end="6870" title="Slovak Republic (1939–1945)" label="Slovak"/>
<link wikidata="Q440237" start="6890" end="6901" title="Stan Mikita" label="Stan Mikita"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="6999" end="7005" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379127" start="7013" end="7024" title="Ulf Sterner" label="Ulf Sterner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887864" start="7064" end="7068" title="1964–65 NHL season" label="1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q365539" start="7094" end="7099" title="Black Canadians" label="black"/>
<link wikidata="Q724358" start="7108" end="7125" title="Willie O&amp;#x27;Ree" label="Willie O&amp;#x27;Ree"/>
<link wikidata="Q464995" start="7366" end="7388" title="American Hockey League" label="American Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100731" start="7396" end="7412" title="Cleveland Barons (1937–1973)" label="Cleveland Barons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806113" start="7867" end="7881" title="Larry Robinson" label="Larry Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q726480" start="7960" end="7973" title="Calder Memorial Trophy" label="Calder Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q43637" start="8095" end="8107" title="monopoly" label="monopolistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161306" start="8177" end="8192" title="James E. Norris" label="James E. Norris"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315269" start="8794" end="8837" title="reserve clause" label="owned by that team for their entire careers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164733" start="9293" end="9304" title="Ted Lindsay" label="Ted Lindsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q444090" start="9461" end="9469" title="Bob Baun" label="Bob Baun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037163" start="9474" end="9485" title="Carl Brewer (ice hockey)" label="Carl Brewer"/>
<link wikidata="Q925288" start="9527" end="9575" title="National Hockey League Players&amp;#x27; Association" label="National Hockey League Players&amp;#x27; Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2830499" start="9627" end="9640" title="Alan Eagleson" label="Alan Eagleson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305240" start="9921" end="9940" title="William M. Jennings" label="William M. Jennings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="10002" end="10023" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="10038" end="10062" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q464508" start="10096" end="10120" title="American Football League" label="American Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q12606" start="10229" end="10248" title="West Coast of the United States" label="American West Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887864" start="10257" end="10271" title="1964–65 NHL season" label="1964–65 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q976512" start="10317" end="10338" title="Western Hockey League (1952–1974)" label="Western Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="10646" end="10649" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q372781" start="10839" end="10853" title="1967 NHL expansion" label="double in size"/>
<link wikidata="Q203008" start="10934" end="10945" title="Los Angeles Kings" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q902512" start="10947" end="10956" title="Minnesota North Stars" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q192083" start="10958" end="10970" title="Philadelphia Flyers" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q193643" start="10972" end="10982" title="Pittsburgh Penguins" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q207735" start="10984" end="10993" title="St. Louis Blues" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q849315" start="11003" end="11024" title="Oakland Seals" label="San Francisco–Oakland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079419" start="11073" end="11087" title="1967–68 NHL season" label="1967–68 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q4572808" start="11153" end="11176" title="1967 Stanley Cup Finals" label="1967 Stanley Cup Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079419" start="11242" end="11249" title="1967–68 NHL season" label="1967–68"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497217" start="11253" end="11260" title="1978–79 NHL season" label="1978–79"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870022" start="11269" end="11282" title="History of the National Hockey League (1967–1992)" label="expansion era"/>
<link wikidata="Q348017" start="11348" end="11357" title="Bobby Orr" label="Bobby Orr"/>
<link wikidata="Q192083" start="11607" end="11626" title="Philadelphia Flyers" label="Philadelphia Flyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576239" start="11631" end="11635" title="1974 Stanley Cup Finals" label="1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576792" start="11640" end="11644" title="1975 Stanley Cup Finals" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q7599548" start="11660" end="11678" title="Stanley Cup Finals" label="Stanley Cup Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q131206" start="11751" end="11765" title="Buffalo Sabres" label="Buffalo Sabres"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382247" start="11815" end="11821" title="1979 NHL expansion" label="merger"/>
<link wikidata="Q527513" start="11831" end="11855" title="World Hockey Association" label="World Hockey Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q4578870" start="12010" end="12033" title="1979 Stanley Cup Finals" label="1979 Stanley Cup Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4583228" start="12131" end="12135" title="1986 Stanley Cup Finals" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q13423220" start="12257" end="12261" title="2013 Stanley Cup Finals" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960822" start="12347" end="12354" title="1995–96 NHL season" label="1995–96"/>
<link wikidata="Q6591170" start="12617" end="12656" title="List of NHL franchise post-season droughts" label="longest active NHL championship drought"/>
<link wikidata="Q4578315" start="12780" end="12784" title="1978 Stanley Cup Finals" label="1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q3465394" start="12884" end="12911" title="1991–92 Pittsburgh Penguins season" label="1991–92 Pittsburgh Penguins"/>
<link wikidata="Q201857" start="13205" end="13224" title="Carolina Hurricanes" label="Carolina Hurricanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2782496" start="13228" end="13232" title="2002 Stanley Cup Finals" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983827" start="13309" end="13313" title="2010 Stanley Cup Finals" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q13415244" start="13366" end="13380" title="2013–14 NHL season" label="2013–14 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q19753291" start="13520" end="13533" title="2015 Stanley Cup playoffs" label="2015 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q201864" start="13539" end="13558" title="Tampa Bay Lightning" label="Tampa Bay Lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q19863701" start="13735" end="13753" title="2015 Stanley Cup Finals" label="Stanley Cup Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q731201" start="13820" end="13833" title="Wayne Cashman" label="Wayne Cashman"/>
<link wikidata="Q667369" start="13967" end="13984" title="John D&amp;#x27;Amico (ice hockey)" label="John D&amp;#x27;Amico"/>
<link wikidata="Q776872" start="14016" end="14030" title="1986–87 NHL season" label="1986–87 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="14052" end="14058" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382240" start="14552" end="14589" title="History of the National Hockey League" label="History of the National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870019" start="14592" end="14641" title="History of the National Hockey League (1942–1967)" label="History of the National Hockey League (1942–1967)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922976" start="14699" end="14719" title="Blackhawks–Red Wings rivalry" label="Blackhawks–Red Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q4978712" start="14722" end="14738" title="Bruins–Canadiens rivalry" label="Bruins–Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q65090285" start="14741" end="14759" title="Bruins–Maple Leafs rivalry" label="Bruins–Maple Leafs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030934" start="14762" end="14783" title="Canadiens–Maple Leafs rivalry" label="Canadiens–Maple Leafs"/>
<link wikidata="Q28163364" start="14786" end="14807" title="Maple Leafs–Red Wings rivalry" label="Maple Leafs–Red Wings"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="335181" wikidata="Q106825" url="?curid=335181" title="Rodriguez, Rizal">
<text>Rodriguez, officially the Municipality of Rodriguez () and still commonly known by its former name Montalban, is a municipality in the province of Rizal, Philippines. According to the 2020 census, it has a population of 443,954 people making it the most populous municipality in the country. Pending an affirmation through plebiscite, Republic Act No. 11812 repealed Batas Pambansa Blg. 275 and intend to formally revert to its original municipal name Montalban.

It is one of the richest municipalities in the Philippines, ranking third in 2016 with an income of .

==Etymology==
The barrio was then called “Balite” by the natives, after the wide spreading Balite Trees that stand proudly on the banks of the Montalban River. But then, the town&#x27;s former official name of Montalban derives from the Spanish word &quot;monte&quot;, which translates to &quot;mountain,&quot; in reference to the numerous hills found within and surrounding the town. A common name for the municipality up to the present, it was its official name from its founding in 1871 until 1982 when the Batasang Pambansa officially renamed it to Rodriguez under Batas Pambansa Blg. 275 in honor of Eulogio Rodriguez, a native of the municipality who served as its first municipal president and Philippine Senate president.

==History==
Based on the 1954 journal &quot;History and Cultural Life of Montalban and its Barrios&quot;, what would then be the town of Montalban was formerly the barrio &quot;Balite&quot; which was under the jurisdiction of the town of San Mateo during the Spanish period. On another account, San Mateo, with its large size, was partitioned on April 27, 1871, when Captain General Rafael Izquierdo issued a decree separating the barrios of Balite, Burgos, Marang and Calipahan from San Mateo and formed them into the new municipality of Montalban.

The town was then headed by its first parish priest Fr. Eustaquio &quot;Quako&quot; Infante of Pasig who led the dedication of the Most Holy Rosary Parish church on June 2, 1871 during the term of Archbishop Gregorio Meliton Martinez of the Archdiocese of Manila. 

According to the Executive Summary included in the Annual Audit Reports of Rodriguez, Rizal, the municipality of Montalban was founded on June 30, 1871, under the &quot;Acta de Erreccion&quot; or Deed of Foundation. The town, including its &quot;poblacion&quot;, was initially part of the province of Manila, while its present-day mountainous central and eastern portion, according to old maps, was under the jurisdiction of the District of Morong. The municipality was then incorporated to the newly created province of Rizal on June 11, 1901, by virtue of Philippine Commission Act No. 137, after having been a part of the defunct province of Manila. Montalban was then returned to its mother municipality of San Mateo by virtue of Philippine Commission Act No. 942 on October 12, 1903. San Mateo served as the seat of government in line with the economic centralization. Montalban then separated from San Mateo to become an independent municipality again by virtue of Executive Order No. 20 on February 29, 1908.

In 1955, Nacionalista gubernatorial candidate Isidro Rodriguez of Montalban won as governor of Rizal, defeating Malabon mayor Florante Villegas of the Liberal Party.
In 1982, the town was officially renamed to Rodriguez under Batas Pambansa Blg. 275 in honor of the former Senate president and town native Eulogio Rodriguez, Sr.

On October 30, 1997, rebels from the New People&#x27;s Army (NPA), the militant arm of the Communist Party of the Philippines, raided the police station of Rodriguez before noontime, where they ransacked the armory, killed one police officer, and kidnapped Rene Francisco, the police chief. He was later released on December 5, 1997 in Tanay, Rizal.

===Proposed cityhood===
As early as 2018, the town&#x27;s Sangguniang Bayan approved Resolution No. 60, Series of 2018 requesting the Senate of the Philippines thru its president, Vicente Sotto III and the House of Representatives through its speaker, Gloria Macapagal Arroyo to co-sponsor a bill for Rodriguez&#x27;s conversion into a city.

===Proposed reversion of town name to Montalban===

In mid-to-late 2019, before a formal ruling could be enacted, the municipal government under the term of Mayor Dennis Hernandez started to refer to the town as Montalban.

Notable examples were the discontinuation of the use of the town name Rodriguez in official documents, office names and correspondences, and the municipal government utilizing a modified municipal seal that indicates the name &quot;Montalban&quot; instead of &quot;Rodriguez&quot;. In February 2020, a new municipal seal that bears the year 1871 as the date of establishment was used.

In April 2020, the municipality celebrated its 149th Foundation Day (&quot;Araw ng Montalban&quot;); in the previous year April 2019, at the time when 1909 was still the recognized date of establishment, the municipality celebrated its 110th founding anniversary.

In response to the numerous requests from the town&#x27;s native residents to return the town to its former name, on July 3, 2019 during the 18th Congress, Rizal&#x27;s 2nd District Representative Juan Fidel Nograles filed &quot;House Bill No. 337&quot;. The bill was later substituted by &quot;HB No. 8899&quot; filed March 5, 2021; it was approved by the House of Representatives on March 17 and was received by the Senate on March 27. It was introduced by Sen. Imee Marcos under &quot;Senate Bill No. 2258&quot; on June 1.

In the Senate hearing of the Committee on Local Government on January 21, 2022, the National Historical Commission of the Philippines did not pose any objection on the proposed measure and clarified that the proposed change will only apply to the municipality&#x27;s name; structures and other features such as buildings, schools in the municipality dedicated in memory of Rodriguez are not covered by the proposed bill and should be retained.

With further minor amendments, the bill was approved on third and final reading on January 31. The House adopted the Senate amendment and the bill was submitted to the president for his signature.

On June 2, 2022, Republic Act No. 11812, an act for the reversion of the name of municipality Rodriguez to Montalban and repealing Batas Pambansa Blg. 275, lapsed into law. A plebiscite, having no final schedule yet, will be supervised by the Commission on Elections.

==Geography==
Rodriguez is a town of mountains. It is located on the slopes of the Sierra Madre mountain range. From its north to south, a series of sloping ridges, hills and mountains ranges adorn the town. In fact, around 27% of the town is occupied by mountains and slopes. The town&#x27;s highest peak is Mount Irid, above sea level.

Rodriguez makes up of the total area of Rizal. Making it the largest town in Rizal province with an area of . The municipality borders San Mateo and Antipolo, Rizal on the south, Norzagaray and San Jose del Monte, Bulacan on the north, Quezon City and Caloocan on the west and General Nakar, Quezon on the east. Rodriguez&#x27;s economic activities include agriculture and commerce such as the Avilon Zoo.

Rodriguez is the northernmost town in the province and comes after San Mateo, Rizal, and Quezon City coming from Metro Manila. It is also the location of the Montalban Gorge that is associated with the Legend of &quot;Bernardo Carpio&quot;. The gorge forms part of a protected area known as the Pamitinan Protected Landscape.

===Elevation and slope===
Rodriguez is generally very rough in topography, with 83% of its total land area composed of upland areas, hills and mountain ranges. The remaining 17% low-lying terrain and rolling lands are found at the south-western portion of the municipality, along with the northern portions of the Municipality of San Mateo.

The rolling slopes comprise the Marikina River Valley, where water from higher elevations drain towards the Marikina River and its tributaries at the south-western portion of the municipality. Elevations at these western lowlands range from above sea level. The western portion of the flatlands gently rises towards the west, which is part of Quezon City.

The mountainous regions of Rodriguez are found at the central and eastern areas, with sleepy sloping ridges and mountain ranges, traversing north to south. The terrain in these mountain ranges has slopes ranging from 30 to 50%. Very steep hills and mountains have slopes greater than 50%. Rolling to hilly areas 18–30% in slope can also be found. These high elevations are drained by the Tanay, Puray, and Rodriguez Rivers.

==Demographics==
===Barangays===

Rodriguez is politically subdivided into 11 barangays (8 urban, 3 rural). Each barangay consists of puroks and some have sitios.

The barangays of San Isidro and San Jose are two of the most populated barangays in the municipality and in the Philippines.

* Balite
* Burgos
* Geronimo
* Macabud
* Manggahan
* Mascap
* Puray
* Rosario
* San Isidro
* San Jose
* San Rafael
In the 2020 census, the population of Rodriguez, Rizal, was 443,954 people, with a density of .

==Climate==
==Economy==
==Transportation==

The main transportation used in the municipality are jeepneys, tricycles, UV Express, and buses. There are jeepneys that ply through the towns of San Mateo, Marikina and Cubao in Quezon City via Marcos Highway, while some ply the route that leads to Philcoa in Quezon City via Batasan Road in San Mateo, others connect Rodriguez to Litex Road in Quezon City. UV Express vehicles ply the routes to Cubao in Quezon City and Santa Lucia Grand Mall in Cainta. During the 2010s, there were additional UV Express vehicles that serve the routes to North EDSA in Quezon City and Quiapo in Manila, and the route to Cubao operates via Marikina and via Payatas Road.

Formerly, there was railway service under the Manila Railroad Company that traversed the San Mateo, Marikina, and Pasig areas and had its terminus at Barangay Balitè behind the Santo Rosario Parish Church. It had been long dismantled and the railway line converted into roadway that now consists of the road aptly named &quot;Daang Bakal&quot;.

It is known that &#x27;patok&#x27; jeepneys originated from this town way back during the 1980s. These jeepneys are known for their notoriety on the road. Despite this, they are popular among the passengers hence the name &quot;patók&quot; which means &#x27;popular&#x27;. They still ply this town up to this day, most plying the Montalban-Cubao route via Marcos Highway. These jeepneys have already spread throughout the Rizal province as well as in Marikina since then.

The Marikina Auto Line Transport Corporation (MALTC) buses is the only one that regularly travels to farther places like Makati and Parañaque. However, during the COVID-19 pandemic, the Land Transportation Franchising and Regulatory Board (LTFRB) implemented a route rationalization system for city buses. Currently, a city bus route connects Montalban with the capital city of Manila and Parañaque Integrated Terminal Exchange.

The proposed San Mateo Railway will connect the municipality of Rodriguez to the Light Rail Transit Line 2, in which 6 stations are in development.

==Government==

===List of former chief executives===

==Hospitals==
*H Vill Hospital
*N. Medcare Hospital
*St. Mark Hospital
*Montalban Infirmary
*Casimiro A. Ynares Sr. Memorial Hospital

==Education==
There are numerous elementary and high schools, both public and private, offering primary, secondary and tertiary education in the town of Rodriguez. There are also colleges and institutions that offer graduate and undergraduate programs in town.

==Tourism==
* Pamitinan Protected Landscape
* Wawa Dam
* Puray Falls
* Rodriguez Ancestral Mansion
* Mount Pamitinan and Binacayan
* Mount Hapunang Banoi
* Mount Sipit-Ulang
* Avilon Zoo
* Espadang Bato

==Gallery==
==See also==
* List of renamed cities and municipalities in the Philippines
* San Mateo, Rizal

==References==
==External links==

* Rodriguez Profile at PhilAtlas.com
* [ Philippine Standard Geographic Code]
* Local Governance Performance Management System</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q106825" start="0" end="9" title="Rodriguez, Rizal" label="Rodriguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q106825" start="26" end="51" title="Rodriguez, Rizal" label="Municipality of Rodriguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q106825" start="99" end="108" title="Rodriguez, Rizal" label="Montalban"/>
<link wikidata="Q24764" start="115" end="127" title="municipality of the Philippines" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q24746" start="135" end="143" title="Philippine Province" label="province"/>
<link wikidata="Q13874" start="147" end="152" title="Rizal (province)" label="Rizal"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="154" end="165" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="804" end="811" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q4868639" start="1077" end="1094" title="Batasang Pambansa" label="Batasang Pambansa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373883" start="1172" end="1189" title="Eulogio Rodriguez" label="Eulogio Rodriguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410551" start="1268" end="1295" title="President of the Senate of the Philippines" label="Philippine Senate president"/>
<link wikidata="Q106832" start="1536" end="1545" title="San Mateo, Rizal" label="San Mateo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543966" start="1681" end="1697" title="Rafael Izquierdo y Gutiérrez" label="Rafael Izquierdo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624" start="1944" end="1949" title="Pasig" label="Pasig"/>
<link wikidata="Q6749659" start="2404" end="2422" title="Manila (province)" label="province of Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q18352032" start="2544" end="2562" title="Morong (district)" label="District of Morong"/>
<link wikidata="Q6749659" start="2760" end="2766" title="Manila (province)" label="Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q302210" start="3141" end="3153" title="Nacionalista Party" label="Nacionalista"/>
<link wikidata="Q20811044" start="3178" end="3194" title="Isidro Rodriguez (politician)" label="Isidro Rodriguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q17071676" start="3215" end="3223" title="Governor of Rizal" label="governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q13874" start="3227" end="3232" title="Rizal (province)" label="Rizal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8861" start="3244" end="3251" title="Malabon" label="Malabon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476937" start="3283" end="3296" title="Liberal Party (Philippines)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410551" start="3405" end="3421" title="President of the Senate of the Philippines" label="Senate president"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373883" start="3438" end="3460" title="Eulogio A. Rodriguez Sr." label="Eulogio Rodriguez, Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q866709" start="3499" end="3521" title="New People&amp;#x27;s Army" label="New People&amp;#x27;s Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q636521" start="3553" end="3587" title="Communist Party of the Philippines" label="Communist Party of the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q106839" start="3798" end="3810" title="Tanay, Rizal" label="Tanay, Rizal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410551" start="3982" end="3991" title="President of the Senate of the Philippines" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q983315" start="3993" end="4010" title="Tito Sotto" label="Vicente Sotto III"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409782" start="4056" end="4063" title="Speaker of the House of Representatives of the Philippines" label="speaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q123665" start="4065" end="4088" title="Gloria Macapagal Arroyo" label="Gloria Macapagal Arroyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q108913574" start="4319" end="4335" title="Dennis Hernandez" label="Dennis Hernandez"/>
<link wikidata="Q28404538" start="5172" end="5185" title="18th Congress of the Philippines" label="18th Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q66771478" start="5187" end="5212" title="Rizal&amp;#x27;s 2nd congressional district" label="Rizal&amp;#x27;s 2nd District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418426" start="5449" end="5455" title="Senate of the Philippines" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2208719" start="5495" end="5506" title="Imee Marcos" label="Imee Marcos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652138" start="5642" end="5691" title="National Historical Commission of the Philippines" label="National Historical Commission of the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q678545" start="6102" end="6107" title="House of Representatives of the Philippines" label="House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209571" start="6171" end="6180" title="President of the Philippines" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q2459712" start="6444" end="6467" title="Commission on Elections (Philippines)" label="Commission on Elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166028" start="6553" end="6565" title="Sierra Madre (Philippines)" label="Sierra Madre"/>
<link wikidata="Q106832" start="6944" end="6953" title="San Mateo, Rizal" label="San Mateo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636" start="6958" end="6966" title="Antipolo" label="Antipolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q54598" start="6988" end="6998" title="Norzagaray" label="Norzagaray"/>
<link wikidata="Q2193" start="7003" end="7021" title="San Jose del Monte" label="San Jose del Monte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475" start="7045" end="7056" title="Quezon City" label="Quezon City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478" start="7061" end="7069" title="Caloocan" label="Caloocan"/>
<link wikidata="Q103899" start="7086" end="7099" title="General Nakar" label="General Nakar"/>
<link wikidata="Q13872" start="7101" end="7107" title="Quezon" label="Quezon"/>
<link wikidata="Q106832" start="7283" end="7299" title="San Mateo, Rizal" label="San Mateo, Rizal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475" start="7305" end="7316" title="Quezon City" label="Quezon City"/>
<link wikidata="Q13580" start="7329" end="7341" title="Metro Manila" label="Metro Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q4893894" start="7434" end="7449" title="Bernardo Carpio" label="Bernardo Carpio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240315" start="7511" end="7540" title="Pamitinan Protected Landscape" label="Pamitinan Protected Landscape"/>
<link wikidata="Q106832" start="7873" end="7882" title="San Mateo, Rizal" label="San Mateo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551251" start="7993" end="8007" title="Marikina River" label="Marikina River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475" start="8228" end="8239" title="Quezon City" label="Quezon City"/>
<link wikidata="Q61878" start="8745" end="8753" title="barangay" label="barangay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7261368" start="8801" end="8806" title="purok" label="purok"/>
<link wikidata="Q572784" start="8822" end="8828" title="sitios" label="sitios"/>
<link wikidata="Q17143236" start="9287" end="9297" title="UV Express" label="UV Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q6763435" start="9408" end="9422" title="Marikina–Infanta Highway" label="Marcos Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7185009" start="9463" end="9470" title="Philippine Coconut Authority" label="Philcoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4868635" start="9490" end="9502" title="Batasan Road" label="Batasan Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q106790" start="9661" end="9667" title="Cainta, Rizal" label="Cainta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7391478" start="9754" end="9764" title="SM North EDSA" label="North EDSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075125" start="9784" end="9790" title="Quiapo, Manila" label="Quiapo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637464" start="9916" end="9939" title="Philippine National Railways" label="Manila Railroad Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q106832" start="9959" end="9968" title="San Mateo, Rizal" label="San Mateo"/>
<link wikidata="Q17175" start="9970" end="9978" title="Marikina" label="Marikina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624" start="9984" end="9989" title="Pasig" label="Pasig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508" start="10810" end="10816" title="Makati" label="Makati"/>
<link wikidata="Q17182" start="10821" end="10830" title="Parañaque" label="Parañaque"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="10852" end="10869" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483998" start="10875" end="10927" title="Land Transportation Franchising and Regulatory Board" label="Land Transportation Franchising and Regulatory Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q104856152" start="10983" end="10993" title="List of bus routes in Metro Manila" label="city buses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461" start="11067" end="11073" title="Manila" label="Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q58811494" start="11078" end="11116" title="Parañaque Integrated Terminal Exchange" label="Parañaque Integrated Terminal Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165317" start="11200" end="11225" title="LRT Line 2" label="Light Rail Transit Line 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240315" start="11734" end="11763" title="Pamitinan Protected Landscape" label="Pamitinan Protected Landscape"/>
<link wikidata="Q7975576" start="11766" end="11774" title="Wawa Dam" label="Wawa Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3347399" start="11951" end="12011" title="List of renamed cities and municipalities in the Philippines" label="List of renamed cities and municipalities in the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q106832" start="12014" end="12030" title="San Mateo, Rizal" label="San Mateo, Rizal"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="335182" wikidata="Q2890420" url="?curid=335182" title="Operation Yoav">
<text>Operation Yoav (also called Operation Ten Plagues or Operation Yo&#x27;av) was an Israeli military operation carried out from 15–22 October 1948 in the Negev Desert, during the 1948 Arab–Israeli War. Its goal was to drive a wedge between the Egyptian forces along the coast and the Beersheba–Hebron–Jerusalem road, and ultimately to conquer the whole Negev. Operation Yoav was headed by the Southern Front commander Yigal Allon. The operation was named after Yitzhak Dubno, codenamed &quot;Yoav&quot; by his commanders in the Palmach. Dubno, a senior Palmach officer, was charged with planning and leading the defense of the kibbutzim Negba and Yad Mordechai. Dubno was killed in an air raid on Kibbutz Negba shortly after Egyptian forces began their offensive on Israel&#x27;s southern front.
==Background==
In the central and northern parts of Palestine, the Israelis had managed to make substantial territorial gains before the second truce of the war went into effect. But the southern Negev Desert, allocated to a Jewish state in the 1947 United Nations Partition Plan for Palestine, was still under Egyptian control. Despite the second truce, the Egyptians denied Jewish convoys passage through to the Negev, and captured positions beyond the truce demarcation lines.

Operation Ten Plagues (after the punishment God sent to the Egyptians for holding the Israelis captive in the Hebrew Bible) was made and approved at a Cabinet Session 6 October 1948. The operation came after at 14 October 1948 when a convoy consisting of 16 trucks was fired on as it passed through Egyptian positions.

Ralph Bunche, who had become UN mediator after the assassination of Count Folke Bernadotte, said:

:&quot;[The Israeli] military action of the last few days has been on a scale which could only be undertaken after considerable preparation, and could scarcely be explained as simple retaliatory action for an attack on an [Israeli] convoy.&quot;

The Operation coincided with Operation ha-Har, 18–24 October, in which the Harel and Etzioni Brigades attacked Egyptian controlled villages along the Jerusalem Corridor.

==History==
The Israeli forces consisted of three infantry brigades, the Negev Brigade, the Givati Brigade under the command of Abraham &quot;Kiki&quot; Elkin, and the Yiftach Brigade, an armored battalion from the 8th Armored Brigade and the largest artillery formation that had been available to the IDF at the time. On October 18 the Oded Brigade also joined in the operation. In the evening of October 15 the Israeli Air Force bombed Gaza, al-Majdal (now Ashkelon), Beersheba and Beit Hanoun. Some targets were bombed again during the following two nights. A battalion of the Yiftach Brigade mined the railroad between El-Arish and Rafah and various roads in the Gaza area, also driving a wedge into the road. Two battalions of the Givati Brigade drove south east of Iraq al-Manshiyya (now Kiryat Gath), thus cutting the road between al-Faluja and Bayt Jibrin. Beit Jibrin was captured by the 52 Battalion of Givati and the 8th Brigade on October 23.

In the early morning hours of October 21, following two nights of air raids, the Negev Brigade and 8th Armored Brigade attacked Beersheba from the west. Another force joined them from the north. The Egyptian army garrison consisted of 500 soldiers with some light artillery. They put up some resistance for five hours before surrendering. The conquest of Beersheba was named Operation Moshe, after Moshe Albert, who fell defending the besieged Beit Eshel.

While a truce was ordered for 15:00 hours on 22 October, action in the days immediately following the operation, and associated with it, continued.

After the Egyptians retreated southward from Ashdod (October 28) and al-Majdal (November 6) to Gaza, the coastal strip down to Yad Mordechai was occupied by Israeli forces. On 9 November, the Iraq Suwaydan fortress was captured and renamed the Yoav Fortress in honor of the operation.

On 29 October soldiers from the 8th Brigade carried out a massacre at al-Dawayima, killing 80-200+ Palestinians.

Towards the end of the operation General Allon sought permission to launch an attack on the Hebron hills and into the Jericho valley. David Ben-Gurion refused, mainly due to fears that this would lead to British involvement.

The United Nations Refugee Relief Project reported that the Gaza Strip&#x27;s refugee population had jumped from 100,000 to 230,000 as a result of Operation Yoav. This figure does not include those who fled to the Hebron Hills.

== Captured Arab villages ==


==Participating brigades==
* 8th Armored Brigade
* Givati Brigade
* Negev Brigade
* Oded Brigade
* Yiftach Brigade

==See also==
* Israeli naval campaign in Operation Yoav
* List of battles and operations in the 1948 Palestine war
* Depopulated Palestinian locations in Israel
* Territory acquired during Israel&#x27;s war of independence
* Yahya Sinwar and Ahmed Yassin

==References==
==External links==
* The First Israeli-Arab War and its Refugees 1948–53 
* Lest We Forget - an article by Nizar Sakhanini</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2890420" start="0" end="14" title="Operation Yoav" label="Operation Yoav"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890420" start="28" end="49" title="Operation Yoav" label="Operation Ten Plagues"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890420" start="53" end="73" title="Operation Yoav" label="Operation Yo&amp;#x27;av"/>
<link wikidata="Q162843" start="152" end="157" title="Negev" label="Negev"/>
<link wikidata="Q49092" start="177" end="198" title="1948 Arab–Israeli War" label="1948 Arab–Israeli War"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="242" end="247" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q41843" start="282" end="291" title="Beersheba" label="Beersheba"/>
<link wikidata="Q168225" start="292" end="298" title="Hebron" label="Hebron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="299" end="308" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q319015" start="416" end="427" title="Yigal Allon" label="Yigal Allon"/>
<link wikidata="Q23792" start="846" end="855" title="Palestine (region)" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="1019" end="1025" title="Jews" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q846795" start="1044" end="1087" title="United Nations Partition Plan for Palestine" label="United Nations Partition Plan for Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="1385" end="1397" title="Hebrew Bible" label="Hebrew Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q213500" start="1595" end="1607" title="Ralph Bunche" label="Ralph Bunche"/>
<link wikidata="Q212163" start="1669" end="1685" title="Folke Bernadotte" label="Folke Bernadotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907168" start="1970" end="1986" title="Operation Ha-Har" label="Operation ha-Har"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734046" start="2016" end="2021" title="Harel Brigade" label="Harel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906857" start="2026" end="2041" title="Etzioni Brigade" label="Etzioni Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910055" start="2091" end="2109" title="Jerusalem Corridor" label="Jerusalem Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564735" start="2185" end="2198" title="Negev Brigade" label="Negev Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528778" start="2204" end="2218" title="Givati Brigade" label="Givati Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2325477" start="2280" end="2295" title="Yiftach Brigade" label="Yiftach Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911048" start="2327" end="2346" title="8th Armored Brigade (Israel)" label="8th Armored Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q58967" start="2414" end="2417" title="Israel Defense Forces" label="IDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q2899526" start="2449" end="2461" title="Oded Brigade" label="Oded Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q47492" start="2550" end="2554" title="Gaza City" label="Gaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q60956" start="2556" end="2565" title="Al-Majdal, Askalan" label="al-Majdal"/>
<link wikidata="Q60956" start="2571" end="2579" title="Ashkelon" label="Ashkelon"/>
<link wikidata="Q41843" start="2582" end="2591" title="Beersheba" label="Beersheba"/>
<link wikidata="Q74176" start="2596" end="2607" title="Beit Hanoun" label="Beit Hanoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q238452" start="2735" end="2743" title="El-Arish" label="El-Arish"/>
<link wikidata="Q172343" start="2748" end="2753" title="Rafah" label="Rafah"/>
<link wikidata="Q303953" start="2803" end="2810" title="Beit Hanoun wedge" label="a wedge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2777842" start="2883" end="2900" title="Iraq al-Manshiyya" label="Iraq al-Manshiyya"/>
<link wikidata="Q152406" start="2906" end="2916" title="Kiryat Gat" label="Kiryat Gat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2777849" start="2950" end="2959" title="al-Faluja" label="al-Faluja"/>
<link wikidata="Q556637" start="2964" end="2975" title="Bayt Jibrin" label="Bayt Jibrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496729" start="3443" end="3458" title="Battle of Beersheba (1948)" label="Operation Moshe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910712" start="3512" end="3522" title="Beit Eshel" label="Beit Eshel"/>
<link wikidata="Q171639" start="3719" end="3725" title="Ashdod" label="Ashdod"/>
<link wikidata="Q60956" start="3743" end="3752" title="Al-Majdal, Askalan" label="al-Majdal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2776659" start="3866" end="3879" title="Iraq Suwaydan" label="Iraq Suwaydan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4702339" start="4018" end="4041" title="Dawayima massacre" label="massacre at al-Dawayima"/>
<link wikidata="Q168225" start="4166" end="4172" title="Hebron" label="Hebron"/>
<link wikidata="Q5687" start="4192" end="4199" title="Jericho" label="Jericho"/>
<link wikidata="Q37610" start="4208" end="4224" title="David Ben-Gurion" label="David Ben-Gurion"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="4278" end="4297" title="British Army" label="British involvement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911048" start="4589" end="4608" title="8th Armored Brigade (Israel)" label="8th Armored Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528778" start="4611" end="4625" title="Givati Brigade" label="Givati Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564735" start="4628" end="4641" title="Negev Brigade" label="Negev Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2899526" start="4644" end="4656" title="Oded Brigade" label="Oded Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2325477" start="4659" end="4674" title="Yiftach Brigade" label="Yiftach Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532383" start="4691" end="4731" title="Israeli naval campaign in Operation Yoav" label="Israeli naval campaign in Operation Yoav"/>
<link wikidata="Q770952" start="4734" end="4790" title="List of battles and operations in the 1948 Palestine war" label="List of battles and operations in the 1948 Palestine war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812935" start="4793" end="4836" title="Depopulated Palestinian locations in Israel" label="Depopulated Palestinian locations in Israel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4839" end="4898" title="Territory acquired during Israel&amp;#x27;s war of independence" label="Territory acquired during Israel&amp;#x27;s war of independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q22690797" start="4901" end="4913" title="Yahya Sinwar" label="Yahya Sinwar"/>
<link wikidata="Q188653" start="4918" end="4930" title="Ahmed Yassin" label="Ahmed Yassin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="335183" wikidata="Q1266779" url="?curid=335183" title="James Douglas, 4th Earl of Morton">
<text>James Douglas, 4th Earl of Morton (c. 1516 – 2 June 1581) was a Scottish nobleman. He played a leading role in the murders of Queen Mary&#x27;s confidant, David Rizzio, and king consort Henry Darnley. He was the last of the four regents of Scotland during the minority of James VI. He was in some ways the most successful of the four since he won the civil war that had been dragging on with the supporters of the exiled Mary, Queen of Scots. However, he came to an unfortunate end, executed by means of the Maiden, a predecessor of the guillotine.

== Biography ==
=== Early life ===
James Douglas was the second son of Sir George Douglas of Pittendreich, Master of Angus, and Elizabeth Douglas, daughter of David Douglas of Pittendreich. He wrote that he was over 61 years old in March 1578, so was probably born around 1516. Before 1543, he married Elizabeth, daughter of James Douglas, 3rd Earl of Morton, and became known as the &quot;Master of Morton&quot;. In 1553, James Douglas succeeded to the title and estates of his father-in-law, including Dalkeith House in Midlothian and Aberdour Castle in Fife. His wife, Elizabeth Douglas suffered from mental illness, as did her two elder sisters Margaret and Beatrix, who were married to Regent Arran and Robert Maxwell, 6th Lord Maxwell. James and Elizabeth&#x27;s children did not survive to adulthood, except three daughters who were declared legally incompetent in 1581. James also had five illegitimate children.

At the start of the Rough Wooing war, James and his brother David communicated with Henry VIII of England on the possibility of their surrendering Tantallon Castle to the English army that burnt Edinburgh in 1544. The English commander Lord Hertford wrote to the Master of Morton in April 1544, discussing his journey towards Berwick-upon-Tweed, and hoping he could leave the castles of Dalkeith and Tantallon in the hands of allies.

However, four years later he defended Dalkeith Palace against the English and was captured in June 1548, &quot;sore hurt on the thigh&quot;, and taken as a hostage to England. After the Treaty of Boulogne in 1550, James was exchanged for the English soldier John Luttrell, returned from captivity in England, and began to use his title of &quot;Earl of Morton&quot;.

James&#x27;s political activities and allegiances during the Scottish Reformation were at first equivocal in 1559, but in February 1560 he signed the Treaty of Berwick which invited an English army into Scotland to expel the Catholic regime of Mary of Guise. He took part in the unsuccessful embassy to England in November 1560 to treat for the marriage of Elizabeth I of England to James Hamilton, 3rd Earl of Arran. On their way back from London, Grey de Wilton hosted the Scottish ambassadors at Berwick and gave James a personal tour of the latest fortifications there.

In 1563 he became Lord Chancellor of Scotland. Though his sympathies were with the reformers, he took no part in the combination of Protestant reformers in 1565, but he headed the armed force which took possession of Holyrood Palace in March 1566 to effect the assassination of David Rizzio, and the leading conspirators adjourned to Morton&#x27;s house while a messenger was sent to obtain Queen Mary&#x27;s signature to the &quot;bond of security&quot;.

The Queen, before complying with the request, escaped to Dunbar, and Morton and the other leaders fled to England. Having been pardoned, Morton returned to Scotland early in 1567, and with 600 men appeared before Borthwick Castle, where the Queen had taken refuge after her marriage to Bothwell. Morton attended the remarkable stand-off at the battle of Carberry Hill in June 1567, where Mary&#x27;s new husband, James Hepburn, 4th Earl of Bothwell offered to settle the matter by single combat. When Patrick, Lord Lindsay took up the challenge, Morton gave Lindsay the sword of his ancestor, Archibald Douglas, 5th Earl of Angus. Mary vetoed a fight and surrendered. Morton took an active part in obtaining the consent of the queen, while she was imprisoned at Lochleven Castle, to her abdication in July 1567. When Mary escaped from Lochleven, he led the vanguard of the army which defeated her forces at the Battle of Langside in 1568, and he was the most valued privy counsellor of the Earl of Moray during the latter&#x27;s brief term of office as Regent of Scotland.

=== Regent of Scotland ===
Scotland was now ruled by regents on behalf of Mary&#x27;s infant son, James VI, who faced a civil war. James Stewart, Regent Moray, Mary&#x27;s half-brother, was assassinated in Linlithgow in January 1570. Morton was worried that Mary might escape and make her way back to Scotland, by feigning sickness during a dance and disguising herself in male apparel, riding away in disguise with a messenger, or cutting her hair and smearing dirt on her face so she looked like a scullion who turned the spit in the kitchen. He wrote to William Cecil, and Queen Elizabeth in April 1571 wrote to the Earl of Shrewsbury at Sheffield Castle to be vigilant.

Matthew Stewart, Regent Lennox died from a gunshot wound after a struggle on the streets of Stirling. On 18 November 1571, the new Regent, John Erskine, Earl of Mar, sent Morton with Robert Pitcairn, Commendator of Dunfermline and James MacGill of Nether Rankeillour to negotiate with Elizabeth&#x27;s representative Henry Carey, 1st Baron Hunsdon, Governor of Berwick upon Tweed. Mar wanted English help to capture Edinburgh Castle from Sir William Kirkcaldy of Grange who held it for Mary. Regent Mar hoped that Morton could arrange for 12 cannons, 3,000 foot soldiers, and wages for the 800 Scottish foot soldiers and 200 horsemen already in the field. Morton was instructed to offer six hostages to England from the sons of the nobility who supported James VI. He also discussed returning the Earl of Northumberland, who was a fugitive after the failed Rising of the North, to England.
A week later Morton wrote to Hunsdon with the same request, urging an attack in winter because the Castle was vulnerable when the Nor Loch was frozen. Hunsdon replied that Elizabeth still hoped for a peaceful settlement, but he would send an estimate of the expedition&#x27;s cost to Elizabeth. Morton received a token payment. The English rebels were handed over. The treaty for military aid was still not finalised when Mar died at Stirling in October 1572.

On 24 November 1572, a month after the death of Regent Mar, Morton, who had been the most powerful noble during Mar and Lennox&#x27;s rule, at last reached the object of his ambition by being elected regent. As Regent of Scotland, Morton expected the support of England and Elizabeth, and a week after his election, he wrote to William Cecil, Lord Burghley following his discussions with the English ambassador Henry Killigrew:

The knowledge of her Majesty&#x27;s meaning has chiefly moved me to accept the charge (the Regency), resting in assured hope of her favourable protection and maintenance, especially for the present payment of our men-of-war their bypast wages, &quot;without the quhilk I salbe drevin in mony great inconvenientis.&quot;

In many respects, Morton was an energetic and capable ruler. His first achievement was the conclusion of the civil war in Scotland against the supporters of the exiled Mary. In February 1573 he effected a pacification with George Gordon, 5th Earl of Huntly, the Hamiltons and other Catholic nobles who supported Mary, at Perth with the aid of Elizabeth&#x27;s envoy, Henry Killigrew. Edinburgh Castle still held out for Mary under the command of William Kirkcaldy of Grange and William Maitland of Lethington, and after a long siege the castle was taken on 27 May 1573, aided by English artillery and soldiers which finally arrived under William Drury. Due to the subsequent execution of the leaders of the castle garrison, there was now no longer any chance of Mary&#x27;s restoration by native support.

In July 1573 Morton had the king&#x27;s chamber at Stirling Castle panelled, 60 new gold buttons made for his clothes, and gave him a football. He made efforts to recover jewels belonging to Mary which were held by Agnes Keith, Countess of Moray and others.

While all now seemed to favour Morton, under-currents combined to procure his fall. The Presbyterian clergy were alienated by his leaning to Episcopacy, and all parties in the divided Church disliked his seizure of its estates. Andrew Melville, who had taken over as leader of the Kirk from John Knox, was firmly against any departure from the Presbyterian model and refused to be won by a place in Morton&#x27;s household. Morton rigorously pursued the collection of a third of the income from every Church benefice, a revenue that had been allocated to finance the King&#x27;s household. Morton had discretion to exempt persons and institutions from paying these thirds, and the historian George Hewitt found no striking evidence of bias in Morton&#x27;s exemptions.

In 1575 Morton obtained six &quot;snaphaunce&quot; musket hand guns from Flanders to serve as patterns for long guns called &quot;calivers&quot;. The Edinburgh gunmakers were ready to make 50 every week, they also made pistols called &quot;dags&quot; which equipped most of the gentlemen of Scotland. He sent goldsmith Michael Sym to London for tools for the royal mint. Sym was also sent to buy silver plate for Morton and have some rubies cut for him.

In 1577 Morton was granted the barony of Stobo. However, over the next few months, opposition to Morton grew, led by the Earl of Argyll and the Earl of Atholl, both leading Roman Catholics and members of the Queen&#x27;s party, in league with Alexander Erskine of Gogar, governor of Stirling Castle and custodian of the young James VI.

Morton was finally forced to resign as Regent in March 1578 but retained much of his power. He surrendered Edinburgh Castle, Holyrood Palace, the Great Seal and the jewels and Honours of Scotland, retiring for a while to Lochleven Castle, where he busied himself in laying out gardens. On 10 March, James VI issued a proclamation recognising that many in Scotland &quot;misliked&quot; the regiment of Morton, who had now resigned, and James would now accept the burden of the administration. The King was eleven years old.

Queen Elizabeth wrote to her agents in Scotland expressing her astonishment and displeasure because, as she was convinced her influence had brought Morton to the regency, his forced resignation reflected badly on her. If Morton was now to be accused of bad government, she instructed her diplomats Thomas Randolph and Robert Bowes to defend him by saying that his accusers should have first appealed to England to pressure Morton to reform his administration.

=== President of the Privy Council and arrest ===
On 27 April 1578, by the action of John Erskine (son of Regent Mar) and his brothers, the Commendators of Cambuskenneth and Dryburgh, Morton gained possession of Stirling Castle and the person of the king, regaining his ascendancy. On 12 August 1578, the forces of his opponents faced his army at Falkirk, but a truce was negotiated by two Edinburgh ministers, James Lawson and David Lindsay, and the English resident Robert Bowes. A nominal reconciliation was effected, and a parliament at Stirling introduced a new government. Morton, who secured an indemnity, was president of the council, but Atholl remained a privy councillor in an enlarged council with the representatives of both parties. Shortly afterwards Atholl died (allegedly of poison) and suspicion pointed to Morton. His return to power was brief, and the only important event was the prosecution of the two Hamiltons who still supported Mary. In the spring of 1579, the Scottish government&#x27;s forces moved to crush the power of the Hamilton family in the west, and Claude Hamilton and his brother John Hamilton fled to England. Morton would later deny that this was his initiative. The final fall of Morton came from an opposite quarter.

In May 1579, at St Andrews, an eccentric called Skipper Lindsay publicly declared to Morton in the King&#x27;s presence during the performance of a play that his day of judgement was at hand. In September, Esmé Stewart, Sieur d&#x27;Aubigny, the king&#x27;s cousin, came to Scotland from France, gained the favour of James by his courtly manners, and received the lands and earldom of Lennox, the custody of Dumbarton Castle, and the office of chamberlain. The young James VI was declared to have reached his majority and formally began his personal rule with some ceremony in Edinburgh in September 1579, and the period of the Regents was concluded.

On 31 December 1580, an associate of Lennox, James Stuart, Earl of Arran, son of Lord Ochiltree and brother-in-law of John Knox, had the daring to accuse Morton at a meeting of the council in Holyrood of complicity in the murder of Darnley, and he was at once committed to custody in Holyroodhouse and taken to Dumbarton Castle in the Lennox heartland.

Some months later Morton was condemned by an assize, presided over by John Graham, Lord Hallyards, for having taken part in the Darnley&#x27;s murder, and the verdict was justified by his confession that the Earl of Bothwell had revealed to him the design, although he denied participation, &quot;art and part&quot;, in its execution.

=== Execution ===

Morton was brought to Edinburgh on 30 May 1581 and confined in the house of Robert Gourlay on the Royal Mile around 100m from his execution site. He was accompanied by a servant, William Stewart, who witnessed that he slept well on the night after he was condemned. Before his execution Morton made a confession in a conversation with John Durie and Walter Balcanquhall.

He was executed on 2 June 1581, attended by James Lawson of St Giles. The method of his execution was the maiden, an early form of guillotine modelled on the Halifax gibbet. According to tradition, he brought it personally from England, having been &quot;impressed by its clean work&quot;, but doubt has been cast on this. It was actually ordered to be made by Edinburgh&#x27;s Town Council in 1564. David Hume of Godscroft appears to have initiated this Morton legend in his &quot;History of the House of Douglas&quot; (1644).

Morton&#x27;s corpse remained on the scaffold for the following day, until it was taken for burial in an unmarked grave at Greyfriars Kirkyard. His head, however, remained on &quot;the prick on the highest stone&quot;, (a spike) on the north gable of the ancient Tolbooth of Edinburgh (outside St Giles Cathedral) for eighteen months, until it was ordered to be reunited with his body in December 1582.

Morton&#x27;s final resting place is reputedly marked by a small sandstone post incised with the initials &quot;J.E.M.&quot; for James Earl of Morton. The post is more probably a Victorian marker for a . In the very unlikely event that a marker was permitted for an executed criminal, the inscribed initials would have been &quot;J.D.&quot; and, secondly, it would have been cleared away in 1595 when all stones were removed from Greyfriars.

=== Widow, daughters, and the Morton title ===
After the execution of her husband, Morton&#x27;s wife, Dame Elizabeth Douglas was found by an inquest to be incapable of managing her affairs, as she was &quot;idiot and prodigal&quot; in the language of the time. King James VI signed a warrant to appoint a legal guardian called an &quot;administrator and tutor&quot; to supervise and protect her property.

The title of Earl of Morton passed by charter to the son of Dame Elizabeth Douglas&#x27;s sister Beatrix, John Maxwell, 8th Lord Maxwell. Maxwell had been in dispute with Regent Morton over the title, and while the former Regent was in prison, Maxwell had made a contract with the Duke of Lennox on 29 April 1581. Lennox would work to give Maxwell rights over the Morton earldom, and make him the legal guardian of James Douglas and Dame Elizabeth&#x27;s three daughters. The three sisters, like their mother, would be declared incapable by a &quot;brieve of idiotry&quot;. In 1586, however, the title was given to Archibald Douglas, 8th Earl of Angus, a nephew and legal heir of Regent Morton. Maxwell was still able to use the title, though it did not descend to his heirs.

Regent Morton had sons (including James Douglas of Spott) by other women. The barony of Stobo was confiscated by the Crown and was granted to the Chancellor of Scotland, John Maitland, in 1587.

== Drochil Castle and other buildings ==
James Douglas started building Drochil Castle for his own use in 1578, three years before his death. It was no more than half built and never finished. The ruins of the castle overlook Peebles and the valleys of the Tarth Water, Lyne Water, and River Tweed. At Aberdour Castle in Fife, Morton&#x27;s lodging survives with its terrace overlooking the Firth of Forth. Morton also extended his residence at Dalkeith Palace, but these works have long since been demolished. Wreaths Tower, Kirkbean Parish, Dumfries and Galloway, is said to have belonged to Morton.

Morton commissioned extensive reconstruction at Edinburgh Castle after the siege, including the Portcullis Gate where his heraldic insignia of a heart can still be seen, and the iconic half-moon battery which fronts the castle and conceals the remains of buildings destroyed in 1573. On his orders, galleries, stables, and other new buildings were constructed at Stirling Castle and Holyroodhouse, and rooms refurbished and furnished for the use of the King. During his resignation in March 1578, Morton pointed out to the officers of the Scottish exchequer that the royal houses were &quot;now in better case than they were at the beginning of his regiment.&quot;

== Morton in fiction ==
Morton is a character in Liz Lochhead&#x27;s play &quot;Mary Queen of Scots Got Her Head Chopped Off&quot;.

Nigel Tranter&#x27;s novel &quot;Lord and Master&quot; (originally called &quot;The Master of Gray&quot;, the first part of a trilogy of that name) includes an account of Morton&#x27;s fall from power and his execution.

Morton was played by the actor Bruce Purchase in the 1971 period drama &quot;Mary, Queen of Scots&quot;.

== References ==
== See also ==
* Casket letters

== Sources ==
* Hewitt, George R., &quot;Scotland under Morton 1572–80&quot;, John Donald, Edinburgh (1982, and reprint, 2003)
* Lee, Maurice, &#x27;The Fall of Regent Morton: a problem in Satellite Diplomacy,&#x27; in &quot;Journal of Modern History&quot;, vol. 28 (1956), pp. 111–129
* Sir Herbert Maxwell Bart., FRS, LLD., &quot;A History of the House of Douglas&quot; 2 vols, Freemantle and Co., London (1902)

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1266779" start="0" end="13" title="James Douglas, 4th Earl of Morton" label="James Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266779" start="15" end="33" title="James Douglas, 4th Earl of Morton" label="4th Earl of Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q66004929" start="64" end="78" title="Scottish noble" label="Scottish noble"/>
<link wikidata="Q769549" start="155" end="167" title="David Rizzio" label="David Rizzio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329104" start="173" end="185" title="king consort" label="king consort"/>
<link wikidata="Q102108690" start="186" end="199" title="murder of Lord Darnley" label="Henry Darnley"/>
<link wikidata="Q173843" start="229" end="235" title="List of regents" label="regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="240" end="248" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="272" end="280" title="James VI and I" label="James VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q6762017" start="351" end="360" title="Marian civil war" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q131412" start="421" end="441" title="Mary, Queen of Scots" label="Mary, Queen of Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434462" start="508" end="514" title="Maiden (guillotine)" label="Maiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q128015" start="537" end="547" title="guillotine" label="guillotine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5538609" start="625" end="655" title="George Douglas of Pittendreich" label="George Douglas of Pittendreich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680291" start="875" end="908" title="James Douglas, 3rd Earl of Morton" label="James Douglas, 3rd Earl of Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5211070" start="1054" end="1068" title="Dalkeith House" label="Dalkeith House"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145629" start="1087" end="1102" title="Aberdour Castle" label="Aberdour Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680516" start="1241" end="1253" title="Regent Arran" label="Regent Arran"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326345" start="1258" end="1290" title="Earl of Nithsdale" label="Robert Maxwell, 6th Lord Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443265" start="1492" end="1508" title="Rough Wooing" label="Rough Wooing war"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="1556" end="1577" title="Henry VIII of England" label="Henry VIII of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q57803" start="1619" end="1635" title="Tantallon Castle" label="Tantallon Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999914" start="1643" end="1684" title="Burning of Edinburgh (1544)" label="English army that burnt Edinburgh in 1544"/>
<link wikidata="Q163936" start="1708" end="1721" title="Edward Seymour, 1st Duke of Somerset" label="Lord Hertford"/>
<link wikidata="Q504678" start="1798" end="1816" title="Berwick-upon-Tweed" label="Berwick-upon-Tweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5211070" start="1859" end="1867" title="Dalkeith Palace" label="Dalkeith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443265" start="2093" end="2111" title="Treaty of Boulogne" label="Treaty of Boulogne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6245561" start="2165" end="2178" title="John Luttrell (soldier)" label="John Luttrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532351" start="2336" end="2356" title="Scottish Reformation" label="Scottish Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836985" start="2425" end="2442" title="Treaty of Berwick (1560)" label="Treaty of Berwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q229846" start="2519" end="2532" title="Mary of Guise" label="Mary of Guise"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="2632" end="2654" title="Elizabeth I of England" label="Elizabeth I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q74317" start="2658" end="2691" title="James Hamilton, 3rd Earl of Arran" label="James Hamilton, 3rd Earl of Arran"/>
<link wikidata="Q8010201" start="2724" end="2738" title="William Grey, 13th Baron Grey de Wilton" label="Grey de Wilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158810" start="2868" end="2895" title="Lord Chancellor of Scotland" label="Lord Chancellor of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="2982" end="2992" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q505950" start="3067" end="3082" title="Holyrood Palace" label="Holyrood Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q769549" start="3128" end="3140" title="David Rizzio" label="David Rizzio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002133" start="3364" end="3370" title="Dunbar" label="Dunbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="3413" end="3420" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q17567402" start="3520" end="3536" title="Borthwick Castle" label="Borthwick Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870653" start="3651" end="3674" title="battle of Carberry Hill" label="battle of Carberry Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q361184" start="3720" end="3755" title="James Hepburn, 4th Earl of Bothwell" label="James Hepburn, 4th Earl of Bothwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q16854092" start="3808" end="3829" title="Patrick Lindsay, 6th Lord Lindsay" label="Patrick, Lord Lindsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q633145" start="3900" end="3936" title="Archibald Douglas, 5th Earl of Angus" label="Archibald Douglas, 5th Earl of Angus"/>
<link wikidata="Q514388" start="4069" end="4085" title="Lochleven Castle" label="Lochleven Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087439" start="4218" end="4236" title="Battle of Langside" label="Battle of Langside"/>
<link wikidata="Q6528244" start="4273" end="4289" title="privy counsellor" label="privy counsellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q937415" start="4297" end="4310" title="James Stewart, 1st Earl of Moray" label="Earl of Moray"/>
<link wikidata="Q173843" start="4360" end="4378" title="Regent of Scotland" label="Regent of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="4479" end="4487" title="James VI and I" label="James VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q6762017" start="4501" end="4510" title="Marian civil war" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q937415" start="4512" end="4539" title="Regent Moray" label="James Stewart, Regent Moray"/>
<link wikidata="Q80271" start="5000" end="5018" title="George Talbot, 6th Earl of Shrewsbury" label="Earl of Shrewsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892594" start="5022" end="5038" title="Sheffield Castle" label="Sheffield Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q727905" start="5056" end="5086" title="Regent Lennox" label="Matthew Stewart, Regent Lennox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2389496" start="5195" end="5220" title="John Erskine, Earl of Mar (d. 1572)" label="John Erskine, Earl of Mar"/>
<link wikidata="Q16863484" start="5239" end="5254" title="Robert Pitcairn (commendator)" label="Robert Pitcairn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861752" start="5256" end="5282" title="Commendator of Dunfermline" label="Commendator of Dunfermline"/>
<link wikidata="Q6138635" start="5287" end="5322" title="James MacGill of Nether Rankeillour" label="James MacGill of Nether Rankeillour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553789" start="5373" end="5403" title="Henry Carey, 1st Baron Hunsdon" label="Henry Carey, 1st Baron Hunsdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q504678" start="5417" end="5435" title="Berwick upon Tweed" label="Berwick upon Tweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q212065" start="5472" end="5488" title="Edinburgh Castle" label="Edinburgh Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q934847" start="5498" end="5525" title="William Kirkcaldy of Grange" label="William Kirkcaldy of Grange"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="5613" end="5626" title="foot soldiers" label="foot soldiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701365" start="5853" end="5875" title="Thomas Percy, 7th Earl of Northumberland" label="Earl of Northumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q427513" start="5913" end="5932" title="Rising of the North" label="Rising of the North"/>
<link wikidata="Q4327251" start="6076" end="6084" title="Nor Loch" label="Nor Loch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="6681" end="6690" title="Elizabeth I" label="Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q354309" start="6735" end="6763" title="William Cecil, Lord Burghley" label="William Cecil, Lord Burghley"/>
<link wikidata="Q15452496" start="6818" end="6833" title="Henry Killigrew (diplomat)" label="Henry Killigrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q351198" start="7380" end="7413" title="George Gordon, 5th Earl of Huntly" label="George Gordon, 5th Earl of Huntly"/>
<link wikidata="Q203000" start="7478" end="7483" title="Perth, Scotland" label="Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579868" start="7635" end="7665" title="William Maitland of Lethington" label="William Maitland of Lethington"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568571" start="7795" end="7808" title="William Drury" label="William Drury"/>
<link wikidata="Q104858307" start="8134" end="8158" title="jewels of Mary, Queen of Scots" label="jewels belonging to Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4693069" start="8178" end="8208" title="Agnes Keith, Countess of Moray" label="Agnes Keith, Countess of Moray"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="8310" end="8322" title="Presbyterian" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q177826" start="8323" end="8329" title="clergy" label="clergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="8363" end="8373" title="Episcopacy" label="Episcopacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q349771" start="8450" end="8465" title="Andrew Melville" label="Andrew Melville"/>
<link wikidata="Q189937" start="8513" end="8522" title="John Knox" label="John Knox"/>
<link wikidata="Q9386593" start="9026" end="9036" title="snaphaunce" label="snaphaunce"/>
<link wikidata="Q178243" start="9043" end="9049" title="musket" label="musket"/>
<link wikidata="Q168289" start="9122" end="9129" title="caliver" label="caliver"/>
<link wikidata="Q107283552" start="9311" end="9322" title="Michael Sym" label="Michael Sym"/>
<link wikidata="Q28406300" start="9478" end="9493" title="barony of Stobo" label="barony of Stobo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556649" start="9568" end="9582" title="Colin Campbell, 6th Earl of Argyll" label="Earl of Argyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701833" start="9591" end="9605" title="John Stewart, 4th Earl of Atholl" label="Earl of Atholl"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="9620" end="9634" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4718808" start="9690" end="9716" title="Alexander Erskine of Gogar" label="Alexander Erskine of Gogar"/>
<link wikidata="Q756268" start="9730" end="9745" title="Stirling Castle" label="Stirling Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q505950" start="9909" end="9924" title="Holyrood Palace" label="Holyrood Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599947" start="9930" end="9940" title="Great Seal of Scotland" label="Great Seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848668" start="9960" end="9979" title="Honours of Scotland" label="Honours of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q514388" start="10005" end="10021" title="Lochleven Castle" label="Lochleven Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7793404" start="10606" end="10621" title="Thomas Randolph (diplomat)" label="Thomas Randolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342247" start="10626" end="10638" title="Robert Bowes (lawyer)" label="Robert Bowes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540282" start="10854" end="10866" title="John Erskine, Earl of Mar (1558–1634)" label="John Erskine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2389496" start="10875" end="10885" title="Regent Mar" label="Regent Mar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149783" start="10909" end="10920" title="Commendator" label="Commendator"/>
<link wikidata="Q4664218" start="10925" end="10938" title="Abbot of Cambuskenneth" label="Cambuskenneth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4664231" start="10943" end="10951" title="Abbot of Dryburgh" label="Dryburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q756268" start="10981" end="10996" title="Stirling Castle" label="Stirling Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q623687" start="11116" end="11123" title="Falkirk" label="Falkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342246" start="11237" end="11249" title="Robert Bowes (diplomat)" label="Robert Bowes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650523" start="11296" end="11306" title="Parliament of Scotland" label="parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q708399" start="11371" end="11380" title="indemnity" label="indemnity"/>
<link wikidata="Q40867" start="11561" end="11567" title="poison" label="poison"/>
<link wikidata="Q600751" start="11670" end="11681" title="prosecution" label="prosecution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039257" start="11822" end="11837" title="Clan Hamilton" label="Hamilton family"/>
<link wikidata="Q3679786" start="11855" end="11870" title="Claud Hamilton, 1st Lord Paisley" label="Claude Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4735" start="11887" end="11900" title="John Hamilton, 1st Marquess of Hamilton" label="John Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q207736" start="12045" end="12055" title="St Andrews" label="St Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367961" start="12235" end="12269" title="Esmé Stewart, 1st Duke of Lennox" label="Esmé Stewart, Sieur d&amp;#x27;Aubigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="12317" end="12323" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277334" start="12403" end="12420" title="earldom of Lennox" label="earldom of Lennox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2177200" start="12437" end="12453" title="Dumbarton Castle" label="Dumbarton Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5069595" start="12473" end="12484" title="Great Chamberlain" label="chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964880" start="12726" end="12753" title="James Stuart, Earl of Arran" label="James Stuart, Earl of Arran"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679836" start="12762" end="12776" title="Lord Ochiltree" label="Lord Ochiltree"/>
<link wikidata="Q312381" start="12913" end="12920" title="Henry Stuart, Lord Darnley" label="Darnley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2177200" start="12992" end="13008" title="Dumbarton Castle" label="Dumbarton Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258000" start="13080" end="13086" title="assize" label="assize"/>
<link wikidata="Q116871403" start="13105" end="13132" title="John Graham, Lord Hallyards" label="John Graham, Lord Hallyards"/>
<link wikidata="Q361184" start="13243" end="13259" title="James Hepburn, 4th Earl of Bothwell" label="Earl of Bothwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4797175" start="13332" end="13344" title="art and part" label="art and part"/>
<link wikidata="Q83770385" start="13466" end="13480" title="Robert Gourlay (merchant)" label="Robert Gourlay"/>
<link wikidata="Q852908" start="13488" end="13498" title="Royal Mile" label="Royal Mile"/>
<link wikidata="Q18576489" start="13725" end="13735" title="John Durie" label="John Durie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7964238" start="13740" end="13759" title="Walter Balcanquhall (divine)" label="Walter Balcanquhall"/>
<link wikidata="Q18671609" start="13806" end="13818" title="James Lawson (minister)" label="James Lawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434462" start="13868" end="13874" title="Maiden (beheading)" label="maiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q128015" start="13893" end="13903" title="guillotine" label="guillotine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3897648" start="13920" end="13934" title="Halifax gibbet" label="Halifax gibbet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018107" start="14162" end="14185" title="David Hume of Godscroft" label="David Hume of Godscroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2876448" start="14414" end="14433" title="Greyfriars Kirkyard" label="Greyfriars Kirkyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7085231" start="14554" end="14562" title="Old Tolbooth, Edinburgh" label="Tolbooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547466" start="14585" end="14603" title="St Giles Cathedral" label="St Giles Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="14874" end="14883" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326336" start="15558" end="15572" title="Earl of Morton" label="Earl of Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6247267" start="15651" end="15681" title="John Maxwell, 8th Lord Maxwell" label="John Maxwell, 8th Lord Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q360323" start="16160" end="16196" title="Archibald Douglas, 8th Earl of Angus" label="Archibald Douglas, 8th Earl of Angus"/>
<link wikidata="Q105319542" start="16356" end="16378" title="James Douglas of Spott" label="James Douglas of Spott"/>
<link wikidata="Q28406300" start="16400" end="16415" title="barony of Stobo" label="barony of Stobo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158810" start="16468" end="16490" title="Chancellor of Scotland" label="Chancellor of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181990" start="16492" end="16505" title="John Maitland, 1st Lord Maitland of Thirlestane" label="John Maitland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304755" start="16589" end="16603" title="Drochil Castle" label="Drochil Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011507" start="16743" end="16750" title="Peebles" label="Peebles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7686850" start="16774" end="16785" title="Tarth Water" label="Tarth Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q6708793" start="16787" end="16797" title="Lyne Water" label="Lyne Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q503262" start="16803" end="16814" title="River Tweed" label="River Tweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145629" start="16819" end="16834" title="Aberdour Castle" label="Aberdour Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q201149" start="16838" end="16842" title="Fife" label="Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421" start="16908" end="16922" title="River Forth" label="Firth of Forth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5211070" start="16962" end="16977" title="Dalkeith Palace" label="Dalkeith Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q126514" start="17060" end="17081" title="Dumfries and Galloway" label="Dumfries and Galloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6780564" start="17866" end="17910" title="Mary Queen of Scots Got Her Head Chopped Off" label="Mary Queen of Scots Got Her Head Chopped Off"/>
<link wikidata="Q143024" start="17919" end="17932" title="Nigel Tranter" label="Nigel Tranter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4978154" start="18171" end="18185" title="Bruce Purchase" label="Bruce Purchase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856597" start="18217" end="18237" title="Mary, Queen of Scots (1971 film)" label="Mary, Queen of Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048965" start="18280" end="18294" title="Casket letters" label="Casket letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7527252" start="18584" end="18620" title="Herbert Maxwell" label="Sir Herbert Maxwell Bart., FRS, LLD."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="335185" wikidata="Q581030" url="?curid=335185" title="Pygopus">
<text>Pygopus is a genus belonging to the family of Australian legless lizards (Pygopodidae). Members of this genus are also commonly called scaly-foot.

==Species==
Within the genus &quot;Pygopus&quot; the following five species are recognized as being valid.

*&quot;Pygopus lepidopodus&quot; – common scaly-foot
*&quot;Pygopus nigriceps&quot; – hooded scaly-foot, western scaly-foot, black-headed scaly-foot, western hooded scaly-foot
*&quot;Pygopus robertsi&quot; – Robert&#x27;s scaly-foot, Cape York scaly-foot
*&quot;Pygopus schraderi&quot; – eastern hooded scaly-foot, eastern scaly-foot
*&quot;Pygopus steelescotti&quot; – northern hooded scaly-foot

&quot;Nota bene&quot;: A binomial authority in parentheses indicates that the species was originally described in a genus other than &quot;Pygopus&quot;.

==References==
==Further reading==

*Boulenger GA (1885). &quot;Catalogue of the Lizards in the British Museum (Natural History). Second Edition. Volume I. Geckonidæ, Eublepharidæ, Uroplatidæ, Pygopodidæ, Agamidæ.&quot; London: Trustees of the British Museum (Natural History). (Taylor and Francis, printers). xii + 436 pp. + Plates I-XXXII. (Genus &quot;Pygopus&quot;, p. 240).
*Cogger HG (2014). &quot;Reptiles and Amphibians of Australia, Seventh Edition&quot;. Clayton, Victoria, Australia: CSIRO Publishing. xxx + 1,033 pp. .
*Merrem B (1820). &quot;Versuchs eines Systems der Amphibien: Tentamen Systematis Amphibiorum.&quot; Marburg: J.C. Krieger. xv + 191 pp. + one plate. (&quot;Pygopus&quot;, new genus, p. 77). (in German and Latin).
*Wilson, Steve; Swan, Gerry (2013). &quot;A Complete Guide to Reptiles of Australia, Fourth Edition&quot;. Sydney: New Holland Publishers. 522 pp. .</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="13" end="18" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="36" end="42" title="Family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q15879" start="65" end="72" title="lizards" label="lizards"/>
<link wikidata="Q849482" start="74" end="85" title="Pygopodidae" label="Pygopodidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q581030" start="135" end="145" title="Pygopus" label="scaly-foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="216" end="223" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q3728483" start="263" end="282" title="Pygopus lepidopodus" label="Pygopus lepidopodus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030189" start="316" end="333" title="Pygopus nigriceps" label="Pygopus nigriceps"/>
<link wikidata="Q11838850" start="439" end="455" title="Pygopus robertsi" label="Pygopus robertsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11838851" start="518" end="535" title="Pygopus schraderi" label="Pygopus schraderi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6451987" start="597" end="617" title="Pygopus steelescotti" label="Pygopus steelescotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q222751" start="660" end="669" title="Nota bene" label="Nota bene"/>
<link wikidata="Q36642" start="679" end="697" title="Binomial nomenclature" label="binomial authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q435731" start="846" end="858" title="George Albert Boulenger" label="Boulenger GA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5660319" start="1189" end="1198" title="Harold Cogger" label="Cogger HG"/>
<link wikidata="Q62862" start="1341" end="1349" title="Blasius Merrem" label="Merrem B"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="335186" wikidata="Q2713798" url="?curid=335186" title="Delma">
<text>Delma is a genus of lizards in the family Pygopodidae. The genus &quot;Delma&quot; contains 22 valid described species, all of which are endemic to Australia.

==Species==
Recognized species of &quot;Delma&quot; according to the Reptile Database:
*&quot;Delma australis&quot; – marble-faced delma
*&quot;Delma borea&quot; – rusty-topped delma
*&quot;Delma butleri&quot; – Butler&#x27;s legless lizard, Butler&#x27;s scalyfoot, spinifex snake-lizard, unbanded delma
*&quot;Delma concinna&quot; – javelin lizard
*&quot;Delma desmosa&quot; – desert delma
*&quot;Delma elegans&quot; – Pilbara delma
*&quot;Delma fraseri&quot; – Fraser&#x27;s delma, Fraser&#x27;s scalyfoot
*&quot;Delma grayii&quot; – side-barred delma, Gray&#x27;s legless lizard
*&quot;Delma hebesa&quot; – heath delma
*&quot;Delma impar&quot; – striped legless lizard
*&quot;Delma inornata&quot; – patternless delma, olive legless lizard, olive snake-lizard
*&quot;Delma labialis&quot; – striped-tailed delma, single-striped delma
*&quot;Delma mitella&quot; – Atherton delma
*&quot;Delma molleri&quot; – Gulfs delma, Adelaide delma
*&quot;Delma nasuta&quot; – sharp-snouted delma, sharp-snouted legless lizard
*&quot;Delma pax&quot; – peace delma
*&quot;Delma petersoni&quot; – painted delma
*&quot;Delma plebeia&quot; – leaden delma
*&quot;Delma tealei&quot; – North West Cape delma, Teale&#x27;s delma
*&quot;Delma tincta&quot; – excitable delma
*&quot;Delma torquata&quot; – collared delma, adorned delma
*&quot;Delma vescolineata&quot; - Hunter Valley delma

&quot;Nota bene&quot;: A binomial authority in parentheses indicates that the species was originally described in a genus other than &quot;Delma&quot;.

==References==
==Further reading==
*Boulenger GA (1885). &quot;Catalogue of the Lizards in the British Museum (Natural History). Second Edition. Volume I. ... Pygopodidæ ...&quot; London: Trustees of the British Museum (Natural History). (Taylor and Francis, printers). xii + 436 pp. + Plates I-XXXII. (Genus &quot;Delma&quot;, p. 243).
*Gray JE (1831). &quot;Description of a new Genus of Ophisaurean Animal, discovered by the late James Hunter, Esq., in New Holland&quot;. &quot;Zoological Miscellany&quot; 1:14. (&quot;Delma&quot;, new genus).</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="11" end="16" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15879" start="20" end="26" title="lizard" label="lizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="35" end="41" title="Family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q849482" start="42" end="53" title="Pygopodidae" label="Pygopodidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="111" end="118" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="137" end="144" title="Endemism" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="148" end="157" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5252982" start="254" end="269" title="Delma australis" label="Delma australis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6451302" start="304" end="315" title="Delma borea" label="Delma borea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5258051" start="350" end="363" title="Delma butleri" label="Delma butleri"/>
<link wikidata="Q6451829" start="472" end="486" title="Delma concinna" label="Delma concinna"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259466" start="517" end="530" title="Delma desmosa" label="Delma desmosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6451125" start="559" end="572" title="Delma elegans" label="Delma elegans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5237976" start="602" end="615" title="Delma fraseri" label="Delma fraseri"/>
<link wikidata="Q5258577" start="676" end="688" title="Delma grayii" label="Delma grayii"/>
<link wikidata="Q21011732" start="750" end="762" title="Delma hebesa" label="Delma hebesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3727403" start="790" end="801" title="Delma impar" label="Delma impar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6451981" start="840" end="854" title="Delma inornata" label="Delma inornata"/>
<link wikidata="Q3727553" start="930" end="944" title="Delma labialis" label="Delma labialis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261016" start="1003" end="1016" title="Delma mitella" label="Delma mitella"/>
<link wikidata="Q4274510" start="1047" end="1060" title="Delma molleri" label="Delma molleri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855136" start="1104" end="1116" title="Delma nasuta" label="Delma nasuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q6451469" start="1182" end="1191" title="Delma pax" label="Delma pax"/>
<link wikidata="Q11838853" start="1219" end="1234" title="Delma petersoni" label="Delma petersoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q6451777" start="1264" end="1277" title="Delma plebeia" label="Delma plebeia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5242175" start="1306" end="1318" title="Delma tealei" label="Delma tealei"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000895" start="1327" end="1342" title="North West Cape" label="North West Cape"/>
<link wikidata="Q5262749" start="1376" end="1388" title="Delma tincta" label="Delma tincta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3727533" start="1420" end="1434" title="Delma torquata" label="Delma torquata"/>
<link wikidata="Q116224333" start="1480" end="1498" title="Delma vescolineata" label="Delma vescolineata"/>
<link wikidata="Q222751" start="1534" end="1543" title="Nota bene" label="Nota bene"/>
<link wikidata="Q36642" start="1553" end="1571" title="Binomial nomenclature" label="binomial authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q435731" start="1717" end="1729" title="George Albert Boulenger" label="Boulenger GA"/>
<link wikidata="Q191963" start="2019" end="2026" title="John Edward Gray" label="Gray JE"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="335187" wikidata="Q3025303" url="?curid=335187" title="Lialis">
<text>Lialis is a genus of legless lizards in the family Pygopodidae. The genus is native to Australia and New Guinea.

==Diet==
Lizards in the genus &quot;Lialis&quot; specialize in eating skinks. They have hinged teeth and kinetic skull joints which flex allowing them to swallow their prey whole.

==Reproduction==
Lizards in the genus &quot;Lialis&quot; exhibit oviparity.

==Species==
The following two species are recognized as being valid.

*&quot;Lialis burtonis&quot; 
*&quot;Lialis jicari&quot; 

==References==
==Further reading==
*Boulenger GA (1885). &quot;Catalogue of the Lizards in the British Museum (Natural History). Second Edition. Volume I. ... Pygopodidæ ...&quot; London: Trustees of the British Museum (Natural History). (Taylor and Francis, printers). xii + 436 pp. + Plates I-XXXII. (Genus &quot;Lialis&quot;, p. 246).
*Gray JE (1835). &quot;Characters of a New Genus of Reptiles (&quot;Lialis&quot;) from New South Wales&quot;. &quot;Proceedings of the Zoological Society of London&quot; 1834: 134–135. (&quot;Lialis&quot;, new genus, p. 134). (in Latin and English).</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="12" end="17" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575091" start="21" end="35" title="legless lizard" label="legless lizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="44" end="50" title="Family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q849482" start="51" end="62" title="Pygopodidae" label="Pygopodidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="87" end="96" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40285" start="101" end="111" title="New Guinea" label="New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q272206" start="184" end="190" title="skinks" label="skinks"/>
<link wikidata="Q212306" start="360" end="369" title="oviparity" label="oviparity"/>
<link wikidata="Q781959" start="449" end="464" title="Lialis burtonis" label="Lialis burtonis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6451693" start="479" end="492" title="Lialis jicari" label="Lialis jicari"/>
<link wikidata="Q435731" start="537" end="549" title="George Albert Boulenger" label="Boulenger GA"/>
<link wikidata="Q191963" start="840" end="847" title="John Edward Gray" label="Gray JE"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="1069" end="1074" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="335188" wikidata="Q2643634" url="?curid=335188" title="Slender slider">
<text>The slender slider (Pletholax gracilis) is a species of lizard in the family Pygopodidae.

==Geographic range==
&quot;Pletholax gracilis&quot; is endemic to coastal areas of southwestern Australia.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2643634" start="4" end="18" title="Slender slider" label="slender slider"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="45" end="52" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q15879" start="56" end="62" title="lizard" label="lizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="70" end="76" title="Family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q849482" start="77" end="88" title="Pygopodidae" label="Pygopodidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="146" end="153" title="Endemism" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="187" end="196" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="335192" wikidata="Q2695796" url="?curid=335192" title="Aprasia">
<text>Aprasia is a genus of lizards in the family Pygopodidae. The genus is endemic to Australia. The species in the genus &quot;Aprasia&quot; are worm-like, burrowing lizards. At least four of the species are oviparous.

==Species==
The genus &quot;Aprasia&quot; contains the following species:
*&quot;Aprasia aurita&quot; – eared worm-lizard, mallee worm-lizard
*&quot;Aprasia clairae&quot; 
*&quot;Aprasia haroldi&quot; – Shark Bay worm-lizard
*&quot;Aprasia inaurita&quot; – mallee worm-lizard, red-tailed worm-lizard
*&quot;Aprasia litorea&quot; – Gnaraloo worm-lizard
*&quot;Aprasia parapulchella&quot; – granite worm-lizard, pink-tailed worm-lizard
*&quot;Aprasia picturata&quot; 
*&quot;Aprasia pseudopulchella&quot; – Flinders Ranges worm-lizard
*&quot;Aprasia pulchella&quot; – pretty worm-lizard
*&quot;Aprasia repens&quot; – sedgelands worm-lizard
*&quot;Aprasia rostrata&quot; – Exmouth worm-lizard, Hermite Island worm-lizard
*&quot;Aprasia smithi&quot; – Zuytdorp worm-lizard
*&quot;Aprasia striolata&quot; – striated worm-lizard
*&quot;Aprasia wicherina&quot; – Wicherina worm-lizard

&quot;Nota bene&quot;: A binomial authority in parentheses indicates that the species was originally described in a genus other than &quot;Aprasia&quot;.

==References==
==Further reading==
*Boulenger GA (1885). &quot;Catalogue of the Lizards in the British Museum (Natural History). Second Edition. Volume I. Geckonidæ, Eublepharidæ, Uroplatidæ, Pygopodidæ, Agamidæ.&quot; London: Trustees of the British Museum (Natural History). (Taylor and Francis, printers). xii + 436 pp. + Plates I-XXXII. (Genus &quot;Aprasia&quot;, p. 245).
*Gray JE (1839). Catalogue of the Slender-tongued Saurians, with Descriptions of many new Genera and Species. &quot;Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist.&quot; [First Series] 2: 331–337. (&quot;Aprasia&quot;, new genus, pp. 331–332).</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="13" end="18" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15879" start="22" end="28" title="lizard" label="lizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="37" end="43" title="Family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q849482" start="44" end="55" title="Pygopodidae" label="Pygopodidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="70" end="77" title="Endemism" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="81" end="90" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="96" end="103" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q212306" start="204" end="213" title="Oviparity" label="oviparous"/>
<link wikidata="Q3729736" start="297" end="311" title="Aprasia aurita" label="Aprasia aurita"/>
<link wikidata="Q15293388" start="365" end="380" title="Aprasia clairae" label="Aprasia clairae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5238627" start="395" end="410" title="Aprasia haroldi" label="Aprasia haroldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452066" start="448" end="464" title="Aprasia inaurita" label="Aprasia inaurita"/>
<link wikidata="Q16604112" start="523" end="538" title="Aprasia litorea" label="Aprasia litorea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6451732" start="575" end="596" title="Aprasia parapulchella" label="Aprasia parapulchella"/>
<link wikidata="Q6451891" start="657" end="674" title="Aprasia picturata" label="Aprasia picturata"/>
<link wikidata="Q3727301" start="689" end="712" title="Aprasia pseudopulchella" label="Aprasia pseudopulchella"/>
<link wikidata="Q11838860" start="756" end="773" title="Aprasia pulchella" label="Aprasia pulchella"/>
<link wikidata="Q11838862" start="808" end="822" title="Aprasia repens" label="Aprasia repens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5235339" start="861" end="877" title="Aprasia rostrata" label="Aprasia rostrata"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452014" start="941" end="955" title="Aprasia smithi" label="Aprasia smithi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2318150" start="992" end="1009" title="Aprasia striolata" label="Aprasia striolata"/>
<link wikidata="Q22009189" start="1046" end="1063" title="Aprasia wicherina" label="Aprasia wicherina"/>
<link wikidata="Q222751" start="1101" end="1110" title="Nota bene" label="Nota bene"/>
<link wikidata="Q36642" start="1120" end="1138" title="Binomial nomenclature" label="binomial authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q435731" start="1286" end="1298" title="George Albert Boulenger" label="Boulenger GA"/>
<link wikidata="Q191963" start="1629" end="1636" title="John Edward Gray" label="Gray JE"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="335193" wikidata="Q1211763" url="?curid=335193" title="London Symphony">
<text>London Symphony may refer to:
*London Symphony Orchestra
*&quot;A London Symphony&quot;, the 2nd symphony by Ralph Vaughan Williams, so named by him
*Symphony No. 104 (Haydn) by Joseph Haydn, an informal nickname
*London symphonies, a collective title for all twelve of Haydn&#x27;s last symphonies, i.e. Nos. 93 to 104</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q155805" start="31" end="56" title="London Symphony Orchestra" label="London Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q300463" start="64" end="81" title="A London Symphony" label="A London Symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q166278" start="150" end="174" title="Symphony No. 104 (Haydn)" label="Symphony No. 104 (Haydn)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001980" start="214" end="231" title="London symphonies" label="London symphonies"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="335195" wikidata="Q212886" url="?curid=335195" title="Stephen Colbert">
<text>Stephen Tyrone Colbert ( ; born May 13, 1964) is an American comedian, writer, producer, political commentator, actor, singer, and television host. He is best known for hosting the satirical Comedy Central program &quot;The Colbert Report&quot; from 2005 to 2014, and the CBS talk program &quot;The Late Show with Stephen Colbert&quot; since September 2015.

Colbert originally studied to be a dramatic actor, but became interested in improvisational theater while attending Northwestern University, where he met Second City director Del Close. Colbert first performed professionally as an understudy for Steve Carell at Second City Chicago. Paul Dinello and Amy Sedaris, comedians with whom he developed the sketch comedy series &quot;Exit 57,&quot; were in his troupe. Colbert performed on &quot;The Dana Carvey Show&quot; (1996) and wrote for the show, before collaborating again with Sedaris and Dinello on the sitcom &quot;Strangers with Candy&quot; (1999–2000).

Colbert&#x27;s work as a correspondent on Comedy Central&#x27;s news-parody series &quot;The Daily Show&quot; gained him wide recognition. In 2005, he left &quot;The Daily Show&quot; to host &quot;The Colbert Report&quot;. Following &quot;The Daily Show&quot;″s news-parody concept, &quot;The Colbert Report&quot; was a parody of personality-driven political opinion shows including &quot;The O&#x27;Reilly Factor&quot;, in which he portrayed a caricatured version of conservative political pundits, earning Colbert an invitation to perform as featured entertainer at the White House Correspondents&#x27; Association Dinner in 2006, which he did in character. This event led to the series becoming one of Comedy Central&#x27;s highest-rated series. After ending &quot;The Colbert Report&quot;, he was hired in 2015 to succeed David Letterman, who was retiring as host of the &quot;Late Show&quot; on CBS. Colbert hosted the 69th Primetime Emmy Awards in September 2017.

Colbert has won nine Primetime Emmy Awards, two Grammy Awards, and three Peabody Awards. Colbert was named one of &quot;Time&quot;″s 100 Most Influential People in 2006 and 2012. His book &quot;I Am America (And So Can You!)&quot; was listed No.1 on &quot;The New York Times&quot; Best Seller list in 2007.

==Early life and education==
Colbert was born in Washington, D.C., the youngest of eleven children (James III, Edward, Mary, William, Margo, Thomas, Jay, Elizabeth, Paul, and Peter) in a Catholic family. Then he lived for a few years in Bethesda, Maryland. Next, he grew up in James Island, an island and a suburb of Charleston, South Carolina. His father, James William Colbert Jr., was an immunologist and medical school dean at Yale University, Saint Louis University, and at the Medical University of South Carolina in Charleston. From 1969, James Colbert Jr. was the school&#x27;s first vice president of academic affairs. Colbert&#x27;s mother, Lorna Elizabeth Colbert (&quot;née&quot; Tuck), was a homemaker.

In interviews, Colbert has described his parents as devout people who nevertheless strongly valued intellectualism, and taught their children it was possible to question the Church and still be Catholic. He has said his father was interested in French humanist writers including Léon Bloy and Jacques Maritain, while his mother was fond of Catholic Worker Movement leader Dorothy Day. Regardless, Colbert recalls having a &quot;pretty conservative upbringing&quot;; with his mother voting for a Democrat, John F. Kennedy, exactly once in her life. In an interview, his mother has described him as &quot;rambunctious&quot;. As a child, he observed that Southerners were often depicted as being less intelligent than other characters on scripted television; to avoid that stereotype, he taught himself to imitate the speech of American news anchors.

Colbert sometimes jokingly claims that his surname is French. His ancestry though is actually 15/16 Irish, and one of his paternal great-great-grandmothers was of German and English descent. Many of his ancestors emigrated from Ireland to North America in the 19th century before and during the Great Famine. Originally, his surname was pronounced in English; Colbert&#x27;s father, James, wanted to pronounce the name , but maintained the pronunciation out of respect for his own father. He offered his children the option to pronounce the name whichever way they preferred. Colbert started using later in life when he transferred to Northwestern University, taking advantage of the opportunity to reinvent himself in a new place where no one knew him. Colbert&#x27;s brother Edward, an intellectual-property attorney, retained ; this was shown in a February 12, 2009, appearance on &quot;The Colbert Report&quot;, when his second-oldest brother asked him, “ or ?” Ed responded ““, to which he jokingly replied, &quot;See you in Hell.&quot;

On September 11, 1974, when Colbert was ten years old, his father and his brothers Paul and Peter, who were closest to him in age, died in the crash of Eastern Air Lines Flight 212 while attempting to land in Charlotte, North Carolina. They were en route to enroll Paul and Peter at Canterbury School in New Milford, Connecticut. He has discussed the impact the tragedy has on him and his philosophy of grief and suffering. Lorna Colbert moved the family from James Island to the George Chisolm House, in downtown Charleston, and she ran the carriage house as a bed and breakfast. 

Colbert found the transition difficult and did not easily make friends in the new neighborhood. Later he described himself during this time as being detached, lacking a sense of importance regarding the things with which other children concerned themselves. &quot;Nothing made any sense after my father and my brothers died. I kind of just shut off,&quot; he recalled. He developed a love of science fiction and fantasy novels, especially the works of J. R. R. Tolkien, of which he remains an avid fan. Colbert says two of his favorite chapters in &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot; are &quot;The Shadow of the Past&quot; and &quot;The Council of Elrond&quot;. During his adolescence, he developed an intense interest in fantasy role-playing games, especially &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot;, a pastime which he later characterized as an early experience in acting and improvisation.

Colbert attended Charleston&#x27;s Episcopal Porter-Gaud School participating in several school plays and contributing to the school newspaper but he was not highly motivated academically. During his adolescence, he briefly fronted &quot;A Shot in the Dark&quot;, a Rolling Stones cover band. When he was younger, he had hoped to study marine biology, but surgery intended to repair a severely perforated eardrum caused him inner-ear damage severe enough to preclude a career involving scuba diving, and leaving him deaf in his right ear.

For a while, he was uncertain whether he would attend college, but eventually he applied and was accepted to Hampden–Sydney College in Virginia, where a friend had also enrolled. Arriving in 1982, he majored in philosophy and continued to participate in plays. He found the curriculum to be rigorous, but was more focused than he had been in high school and was able to apply himself to his studies. Despite the lack of a significant theater community at Hampden–Sydney, Colbert&#x27;s interest in acting escalated during this time. After two years, he transferred in 1984 to Northwestern University as a theater major to study performance, emboldened by the realization that he loved performing, even when no one was coming to shows. He graduated from Northwestern&#x27;s School of Communication in 1986.

== Early career in comedy ==
While at Northwestern, Colbert studied with the intent of becoming a dramatic actor; mostly he performed in experimental plays and was uninterested in comedy. He began performing improvisation while in college, both in the campus improv team No Fun Mud Piranhas and at the Annoyance Theatre in Chicago as a part of Del Close&#x27;s ImprovOlympic at a time when the project was focused on competitive, long-form improvisation, rather than improvisational comedy. &quot;I wasn&#x27;t gonna do Second City&quot;, Colbert later recalled, &quot;because those Annoyance people looked down on Second City because they thought it wasn&#x27;t pure improv – there was a slightly snobby, mystical quality to the Annoyance people&quot;. After Colbert graduated in 1986, however, he was in need of a job. A friend who was employed at Second City&#x27;s box office offered him work answering phones and selling souvenirs. Colbert accepted and discovered that Second City employees were entitled to take classes at their training center free of charge. Despite his earlier aversion to the comedy group, he signed up for improvisation classes and enjoyed the experience greatly.

Shortly thereafter, he was hired to perform with Second City&#x27;s touring company, initially as an understudy for Steve Carell. It was there he met Amy Sedaris and Paul Dinello, with whom he often collaborated later in his career. By their retelling, the three comedians did not get along at first – Dinello thought Colbert was uptight, pretentious and cold, while Colbert thought of Dinello as &quot;an illiterate thug&quot; – but the trio became close friends while touring together, discovering that they shared a similar comic sensibility.

When Sedaris and Dinello were offered the opportunity to create a television series for HBO Downtown Productions, Colbert left Second City and relocated to New York to work with them on the sketch comedy show &quot;Exit 57&quot;. The series debuted on Comedy Central in 1995 and aired through 1996. Although it lasted only 12 episodes, the show received favorable reviews and was nominated for five CableACE Awards in 1995, in categories including best writing, performance, and comedy series.

== Television career ==
=== &quot;The Dana Carvey Show&quot; (1996) ===

Following the cancelation of &quot;Exit 57&quot;, Colbert worked for six months as a cast member and writer on &quot;The Dana Carvey Show&quot;, alongside former Second City castmate Steve Carell, and also Robert Smigel, Charlie Kaufman, Louis C.K., and Dino Stamatopoulos, among others. The series, described by one reviewer as &quot;kamikaze satire&quot; in &quot;borderline-questionable taste&quot;, had sponsors pull out after its first episode aired and was canceled after seven episodes. Colbert then worked briefly as a freelance writer for &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot; with Robert Smigel. Smigel brought his animated sketch, &quot;The Ambiguously Gay Duo&quot;, to &quot;SNL&quot; from &quot;The Dana Carvey Show&quot;; Colbert provided the voice of Ace on both series, opposite Steve Carell as Gary. Needing money, he also worked as a script consultant for VH1 and MTV, before taking a job filming humorous correspondent segments for &quot;Good Morning America&quot;. Only two of the segments he proposed were ever produced and only one aired, but the job led his agent to refer him to &quot;The Daily Show&#x27;s&quot; producer, Madeline Smithberg, who hired Colbert on a trial basis in 1997. 

=== &quot;Strangers with Candy&quot; (1999–2000) ===
During the same period, Colbert worked again with Sedaris and Dinello to develop a new comedy series for Comedy Central, &quot;Strangers with Candy&quot;. Comedy Central picked up the series in 1998 after Colbert had already begun working on &quot;The Daily Show&quot;. As a result, he accepted a reduced role, filming only around 20 &quot;Daily Show&quot; segments a year while he worked on the new series.

&quot;Strangers with Candy&quot; was conceived of as a parody of after school specials, following the life of Jerri Blank, a 46-year-old dropout who returns to finish high school after 32 years of life on the street. Most noted by critics for its use of offensive humor, it concluded each episode by delivering to the audience a skewed, politically incorrect moral lesson. Colbert served as a main writer alongside Sedaris and Dinello, and portrayed Jerri&#x27;s strict but uninformed history teacher, Chuck Noblet, seen throughout the series dispensing inaccurate information to his classes. Colbert has likened this to the character he played on &quot;The Daily Show&quot; and later &quot;The Colbert Report&quot;, claiming that he has a very specific niche in portraying &quot;poorly informed, high-status idiot&quot; characters. Another running joke throughout the series was that Noblet, a closeted homosexual, was having a &quot;secret&quot; affair with fellow teacher Geoffrey Jellineck, despite the fact that their relationship was apparent to everyone around them. This obliviousness also appears in Colbert&#x27;s &quot;Daily Show&quot; and &quot;Colbert Report&quot; character.

Thirty episodes of &quot;Strangers with Candy&quot; were made, which aired on Comedy Central in 1999 and 2000. Though its ratings were not remarkable during its initial run, it has been characterized as a cult show with a small but dedicated audience. Colbert reprised his role for a film adaptation which premiered at the Sundance Film Festival in 2005 and had a limited release in 2006. The film received mixed reviews. Colbert also co-wrote the screenplay with Sedaris and Dinello.

=== &quot;The Daily Show&quot; (1997–2005) ===
Colbert joined the cast of Comedy Central&#x27;s parody-news series &quot;The Daily Show&quot; in 1997, when the show was in its second season. Originally one of four correspondents who filmed segments from remote locations in the style of network news field reporters, Colbert was referred to as &quot;the new guy&quot; on-air for his first two years on the show, during which time Craig Kilborn served as host. When Kilborn left the show prior to the 1999 season, Jon Stewart took over hosting duties, also serving as a writer and co-executive producer. From this point, the series gradually began to take on a more political tone and increase in popularity, particularly in the latter part of the 2000 U.S. presidential election season. The roles of the show&#x27;s correspondents were expanded to include more in-studio segments and international reports, which were almost always done in the studio with the aid of a greenscreen. Colbert usually wrote and edited his own pieces.

Unlike Stewart, who essentially hosted &quot;The Daily Show&quot; as himself, Colbert developed a correspondent character for his pieces on the series that was a parody of conservative political pundits such as Bill O&#x27;Reilly. Colbert has described his correspondent character as &quot;a well-intentioned, poorly informed, high-status idiot&quot; and &quot;a fool who has spent a lot of his life playing not the fool – one who is able to cover it at least well enough to deal with the subjects that he deals with&quot;. Colbert was frequently pitted against knowledgeable interview subjects, or against Stewart in scripted exchanges, with the resultant dialogue demonstrating the character&#x27;s lack of knowledge of whatever subject he is discussing. Colbert also made generous use of humorous fallacies of logic in explaining his point of view on any topic. Other &quot;Daily Show&quot; correspondents have adopted a similar style; former correspondent Rob Corddry recalls that when he and Ed Helms first joined the show&#x27;s cast in 2002, they &quot;just imitated Stephen Colbert for a year or two&quot;. Correspondent Aasif Mandvi has stated &quot;I just decided I was going to do my best Stephen Colbert impression&quot;. Reminiscing on his hiring, Smithberg said, &quot;We saw what comedy genius was up close&quot;.

Colbert appeared in several recurring segments for &quot;The Daily Show&quot;, including &quot;Even Stevphen&quot; with Steve Carell, in which both characters were expected to debate a selected topic but instead would unleash their anger at one another. Colbert commonly hosted &quot;This Week in God&quot;, a report on topics in the news pertaining to religion, presented with the help of the &quot;God Machine&quot;. Colbert filed reports from the floor of the Democratic National Convention and the Republican National Convention as a part of &quot;The Daily Show&#x27;s&quot; award-winning coverage of the 2000 and 2004 U.S. presidential elections; many from the latter were included as part of their &quot;The Daily Show: Indecision 2004&quot; DVD release. Other pieces that have been named as his signature segments include &quot;Grouse Hunting in Shropshire&quot;, in which he reported on the &quot;gayness&quot; of British aristocracy, his mock lionization of a smoking-rights activist and apparent chain-smoker, and his cameo appearances during his faux campaign for president. In several episodes of &quot;The Daily Show&quot;, Colbert filled in as anchor in the absence of Jon Stewart, including the full week of March 3, 2002, when Stewart was scheduled to host &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot;. After Colbert left the show, Rob Corddry took over &quot;This Week in God&quot; segments, although a recorded sample of Colbert&#x27;s voice was still used as the sound effect for the God Machine. Later episodes of &quot;The Daily Show&quot; have reused older Colbert segments under the label &quot;Klassic Kolbert&quot;. Colbert won three Emmys as a writer of &quot;The Daily Show&quot; in 2004, 2005, and 2006.

=== &quot;The Colbert Report&quot; (2005–2014) ===

Colbert hosted his own television show, &quot;The Colbert Report&quot;, from October 17, 2005, through December 18, 2014. &quot;The Colbert Report&quot; was a &quot;Daily Show&quot; spin-off that parodied the conventions of television news broadcasting, particularly cable-personality political talk shows like &quot;The O&#x27;Reilly Factor&quot;, &quot;Hannity&quot;, and &quot;Glenn Beck&quot;. Colbert hosted the show in-character as a blustery right-wing pundit, generally considered to be an extension of his character on &quot;The Daily Show&quot;. Conceived by co-creators Stewart, Colbert, and Ben Karlin in part as an opportunity to explore &quot;the character-driven news&quot;, the series focused less on the day-to-day news style of the &quot;Daily Show&quot;, instead frequently concentrating on the foibles of the host-character himself.

The concept for &quot;The Report&quot; was first seen in a series of &quot;Daily Show&quot; segments which advertised the then-fictional series as a joke. It was later developed by Stewart&#x27;s Busboy Productions and pitched to Comedy Central, which green-lighted the program; Comedy Central had already been searching for a way to extend the successful &quot;Daily Show&quot; franchise beyond a half-hour. The series opened to strong ratings, averaging 1.2 million viewers nightly during its first week on the air. Comedy Central signed a long-term contract for &quot;The Colbert Report&quot; within its first month on the air, when it immediately established itself among the network&#x27;s highest-rated shows.

Much of Colbert&#x27;s personal life was reflected in his character on &quot;The Colbert Report&quot;. With the extended exposure of the character on the show, he often referenced his interest in and knowledge of Catholicism, science fiction, and &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot;, as well as using real facts to create his character&#x27;s history. His alternate persona was also raised in South Carolina, is the youngest of 11 siblings and is married. However, Colbert&#x27;s actual career history in acting and comedy was often downplayed or even denied outright, and he frequently referred to having attended Dartmouth College (which was at the forefront of the conservative campus movement in the 1980s) rather than his actual alma mater, Northwestern. In July 2012, Colbert added two years to his contract with Comedy Central, extending the run of &quot;The Colbert Report&quot; until the end of 2014.

The final episode on December 18, 2014, featured a rendition of &quot;We&#x27;ll Meet Again&quot; and appearances from former guests of the show, including Jon Stewart, Randy Newman, Bryan Cranston, Willie Nelson, Yo-Yo Ma, Mandy Patinkin, Neil deGrasse Tyson, Tom Brokaw, David Gregory, J. J. Abrams, Big Bird, Gloria Steinem, Ken Burns, James Franco, Barry Manilow, Bob Costas, Jeff Daniels, Sam Waterston, Bill de Blasio, Katie Couric, Patrick Stewart, George Lucas, Henry Kissinger, Cookie Monster, Alan Alda, Eliot Spitzer, Vince Gilligan, Paul Krugman, and a text from Bill Clinton. There were appearances by Alex Trebek, U.S. and coalition Afghanistan forces, and further characters (for example a space station astronaut, Santa Claus, and Abraham Lincoln).

=== &quot;The Late Show&quot; (since 2015) ===
On April 10, 2014, CBS announced in a press release that Colbert &quot;will succeed David Letterman as the host of &quot;The Late Show&quot;, effective when Mr. Letterman retires from the broadcast.&quot; On January 12, 2015, CBS announced that Colbert would premiere as the &quot;Late Show&quot; host on Tuesday, September 8, 2015. The first guest of the new Late Show was George Clooney. The show has a much more political focus than David Letterman&#x27;s &quot;Late Show&quot;.

During his tenure as the host of &quot;The Late Show&quot;, Colbert hosted the 69th Primetime Emmy Awards, broadcast on CBS on September 17, 2017. More recently, he and his Spartina Productions company had signed a deal with CBS Studios, through which programs such as &quot;Tooning Out the News&quot; and &quot;Fairview&quot; are produced. Colbert is also an executive producer on Comedy Central&#x27;s &quot;Tha God&#x27;s Honest Truth&quot;. On August 30, 2023, Colbert and fellow talk show hosts Jimmy Fallon, Seth Meyers, Jimmy Kimmel, and John Oliver, began hosting the comedy podcast &quot;Strike Force Five&quot; to support their staff members out of work due to the 2023 Writers Guild of America strike. Since 2024 he is a producer of the CBS late-night comedy panel game show, &quot;After Midnight&quot;, alongside his wife Evie.

== Politics ==

===Views===
Although, by his own account, he was not particularly political before joining the cast of &quot;The Daily Show&quot;, Colbert has described himself as a Democrat according to a 2004 interview. In an interview at the Kennedy School of Government at Harvard Institute of Politics, he said he has &quot;no problems with Republicans, just Republican policies&quot;. Columnist and close friend Jonathan Alter has described him as &quot;left of center&quot;. On the intersection of faith and politics, Colbert has pointed out that his views are in line with those of Cesar Chavez.

Colbert owns a 1972 Richard Nixon campaign poster, which hangs on a wall in his office. The poster reads: &quot;For the first time in 20 years we are spending more on human resources than on defense!&quot; and highlights Nixon&#x27;s compromise towards progressive issues. Colbert has half-jokingly made reference to those views: &quot;He started the EPA. He opened China. He gave 18-year-olds the vote. His issues were education, drugs, women, minorities, youth involvement, ending the draft, and improving the environment. John Kerry couldn&#x27;t have run on this!&quot; As a child, he recalled being transfixed by the Watergate hearings, while his siblings explained the importance of what had happened. In 2013 he said that Nixon&#x27;s prolongation of the Vietnam War for political gain, &quot;Led to the deaths of tens of thousands of peoples, shattered the trust of the American people to the American military establishment, to trusting the president, and changed your [the press] relationship to the president forever.&quot; Adding that, &quot;the depth of his selfish evil musn&#x27;t be forgotten. Because while he&#x27;s not the only one, he&#x27;s the Ur for me&quot;.

Initially &quot;all in&quot; for Ronald Reagan, Colbert&#x27;s political ideas shifted left as he went to Northwestern: &quot;I&#x27;m not buying the hype because I see how well-staged all of this is. Then after that, I was in theater and there&#x27;s no turning back.&quot; He has joked that Reagan is &quot;in hell&quot; for his handling of the AIDS crisis. While teaching improv at The Second City he would tell his students to read and stay informed; recommending them the works of Noam Chomsky.

Colbert has criticized the United States&#x27; use of drone strikes, and NSA&#x27;s surveillance tactics, during the Obama administration. He has also described the 2016 Democratic candidate, Hillary Clinton, as someone who has &quot;been around for a long time, but actually represents [...] what you would think of as the common systemic corruption of Washington, D.C.&quot; adding &quot;I think people&#x27;s hesitancy about Hillary Clinton is completely reasonable. [...] I can imagine that Trump might be the only person she could beat because she&#x27;s not a great candidate. And she&#x27;s got a lot of flaws and a lot of baggage that she can&#x27;t shake off, however historic or even prepared for the job she is in this case.&quot;

Colbert supports the implementation of the Medicare for All plan introduced by Bernie Sanders, considering it &quot;a sensible fix to Obamacare&quot;. He is also in favor of abolishing the U.S. Senate.
When asked about his views on abortion, Colbert positioned himself as pro-choice. Colbert has been critical of Israel&#x27;s treatment of Palestinians. He called for a ceasefire in Gaza after the 2024 World Central Kitchen aid convoy attack carried by the IDF. Addressing Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu he said: &quot;Nothing just happens. You are responsible. If your answer is, &#x27;This happens in war,&#x27; then maybe consider ending the war.&quot; He also defended the pro-Palestine college protests saying: &quot;Students should be allowed to protest. It&#x27;s their first amendment right.&quot; During the 2023 writers&#x27; strike he showed his support to the writers, saying: &quot;I&#x27;m a member of the guild. I support collective bargaining. This nation owes so much to unions.&quot; In May 2023, Colbert was permanently banned from entering Russia alongside 500 other Americans, due to being &quot;involved in the spread of Russophobic attitudes and fakes.&quot; These bans were made in response to U.S. imposed sanctions on the country.

In 2024, he moderated a fundraiser for the Joe Biden 2024 presidential campaign featuring Joe Biden, Bill Clinton and Barack Obama.

=== 2006 White House Correspondents&#x27; Dinner ===
On Saturday, April 29, 2006, Colbert was the featured entertainer for the 2006 White House Correspondents&#x27; Association Dinner. Standing a few yards from U.S. President George W. Bush – in front of an audience the Associated Press called a &quot;Who&#x27;s Who of power and celebrity&quot; – Colbert delivered a searing routine targeting the president and the media. In his politically conservative character from &quot;The Colbert Report&quot;, Colbert satirized the George W. Bush Administration and the White House Press Corps with such lines as:

Colbert received a chilly response from the audience. His jokes were often met with silence and muttering, apart from the enthusiastic laughter of a few in the audience. The major media outlets paid little attention to it initially. &quot;Washington Post&quot; columnist Dan Froomkin and Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism professor Todd Gitlin claimed that this was because Colbert&#x27;s routine was as critical of the media as it was of Bush. Richard Cohen, also writing for &quot;The Washington Post&quot;, responded that the routine was not funny. The video of Colbert&#x27;s performance became an internet and media sensation, while in the week following the speech, ratings for &quot;The Colbert Report&quot; rose by 37% to average just under 1.5 million total viewers per episode. In &quot;Time&quot; magazine, James Poniewozik called it &quot;the political-cultural touchstone issue of 2006&quot;. Writing six months later, &quot;New York Times&quot; columnist Frank Rich referred to Colbert&#x27;s speech as a &quot;cultural primary&quot; and called it the &quot;defining moment&quot; of the 2006 midterm elections.

=== 2008 presidential bid ===

Under his fictional persona in &quot;The Colbert Report&quot;, Colbert dropped hints of a potential presidential run throughout 2007, with speculation intensifying following the release of his book, &quot;I Am America (And So Can You!)&quot;, which was rumored to be a sign that he was indeed testing the waters for a future bid for the White House. On October 16, 2007, he announced his candidacy on his show, stating his intention to run on both the Republican and Democratic platforms, but only as a &quot;favorite son&quot; in his native South Carolina. He later abandoned plans to run as a Republican due to the $35,000 fee required to file for the South Carolina primary; however, he continued to seek a place on the Democratic ballot and on October 28, 2007, campaigned in the South Carolina state capital of Columbia, where he was presented with the key to the city by Mayor Bob Coble.

After announcing his presidential ticket, he asked his viewers to cast their votes by donating to Donorschoose.org, an online charity connecting individuals to classrooms in need.
Colbert&#x27;s promotion inspired $68,000 in donations to South Carolina classrooms, which benefited over 14,000 low-income students.
Colbert teamed up with Donorschoose.org again in 2008 by asking supporters of Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton to do the same. As a lead-up to the Pennsylvania primary, he created a &quot;straw poll that makes a difference&quot; by which people could donate to Pennsylvania classroom projects in honor of their favorite candidate.
Colbert viewers donated $185,000 to projects reaching 43,000 students in Pennsylvania public schools.

On November 1, 2007, the South Carolina Democratic Party executive council voted 13–3 to refuse Colbert&#x27;s application onto the ballot. &quot;The general sense of the council was that he wasn&#x27;t a serious candidate and that was why he wasn&#x27;t selected to be on the ballot&quot;, stated John Werner, the party&#x27;s director. Several days later he announced that he was dropping out of the race, saying he did not wish to put the country through an agonizing Supreme Court battle (referencing the 2000 election, wherein a tight recount in Florida was settled in a landmark Supreme Court decision). CNN has reported that Obama supporters pressured the South Carolina Democratic Executive Council to keep Colbert off the ballot. One anonymous member of the council told CNN that former State Superintendent of Education Inez Tenenbaum had placed pressure on them to refuse Colbert&#x27;s application despite his steady rise in polls.

Though Colbert&#x27;s real-life presidential campaign had ended, Marvel Comics editor-in-chief Joe Quesada established in an interview on &quot;The Colbert Report&quot; that Colbert&#x27;s campaign was still going strong in the fictional Marvel Universe, citing the cover art of a then-recent issue of &quot;The Amazing Spider-Man&quot; which featured a Colbert campaign billboard in the background. Background appearances of Colbert campaign ads continued to appear in Marvel Comics publications, as late as August 2008&#x27;s &quot;Secret Invasion&quot; No.5 (which also features a cameo of an alien Skrull posing as Colbert). In October 2008, Colbert made an extended 8-page appearance webslinging with Spider-Man in &quot;The Amazing Spider-Man&quot; issue No. 573. Colbert voiced the president of the U.S. in the 2009 film &quot;Monsters vs. Aliens&quot;.

=== 2009 solidarity with U.S. troops in Iraq War ===
Colbert arrived in Baghdad, Iraq, on June 5, 2009, to film a week of shows called &quot;Operation Iraqi Stephen: Going Commando&quot; sponsored by the USO (United Service Organizations). Colbert had a suit tailored for him in the Army Combat Uniform pattern. During the first episode (which featured a cameo appearance from U.S. president Barack Obama), Colbert had his hair cropped in a military style to show his solidarity with the troops. One Army major said that &quot;shaving of the hair is an amazing show of support&quot; that was &quot;very touching.&quot; USO Senior Vice President John Hanson said the shows are an important diversion for the troops.

=== 2010 Congressional testimony ===
On September 24, 2010, Colbert testified in character before the House Judiciary Subcommittee on Immigration, Citizenship, and Border Security. He was invited by committee chairwoman Zoe Lofgren to describe his experience participating in the United Farm Workers&#x27; &quot;Take Our Jobs&quot; program, where he spent a day working alongside migrant workers in upstate New York. At the end of his often-humorous testimony, Colbert broke character in responding to a question from Rep. Judy Chu, D-CA, and explained his purpose for being at the hearing:

Democratic committee member John Conyers questioned whether it was appropriate for the comedian to appear before Congress and asked him to leave the hearing. Though Colbert offered to depart at the direction of the committee chairwoman, Lofgren requested that he stay at least until all opening testimony had been completed, whereupon Conyers withdrew his request.

Conservative pundits took aim at Colbert&#x27;s Congress testimony not long afterwards.

=== 2010 Washington, D.C. rallies ===
In September 2010, following Glenn Beck&#x27;s &quot;Restoring Honor rally&quot;, a campaign developed that called for Colbert to hold his own rally at the Lincoln Memorial. On the September 10, 2010, episode of the &quot;Daily Show&quot; and &quot;The&quot; &quot;Colbert Report&quot;, Stewart and Colbert made preannouncements of a future event. On September 16, 2010, Stewart and Colbert announced competing rallies on the Washington, D.C., Mall on October 30, 2010, Stewart&#x27;s &quot;&quot;Rally to Restore Sanity&quot;, and Colbert&#x27;s &quot;March to Keep Fear Alive&quot;&quot;. Both were eventually merged into the Rally to Restore Sanity and/or Fear.

=== 2011 Political Super PAC ===

In May 2011, Colbert filed a request with the Federal Election Commission (FEC) asking for a media exemption for coverage of his political action committee, ColbertPAC, on &quot;The Colbert Report&quot;. In June 2011, during a public meeting, the FEC voted 5–1 to grant &quot;The Colbert Report&quot; a limited media exemption. The exemption allows unlimited donations of airtime and show resources to promote the Colbert Super PAC without requiring disclosure to the FEC, but only for ads appearing on &quot;The Colbert Report&quot;. Following the hearing, Colbert formally filed paperwork for the creation of his Super PAC with the FEC secretary.

=== 2012 South Carolina GOP primary ===
After the 2012 New Hampshire primary, a poll for the subsequent South Carolina primary taken by Public Policy Polling (of 1,112 likely GOP voters, Jan 5–7, 2012) was reported to place Colbert at 5%, one point ahead of Jon Huntsman polling at 4%, in spite of the fact that Colbert was not on the ballot. This poll showed Colbert to be closely behind Rick Perry&#x27;s 7% and Ron Paul&#x27;s 8% (with Romney at 27%, Gingrich 23% and Santorum at 18%). On the January 11 episode of &quot;The Colbert Report&quot;, Colbert asked his audience if he should run for president in South Carolina, to which he received strong applause. He then stated that he would be making a &quot;Major Announcement&quot; during the next day&#x27;s show. On January 12, Colbert started his show by discussing his role in the presidential campaign, then addressed the law preventing him from being a presidential candidate while running his Super PAC. With the help of his lawyer Trevor Potter, he then signed over control of his Super PAC to Jon Stewart, with the organization title then being referred to as &quot;The Definitely Not Coordinating With Stephen Colbert Super PAC&quot;. Immediately after this legal block was out of the way, Colbert announced, &quot;I am forming an exploratory committee to lay the groundwork for my possible candidacy for the President of the United States of South Carolina. I&#x27;m doin&#x27; it!&quot; He reiterated in the interview portion of that show that &quot;I&#x27;m still in the exploratory phase&quot; of his presidential campaign.

On the January 16, 2012, episode, Colbert satirically encouraged his viewers to vote for Herman Cain in the South Carolina primary. As Cain was still on the ballot, despite having recently dropped out of the race, Colbert announced that he would consider any votes cast for Cain to be in direct support of his own possible candidacy.

== Other work ==
Colbert is co-author of the satirical text-and-picture novel &quot;Wigfield: The Can Do Town That Just May Not&quot;, which was published in 2003 by Hyperion Books. The novel was a collaboration between Colbert, Amy Sedaris, and Paul Dinello, and tells the story of a small town threatened by the impending destruction of a massive dam. The narrative is presented as a series of fictional interviews with the town&#x27;s residents, accompanied by photos. The three authors toured performing an adaptation of &quot;Wigfield&quot; on stage the same year the book was released.
Colbert appeared in a small supporting role in the 2005 film adaptation of &quot;Bewitched&quot;. He has made guest appearances on the television series &quot;Curb Your Enthusiasm&quot;, &quot;Spin City&quot;, and &quot;Law &amp; Order: Criminal Intent&quot;, and on the first season of the American improvisational comedy show &quot;Whose Line Is It Anyway?&quot;. He voiced the characters of Reducto and Phil Ken Sebben in the Adult Swim&#x27;s &quot;Harvey Birdman, Attorney at Law&quot;, but left the show in 2005 to work on &quot;The Colbert Report&quot;. His characters were both killed, though he returned to voice Phil for the series finale. Colbert also has provided voices for Cartoon Network&#x27;s &quot;The Venture Bros.&quot;, Comedy Central&#x27;s &quot;Crank Yankers&quot;, and &quot;American Dad!&quot;, and for Canadian animated comedy series &quot;The Wrong Coast&quot;. He appeared as Homer Simpson&#x27;s life coach, Colby Krause, in &quot;The Simpsons&quot; episode &quot;He Loves to Fly and He D&#x27;ohs&quot;.
Colbert filled in for Sam Seder on the second episode of &quot;The Majority Report&quot; on Air America Radio, and was a frequent guest. He has also done reports for &quot;The Al Franken Show&quot;. He appeared on a track on &quot;Wig in a Box&quot;, a tribute album for &quot;Hedwig and the Angry Inch&quot;. Colbert read the part of Leopold Bloom in &quot;Bloomsday on Broadway XXIV: Love Literature Language Lust: Leopold&#x27;s Women Bloom&quot; on June 16, 2005, at Symphony Space in New York City. He appeared in a series of TV commercials for General Motors, as a not-too-bright investigator searching for the elusive (and non-existent in real life) &quot;Mr. Goodwrench&quot;. He also portrayed the letter Z in &quot;Sesame Street: All-Star Alphabet&quot;, a 2005 video release.

Colbert released a book associated with &quot;The Colbert Report&quot;, &quot;I Am America (And So Can You!)&quot;. It was released on October 7, 2007, by Grand Central Publishing. Grand Central Publishing is the successor to Warner Books, which published &quot;America (The Book)&quot;, written by &quot;The Daily Show&quot; staff. The book contains similar political satire, but was written primarily by Colbert himself rather than as a collaboration with his &quot;Colbert Report&quot; writing staff. On November 23, 2008, his Christmas special, &quot;A Colbert Christmas: The Greatest Gift of All!&quot;, aired on Comedy Central. It was released on DVD in November 2008.

In January 2010, Colbert was named the assistant sports psychologist for the US Olympic speed skating team at the 2010 Winter Olympics. He was also invited to be part of NBC&#x27;s 2010 Winter Olympics coverage team by Dick Ebersol, chairman of NBC Universal Sports. In April 2011, Colbert performed as Harry in the concert-style revival of Stephen Sondheim&#x27;s musical &quot;Company&quot;, presented by the New York Philharmonic at the Lincoln Center. The show, featuring Neil Patrick Harris in the starring role, ran for four nights and was filmed for later showings in movie theaters, which began June 15. In May 2011, Colbert joined the Charleston to Bermuda Race yachting race, as captain of the ship &quot;the Spirit of Juno&quot;. He finished second, five miles behind leaders &quot;Tucana&quot;. Since 2012, he has collaborated with the Montclair Film Festival, of which his wife is a founder and current president of its board. Every year since its foundation, he has participated by hosting an annual fundraising event and leading Q&amp;As and conversations with directors, writers, journalists, and actors such as Jon Stewart, Rob Reiner, Steve Carell, J. J. Abrams, David Itzkoff, Ethan Hawke, Rachel Weisz, and Meryl Streep. He is also part of the Montclair Film advisory board.

He has a cameo as a &quot;Laketown Spy&quot; in the film &quot;The Hobbit: The Desolation of Smaug&quot;, along with his wife and two sons, filmed on location in New Zealand.

Aside from hosting his talk shows, Colbert has hosted other types of shows. Since 2014, he has hosted the Kennedy Center Honors for three consecutive years. In 2017, he hosted the 69th Primetime Emmy Awards. A year later, Colbert used a fake children&#x27;s book &quot;Whose Boat Is This Boat?&quot;, incorporating unedited quotes from President Trump during his tour of North Carolina after Hurricane Florence, as a joke against Trump and raised over $1 million for relief funds. In 2014, Colbert alongside &quot;The Colbert Report&quot; writer and amateur coder Rob Dubbin, created Scripto, a collaborative script software which allows writer rooms to edit scripts in real time from different locations. Scripto was conceived at the end of 2010, when Colbert and Dubbin, first discussed making a bespoke drafting program for the staff. The idea was further inspired by a mishap on the show involving a real life goat. Colbert&#x27;s wife Evie McGee is also credited as a co-founder of the company. The program is used by several late-night talk shows, including Colbert&#x27;s &quot;Late Show&quot;, &quot;The Daily Show,&quot; and &quot;Last Week Tonight with John Oliver&quot;.

In 2019, he hosted a conversation with the cast of the film &quot;Tolkien&quot; as part of an event for Montclair Film and Fathom Events. In 2021 he moderated &quot;Lord of the Rings&quot; cast reunions screened at Alamo Drafthouse Cinema and made available on a Bluray collectors edition of the film series.

Through Spartina, Colbert and his wife served as executive producers for &quot;In &amp; Of Itself,&quot; a film version of Derek DelGaudio&#x27;s off-Broadway show of the same name. In 2024, Colbert and his wife co-authored, &quot;Does This Taste Funny?&quot;, a cookbook featuring recipes from their family, centered on Lowcountry cuisine.

== Influences ==
Colbert has said his comedy influences include Don Novello, Phil Silvers, Alec Guinness, Bill Cosby, George Carlin, Dean Martin, Jon Stewart, Monty Python, Steve Martin, and David Letterman. In 2017, Colbert said due to the sexual assault allegations made against Cosby, he can no longer listen to his comedy.

Among comedians who say they were influenced by Colbert are Nathan Fielder, James Corden, Mindy Kaling, Hasan Minhaj, Jordan Klepper, Ziwe Fumudoh, Sara Benincasa, John Mulaney, Derrick Beckles, Julie Klausner, and Billy Eichner.

== Personal life ==
Colbert is a practicing Roman Catholic who has taught Sunday school at church. He is an ordained minister with the Universal Life Church Monastery. He is an avid reader and his favorite authors include J. R. R. Tolkien, J. D. Salinger, Robertson Davies, George Saunders, Larry Niven, Henry Kuttner, and Isaac Asimov.

Colbert has been married to Evelyn &quot;Evie&quot; McGee-Colbert since 1993. She is the daughter of prominent Charleston civil litigator Joseph McGee, of the firm Buist Moore Smythe McGee. His wife appeared with him in an episode of &quot;Strangers with Candy&quot; as his mother. She also had an uncredited cameo as a nurse in the series pilot and a credited one (as his wife Clair) in the film. McGee met Jon Stewart before she met her future husband in 1990. They met at the world premiere of &quot;Hydrogen Jukebox&quot; at the Spoleto Festival USA in Charleston. Colbert later described the first moment he met Evie as being a love at first sight encounter. Moments after they met though, they realized they had grown up together in Charleston and had many mutual friends. The couple lives in Montclair, New Jersey and have three children.

During his college and Second City years, Colbert suffered from bouts of depression and anxiety, for which he had to be medicated. In a 2018 interview, Colbert told &quot;Rolling Stone:&quot;

Colbert used the Myers–Briggs Type Indicator during a segment of &quot;The Late Show&quot;, which identified him as an INFP.

===Health===
In 2020, Colbert revealed he developed benign paroxysmal positional vertigo, a type of balance disorder. Of the diagnosis he said, &quot;It&#x27;s almost entertaining, until I forget, and then I go to stand up, and then I just fall down.&quot;

In April 2022, he tested positive for COVID-19, a few weeks later he experienced recurring symptoms, which led to &quot;The Late Show&quot; production being halted out of caution. In October 2023, Colbert tested positive for COVID for a second time.

In November 2023, Colbert suffered from a ruptured appendix during a taping of an episode of &quot;The Late Show&quot;, putting the show on hiatus for a few weeks as he recovered from surgery. Colbert later said the pain he was attempting to conceal during the taping was greatly exacerbated when celebrity chef José Andrés grabbed him for an impromptu dance during a cooking segment. Colbert returned on December 11, 2023.

== Awards and honors ==
In 2000, Colbert and the other &quot;Daily Show&quot; writers were the recipients of three Emmy Awards as writers for &quot;The Daily Show&quot; and again in 2005 and 2006. In 2005 he was nominated for a Satellite Award for his performance on &quot;The Colbert Report&quot; and again in 2006. He was nominated for three Emmys for &quot;The Colbert Report&quot; in 2006, including Best Performance in a Variety, Musical Program or Special, which he lost to Barry Manilow. Manilow and Colbert jokingly signed and notarized a revolving biannual custody agreement for the Emmy on &quot;The&quot; &quot;Colbert Report&quot; episode aired on October 30, 2006. He lost in the same category to Tony Bennett in 2007 and to Don Rickles in 2008.

In January 2006, the American Dialect Society named &quot;truthiness&quot;, a word which Colbert coined on the premiere episode of &quot;The Colbert Report&quot;, as its 2005 Word of the Year. He devoted time on five successive episodes to bemoaning the failure of the Associated Press to mention his role in popularizing the word &quot;truthiness&quot; in its news coverage of the Word of the Year. On December 9, 2006, Merriam-Webster also announced that it selected &quot;truthiness&quot; as its Word of the Year for 2006. Votes were accepted on their website, and according to poll results, &quot;truthiness&quot; won by a five-to-one margin.
In June 2006, after speaking at the school&#x27;s commencement ceremony, Colbert received an honorary Doctorate of Fine Arts degree from Knox College. &quot;Time&quot; named Stephen Colbert as one of the 100 most influential people in 2006 and 2012 and in May 2006, &quot;New York&quot; magazine listed Colbert (and Jon Stewart) as one of its top dozen influential persons in media. Colbert was named Person of the Year by the U.S. Comedy Arts Festival in Aspen, Colorado on March 3, 2007, and was also given the Speaker of the Year Award by The Cross Examination Debate Association (CEDA) on March 24, 2007, for his &quot;drive to expose the rhetorical shortcomings of contemporary political discourse&quot;.

Colbert was named the 2nd Sexiest TV News Anchor in September 2006 by &quot;Maxim&quot;, next to Mélissa Theuriau of France and was the only man featured on the list. In November 2006, he was named a &quot;sexy surprise&quot; by &quot;People&quot; in the Sexiest Man Alive honors and in the December 2006 issue of &quot;GQ&quot; he was named one of &quot;GQ&#x27;s&quot; &quot;Men of the Year&quot;.
In 2012, he was listed as No. 69 on Maxim Magazine&#x27;s Hot 100, becoming the first man to be included on the list. He has received three Peabody Awards, in 2007, 2011, and 2020. He was nominated for five TCA Awards for &quot;The Colbert Report&quot; by the Television Critics Association.

After the Saginaw Spirit defeated the Oshawa Generals in Ontario Junior League Hockey, Oshawa Mayor John Gray declared March 20, 2007 (the mayor&#x27;s own birthday), Stephen Colbert Day, honoring a previous bet with Stephen. At the event, Gray referred to the publicity the bet brought the city, remarking, &quot;This is the way to lose a bet&quot;. Colbert was honored for the Gutsiest Move on the Spike TV Guys&#x27; Choice Awards on June 13, 2007, for his performance at the 2006 White House Correspondents&#x27; Association Dinner. In August 2007, Virgin America named an airplane, &quot;Air Colbert&quot;, in his honor. On October 28, 2007, Colbert received the key to the city of Columbia, South Carolina, from Mayor Bob Coble.

On December 20, 2007, Colbert was named Celebrity of the Year by The Associated Press. On April 2, 2008, he received a Peabody Award for &quot;The Colbert Report&quot;, saying, &quot;I proudly accept this award and begrudgingly forgive the Peabody Committee for taking three years to recognize greatness&quot;. In 2008, Colbert won the Emmy Award for writing again, this time as a writer for &quot;The&quot; &quot;Colbert Report&quot;. Colbert delivered the Class Day address to the graduating class of Princeton University on June 2, 2008, and accepted the &quot;Class of 2008 Understandable Vanity Award&quot;, consisting of a sketch of Colbert and a mirror. He also has been announced as the Person of the Year for the 12th annual Webby Awards.

In January 2010, Colbert received the Grammy Award for Best Comedy Album for his album &quot;A Colbert Christmas: The Greatest Gift of All!&quot;. He also announced the nominees for Song of the Year while toting a pre-released Apple iPad. Colbert was the 2011 commencement speaker for Northwestern University, and received an honorary degree. In 2013, Colbert again won the Emmy award for writing for &quot;The&quot; &quot;Colbert Report&quot;. In 2014, Colbert won the 2014 Best Spoken Word Album for his audiobook &quot;America Again: Re-becoming The Greatness We Never Weren&#x27;t&quot;. In January 2013, &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; named him number 2 in their &quot;The 50 Funniest People Now&quot; list. In December 2014, &quot;Paste&quot; named his Twitter one of &quot;The 75 Best Twitter Accounts of 2014&quot; ranking it at number 7. Colbert received an honorary degree from Wake Forest University as the 2015 commencement speaker.

In 2015, Colbert was awarded the third highest honor within the Department of the Army Civilian Awards, the Outstanding Civilian Service Award, for substantial contributions to the U.S. Army community. In 2017 and 2018, Colbert was named one of &quot;The 35 Most Powerful People in New York Media&quot; by &quot;The Hollywood Reporter&quot;. He was chosen as one of &quot;GQ&#x27;s&quot; &quot;Men of the Year&quot; for its December 2017 issue. Colbert was placed at number 32 in &quot;Vanity Fair&quot; &quot;2018 New Establishment List&quot;. Other placements in earlier lists include number 40 in 2017 and number 28 in 2011.

In May 2021, Colbert received an honorary Doctor of Humane Letters degree from Yale University.

=== Ben &amp; Jerry&#x27;s &quot;AmeriCone Dream&quot; ice cream ===
In February 2007, Ben &amp; Jerry&#x27;s unveiled a new ice cream flavor in honor of Colbert, named Stephen Colbert&#x27;s AmeriCone Dream. Colbert waited until Easter to sample the ice cream because he &quot;gave up sweets for Lent&quot;. Colbert donated all proceeds to charity through the new Stephen Colbert AmeriCone Dream Fund, which distributes the money to various causes.

=== Species named in honor ===
At least five species have been given scientific names honoring Colbert. In 2008 a species of California trapdoor spider was named &quot;Aptostichus stephencolberti&quot;. The spider was named for Colbert after he reported on his television series that Jason Bond, a professor of biology at East Carolina University, had named a different species of spider &quot;Myrmekiaphila neilyoungi&quot; after the Canadian rock star Neil Young, and began to appeal for a species of animal to be named after him. On a later edition of &quot;The Colbert Report&quot;, Colbert revealed that Bond would name a spider after him, with Colbert claiming, &quot;And all I had to do was shamelessly beg on national television.&quot; Other species named for Colbert include a species of Venezuelan diving beetle named &quot;Agaporomorphus colberti&quot; and a Chilean stonefly named &quot;Diamphipnoa colberti&quot;, both formally described in 2008. On his 45th birthday, Colbert was sent a framed print of his eponymous beetle by the biologists who named it. In 2014, a species of parasitic wasp from Ecuador, &quot;Aleiodes colberti&quot;, was named for Colbert, along with newly described species named for celebrities Jon Stewart, Jimmy Fallon, Ellen DeGeneres, and Shakira, and in 2016 a rove beetle, &quot;Sonoma colberti&quot;, was named after Colbert&#x27;s on-screen persona.

=== COLBERT Treadmill ===

In 2009, NASA engineered a new treadmill for the International Space Station. It was taken to the ISS by the Space Shuttle &quot;Discovery&quot; during the STS-128 mission in August 2009. The complex machine is now used eight hours daily by astronauts and cosmonauts aboard the space station in order to maintain their muscle mass and bone density while spending long periods of time in a zero-gravity environment. While engineers at NASA were constructing this treadmill, it was simply called T-2 for more than two years. However, on April 14, 2009, NASA renamed it the &quot;Combined Operational Load-Bearing External Resistance Treadmill&quot;, or COLBERT. NASA named the treadmill after Colbert, who took an interest during the Node3 naming census for the ISS module, &quot;Tranquility&quot;.

Colbert urged his followers to post the name &quot;Colbert&quot;, which upon completion of the census received the most entries totaling 230,539, some 40,000 votes more than the second-place choice, Serenity. The COLBERT is expected to last the life of the ISS and will have seen about 38,000 miles of running when the Space Station is retired in 2024 or later, but it was also built with a 150,000-mile lifespan (if needed until 2028 or beyond). Colbert realized he was the recipient of an extremely rare honor—the COLBERT (a backronym) is the only piece of NASA-engineered equipment in space that is named after a living human being—when astronaut Sunita Williams came on &quot;The Colbert Report&quot; to announce that NASA had named the treadmill after him.

== Filmography ==

=== Film ===
=== Television ===
=== Video games ===
=== Theatre ===
== Published works ==
* Colbert, Dinello, Sedaris. &quot;Wigfield: The Can-Do Town That Just May Not&quot; (Hyperion; May 19, 2004) 
* &quot;America (The Book): A Citizen&#x27;s Guide to Democracy Inaction&quot; (Warner Books; September 2004) 
* &quot;I Am America (And So Can You!)&quot; (Grand Central Publishing; October 9, 2007) 
* &quot;America Again: Re-becoming the Greatness We Never Weren&#x27;t&quot; (Grand Central Publishing; October 2, 2012) 
* &quot;I Am a Pole (And So Can You!)&quot; (Grand Central Publishing; May 8, 2012) 
* &quot;Stephen Colbert&#x27;s Midnight Confessions&quot; (Simon &amp; Schuster; September 5, 2017) 
* Colbert, McGee-Colbert. &quot;Does This Taste Funny?: Recipes Our Family Loves&quot; (Celadon Books; September 17, 2024) 

== See also ==
* New Yorkers in journalism
* Political satire

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 

== External links ==
* 
* 
* Colbert interview transcript, &quot;60 Minutes&quot;. (April 30, 2006)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q212886" start="0" end="22" title="Stephen Colbert" label="Stephen Tyrone Colbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q131439" start="191" end="205" title="Comedy Central" label="Comedy Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130799" start="220" end="238" title="The Colbert Report" label="The Colbert Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="272" end="275" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q18151598" start="295" end="329" title="The Late Show with Stephen Colbert" label="The Late Show with Stephen Colbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140700" start="435" end="458" title="improvisational theater" label="improvisational theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q309350" start="475" end="498" title="Northwestern University" label="Northwestern University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777200" start="513" end="524" title="The Second City" label="Second City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883424" start="534" end="543" title="Del Close" label="Del Close"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309178" start="590" end="600" title="understudy" label="understudy"/>
<link wikidata="Q216221" start="605" end="617" title="Steve Carell" label="Steve Carell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777200" start="621" end="640" title="Second City Chicago" label="Second City Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150288" start="642" end="654" title="Paul Dinello" label="Paul Dinello"/>
<link wikidata="Q262170" start="659" end="670" title="Amy Sedaris" label="Amy Sedaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420384" start="736" end="743" title="Exit 57" label="Exit 57"/>
<link wikidata="Q7728800" start="798" end="818" title="The Dana Carvey Show" label="The Dana Carvey Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q170238" start="915" end="921" title="sitcom" label="sitcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q824379" start="928" end="948" title="Strangers with Candy" label="Strangers with Candy"/>
<link wikidata="Q824192" start="1058" end="1072" title="The Daily Show" label="The Daily Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977646" start="1358" end="1382" title="The O&amp;#x27;Reilly Factor" label="The O&amp;#x27;Reilly Factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4827730" start="1414" end="1433" title="Stephen Colbert (character)" label="caricatured version"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585032" start="1437" end="1449" title="Conservatism in the United States" label="conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642960" start="1450" end="1467" title="Pundit" label="political pundits"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498531" start="1541" end="1592" title="Stephen Colbert at the 2006 White House Correspondents&amp;#x27; Association Dinner" label="White House Correspondents&amp;#x27; Association Dinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q217298" start="1795" end="1810" title="David Letterman" label="David Letterman"/>
<link wikidata="Q16269155" start="1844" end="1865" title="Late Show (CBS TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Late Show&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q28864472" start="1893" end="1919" title="69th Primetime Emmy Awards" label="69th Primetime Emmy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044427" start="1961" end="1981" title="Primetime Emmy Award" label="Primetime Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="1988" end="2000" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q838121" start="2013" end="2027" title="Peabody Awards" label="Peabody Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q604370" start="2054" end="2100" title="Time 100" label="&amp;quot;Time&amp;quot;″s 100 Most Influential People"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975913" start="2134" end="2164" title="I Am America (And So Can You!)" label="I Am America (And So Can You!)"/>
<link wikidata="Q578913" start="2190" end="2237" title="The New York Times Best Seller list" label="&amp;quot;The New York Times&amp;quot; Best Seller list"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="2297" end="2313" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q5362608" start="2402" end="2411" title="Elizabeth Colbert Busch" label="Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="2435" end="2443" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q584451" start="2485" end="2503" title="Bethesda, Maryland" label="Bethesda, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6136614" start="2525" end="2537" title="James Island, South Carolina" label="James Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q47716" start="2565" end="2591" title="Charleston, South Carolina" label="Charleston, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q24069531" start="2605" end="2630" title="James William Colbert Jr." label="James William Colbert Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q101929" start="2639" end="2651" title="immunology" label="immunologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="2679" end="2694" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q734774" start="2696" end="2718" title="Saint Louis University" label="Saint Louis University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806451" start="2731" end="2767" title="Medical University of South Carolina" label="Medical University of South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q16845500" start="3210" end="3225" title="Humanism in France" label="French humanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q462666" start="3244" end="3253" title="Léon Bloy" label="Léon Bloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q45723" start="3258" end="3274" title="Jacques Maritain" label="Jacques Maritain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051103" start="3305" end="3329" title="Catholic Worker Movement" label="Catholic Worker Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q150281" start="3337" end="3348" title="Dorothy Day" label="Dorothy Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="3460" end="3468" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="3470" end="3485" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308526" start="3776" end="3786" title="General American" label="the speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q270389" start="3799" end="3811" title="news presenter" label="news anchors"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="4042" end="4049" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q188371" start="4109" end="4121" title="Great Famine (Ireland)" label="Great Famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q309350" start="4449" end="4472" title="Northwestern University" label="Northwestern University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329956" start="5009" end="5037" title="Eastern Air Lines Flight 212" label="Eastern Air Lines Flight 212"/>
<link wikidata="Q16565" start="5066" end="5091" title="Charlotte, North Carolina" label="Charlotte, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5033691" start="5140" end="5157" title="Canterbury School (Connecticut)" label="Canterbury School"/>
<link wikidata="Q977989" start="5161" end="5185" title="New Milford, Connecticut" label="New Milford, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q24693539" start="5337" end="5357" title="George Chisolm House" label="George Chisolm House"/>
<link wikidata="Q47716" start="5371" end="5381" title="Charleston, South Carolina" label="Charleston"/>
<link wikidata="Q517820" start="5399" end="5413" title="carriage house" label="carriage house"/>
<link wikidata="Q367914" start="5419" end="5436" title="bed and breakfast" label="bed and breakfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q132311" start="5852" end="5859" title="fantasy" label="fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q892" start="5892" end="5908" title="J. R. R. Tolkien" label="J. R. R. Tolkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q15228" start="5994" end="6015" title="The Lord of the Rings" label="The Lord of the Rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q109875822" start="6032" end="6054" title="The Shadow of the Past" label="The Shadow of the Past"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631743" start="6071" end="6092" title="The Council of Elrond" label="The Council of Elrond"/>
<link wikidata="Q160738" start="6168" end="6185" title="role-playing game" label="role-playing game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375" start="6205" end="6227" title="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons" label="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons"/>
<link wikidata="Q214961" start="6311" end="6324" title="improvisation" label="improvisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q682443" start="6362" end="6371" title="Episcopal Church in the United States of America" label="Episcopal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231582" start="6372" end="6390" title="Porter-Gaud School" label="Porter-Gaud School"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036" start="6593" end="6607" title="Rolling Stones" label="Rolling Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q181847" start="6608" end="6618" title="cover band" label="cover band"/>
<link wikidata="Q7173" start="6663" end="6677" title="marine biology" label="marine biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562623" start="6721" end="6739" title="perforated eardrum" label="perforated eardrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096878" start="6813" end="6825" title="scuba diving" label="scuba diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q16035842" start="6843" end="6847" title="hearing impairment" label="deaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797609" start="6976" end="6998" title="Hampden–Sydney College" label="Hampden–Sydney College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="7002" end="7010" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q309350" start="7443" end="7466" title="Northwestern University" label="Northwestern University"/>
<link wikidata="Q309350" start="7640" end="7663" title="Northwestern University School of Communication" label="School of Communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q4769633" start="7976" end="7993" title="Annoyance Theatre" label="Annoyance Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883424" start="8018" end="8027" title="Del Close" label="Del Close"/>
<link wikidata="Q5972935" start="8035" end="8048" title="IO Theater" label="ImprovOlympic"/>
<link wikidata="Q216221" start="8983" end="8995" title="Steve Carell" label="Steve Carell"/>
<link wikidata="Q262170" start="9017" end="9028" title="Amy Sedaris" label="Amy Sedaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150288" start="9033" end="9045" title="Paul Dinello" label="Paul Dinello"/>
<link wikidata="Q95148451" start="9502" end="9526" title="HBO Downtown Productions" label="HBO Downtown Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420384" start="9629" end="9636" title="Exit 57" label="Exit 57"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024866" start="9813" end="9827" title="CableACE Award" label="CableACE Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7728800" start="10099" end="10119" title="The Dana Carvey Show" label="The Dana Carvey Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q779151" start="10188" end="10201" title="Robert Smigel" label="Robert Smigel"/>
<link wikidata="Q312751" start="10203" end="10218" title="Charlie Kaufman" label="Charlie Kaufman"/>
<link wikidata="Q15079" start="10220" end="10230" title="Louis C.K." label="Louis C.K."/>
<link wikidata="Q5278553" start="10236" end="10254" title="Dino Stamatopoulos" label="Dino Stamatopoulos"/>
<link wikidata="Q133194" start="10317" end="10325" title="kamikaze" label="kamikaze"/>
<link wikidata="Q13979" start="10536" end="10555" title="Saturday Night Live" label="Saturday Night Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q7713404" start="10624" end="10647" title="The Ambiguously Gay Duo" label="The Ambiguously Gay Duo"/>
<link wikidata="Q203078" start="10851" end="10854" title="VH1" label="VH1"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="10859" end="10862" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q825946" start="10934" end="10954" title="Good Morning America" label="Good Morning America"/>
<link wikidata="Q824192" start="11124" end="11142" title="Madeline Smithberg" label="Madeline Smithberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q824379" start="11370" end="11390" title="Strangers with Candy" label="Strangers with Candy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4690602" start="11717" end="11737" title="after school special" label="after school special"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11762" end="11773" title="List of Strangers with Candy characters#Geraldine &amp;quot;Jerri&amp;quot; Antonia Blank" label="Jerri Blank"/>
<link wikidata="Q780562" start="11789" end="11796" title="High school dropouts" label="dropout"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12154" end="12166" title="List of Strangers with Candy characters#Mr. Charles &amp;quot;Chuck&amp;quot; Noblet" label="Chuck Noblet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574320" start="12547" end="12555" title="closeted" label="closeted"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12627" end="12645" title="List of Strangers with Candy characters#Geoffrey Jellineck" label="Geoffrey Jellineck"/>
<link wikidata="Q4039001" start="13126" end="13141" title="Strangers with Candy (film)" label="film adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q189887" start="13165" end="13187" title="Sundance Film Festival" label="Sundance Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155838" start="13542" end="13555" title="correspondent" label="correspondent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5181118" start="13758" end="13771" title="Craig Kilborn" label="Craig Kilborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q211987" start="13841" end="13852" title="Jon Stewart" label="Jon Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q327959" start="14075" end="14106" title="2000 United States presidential election" label="2000 U.S. presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q262155" start="14297" end="14308" title="Chroma key" label="greenscreen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4827730" start="14458" end="14481" title="Stephen Colbert (character)" label="correspondent character"/>
<link wikidata="Q310953" start="14571" end="14589" title="Bill O&amp;#x27;Reilly (commentator)" label="Bill O&amp;#x27;Reilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q186150" start="15160" end="15178" title="Fallacy" label="fallacies of logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378118" start="15320" end="15331" title="Rob Corddry" label="Rob Corddry"/>
<link wikidata="Q328790" start="15357" end="15365" title="Ed Helms" label="Ed Helms"/>
<link wikidata="Q303538" start="15489" end="15501" title="Aasif Mandvi" label="Aasif Mandvi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15785" end="15798" title="List of The Daily Show recurring segments#Even Stevphen" label="Even Stevphen"/>
<link wikidata="Q216221" start="15810" end="15822" title="Steve Carell" label="Steve Carell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6599596" start="15974" end="15990" title="This Week in God" label="This Week in God"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185865" start="16153" end="16183" title="Democratic National Convention" label="Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q361909" start="16192" end="16222" title="Republican National Convention" label="Republican National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q464075" start="16309" end="16341" title="2004 United States presidential election" label="2004 U.S. presidential elections"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16401" end="16432" title="The Daily Show: Indecision 2004" label="The Daily Show: Indecision 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q13979" start="16970" end="16989" title="Saturday Night Live" label="Saturday Night Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378118" start="17026" end="17037" title="Rob Corddry" label="Rob Corddry"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="17337" end="17342" title="Emmy Award" label="Emmys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1962634" start="17698" end="17715" title="news broadcasting" label="news broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977646" start="17780" end="17804" title="The O&amp;#x27;Reilly Factor" label="The O&amp;#x27;Reilly Factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310195" start="17818" end="17825" title="Hannity" label="Hannity"/>
<link wikidata="Q310618" start="17843" end="17853" title="Glenn Beck" label="Glenn Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q4827730" start="17885" end="17897" title="Stephen Colbert (character)" label="in-character"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642960" start="17923" end="17929" title="pundit" label="pundit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4885977" start="18066" end="18076" title="Ben Karlin" label="Ben Karlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001290" start="18513" end="18531" title="Busboy Productions" label="Busboy Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336758" start="18569" end="18580" title="green-light" label="green-light"/>
<link wikidata="Q15228" start="19287" end="19308" title="The Lord of the Rings" label="The Lord of the Rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456" start="19425" end="19439" title="South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q49116" start="19647" end="19664" title="Dartmouth College" label="Dartmouth College"/>
<link wikidata="Q18809367" start="19947" end="19960" title="final episode of The Colbert Report" label="final episode"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624195" start="20013" end="20034" title="We&amp;#x27;ll Meet Again" label="We&amp;#x27;ll Meet Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q211987" start="20099" end="20110" title="Jon Stewart" label="Jon Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q318475" start="20112" end="20124" title="Randy Newman" label="Randy Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q23547" start="20126" end="20140" title="Bryan Cranston" label="Bryan Cranston"/>
<link wikidata="Q206112" start="20142" end="20155" title="Willie Nelson" label="Willie Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q234891" start="20157" end="20165" title="Yo-Yo Ma" label="Yo-Yo Ma"/>
<link wikidata="Q267097" start="20167" end="20181" title="Mandy Patinkin" label="Mandy Patinkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q310903" start="20183" end="20202" title="Neil deGrasse Tyson" label="Neil deGrasse Tyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q919527" start="20204" end="20214" title="Tom Brokaw" label="Tom Brokaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174598" start="20216" end="20229" title="David Gregory (journalist)" label="David Gregory"/>
<link wikidata="Q188137" start="20231" end="20243" title="J. J. Abrams" label="J. J. Abrams"/>
<link wikidata="Q242562" start="20245" end="20253" title="Big Bird" label="Big Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q231178" start="20255" end="20269" title="Gloria Steinem" label="Gloria Steinem"/>
<link wikidata="Q616886" start="20271" end="20280" title="Ken Burns" label="Ken Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q306403" start="20282" end="20294" title="James Franco" label="James Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q302762" start="20296" end="20309" title="Barry Manilow" label="Barry Manilow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2458861" start="20311" end="20321" title="Bob Costas" label="Bob Costas"/>
<link wikidata="Q53680" start="20323" end="20335" title="Jeff Daniels" label="Jeff Daniels"/>
<link wikidata="Q284876" start="20337" end="20350" title="Sam Waterston" label="Sam Waterston"/>
<link wikidata="Q4911497" start="20352" end="20366" title="Bill de Blasio" label="Bill de Blasio"/>
<link wikidata="Q230739" start="20368" end="20380" title="Katie Couric" label="Katie Couric"/>
<link wikidata="Q16296" start="20382" end="20397" title="Patrick Stewart" label="Patrick Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q38222" start="20399" end="20411" title="George Lucas" label="George Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q66107" start="20413" end="20428" title="Henry Kissinger" label="Henry Kissinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754267" start="20430" end="20444" title="Cookie Monster" label="Cookie Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q310394" start="20446" end="20455" title="Alan Alda" label="Alan Alda"/>
<link wikidata="Q11675" start="20457" end="20470" title="Eliot Spitzer" label="Eliot Spitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4500" start="20472" end="20486" title="Vince Gilligan" label="Vince Gilligan"/>
<link wikidata="Q131112" start="20488" end="20500" title="Paul Krugman" label="Paul Krugman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="20518" end="20530" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q929985" start="20558" end="20569" title="Alex Trebek" label="Alex Trebek"/>
<link wikidata="Q315796" start="20673" end="20684" title="Santa Claus" label="Santa Claus"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="20690" end="20705" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q217298" start="20840" end="20855" title="David Letterman" label="David Letterman"/>
<link wikidata="Q16269155" start="20877" end="20890" title="Late Show (CBS TV series)" label="The Late Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q23844" start="21130" end="21144" title="George Clooney" label="George Clooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q28864472" start="21318" end="21344" title="69th Primetime Emmy Awards" label="69th Primetime Emmy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576666" start="21464" end="21475" title="CBS Studios" label="CBS Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q96586075" start="21514" end="21534" title="Tooning Out the News" label="Tooning Out the News"/>
<link wikidata="Q111168666" start="21551" end="21559" title="Fairview (TV series)" label="Fairview"/>
<link wikidata="Q109927505" start="21649" end="21676" title="Tha God&amp;#x27;s Honest Truth" label="Tha God&amp;#x27;s Honest Truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q335680" start="21739" end="21751" title="Jimmy Fallon" label="Jimmy Fallon"/>
<link wikidata="Q14536" start="21753" end="21764" title="Seth Meyers" label="Seth Meyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4914" start="21766" end="21778" title="Jimmy Kimmel" label="Jimmy Kimmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701254" start="21784" end="21795" title="John Oliver" label="John Oliver"/>
<link wikidata="Q122835038" start="21836" end="21853" title="Strike Force Five" label="Strike Force Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q118127692" start="21914" end="21950" title="2023 Writers Guild of America strike" label="2023 Writers Guild of America strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q6495397" start="21991" end="22001" title="Late night television" label="late-night"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049337" start="22002" end="22024" title="panel show" label="comedy panel game show"/>
<link wikidata="Q123286436" start="22032" end="22046" title="After Midnight (TV series)" label="After Midnight"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="22262" end="22270" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q49127" start="22325" end="22353" title="John F. Kennedy School of Government" label="Kennedy School of Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q16841440" start="22357" end="22386" title="Harvard Institute of Politics" label="Harvard Institute of Politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="22426" end="22437" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q12052861" start="22498" end="22512" title="Jonathan Alter" label="Jonathan Alter"/>
<link wikidata="Q737014" start="22540" end="22554" title="Centre-left politics" label="left of center"/>
<link wikidata="Q355425" start="22670" end="22682" title="Cesar Chavez" label="Cesar Chavez"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="22705" end="22718" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="23036" end="23039" title="United States Environmental Protection Agency" label="EPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q862054" start="23051" end="23056" title="1972 visit by Richard Nixon to China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q219274" start="23066" end="23087" title="Twenty-sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="18-year-olds the vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162775" start="23168" end="23177" title="Conscription in the United States" label="the draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q22316" start="23210" end="23220" title="John Kerry" label="John Kerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q42761" start="23307" end="23316" title="Watergate" label="Watergate"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="23447" end="23458" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="23902" end="23915" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099260" start="24216" end="24227" title="HIV/AIDS in the United States" label="AIDS crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777200" start="24254" end="24269" title="The Second City" label="The Second City"/>
<link wikidata="Q9049" start="24355" end="24367" title="Noam Chomsky" label="Noam Chomsky"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24417" end="24437" title="Drone warfare#United States" label="use of drone strikes"/>
<link wikidata="Q17083171" start="24443" end="24474" title="Barack Obama on mass surveillance" label="NSA&amp;#x27;s surveillance tactics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379733" start="24487" end="24507" title="Presidency of Barack Obama" label="Obama administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q699872" start="24535" end="24560" title="2016 United States presidential election" label="2016 Democratic candidate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="24562" end="24577" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Hillary Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7890779" start="25156" end="25172" title="Medicare for All Act" label="Medicare for All"/>
<link wikidata="Q359442" start="25192" end="25206" title="Bernie Sanders" label="Bernie Sanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="25302" end="25313" title="United States Senate" label="U.S. Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q8452" start="25345" end="25353" title="abortion" label="abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893172" start="25385" end="25395" title="United States abortion-rights movement" label="pro-choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q151622" start="25426" end="25465" title="Israeli–Palestinian conflict" label="Israel&amp;#x27;s treatment of Palestinians"/>
<link wikidata="Q125292516" start="25470" end="25500" title="Calls for a ceasefire during the Israel–Hamas war" label="called for a ceasefire in Gaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q125273168" start="25516" end="25555" title="World Central Kitchen aid convoy attack" label="World Central Kitchen aid convoy attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q58967" start="25571" end="25574" title="Israel Defense Forces" label="IDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q43723" start="25610" end="25628" title="Benjamin Netanyahu" label="Benjamin Netanyahu"/>
<link wikidata="Q125584774" start="25802" end="25832" title="2024 pro-Palestinian protests on university campuses" label="pro-Palestine college protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q118127692" start="25942" end="25967" title="2023 Writers Guild of America strike" label="2023 writers&amp;#x27; strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q452421" start="26062" end="26083" title="collective bargaining" label="collective bargaining"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="26113" end="26119" title="Trade union" label="unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="26185" end="26191" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q512990" start="26268" end="26279" title="Anti-Russian sentiment" label="Russophobic"/>
<link wikidata="Q17373979" start="26343" end="26380" title="International sanctions during the Russo-Ukrainian War" label="U.S. imposed sanctions on the country"/>
<link wikidata="Q117842677" start="26426" end="26462" title="Joe Biden 2024 presidential campaign" label="Joe Biden 2024 presidential campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="26473" end="26482" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="26484" end="26496" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="26501" end="26513" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867521" start="26648" end="26692" title="White House Correspondents&amp;#x27; Association" label="White House Correspondents&amp;#x27; Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="26742" end="26756" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="26787" end="26803" title="Associated Press" label="Associated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q4827730" start="26943" end="26981" title="Stephen Colbert (character)" label="his politically conservative character"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719918" start="27041" end="27070" title="Presidency of George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q13563196" start="27079" end="27102" title="White House Press Corps" label="White House Press Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="27363" end="27378" title="The Washington Post" label="Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q5213526" start="27395" end="27407" title="Dan Froomkin" label="Dan Froomkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q844673" start="27412" end="27461" title="Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism" label="Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438434" start="27472" end="27483" title="Todd Gitlin" label="Todd Gitlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324824" start="27585" end="27598" title="Richard Cohen (Washington Post columnist)" label="Richard Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030329" start="27742" end="27750" title="viral video" label="internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="27937" end="27941" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="28078" end="28092" title="The New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q5489205" start="28109" end="28119" title="Frank Rich" label="Frank Rich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751449" start="28241" end="28263" title="United States general elections, 2006" label="2006 midterm elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="28749" end="28759" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="28764" end="28774" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438638" start="28806" end="28818" title="favorite son" label="favorite son"/>
<link wikidata="Q5296810" start="29290" end="29306" title="Donorschoose.org" label="Donorschoose.org"/>
<link wikidata="Q5296810" start="29529" end="29545" title="Donorschoose.org" label="Donorschoose.org"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="29584" end="29596" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="29601" end="29616" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Hillary Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q327959" start="30449" end="30462" title="2000 United States presidential election" label="2000 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065434" start="30514" end="30547" title="Bush v. Gore" label="a landmark Supreme Court decision"/>
<link wikidata="Q6028719" start="30770" end="30784" title="Inez Tenenbaum" label="Inez Tenenbaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q173496" start="30950" end="30963" title="Marvel Comics" label="Marvel Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635391" start="30980" end="30991" title="Joe Quesada" label="Joe Quesada"/>
<link wikidata="Q931597" start="31123" end="31138" title="Marvel Universe" label="Marvel Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q944598" start="31193" end="31215" title="The Amazing Spider-Man" label="The Amazing Spider-Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665153" start="31419" end="31434" title="Secret Invasion" label="Secret Invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q191796" start="31469" end="31474" title="cameo appearance" label="cameo"/>
<link wikidata="Q637245" start="31487" end="31493" title="Skrull" label="Skrull"/>
<link wikidata="Q681918" start="31719" end="31738" title="Monsters vs. Aliens" label="Monsters vs. Aliens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="31819" end="31832" title="Baghdad, Iraq" label="Baghdad, Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q198763" start="31913" end="31927" title="Going Commando" label="Going Commando"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972821" start="31951" end="31954" title="USO" label="USO"/>
<link wikidata="Q689723" start="32030" end="32049" title="Army Combat Uniform" label="Army Combat Uniform"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="32139" end="32151" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q218217" start="32683" end="32694" title="Zoe Lofgren" label="Zoe Lofgren"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887749" start="32743" end="32762" title="United Farm Workers" label="United Farm Workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q15320003" start="32843" end="32858" title="migrant workers" label="migrant workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q460035" start="32986" end="32994" title="Judy Chu" label="Judy Chu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370968" start="33083" end="33095" title="John Conyers" label="John Conyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q310618" start="33577" end="33587" title="Glenn Beck" label="Glenn Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316251" start="33601" end="33622" title="Restoring Honor rally" label="Restoring Honor rally"/>
<link wikidata="Q213559" start="33704" end="33720" title="Lincoln Memorial" label="Lincoln Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2482795" start="34176" end="34211" title="Rally to Restore Sanity and/or Fear" label="Rally to Restore Sanity and/or Fear"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705072" start="34294" end="34321" title="Federal Election Commission" label="Federal Election Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101438" start="34377" end="34403" title="political action committee" label="political action committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705072" start="34495" end="34498" title="Federal Election Commission" label="FEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q124708886" start="34863" end="34872" title="Super PAC" label="Super PAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q491019" start="36581" end="36592" title="Herman Cain" label="Herman Cain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7999576" start="36911" end="36919" title="Wigfield" label="Wigfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q55233" start="36993" end="37007" title="Hyperion (publisher)" label="Hyperion Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q262170" start="37056" end="37067" title="Amy Sedaris" label="Amy Sedaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150288" start="37073" end="37085" title="Paul Dinello" label="Paul Dinello"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356410" start="37500" end="37509" title="Bewitched (2005 film)" label="Bewitched"/>
<link wikidata="Q23722" start="37578" end="37598" title="Curb Your Enthusiasm" label="Curb Your Enthusiasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q256527" start="37612" end="37621" title="Spin City" label="Spin City"/>
<link wikidata="" start="37639" end="37671" title="Law &amp;amp; Order: Criminal Intent" label="Law &amp;amp; Order: Criminal Intent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997671" start="37753" end="37777" title="Whose Line Is It Anyway? (American TV series)" label="Whose Line Is It Anyway?"/>
<link wikidata="Q379052" start="37848" end="37858" title="Adult Swim" label="Adult Swim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668194" start="37872" end="37903" title="Harvey Birdman, Attorney at Law" label="Harvey Birdman, Attorney at Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636213" start="38135" end="38152" title="The Venture Bros." label="The Venture Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q1138905" start="38188" end="38201" title="Crank Yankers" label="Crank Yankers"/>
<link wikidata="Q210311" start="38219" end="38232" title="American Dad!" label="American Dad!"/>
<link wikidata="Q7776346" start="38286" end="38301" title="The Wrong Coast" label="The Wrong Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810" start="38324" end="38337" title="Homer Simpson" label="Homer Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q886" start="38380" end="38392" title="The Simpsons" label="The Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636056" start="38413" end="38446" title="He Loves to Fly and He D&amp;#x27;ohs" label="He Loves to Fly and He D&amp;#x27;ohs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408131" start="38476" end="38485" title="Sam Seder" label="Sam Seder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749686" start="38517" end="38536" title="The Majority Report" label="The Majority Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q2828179" start="38546" end="38563" title="Air America Radio" label="Air America Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7712954" start="38626" end="38645" title="The Al Franken Show" label="The Al Franken Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q7999498" start="38685" end="38697" title="Wig in a Box" label="Wig in a Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q13424058" start="38731" end="38756" title="Hedwig and the Angry Inch (musical)" label="Hedwig and the Angry Inch"/>
<link wikidata="Q573988" start="38789" end="38802" title="Leopold Bloom" label="Leopold Bloom"/>
<link wikidata="Q81965" start="39004" end="39018" title="General Motors" label="General Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q5513860" start="39117" end="39131" title="GM Goodwrench" label="Mr. Goodwrench"/>
<link wikidata="" start="39179" end="39211" title="Sesame Street: All-Star Alphabet" label="Sesame Street: All-Star Alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975913" start="39320" end="39350" title="I Am America (And So Can You!)" label="I Am America (And So Can You!)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567078" start="39397" end="39421" title="Hachette Book Group USA" label="Grand Central Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4742720" start="39504" end="39522" title="America (The Book)" label="America (The Book)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="39797" end="39843" title="A Colbert Christmas: The Greatest Gift of All!" label="A Colbert Christmas: The Greatest Gift of All!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418438" start="39995" end="40005" title="United States Olympic Committee" label="US Olympic"/>
<link wikidata="Q192431" start="40006" end="40019" title="speed skating" label="speed skating"/>
<link wikidata="Q9674" start="40032" end="40052" title="2010 Winter Olympics" label="2010 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="40088" end="40091" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209648" start="40137" end="40149" title="Dick Ebersol" label="Dick Ebersol"/>
<link wikidata="Q153579" start="40259" end="40275" title="Stephen Sondheim" label="Stephen Sondheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915810" start="40297" end="40304" title="Company (musical)" label="Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q471154" start="40329" end="40350" title="New York Philharmonic" label="New York Philharmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q581044" start="40358" end="40372" title="Lincoln Center" label="Lincoln Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q485310" start="40394" end="40413" title="Neil Patrick Harris" label="Neil Patrick Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q15139039" start="40766" end="40789" title="Montclair Film Festival" label="Montclair Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q211987" start="41046" end="41057" title="Jon Stewart" label="Jon Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q287607" start="41059" end="41069" title="Rob Reiner" label="Rob Reiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q216221" start="41071" end="41083" title="Steve Carell" label="Steve Carell"/>
<link wikidata="Q188137" start="41085" end="41097" title="J. J. Abrams" label="J. J. Abrams"/>
<link wikidata="Q5235386" start="41099" end="41112" title="David Itzkoff" label="David Itzkoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q484615" start="41114" end="41125" title="Ethan Hawke" label="Ethan Hawke"/>
<link wikidata="Q134077" start="41127" end="41139" title="Rachel Weisz" label="Rachel Weisz"/>
<link wikidata="Q873" start="41145" end="41157" title="Meryl Streep" label="Meryl Streep"/>
<link wikidata="" start="41277" end="41312" title="The Hobbit: The Desolation of Smaug" label="The Hobbit: The Desolation of Smaug"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="41376" end="41387" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738793" start="41496" end="41517" title="Kennedy Center Honors" label="Kennedy Center Honors"/>
<link wikidata="Q28864472" start="41570" end="41596" title="69th Primetime Emmy Awards" label="69th Primetime Emmy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q58741341" start="41659" end="41683" title="Whose Boat Is This Boat?" label="Whose Boat Is This Boat?"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="41726" end="41741" title="Donald Trump" label="President Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="41761" end="41775" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q56552345" start="41782" end="41800" title="Hurricane Florence" label="Hurricane Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130799" start="41904" end="41922" title="The Colbert Report" label="The Colbert Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q130749290" start="41974" end="41981" title="Scripto Enterprises" label="Scripto"/>
<link wikidata="Q986699" start="42421" end="42442" title="late-night talk shows" label="late-night talk shows"/>
<link wikidata="Q824192" start="42498" end="42512" title="The Daily Show" label="The Daily Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q16735585" start="42530" end="42564" title="Last Week Tonight with John Oliver" label="Last Week Tonight with John Oliver"/>
<link wikidata="Q42689885" start="42633" end="42652" title="Tolkien (film)" label="&amp;quot;Tolkien&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q15139039" start="42677" end="42691" title="Montclair Film" label="Montclair Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q24944815" start="42696" end="42710" title="Fathom Events" label="Fathom Events."/>
<link wikidata="Q4705954" start="42788" end="42811" title="Alamo Drafthouse Cinema" label="Alamo Drafthouse Cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q16728477" start="43006" end="43021" title="Derek DelGaudio" label="Derek DelGaudio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884723" start="43204" end="43222" title="Lowcountry cuisine" label="Lowcountry cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q734143" start="43289" end="43300" title="Don Novello" label="Don Novello"/>
<link wikidata="Q601358" start="43302" end="43314" title="Phil Silvers" label="Phil Silvers"/>
<link wikidata="Q103894" start="43316" end="43329" title="Alec Guinness" label="Alec Guinness"/>
<link wikidata="Q213512" start="43331" end="43341" title="Bill Cosby" label="Bill Cosby"/>
<link wikidata="Q150651" start="43343" end="43356" title="George Carlin" label="George Carlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q215359" start="43358" end="43369" title="Dean Martin" label="Dean Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q211987" start="43371" end="43382" title="Jon Stewart" label="Jon Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q16402" start="43384" end="43396" title="Monty Python" label="Monty Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q16473" start="43398" end="43410" title="Steve Martin" label="Steve Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q217298" start="43416" end="43431" title="David Letterman" label="David Letterman"/>
<link wikidata="Q20917517" start="43466" end="43492" title="Bill Cosby sexual assault cases" label="sexual assault allegations"/>
<link wikidata="Q16207915" start="43613" end="43627" title="Nathan Fielder" label="Nathan Fielder"/>
<link wikidata="Q767499" start="43629" end="43641" title="James Corden" label="James Corden"/>
<link wikidata="Q539917" start="43643" end="43655" title="Mindy Kaling" label="Mindy Kaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q18348652" start="43657" end="43669" title="Hasan Minhaj" label="Hasan Minhaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q16730921" start="43671" end="43685" title="Jordan Klepper" label="Jordan Klepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q62269204" start="43687" end="43699" title="Ziwe Fumudoh" label="Ziwe Fumudoh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7421565" start="43701" end="43715" title="Sara Benincasa" label="Sara Benincasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6249723" start="43717" end="43729" title="John Mulaney" label="John Mulaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q16205943" start="43731" end="43746" title="Derrick Beckles" label="Derrick Beckles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6308314" start="43748" end="43762" title="Julie Klausner" label="Julie Klausner"/>
<link wikidata="Q4912515" start="43768" end="43781" title="Billy Eichner" label="Billy Eichner"/>
<link wikidata="Q769585" start="43828" end="43842" title="Catholic Church in the United States" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q661513" start="43858" end="43871" title="Sunday school" label="Sunday school"/>
<link wikidata="Q19979276" start="43919" end="43950" title="Universal Life Church Monastery" label="Universal Life Church Monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q892" start="44006" end="44022" title="J. R. R. Tolkien" label="J. R. R. Tolkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q79904" start="44024" end="44038" title="J. D. Salinger" label="J. D. Salinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q545375" start="44040" end="44056" title="Robertson Davies" label="Robertson Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251926" start="44058" end="44073" title="George Saunders" label="George Saunders"/>
<link wikidata="Q316610" start="44075" end="44086" title="Larry Niven" label="Larry Niven"/>
<link wikidata="Q551710" start="44088" end="44101" title="Henry Kuttner" label="Henry Kuttner"/>
<link wikidata="Q34981" start="44107" end="44119" title="Isaac Asimov" label="Isaac Asimov"/>
<link wikidata="Q47716" start="44233" end="44243" title="Charleston, South Carolina" label="Charleston"/>
<link wikidata="Q19518482" start="44260" end="44272" title="Joseph H. McGee Jr." label="Joseph McGee"/>
<link wikidata="Q824379" start="44362" end="44382" title="Strangers with Candy" label="Strangers with Candy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4039001" start="44514" end="44518" title="Strangers with Candy (film)" label="film"/>
<link wikidata="Q211987" start="44530" end="44541" title="Jon Stewart" label="Jon Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3143733" start="44625" end="44641" title="Hydrogen Jukebox" label="Hydrogen Jukebox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526635" start="44755" end="44774" title="love at first sight" label="love at first sight"/>
<link wikidata="Q678437" start="44921" end="44942" title="Montclair, New Jersey" label="Montclair, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4340209" start="45042" end="45052" title="depression (mood)" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q845224" start="45057" end="45064" title="Generalised anxiety disorder" label="anxiety"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="45140" end="45153" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q897939" start="45179" end="45206" title="Myers–Briggs Type Indicator" label="Myers–Briggs Type Indicator"/>
<link wikidata="Q897939" start="45281" end="45285" title="Myers–Briggs Type Indicator" label="INFP"/>
<link wikidata="Q817310" start="45340" end="45376" title="benign paroxysmal positional vertigo" label="benign paroxysmal positional vertigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3540864" start="45388" end="45404" title="balance disorder" label="balance disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="45584" end="45592" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q121041" start="45839" end="45856" title="Appendicitis" label="ruptured appendix"/>
<link wikidata="Q3751091" start="46109" end="46120" title="José Andrés" label="José Andrés"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="46337" end="46347" title="Emmy Award" label="Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q40024" start="46450" end="46465" title="Satellite Award" label="Satellite Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q302762" start="46702" end="46715" title="Barry Manilow" label="Barry Manilow"/>
<link wikidata="Q296729" start="46932" end="46944" title="Tony Bennett" label="Tony Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q269890" start="46960" end="46971" title="Don Rickles" label="Don Rickles"/>
<link wikidata="Q463842" start="47003" end="47027" title="American Dialect Society" label="American Dialect Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701243" start="47040" end="47050" title="truthiness" label="truthiness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1895274" start="47157" end="47173" title="Word of the year" label="Word of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="47251" end="47267" title="Associated Press" label="Associated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q585329" start="47403" end="47418" title="Merriam-Webster" label="Merriam-Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q209896" start="47722" end="47730" title="Honorary degree" label="honorary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287507" start="47731" end="47760" title="Doctor of Fine Arts" label="Doctorate of Fine Arts degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q669442" start="47766" end="47778" title="Knox College, Illinois" label="Knox College"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="47786" end="47790" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q604370" start="47833" end="47860" title="Time 100" label="100 most influential people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507987" start="47901" end="47909" title="New York (magazine)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q211987" start="47945" end="47956" title="Jon Stewart" label="Jon Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7726923" start="48056" end="48081" title="U.S. Comedy Arts Festival" label="U.S. Comedy Arts Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q205842" start="48085" end="48090" title="Aspen, Colorado" label="Aspen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552325" start="48416" end="48421" title="Maxim (magazine)" label="Maxim"/>
<link wikidata="Q234627" start="48437" end="48453" title="Mélissa Theuriau" label="Mélissa Theuriau"/>
<link wikidata="Q33659" start="48575" end="48581" title="People (magazine)" label="People"/>
<link wikidata="Q33659" start="48595" end="48612" title="Sexiest Man Alive" label="Sexiest Man Alive"/>
<link wikidata="Q311249" start="48660" end="48662" title="GQ (magazine)" label="GQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552325" start="48776" end="48790" title="Maxim Magazine" label="Maxim Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q838121" start="48880" end="48893" title="Peabody Award" label="Peabody Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3517351" start="48947" end="48957" title="TCA Awards" label="TCA Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659514" start="49000" end="49030" title="Television Critics Association" label="Television Critics Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q673657" start="49043" end="49057" title="Saginaw Spirit" label="Saginaw Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q823093" start="49071" end="49086" title="Oshawa Generals" label="Oshawa Generals"/>
<link wikidata="Q902860" start="49090" end="49097" title="Ontario Hockey League" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139013" start="49098" end="49118" title="Junior ice hockey" label="Junior League Hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q211867" start="49120" end="49126" title="Oshawa" label="Oshawa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49200" end="49219" title="The Colbert Report#Stephen Colbert Day" label="Stephen Colbert Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577195" start="49433" end="49466" title="Spike TV Guys&amp;#x27; Choice Awards" label="Spike TV Guys&amp;#x27; Choice Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q645084" start="49586" end="49600" title="Virgin America" label="Virgin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q99864" start="49701" end="49716" title="key to the city" label="key to the city"/>
<link wikidata="Q38453" start="49720" end="49744" title="Columbia, South Carolina" label="Columbia, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q4225155" start="49757" end="49766" title="Bob Coble" label="Bob Coble"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="49838" end="49854" title="Associated Press" label="Associated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q838121" start="49888" end="49901" title="Peabody Award" label="Peabody Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="50105" end="50115" title="Emmy Award" label="Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="50272" end="50292" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411891" start="50503" end="50514" title="Webby Award" label="Webby Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326340" start="50556" end="50590" title="Grammy Award for Best Comedy Album" label="Grammy Award for Best Comedy Album"/>
<link wikidata="" start="50611" end="50657" title="A Colbert Christmas: The Greatest Gift of All!" label="A Colbert Christmas: The Greatest Gift of All!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027904" start="50700" end="50716" title="Grammy Award for Song of the Year" label="Song of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796" start="50751" end="50755" title="iPad" label="iPad"/>
<link wikidata="Q309350" start="50803" end="50826" title="Northwestern University" label="Northwestern University"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="50892" end="50902" title="Emmy award" label="Emmy award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593890" start="50993" end="51015" title="Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word Album" label="Best Spoken Word Album"/>
<link wikidata="" start="51040" end="51102" title="America Again: Re-becoming The Greatness We Never Weren&amp;#x27;t" label="America Again: Re-becoming The Greatness We Never Weren&amp;#x27;t"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="51133" end="51146" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q12811336" start="51250" end="51255" title="Paste (magazine)" label="Paste"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="51272" end="51279" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q392667" start="51401" end="51423" title="Wake Forest University" label="Wake Forest University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260542" start="51523" end="51561" title="Department of the Army Civilian Awards" label="Department of the Army Civilian Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260547" start="51567" end="51601" title="Outstanding Civilian Service Award" label="Outstanding Civilian Service Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="51640" end="51649" title="United States Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q61503" start="51771" end="51793" title="The Hollywood Reporter" label="The Hollywood Reporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q311249" start="51831" end="51833" title="GQ" label="GQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q158283" start="51945" end="51956" title="Vanity Fair (magazine)" label="Vanity Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q9301216" start="52130" end="52154" title="Doctor of Humane Letters" label="Doctor of Humane Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="52167" end="52182" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q816412" start="52272" end="52294" title="Ben &amp;amp; Jerry&amp;#x27;s" label="Ben &amp;amp; Jerry&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7608917" start="52354" end="52392" title="Stephen Colbert&amp;#x27;s AmeriCone Dream" label="Stephen Colbert&amp;#x27;s AmeriCone Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q82866" start="52482" end="52486" title="Lent" label="Lent"/>
<link wikidata="Q36642" start="52705" end="52720" title="scientific name" label="scientific name"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005828" start="52772" end="52787" title="trapdoor spider" label="trapdoor spider"/>
<link wikidata="Q741732" start="52804" end="52831" title="Aptostichus stephencolberti" label="Aptostichus stephencolberti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390111" start="52920" end="52930" title="Jason Bond" label="Jason Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277776" start="52958" end="52982" title="East Carolina University" label="East Carolina University"/>
<link wikidata="Q134487" start="53030" end="53054" title="Myrmekiaphila neilyoungi" label="Myrmekiaphila neilyoungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q633" start="53090" end="53100" title="Neil Young" label="Neil Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q327149" start="53444" end="53457" title="diving beetle" label="diving beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q203547" start="53514" end="53522" title="stonefly" label="stonefly"/>
<link wikidata="Q896734" start="53728" end="53742" title="Braconidae" label="parasitic wasp"/>
<link wikidata="Q335680" start="53881" end="53893" title="Jimmy Fallon" label="Jimmy Fallon"/>
<link wikidata="Q483325" start="53895" end="53910" title="Ellen DeGeneres" label="Ellen DeGeneres"/>
<link wikidata="Q34424" start="53916" end="53923" title="Shakira" label="Shakira"/>
<link wikidata="Q467400" start="53939" end="53950" title="rove beetle" label="rove beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q25271" start="54108" end="54135" title="International Space Station" label="International Space Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q54384" start="54168" end="54203" title="Space Shuttle Discovery" label="Space Shuttle &amp;quot;Discovery&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q841607" start="54831" end="54854" title="Tranquility (ISS module)" label="&amp;quot;Tranquility&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q636300" start="55384" end="55393" title="backronym" label="backronym"/>
<link wikidata="Q55177" start="55507" end="55522" title="Sunita Williams" label="Sunita Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150288" start="55740" end="55747" title="Paul Dinello" label="Dinello"/>
<link wikidata="Q262170" start="55749" end="55756" title="Amy Sedaris" label="Sedaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q7999576" start="55764" end="55772" title="Wigfield" label="Wigfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q4742720" start="55848" end="55866" title="America (The Book)" label="America (The Book)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975913" start="55959" end="55989" title="I Am America (And So Can You!)" label="I Am America (And So Can You!)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4742736" start="56049" end="56062" title="America Again" label="America Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q13581041" start="56171" end="56200" title="I Am a Pole (And So Can You!)" label="I Am a Pole (And So Can You!)"/>
<link wikidata="Q56724095" start="56491" end="56516" title="New Yorkers in journalism" label="New Yorkers in journalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225114" start="56519" end="56535" title="Political satire" label="Political satire"/>
<link wikidata="Q247869" start="56645" end="56655" title="60 Minutes" label="60 Minutes"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="335196" wikidata="Q2660773" url="?curid=335196" title="Chamaesaura">
<text>The Chamaesaura, also known as grass lizards, are a genus of legless lizards from southern and eastern Africa. The limbs are reduced to small spikes. Chamaesaura propel themselves like snakes, pushing against contact points in the environment, such as rocks, plants and irregularities in the soil. They are viviparous and eat small invertebrates, especially grasshoppers.

== Species ==

*&quot;Chamaesaura aenea&quot; – coppery grass lizard, Transvaal snake lizard 
*&quot;Chamaesaura anguina&quot; – Cape grass lizard, Cape snake lizard 
*&quot;Chamaesaura macrolepis&quot; – large-scale grass lizard, large-scale snake lizard 
*&quot;Chamaesaura miopropus&quot; – Zambian snake lizard, Zambian grass lizard 
*&quot;Chamaesaura tenuior&quot; – Cape snake lizard

== References ==

*Branch, B., 1998. Field Guide to Snakes and other Reptiles of Southern Africa: Ralph Curtis Books Publishing, Sanibel Island, Florida, 399 p.
* Spawls, S., Howell, K, Drewes, R, and Ashe, J, 2002. A Field Guide to the Reptiles of East Africa: Academic Press, San Diego, 543 p.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2660773" start="31" end="44" title="Chamaesaura" label="grass lizards"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="52" end="57" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15879" start="69" end="75" title="lizard" label="lizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="103" end="109" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q120446" start="307" end="317" title="viviparous" label="viviparous"/>
<link wikidata="Q18398431" start="358" end="369" title="grasshopper" label="grasshopper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422643" start="395" end="412" title="Chamaesaura aenea" label="Chamaesaura aenea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061329" start="474" end="493" title="Chamaesaura anguina" label="Chamaesaura anguina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705730" start="547" end="569" title="Chamaesaura macrolepis" label="Chamaesaura macrolepis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2948067" start="637" end="658" title="Chamaesaura miopropus" label="Chamaesaura miopropus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2948068" start="718" end="737" title="Chamaesaura tenuior" label="Chamaesaura tenuior"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="335197" wikidata="Q536460" url="?curid=335197" title="Cordylus">
<text>The genus Cordylus (Sauria: Cordylidae) includes a wide variety of species of small to medium spiny lizards from Africa, collectively called girdle-tailed lizards or girdled lizards. All are diurnal and ovoviviparous (live-bearing, without shelled eggs). Most species are rupicolous (rock-dwelling), while a few species are arboreal or live in burrows. They defend themselves with osteoderms (flat bony plates in the skin) and by quickly retreating into rock crevices or burrows. Many species live in groups, and males defend territories.

Cordylids are generally listed under CITES Appendix II. They are not necessarily threatened with extinction, but trade is controlled to prevent overexploitation. Some species of &quot;Cordylus&quot; have limited ranges and may be threatened with habitat destruction or over collecting for the pet trade.

==Classification==
Broadley (2006) recognized 47 species in the genus &quot;Cordylus&quot;, including eight species originally placed in the genus &quot;Pseudocordylus&quot; (&quot;P. fasciatus&quot;, &quot;P. langi&quot;, &quot;P. melanotus&quot;, &quot;P. microlepidotus&quot;, &quot;P. nebulosus&quot;, &quot;P. spinosus&quot;, &quot;P. subviridis&quot;, and &quot;P. transvaalensis&quot;) and &quot;Hemicordylus capensis&quot;. The greatest diversity of cordylids is in South Africa, with a few species found in Angola and eastern Africa as far north as Ethiopia. Other members of the Cordylidae are the genera &quot;Chamaesaura&quot; (a group of legless lizards from southern and eastern Africa) and &quot;Platysaurus&quot;. The sister group of Cordylidae is the plated lizards, family Gerrhosauridae.

In 2011, a study based on the molecular phylogeny of the family suggested several species traditionally included in &quot;Cordylus&quot; should be moved to other genera: &quot;Hemicordylus&quot; (for &quot;capensis&quot; and &quot;nebulosus&quot;), &quot;Karusasaurus&quot; (for &quot;jordani&quot; and &quot;polyzonus&quot;), &quot;Namazonurus&quot; (for &quot;campbelli&quot;, &quot;lawrenci&quot;, &quot;namaquensis&quot;, &quot;peersi&quot; and &quot;pustulatus&quot;), &quot;Ninurta&quot; (for &quot;coeruleopunctatus&quot;), &quot;Ouroborus&quot; (for &quot;cataphractus&quot;) and &quot;Smaug&quot; (for &quot;breyeri&quot;, &quot;giganteus&quot;, &quot;mossambicus&quot;, &quot;regius&quot;, &quot;vandami&quot; and &quot;warreni&quot;). This classification is supported by the &quot;Reptile Database&quot; where 21 species remain in &quot;Cordylus&quot;.

Genus&quot; Cordylus&quot; (&quot;sensu stricto&quot;):
*Angolan girdled lizard, &quot;Cordylus angolensis&quot; 
*Maasai girdled lizard, &quot;Cordylus beraduccii&quot; 
*Cape girdled lizard, &quot;Cordylus cordylus&quot; 

*Rooiberg girdled lizard, &quot;Cordylus imkeae&quot; 
*Limpopo girdled lizard, &quot;Cordylus jonesii&quot; 

*Machadoe&#x27;s girdled lizard, &quot;Cordylus machadoi&quot; 
*Coastal spiny-tailed lizard, &quot;Cordylus macropholis&quot; 
*Marungu girdled lizard, &quot;Cordylus marunguensis&quot; 
*McLachlan&#x27;s girdled lizard, &quot;Cordylus mclachlani&quot; 
*Mecula girdled lizard, &quot;Cordylus meculae&quot; 
*Dwarf girdled lizard, &quot;Cordylus minor&quot; 
*Kaokoveld girdled lizard, &quot;Cordylus namakuiyus&quot; 
*Black girdled lizard, &quot;Cordylus niger&quot; 

*Nyika girdled lizard, &quot;Cordylus nyikae&quot; 
*Oelofsen&#x27;s girdled lizard, &quot;Cordylus oelofseni&quot; 
*N’Dolondolo girdled lizard, &quot;Cordylus phonolithos&quot; 
*Rhodesian girdled lizard, &quot;Cordylus rhodesianus&quot; 
*Ethiopian girdled lizard, &quot;Cordylus rivae&quot; 


*East African spiny-tailed lizard, &quot;Cordylus tropidosternum&quot; 
*Ukinga girdled lizard, &quot;Cordylus ukingensis&quot; 
*Transvaal girdled lizard, &quot;Cordylus vittifer&quot; 

&quot;Nota bene&quot;: A binomial authority in parentheses indicates that the species was originally described in a genus other than &quot;Cordylus&quot;.

Formerly assigned in &quot;Cordylus&quot; (&quot;sensu lato&quot;):
*species in the genus &quot;Hemicordylus&quot;
*species in the genus &quot;Karusasaurus&quot;
*species in the genus &quot;Namazonurus&quot; 
*Blue-spotted girdled lizard, &quot;Ninurta coeruleopunctatus&quot;
*Armadillo girdled lizard, &quot;Ouroborus cataphractus&quot;
*species in the genus &quot;Pseudocordylus&quot;
*species in the genus &quot;Smaug&quot;

==References==
==Further reading==
*Branch, Bill (2004). &quot;Field Guide to Snakes and other Reptiles of Southern Africa&quot;. Third Revised edition, Second impression. Sanibel Island, Florida: Ralph Curtis Books Publishing. 399 pp. . (Genus &quot;Cordylus&quot;, pp. 185–186).
*Broadley DG (2006). 
*FitzSimons VF (1943). &quot;The Lizards of South Africa&quot;. Pretoria: Transvaal Museum Memoir.
*Laurenti JN (1768). &quot;Specimen medicum, exhibens synopsin reptilium emendatam cum experimentis circa venena et antidota reptilium austriacorum.&quot; Vienna: &quot;Joan. Thom. Nob. de Trattnern&quot;. 214 pp. + Plates I–V. (&quot;Cordylus&quot;, new genus, p. 51). (in Latin).
*Reissig, Jens (2014). &quot;Girdled Lizards and their relatives: Natural History, Captive Care and Breeding&quot;. (Foreword by Aaron M. Bauer). Frankfurt am Main: Chimaira. 249 pp. .
*, , , (2002). &quot;A Field Guide to the Reptiles of East Africa&quot;. San Diego: Academic Press. 543 pp.

==External links==
*Tallbo
*Live Birth
*Sungrazers
*Armadillo Lizards</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="4" end="9" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254408" start="20" end="26" title="Sauria" label="Sauria"/>
<link wikidata="Q840980" start="28" end="38" title="Cordylidae" label="Cordylidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="67" end="74" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q536460" start="141" end="162" title="Cordylus" label="girdle-tailed lizards"/>
<link wikidata="Q536460" start="166" end="181" title="Cordylus" label="girdled lizards"/>
<link wikidata="Q192805" start="203" end="216" title="ovoviviparous" label="ovoviviparous"/>
<link wikidata="Q191836" start="577" end="582" title="CITES" label="CITES"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050262" start="684" end="700" title="overexploitation" label="overexploitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q552431" start="786" end="805" title="habitat destruction" label="habitat destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2220649" start="998" end="1012" title="Pseudocordylus" label="Pseudocordylus"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="1453" end="1459" title="Genus" label="genera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660773" start="1466" end="1477" title="Chamaesaura" label="Chamaesaura"/>
<link wikidata="Q3021540" start="1556" end="1567" title="Platysaurus" label="Platysaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="1629" end="1635" title="Family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q579535" start="1636" end="1650" title="Gerrhosauridae" label="Gerrhosauridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q242125" start="1693" end="1702" title="phylogeny" label="phylogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130022" start="1829" end="1841" title="Hemicordylus" label="Hemicordylus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3193628" start="1908" end="1920" title="Karusasaurus" label="Karusasaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335423" start="1986" end="1997" title="Namazonurus" label="Namazonurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405058" start="2133" end="2140" title="Ninurta coeruleopunctatus" label="Ninurta"/>
<link wikidata="Q777490" start="2190" end="2199" title="Armadillo girdled lizard" label="Ouroborus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3486900" start="2247" end="2252" title="Smaug (lizard)" label="Smaug"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644501" start="2445" end="2461" title="Reptile Database" label="Reptile Database"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087319" start="2552" end="2565" title="sensu stricto" label="sensu stricto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712630" start="2605" end="2624" title="Cordylus angolensis" label="Cordylus angolensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997173" start="2662" end="2681" title="Cordylus beraduccii" label="Cordylus beraduccii"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714036" start="2717" end="2734" title="Cordylus cordylus" label="Cordylus cordylus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997178" start="2775" end="2790" title="Cordylus imkeae" label="Cordylus imkeae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997183" start="2829" end="2845" title="Cordylus jonesii" label="Cordylus jonesii"/>
<link wikidata="Q636171" start="2893" end="2910" title="Cordylus machadoi" label="Cordylus machadoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997181" start="2954" end="2974" title="Cordylus macropholis" label="Cordylus macropholis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997180" start="3013" end="3034" title="Cordylus marunguensis" label="Cordylus marunguensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711990" start="3082" end="3101" title="Cordylus mclachlani" label="Cordylus mclachlani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997188" start="3139" end="3155" title="Cordylus meculae" label="Cordylus meculae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997186" start="3192" end="3206" title="Cordylus minor" label="Cordylus minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q25712747" start="3247" end="3266" title="Cordylus namakuiyus" label="Cordylus namakuiyus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997194" start="3303" end="3317" title="Cordylus niger" label="Cordylus niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997196" start="3355" end="3370" title="Cordylus nyikae" label="Cordylus nyikae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997193" start="3417" end="3435" title="Cordylus oelofseni" label="Cordylus oelofseni"/>
<link wikidata="Q78912854" start="3478" end="3498" title="Cordylus phonolithos" label="Cordylus phonolithos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711973" start="3539" end="3559" title="Cordylus rhodesianus" label="Cordylus rhodesianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997195" start="3600" end="3614" title="Cordylus rivae" label="Cordylus rivae"/>
<link wikidata="Q734766" start="3665" end="3688" title="Cordylus tropidosternum" label="Cordylus tropidosternum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997198" start="3726" end="3745" title="Cordylus ukingensis" label="Cordylus ukingensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997201" start="3786" end="3803" title="Cordylus vittifer" label="Cordylus vittifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q222751" start="3818" end="3827" title="Nota bene" label="Nota bene"/>
<link wikidata="Q36642" start="3837" end="3855" title="Binomial nomenclature" label="binomial authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087319" start="4017" end="4027" title="sensu lato" label="sensu lato"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130022" start="4064" end="4076" title="Hemicordylus" label="Hemicordylus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3193628" start="4111" end="4123" title="Karusasaurus" label="Karusasaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335423" start="4158" end="4169" title="Namazonurus" label="Namazonurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405058" start="4178" end="4205" title="Blue-spotted girdled lizard" label="Blue-spotted girdled lizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q777490" start="4246" end="4270" title="Armadillo girdled lizard" label="Armadillo girdled lizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2220649" start="4335" end="4349" title="Pseudocordylus" label="Pseudocordylus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3486900" start="4384" end="4389" title="Smaug (lizard)" label="Smaug"/>
<link wikidata="Q14939241" start="4433" end="4445" title="William Roy Branch" label="Branch, Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3036021" start="4679" end="4690" title="Donald George Broadley" label="Broadley DG"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561552" start="4701" end="4714" title="Vivian Frederick Maynard FitzSimons" label="FitzSimons VF"/>
<link wikidata="Q45120" start="4800" end="4811" title="Josephus Nicolaus Laurenti" label="Laurenti JN"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5210" end="5224" title=":fr:Aaron M. Bauer" label="Aaron M. Bauer"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="335198" wikidata="Q3021540" url="?curid=335198" title="Platysaurus">
<text>Platysaurus is a genus of lizards, commonly known as flat lizards for their flat backs, in the family Cordylidae.

==Geographic range==
All species in the genus &quot;Platysaurus&quot; live in isolated populations in southern Africa. They are found in Mozambique, Zimbabwe, eastern Botswana, southern Namibia and northern and western South Africa.

==Description==

The species of &quot;Platysaurus&quot; exhibit sexual dimorphism. Females and juveniles often have black or brown backs with white stripes, while males are much more colored. Also, males are somewhat larger than females.

==Species==
The described species are:
*&quot;Platysaurus attenboroughi&quot; – Attenborough&#x27;s flat lizard
*&quot;Platysaurus broadleyi&quot; – Broadley&#x27;s flat lizard or Augrabies flat lizard 
*&quot;Platysaurus capensis&quot; – Cape flat lizard 
*&quot;Platysaurus guttatus&quot; – dwarf flat lizard
*&quot;Platysaurus imperator&quot; – emperor flat lizard
*&quot;Platysaurus intermedius&quot; – common flat lizard
*&quot;Platysaurus lebomboensis&quot; – Lebombo flat lizard 
*&quot;Platysaurus maculatus&quot; – spotted flat lizard 
*&quot;Platysaurus minor&quot; – Waterberg flat lizard
*&quot;Platysaurus mitchelli&quot; – Mitchell&#x27;s flat lizard 
*&quot;Platysaurus monotropis&quot; – orange-throated flat lizard 
*&quot;Platysaurus ocellatus&quot; – ocellated flat lizard 
*&quot;Platysaurus orientalis&quot; – Sekukune flat lizard 
*&quot;Platysaurus pungweensis&quot; – Pungwe flat lizard 
*&quot;Platysaurus relictus&quot; – Soutpansberg flat lizard 
*&quot;Platysaurus torquatus&quot; – striped flat lizard

==See also==
*Cordylidae
*&quot;Pseudocordylus&quot;
*&quot;Cordylus&quot;

==References==
==Further reading==
*Boulenger GA (1885). &quot;Catalogue of the Lizards in the British Museum (Natural History). Second Edition. Volume II. ... Zonuridæ ...&quot; London: Trustees of the British Museum (Natural History). (Taylor and Francis, printers). xiii + 497 pp. + Plates I-XXIV. (Genus &quot;Platysaurus&quot;, p. 261).
*Branch, Bill (2004). &quot;Field Guide to Snakes and other Reptiles of Southern Africa&quot;. Third Revised edition, Second impression. Sanibel Island, Florida: Ralph Curtis Books. 399 pp. . (Genus &quot;Platysaurus&quot;, p. 198).

==External links==
*More Information</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="17" end="22" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15879" start="26" end="32" title="lizard" label="lizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="95" end="101" title="Family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q840980" start="102" end="112" title="Cordylidae" label="Cordylidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="140" end="147" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q27394" start="217" end="232" title="southern Africa" label="southern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="252" end="262" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="264" end="272" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q963" start="282" end="290" title="Botswana" label="Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="301" end="308" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="334" end="346" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q181497" start="413" end="430" title="sexual dimorphism" label="sexual dimorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q21011781" start="634" end="659" title="Platysaurus attenboroughi" label="Platysaurus attenboroughi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3019561" start="707" end="728" title="Platysaurus broadleyi" label="Platysaurus broadleyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007397" start="798" end="818" title="Platysaurus capensis" label="Platysaurus capensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q374414" start="852" end="872" title="Platysaurus guttatus" label="Platysaurus guttatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110601" start="906" end="927" title="Platysaurus imperator" label="Platysaurus imperator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2716815" start="963" end="986" title="Platysaurus intermedius" label="Platysaurus intermedius"/>
<link wikidata="Q3021785" start="1021" end="1045" title="Platysaurus lebomboensis" label="Platysaurus lebomboensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3061035" start="1082" end="1103" title="Platysaurus maculatus" label="Platysaurus maculatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3006682" start="1140" end="1157" title="Platysaurus minor" label="Platysaurus minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3005688" start="1195" end="1216" title="Platysaurus mitchelli" label="Platysaurus mitchelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q3022806" start="1261" end="1283" title="Platysaurus monotropis" label="Platysaurus monotropis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3060983" start="1328" end="1349" title="Platysaurus ocellatus" label="Platysaurus ocellatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3006651" start="1388" end="1410" title="Platysaurus orientalis" label="Platysaurus orientalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3004542" start="1448" end="1471" title="Platysaurus pungweensis" label="Platysaurus pungweensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3022508" start="1507" end="1527" title="Platysaurus relictus" label="Platysaurus relictus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007382" start="1569" end="1590" title="Platysaurus torquatus" label="Platysaurus torquatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q840980" start="1634" end="1644" title="Cordylidae" label="Cordylidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2220649" start="1652" end="1666" title="Pseudocordylus" label="Pseudocordylus"/>
<link wikidata="Q536460" start="1680" end="1688" title="Cordylus" label="Cordylus"/>
<link wikidata="Q435731" start="1732" end="1744" title="George Albert Boulenger" label="Boulenger GA"/>
<link wikidata="Q14939241" start="2039" end="2051" title="William Roy Branch" label="Branch, Bill"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="335200" wikidata="Q2220649" url="?curid=335200" title="Pseudocordylus">
<text>Pseudocordylus is a genus of small to large girdled lizards from South Africa, commonly known as crag lizards. Six species of &quot;Pseudocordylus&quot; are known; they are distinguished from girdled lizards of the genus &quot;Cordylus&quot; by the presence of granular scales on the back instead of osteoderms. 

==Species==
The following six species are recognized as being valid.
*&quot;Pseudocordylus langi&quot; – Lang&#x27;s crag lizard
*&quot;Pseudocordylus melanotus&quot; – common crag lizard 
*&quot;Pseudocordylus microlepidotus&quot; – Cape crag lizard 

*&quot;Pseudocordylus spinosus&quot; – spiny crag lizard
*&quot;Pseudocordylus subviridis&quot; – Drakensberg crag lizard 
*&quot;Pseudocordylus transvaalensis&quot; – northern crag lizard

&quot;Nota bene&quot;: A binomial authority in parentheses indicates that the species was originally described in a genus other than &quot;Pseudocordylus&quot;.

==References==
==Further reading==
*Boulenger GA (1885). &quot;Catalogue of the Lizards in the British Museum (Natural History). Second Edition. Volume II. ... Zonuridæ&quot; ... London: Trustees of the British Museum (Natural History). (Taylor and Francis, printers). xiii + 497 pp. + Plates I–XXIV. (Genus &quot;Pseudocordylus&quot;, p. 259).
*Branch, Bill (2004). &quot;Field Guide to Snakes and other Reptiles of Southern Africa&quot;. Third Revised edition, Second impression. Sanibel Island, Florida: Ralph Curtis Books. 399 pp. SBN 0-88359-042-5. (Genus &quot;Psdeudocordylus&quot;, p. 205).

==External links==
*Broadley DG (2006). 
*Frost DR et al. (2001). </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="20" end="25" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q840980" start="44" end="59" title="Cordylidae" label="girdled lizards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2220649" start="97" end="109" title="Pseudocordylus" label="crag lizards"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="115" end="122" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q536460" start="227" end="235" title="Cordylus" label="Cordylus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007071" start="390" end="410" title="Pseudocordylus langi" label="Pseudocordylus langi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409712" start="450" end="474" title="Pseudocordylus melanotus" label="Pseudocordylus melanotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409713" start="510" end="539" title="Pseudocordylus microlepidotus" label="Pseudocordylus microlepidotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3008449" start="574" end="597" title="Pseudocordylus spinosus" label="Pseudocordylus spinosus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409711" start="631" end="656" title="Pseudocordylus subviridis" label="Pseudocordylus subviridis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409709" start="697" end="726" title="Pseudocordylus transvaalensis" label="Pseudocordylus transvaalensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q222751" start="763" end="772" title="Nota bene" label="Nota bene"/>
<link wikidata="Q36642" start="782" end="800" title="Binomial nomenclature" label="binomial authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q435731" start="955" end="967" title="George Albert Boulenger" label="Boulenger GA"/>
<link wikidata="Q14939241" start="1265" end="1277" title="William Roy Branch" label="Branch, Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3036021" start="1539" end="1550" title="Donald George Broadley" label="Broadley DG"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016457" start="1561" end="1566" title="Darrel Frost" label="Frost"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="335207" wikidata="Q1661777" url="?curid=335207" title="Ski boot">
<text>Ski boots are footwear used in skiing to provide a way to attach the skier to skis using ski bindings. The ski/boot/binding combination is used to effectively transmit control inputs from the skier&#x27;s legs to the snow.

==History==
Ski boots were leather winter boots, held to the ski with leather straps. As skiing became more specialized, so too did ski boots, leading to the splitting of designs between those for alpine skiing and cross-country skiing.

Modern skiing developed as an all-round sport with uphill, downhill and cross-country portions. The introduction of the cable binding started a parallel evolution of binding and boot. The binding looped a strap around the back of the boot to hold it forward into a metal cup at the toe. Boots with the sole extended rearward to produce a flange for the cable to firmly latch to become common, as did designs with semi-circular indentations on the heel for the same purpose.

Effective cross-country skiing requires the boot to flex forward to allow a striding action, so the boots were designed around a sole piece that allowed forward flexing while still keeping the foot relatively firm side-to-side. The upper portions, the cuff, was relatively soft, designed primarily for comfort and warmth. Modern cross-country ski boots remain almost unchanged since the 1950s, although modern materials have replaced leather and other natural fibres.

With the introduction of ski lifts, the need for skiing to get to the top of the hill was eliminated, and a much stiffer design was preferred, providing better control over the ski when sliding downhill. A key development was the invention in 1928 of the Kandahar cable binding, which attached the heel solidly to the ski and used a strong spring to pull the boot forward into the toe iron. The design required a stiffer, reinforced boot sole, often built on a wooden shank. New boots that had been boiled in oil or soaked in glue were introduced to stiffen the upper cuff. These were universally uncomfortable, especially during the break-in period when they were new. Once broken-in, they wore out quickly as they continued to soften up. Racers typically had only weeks to wear a particular pair before it was no longer useful. Another attempt to stiffen the leg/ski connection was the &quot;long thong&quot;, a long leather strap fixed directly to the ski that was wrapped several times around the lower leg and then buckled closed. This offered a great improvement in control, but increased the risk of injury in the event of an accident.

==Alpine==
Modern alpine ski boots have rigid soles and attach to the ski at both toe and heel using a spring-loaded binding. The interface between boot and binding is standardized by ISO 5355, which defines the size and shape of the hard plastic flanges on the toe and heel of the boot. Ski boots are sized using the Mondopoint system.

===Front-entry===
Front-entry (or &quot;top-entry&quot;, rarely &quot;overlap&quot; or &quot;Lange&quot;) boots have been the primary boot design for most of the history of downhill skiing. The design evolved from existing leather boot through several steps.

In 1956, the Swiss factory Henke introduced the buckle boot, using over-center levered latches patented by Hans Martin to replace laces. Laces spread the load across a number of eyelets in the leather, whereas the buckles concentrated the load at only a few points. To spread it back out again, the boots featured C-shaped flaps that stretched over the opening where the laces would be, to the side where the buckles were located. These had the added advantage of also helping block snow from entering the front of the boot.

Beginning around 1960 Bob Lange experimented with ways to replace leather with plastic. Early examples used a lace-up design, but in 1964 he combined a new, more flexible polyurethane plastic with the overlapping flap and buckle system from Henke to produce the first recognizably modern ski boot. Production examples appeared in 1966, and when Nancy Greene started winning races on them, the plastic boot became a must-have item. Replacing leather with plastic dramatically improved stiffness and control, along with durability and warmth (leather boots had a way of soaking through, which led to wet, frozen feet). Over time the cuff around the leg evolved upward, starting just over the ankle like leather boots, but rising to a point about halfway to the knee by the 1980s. Only minor changes have occurred to this basic design since then.

Almost all modern front-entry boots consist of two sections, one around the foot, and another around the lower leg. These are joined by rivets/rotating joints near the ankle that allows the leg to pivot forward, but not to the sides. This allows excellent control by transmitting even the smallest lateral movements of the leg to the ski. However, the rigid cuff also makes them very difficult to put on and take off. Additionally, because the boot clamps across the foot, pulling the sides inward, it is difficult to produce a single design that fits a range of foot shapes and sizes. This leads to shell modification services, when the boot is stretched to fit the skier&#x27;s foot, typically by heating the plastic and pressing it into place. This is also known as &quot;blowing&quot; (&quot;punching&quot;, &quot;pushing&quot;). Sometimes material will be ground off the boot to provide more room. This is normally used only with front-entry designs, other designs normally include much more room in the foot area as they do not clamp down the same way.

===Rear-entry===
Rear-entry boots were brought to market in the early 1970s by the Hanson brothers to address the issue of getting conventional boots on and off, while also providing a generally better fit. Rear-entry designs were very popular in the 1980s, notably Salomon designs like the racing-oriented SX 91 Equipe.

In the rear-entry design, the entire foot area and sole are a single unit similar to a slipper. The leg cuff is split in two, with front and rear sections that meet at the hinge point at the ankle. The rear half of the cuff can pivot far to the rear, opening wide for easy entry. Closing a cable locks the moving rear portion forward onto the front half, forming the stiff cuff that pivots around rivets at the ankle like a conventional front-entry design. As the toe area is a single piece and lacks buckles for adjustment, rear-entry boots may have considerable &quot;slop&quot;, and various systems of cables, plates or foam-filled bladders were used to address this. The upside of this approach is that the foot area can be made larger, fitting almost any foot.

The rear entry design fell from popularity in the 1990s due to their shunning by racers in search of a closer fit. Recent improvements to front-entry and mid-entry boots, primarily in the areas of comfort and ease of entry/exit, have diminished the popularity of rear-entry designs even in recreational roles, though mid-range models remain common as rental boots.

===Three-piece===
Three-piece (or &quot;open-throat&quot;) boots were first developed by Mel Dalebout (around 1969), who introduced a rigid magnesium boot shell in that year (Brixia did the same thing with their aluminum shell at around the same time). The big advantage was that the main shell was a single piece that was convex at all points, meaning it could be easily produced using a plug mould. Conventional boots with overlapping flaps required more complex moulding processes. Engineers at Henke, Heierling, Sanmarco and Caber saw the advantage for high-speed moulding, and plastic three-piece boots were on the market by 1972, when Roland Collombin won the Olympic downhill in the Henke Strato.

Boot designer Sven Coomer later improved the design with a corrugated tongue, and this technique was commercialized by Comfort Products, an Aspen, Colo. company owned by the ex-ski racer Erik Giese. Giese licensed Coomer&#x27;s concept to the Swiss company Raichle-Molitor; the company introduced it in 1979 as the Flexon, which became very popular among downhill racers and mogul skiers. The Flexon was extremely popular among professional skiers, especially for moguls and freestyle, but a series of business blunders put Raichle out of business in the late 1990s. Several companies produce three-piece designs today, often referred to as &quot;cabrio&quot; boots (after convertible-top cabriolet vehicles), and they are once again becoming popular models.

The design closely resembles a conventional front-entry design, with separate foot and leg sections riveted at the ankle. However, the overlapping flaps of these designs are cut away, leaving a slot-like opening running down the front of the leg and over the foot. A separate plastic tongue is positioned over this opening on the front of the boot, and buckled down to close it. The open cuff (the &quot;throat&quot;) makes the boots easy to get on and off, and the shaping of the tongue allows complete control over the forward flex. A single shell can be used with different tongues to provide any needed flex pattern from racing-stiff to freestyle-soft.

===Hybrid leather===
The introduction of plastic boots in the 1960s led a number of companies to introduce &quot;hybrid&quot; boots with plastic inserts for additional lateral strength. These were widespread in the late 1960s, especially from the large collection of Italian bookmakers in Montebelluna, before they started introducing all-plastic designs of their own. Typical designs used a plastic insert wrapping around the heel area and extending up to just below the ankle, allowing the skier to force their foot sideways and offering some edging control. Others, notably 1968&#x27;s Raichle Fibre Jet, wrapped a soft leather boot in an external fibreglass shell, producing a side-entry design that was not particularly successful. Hybrid designs often incorporated elements of the side-entry or three-piece designs. The Fibre Jet shared much in common with the Rosemount design, for instance.

===Side-entry===
Introduced by Rosemount in 1965, side-entry design consisted of an almost completely enclosed shell with a cut-out section on one side. The cut-out was covered by a flap that hinged along the back of the boot, swinging to the rear to open. Stepping in was very easy, simply sliding the foot sideways in through the opening, then swinging the flap closed and stretching a fabric cover over it to seal it. As the upper and lower sections both opened, metal plates were needed on the sides to connect the two mechanically. A problem was that the boot did not meet perfectly along the join, allowing snow to force its way into the boot, although improvements were continuous. This design fell from use in the 1970s as higher-cuff front-entry boots became largely universal.

===External frames===
The ski boot provides three functions; protecting the foot from the elements, providing a mounting point for the binding, and transmitting forces between the leg and the ski. In theory, there&#x27;s no reason these have to be combined in a single unit, and several designs have split these functions up. One example is the Nava System from the 1980s, which used a soft boot that clipped into custom bindings, and an arm that extended up from the rear binding to wrap around the leg and provide lateral control.

===Knee-highs===
In 1980 four designs were introduced that all rose to a point just under the knee. They were normal ski boots below, but used an extended tongue that fastened around the upper leg using a variety of methods. They offered much greater edging control, and were quickly copied by many other companies. They all disappeared by 1983, a victim largely of fashion - ski pants would not fit over them. None are produced today.
===Rockered Soles===
GripWalk (ISO 23223) is a modification of the traditional flat-bottomed alpine boot with a rockered rubber sole, allowing improved traction and walking ability on slippery or uneven surfaces. As of 2024 GripWalk boots and bindings are widely available. 

==Nordic==
===Cross-country and telemark===

Cross-country boots, like all Nordic equipment, attach to the ski usually only at the toe of the boot and are allowed to flex at the ball of the foot similarly to a normal shoe or boot. Cross-country boots generally use one of four attachment systems; NNN (New Nordic Norm), 75mm Nordic Norm (&quot;three-pin&quot; binding, &quot;75NN&quot;), d-ring, or SNS (Salomon Nordic System). A four-pin binding system similar to 75NN used to be popular in the USSR. A new Salomon Pilot binding is now widely used for racing because it uses two connection points so that the skier has more stability and control over the ski. As these boots are intended for travel over generally flat terrain, they are optimized for light weight and efficiency of motion.
Telemark refers to a specific technique for making downhill turns on Nordic equipment. This has resulted in highly specialized equipment designed for better performance in a downhill setting. Until 1992 Telemark boots were basically heavy leather boots with the front of the sole adapted to the 75mm Nordic Norm. The introduction of the New Telemark Norm (NTN) binding in 2007 change the technique dramatically. Since then plastic boots have become more and more common and now make up almost all Telemark boots. Plastic allows for a laterally stiffer boot while still allowing freedom of flex at the ball of the foot through the use of bellows. Boots intended for more cross country travel generally have a lower cuff, softer flex and lighter weight. Boots specialized for downhill use have higher cuffs, stiffer flex and heavier weight. Telemark boots are almost always equipped with a rubber sole.

===Alpine touring===
Although randonnée is considered as an alpine sport, it basically combines the cross-country stride for uphill portions and then conventional alpine techniques on the downhill. The equipment uses most closely compares to modern telemark systems, with a stiff plastic boot offering good downhill control, and a binding system that allows it to pivot at the toe for cross-country striding. Different models trade off light weight against downhill performance. They have a rockered, rubber sole to allow for easier walking. This means that they will not fit in ordinary alpine bindings. Instead, the interface between alpine touring boots and bindings is defined by ISO 9523. Other attachment methods exist and prominent amongst these are the &quot;Tech&quot; bindings and fittings that were first commercialized by Dynafit as the TLT. As yet, these are not covered by an international standard.

==Snowboarding==

Downhill techniques, alpine, telemark and snowboarding, all perform turns by rotating the ski or board onto its edge. Once on edge, the curved pattern cut into the side (the &quot;sidecut&quot;) causes the ski or board to bend into a curve. As they move forward over the snow, this curved shape causes them to turn.

Snowboard boots and bindings are normally far simpler than their downhill counterparts, rarely including release systems for instance, and need to provide mechanical support only in the fore and aft directions. These typically consist of an external frame, generally L-shaped, which the snowboarder steps into and then fastens down using straps over the boot. The boot itself is not as responsible for transmitting forces, and can be much softer than a typical downhill boot. When the sport was first introduced, normal winter boots were used, but today it is much more common to use semi-stiff snowboarding boots. Some specialty disciplines use harder boots with step-in bindings more similar to downhill systems, but these are not widely used outside these fields, even though some downhill sports teachers use these so they can switch between snowboarding or skiing classes without having to change boots.

==See also==
*Ski binding

==References==


==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1661777" start="0" end="9" title="Ski boot" label="Ski boots"/>
<link wikidata="Q161928" start="14" end="22" title="footwear" label="footwear"/>
<link wikidata="Q130949" start="31" end="37" title="skiing" label="skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q172226" start="78" end="81" title="ski" label="ski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892020" start="89" end="100" title="ski binding" label="ski binding"/>
<link wikidata="Q286" start="251" end="258" title="leather" label="leather"/>
<link wikidata="Q186222" start="421" end="434" title="alpine skiing" label="alpine skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q179687" start="439" end="459" title="cross-country skiing (sport)" label="cross-country skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015667" start="582" end="595" title="cable binding" label="cable binding"/>
<link wikidata="Q900925" start="2868" end="2878" title="ISO 9407" label="Mondopoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q6485834" start="3696" end="3705" title="Lange (ski boots)" label="Bob Lange"/>
<link wikidata="Q146322" start="3845" end="3857" title="polyurethane" label="polyurethane"/>
<link wikidata="Q238041" start="4019" end="4031" title="Nancy Greene" label="Nancy Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q5651206" start="5662" end="5677" title="Hanson Industries (ski boots)" label="Hanson brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120822" start="5845" end="5852" title="Salomon Group" label="Salomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q876824" start="5988" end="5995" title="slipper" label="slipper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7651955" start="7753" end="7764" title="Sven Coomer" label="Sven Coomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283701" start="8054" end="8060" title="Raichle Flexon" label="Flexon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192132" start="8203" end="8209" title="mogul skiing" label="moguls"/>
<link wikidata="Q189472" start="8214" end="8223" title="freestyle skiing" label="freestyle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9746" end="9763" title="Raichle Fibre Jet" label="Raichle Fibre Jet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368500" start="10088" end="10097" title="Rosemount Ski Boots" label="Rosemount"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981586" start="11190" end="11201" title="Nava System" label="Nava System"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000617" start="15034" end="15043" title="Snowboard" label="Snowboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892020" start="15958" end="15969" title="Ski binding" label="Ski binding"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="335211" wikidata="Q559199" url="?curid=335211" title="Quern">
<text>Quern () is a former municipality in the district of Schleswig-Flensburg, in Schleswig-Holstein, Germany. Since 1 March 2013, it has been part of the municipality of Steinbergkirche.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q559199" start="0" end="5" title="Quern" label="Quern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2941" start="53" end="72" title="Schleswig-Flensburg" label="Schleswig-Flensburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194" start="77" end="95" title="Schleswig-Holstein" label="Schleswig-Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="97" end="104" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q556975" start="166" end="181" title="Steinbergkirche" label="Steinbergkirche"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="335213" wikidata="Q207786" url="?curid=335213" title="Tamagotchi">
<text>is a brand of handheld digital pets that was created in Japan by Akihiro Yokoi of WiZ and Aki Maita of Bandai. It was released by Bandai on November 23, 1996 in Japan and in the United States on May 1, 1997, quickly becoming one of the biggest toy fads of the late 1990s and the early 2000s. , over units have been sold worldwide. Most Tamagotchi are housed in a small egg-shaped handheld video game with an interface consisting of three buttons, with the Tamagotchi Pix adding a shutter on the top to activate the camera.

According to Bandai, the name is a portmanteau combining the two Japanese words , which means &quot;egg&quot;, and &quot;watch&quot;. After the original English spelling of &quot;watch&quot;, the name is sometimes romanized as &quot;Tamagotch&quot; without the &quot;i&quot; in Japan. Most Tamagotchi characters&#x27; names end in &quot;tchi&quot; or in Japanese, with few exceptions.

==History==
Tamagotchi was invented by Aki Maita and Akihiro Yokoi in 1996. They both won the 1997 Ig Nobel Prize for economics, dubbing them the father and mother of Tamagotchi. Tamagotchi is a keychain-sized virtual pet simulation game. The characters were first drawn in heta-uma which was a popular style found in teen magazines then converted to pixel art. They were worn like a wristwatch in the initial concept, hence the portmanteau name. The egg shape might have been chosen as reptiles like snakes were popular pets at that time. The characters are colorful creatures with simple designs based on animals, objects, or people. In 2004, beginning with the Tamagotchi Plus/Connection, a second wave of Tamagotchi toys emerged, featuring a different graphic design by artist JINCO and gameplay which elaborated upon the first generations. However, the story behind the games remained the same: Tamagotchis are a small alien species that deposited an egg on Earth to see what life was like, and it is up to the player to raise the egg into an adult creature. The creature goes through several stages of growth, and will develop differently depending on the care the player provides, with better care resulting in an adult creature that is smarter, happier, and requires less attention. Gameplay can vary widely between models, and some models, such as TamagoChu, require little to no care from the player.

When releasing the Tamagotchi in Japan, Bandai initially marketed them exclusively to teenage girls. Bandai and WiZ would later create a masculine counterpart to the Tamagotchi, the Digital Monster, which would spawn the &quot;Digimon&quot; franchise.

==Gameplay==
Upon activating the pet, an egg appears on the screen. After setting the clock on the device, the egg will wiggle for several minutes, and then hatch into a small pet. In later versions, inputting the player&#x27;s name and birthday is also required when setting the clock, and at birth, the player can name the pet and learn of its family group and/or gender. The player can care for the pet as much or as little as they choose, and the outcome depends on the player&#x27;s actions. The first Tamagotchi units could only be paused by going to set the clock, effectively stopping the passage of time in the game, but in later models, a pause function was included.

Pets have a Hunger meter, Happy meter and a Training meter to determine how healthy and well-behaved the pet is. There is also an age and weight check function for the current age and weight of the pet. Filling up the Hunger meter can be achieved by feeding the pet a meal (usually a loaf of bread or hamburger) or a snack (usually a piece of candy or cake). Filling up the Happy meter can be achieved by playing mini-games with the pet or by feeding it a snack (there are no limits to this, but there are limits to how many meals can be fed). Mini-games usually vary between versions. The Training meter (formerly called Discipline in earlier releases) can be filled by pressing the &quot;scold&quot; option when a pet calls for attention despite neither its hunger or happy meter being full, calls for attention but refuses to play or be fed a meal and in later models, sending a prank gift to a friend. Later models added a &quot;praise&quot; option for when the pet sulks or performs a good deed. The pet will leave droppings around the screen from time to time and can become sick if they are not cleaned up. Before the pet goes to the bathroom, it will make a face and &quot;stink&quot; lines will appear around it. If the player activates the toilet icon during this animation, but before the pet has gone to the bathroom, the pet will use a toilet instead. When done repeatedly, the pet can be potty trained.

If the pet gets sick, a skull icon appears next to the pet as it sits still at the bottom of the screen, with an unhappy expression. The pet can become sick for a number of reasons, such as overfeeding of snacks or failing to clean up droppings. The pet can die if sickness is left unchecked. The pet can be cured by pressing the &quot;Medicine&quot; option, however, it may need to be pressed more than once. Usually, a pet will not play or accept a meal when sick.

===Life cycle===
The pet goes through several distinct stages of development throughout its life cycle. Each stage lasts a set amount of days, depending on the model of the toy, and when it reaches a new stage, the toy plays a jingle, and the pet&#x27;s appearance changes. The pet can &quot;die&quot; due to poor care, old age, sickness, and in a few versions, predators. The pet&#x27;s life cycle stages are Baby, Child, Teenager, Adult and Special, with some units also having a Senior stage. Usually, the pet&#x27;s age will increase once it has awakened from its sleep time.

Poor care can cause a pet to die, but on certain releases, it can also die of old age. If an old pet dies without producing offspring, the family line has ended. The Japanese Tamagotchi toys usually feature a ghost and headstone when the pet dies, but English language versions have been changed to show an angel at death. There is sometimes more than one death based on how well the pet was cared for prior to death. Pressing the C button shows the age at which the pet died. After the pet dies, a player can restart the game by pressing the A and C buttons at the same time.

==Additional features==

In recent models, the player earns currency called Gotchi Points while playing games, and can use the currency in an in-game shop to buy different foods, toys, accessories, or even room decorations for the pet.

=== Connectivity ===
Using infrared communication, two players can link their toys and the pets may form friendships, play games, exchange gifts, and even marry. Connectivity was introduced with Osutchi and Mesutchi. The Japanese Keitai Kaitsuu Tamagotchi Plus was the first model to feature support for an online app. Since then, many subsequent models have also been able to interact with apps like Tamatown by using alphanumeric codes generated by the toy to log into the website&#x27;s Flash game. After generating a code, the toy remains paused until the player either enters a logout code or cancels. The player may play minigames in the town to earn Gotchi Points, or use Gotchi Points to buy items in the town shops. To transfer points and items back to the toy, the player signs out of the Flash game and is given a code to input back into the toy. Newer models, such as the Tamagotchi 4U and the Tamagotchi 4U+ can connect to other Tamagotchi 4U units, as well as smartphones and tablets, using near-field communication. Unlike previous models, the Tamagotchi 4U does not have infrared, which consequently caused it to sell rather poorly. In the recently released Tamagotchi pix, there is an option for connecting through QR codes.

=== Marriage and family ===
The Mesutchi and Osutchi Tamagotchis were the first to introduce marriages and offspring, and the feature returned in the Plus/Connection and subsequent models. Two players with a male and female pet may link their toys and allow the pets to develop a friendship and fall in love. Once the pets have raised their relationship meter sufficiently, the pets may marry. The player can also choose to have their pet marry a random pet brought in by the &quot;Matchmaker.&quot; Once married, the female will eventually produce two eggs, keeping one and leaving one with the male. Since the parent will automatically guide the baby&#x27;s life, the only care it needs from the player is medicine in the case of sickness. After 24 hours has passed or the offspring evolves into a child the parent will leave, and the player is left to care for a new generation. This can continue for as long as the player manages to care for the pets.

The Chou Jinsei Enjoy Tamagotchi also introduced the idea of character &quot;families&quot; or &quot;groups.&quot; These &quot;families&quot; are a kind of classification for characters obtainable in the game, grouped mainly by appearance, though they are also associated with certain skills. A character of one group cannot grow into an adult of a different group, and if two pets of different groups marry and have an egg, the baby will be of the female&#x27;s group. &quot;Tamagotchi m!x&quot; has a notable change to this feature; in this release, Tamagotchi offspring will share genetics from both of their parents.

=== Other ===
With the many different versions of the toy, there are other less common mechanics that influence the pet&#x27;s growth, including but not limited to friendship with the player, varying types of skills, and career.
The Chou Jinsei Enjoy Tamagotchi also introduced Skills, which can be built by playing certain games with the pet, or using certain toys or foods bought from the E-Tamago or in-game shops. Having certain skills can help the pet obtain a career, and if built up high enough, can unlock special characters.

The Tamagotchi Pix has a camera installed, allowing the user to get a pet based on the skin tone and age of the face; it also allows the user to take pictures and &quot;take&quot; the pet on a walk.

==Releases==
As of 2009, there have been over 44 Tamagotchi versions released since their creation, several of which were only released in Japan. &quot;Mametchi&quot;, present since the original release, became a mascot of sorts for the series. Along with the original Tamagotchi, the first wave of Tamagotchi toys included Christmas, angel, and ocean themed versions. The newer versions began in 2004 with the Tamagotchi Plus, and the most recent version is the &quot;Tamagotchi Uni&quot;, which was released on July 15, 2023.

Bandai sold 400,000 units in 1996, increasing to by July 1997 and by October 1997. By Spring 1998, nearly units were sold worldwide, including in Japan and nearly overseas. In the first two years following Tamagotchi&#x27;s release, Bandai had sold units. By 2010, over 76 million Tamagotchis had been sold worldwide. By 2017, over units had been sold worldwide. , Bandai Namco has sold Tamagotchi units.

In early 2013, Bandai released an enhanced version of the original Tamagotchi as a free iOS and Android app named &quot;Tamagotchi L.i.f.e.&quot;. A sequel to the game, &quot;Tamagotchi L.i.f.e. Angel&quot;, was released on February 26, 2014.
&quot;Tamagotchi ON&quot; is the first color Tamagotchi to be released internationally.

Bandai released various special editions favored by collectors, some of them being &quot;Tamagochi: Neon Genesis Evangelion&quot; or &quot;Tamagochi: Gudetama&quot;, which came out in 2020.

===Video games===
Since its debut, Tamagotchi has made its way onto several gaming platforms. Several early games feature gameplay similar to the original toys. A few party-style games appeared on major consoles, along with the &quot;Corner Shop&quot; series of simulation games and a few role playing games for the Nintendo DS.

===Arcade===
The character Mametchi makes an appearance in Namco Bandai/Nintendo&#x27;s &quot;Mario Kart Arcade GP 2&quot; as a playable character, along with his pet, Bagubagutchi, as an item. Mametchi and Yumemitchi also appeared in the arcade game &quot;Taiko no Tatsujin&quot; as unlockable costumes.

An arcade machine known as TamaStation is available in Japan from which players can win prizes for their Tamagotchi toy. This machine has several sequels, such as TamaStation 2.

==Marketing and other media==
===Film===
On June 5, 2007, it was announced by Reuters that an animated Tamagotchi film was to be released in December 2007. The film, &quot;&quot;, focuses on Mametchi, along with his friends Memetchi and Kuchipatchi. Introduced are Tanpopo, a human girl who Mametchi accidentally transports to the Tamagotchi Planet; and Chamametchi, the younger sister of Mametchi, who is born during the film&#x27;s events. &quot;Tamagotchi: The Movie&quot; was released on December 15, 2007, and was distributed by Toho Co. The film opened at number 3 at the box office on opening weekend. On May 31, 2008, North American distributor Bandai Entertainment announced they had acquired the rights to the film. The movie&#x27;s first English release was a direct-to-DVD version, released on June 3, 2009 in Australia by Madman Entertainment. The UK DVD was released on September 14, 2009 via Manga Entertainment.

On December 20, 2008, a second film, known as &quot;&quot; was released into theaters. This film, introducing a new Tamagotchi known as Hapihapitchi, was later released on DVD, on June 26, 2009. Unlike the first film, no English dub was ever released on any home video formats, but an English dub aired on television in the Philippines. Madman Entertainment intended to dub &quot;Happiest Story in the Universe!&quot;, but the dub was cancelled for unknown reasons.

On November 1, 2016, Bandai announced a new Tamagotchi short film called &quot;Tamagotchi: Secret Delivery Operation&quot;. The film was theatrically released alongside the &quot;Kamisama Minarai: Himitsu no Cocotama&quot; film on April 28, 2017, and was included in the &quot;Cocotama&quot; movie&#x27;s DVD released on December 6, 2017. The short film once again follows Mametchi and his friends, assigned to make an essential delivery to the Gotchi King when a giant mechanical claw controlled by the Spacy Brothers intervenes with the delivery.

In the 2022 film &quot;Turning Red&quot;, which was set in 2002, the main protagonist Meilin &quot;Mei&quot; Lee owns a Tamagotchi that she names &quot;Robaire Junior&quot;, after one of the members of her favorite band. This was inspired by director Domee Shi&#x27;s desire to have a Tamagotchi when she was younger.
===Anime===
A Japanese-only anime series called &quot;Anime TV de Hakken!! Tamagotchi&quot; (アニメ TVで発見!! たまごっち, lit. &quot;Found on Anime TV!! Tamagotchi&quot;) aired from July 7, 1997 to March 21, 1998 on Fuji TV.

In December 2007, Bandai Japan began airing &quot;Saa Ikō! Tamagotchi&quot; (さぁイコー！たまごっち) a week before the release of the first film. In December 2008, Bandai America dubbed the series, &quot;Let&#x27;s Go! Tamagotchi&quot;, and began streaming it on YouTube in both English and Japanese, with captions for up to seven other languages.

In 2009, another anime television series was announced, called &quot;Tamagotchi!&quot; (たまごっち!). It began in October 2009 and ended in March 2015. A short-lived English dub of the Tamagotchi anime aired in Australia on channel GO! from 2010 to 2014; only the first 26 episodes have been dubbed and have been repeated until 2014, when GO! took the anime out of their channel. The anime has been dubbed in Tagalog in the Philippines, with said dub airing on GMA Network. There is also a dub in Taiwan that aired on YoYo TV.

From November 23, 2013 to December 2014, Bandai America adapted the second Tamagotchi anime, &quot;Tamagotchi! Yume Kira Dream&quot;, into &quot;webisodes&quot; promoting the then-latest addition to the franchise outside Japan, &quot;Tamagotchi Friends&quot;.

===Animated video===
An animated video, &quot;Tamagotchi Video Adventures&quot;, was produced by 7th Level, Inc. in association with Bandai in 1997. It was directed by Dan Kuenster, produced by Susan Deming and written by Kuenster, Deming, and David Lewman. It runs approximately 42 and a half minutes long. Cosmotchi sends the Tamagotchi to Earth to collect an object that best exemplifies the planet for the Tamagotchi Museum. An original animated music video (&quot;What&#x27;s a Tamagotchi?&quot;) and a how-to-draw Tamagotchi featurette, starring director Kuenster, follow the movie.

===Music===

* Momus&#x27;s 1997 album &quot;Ping Pong&quot; features a song called &quot;Tamagotchi Press Officer&quot;, which mocked Bandai&#x27;s advertising strategy.
* The song &quot;Tamagotchi (Tschoopapa...)&quot; was produced by the music band Sqeezer in 1997.
* In Japan, the band Kigurumi, after gaining new members and becoming a trio, released their single &quot;Tamagotchi&quot; on November 21, 2007, which was also the theme music for the film. It was dubbed in English along with the English dub of the movie.
* The Eurodance group Daze song entitled &quot;Together Forever&quot; uses many Tamagotchi references.
* The Los Angeles-based pop duo LOONER released their tribute to the toy in May 2009 with the single &quot;I Love My Tamagotchee!&quot;.
* The Filipino band Eraserheads made a song called &quot;Tamagotchi Baby&quot; on their Aloha Milkyway album.
* The German band &quot;Die Ärzte&quot; also made a song called &quot;Tamagotchi&quot;.
* The French singer Lorie made a song called &quot;La TamaDance&quot; in 2014 to the contest TamaDance.
* &quot;Tamagotchi!&quot;, the anime based on Tamagotchi, also features numerous original songs, most of which are performed by the Japanese voice actress Kei Shindō as the pop idol character Lovelitchi.
* Polish rapper duo Taconafide (Taco Hemingway and Quebonafide) released their song &quot;Tamagotchi&quot; in 2018; it has reached the position 1 on many Polish charts.

==Reception and impact==
The success of the Tamagotchi led to the electronic pet being appointed the Christmas Gift of the Year by the Swedish Retail Institute in November 1997.

During the late 1990s, children frequently took Tamagotchi digital pets to school because in the first two releases (Generation 1 and Generation 2), a character could die in less than half a day if it did not receive adequate care. Teachers expressed concerns over class disruption as well as general distraction from schoolwork and this eventually led many schools to ban the product. Children became emotional over the deaths of their Tamagotchi, leading to teenagers sending them to graveyards for burial and urban legends of teen suicide, such as an alleged case of a teenage girl hanging herself over the death of her Tamagotchi after her parents took it away as a punishment.

Between 2022 and 2023, global sales doubled, which lead to the opening of the first Tamagotchi Shop in the UK. The reason for this seems to be for nostalgia as Tamagotchi celebrates its 28th anniversary in 2024.

==See also==
*&quot;Digimon&quot; — a similar digital pet by Bandai
*Giga Pet — a brand of virtual pets released by Tiger Electronics to compete with the Tamagotchi
*Furby — a 90&#x27;s toy with a similar market and a robotic feature with simulated speech and movement
*&quot;Fin Fin on Teo the Magic Planet&quot; — a similar digital pet game
*Neopets — a type of online browser based virtual pet
*&quot;Pixel Chix&quot; — a similar toy aimed at girls
*&quot;Pokémon Pikachu&quot; — a similar line of digital pets by Nintendo
*&quot;Pou&quot; — a Tamagotchi clone where the user cares for a simulated creature
*Tamagotchi effect — A psychological effect named after the digital pet
*&quot;Tuttuki Bako&quot; — a similar Bandai release

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1187635" start="23" end="34" title="digital pet" label="digital pet"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="56" end="61" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q207786" start="90" end="99" title="Aki Maita" label="Aki Maita"/>
<link wikidata="Q507269" start="103" end="109" title="Bandai" label="Bandai"/>
<link wikidata="Q13427002" start="248" end="251" title="fad" label="fad"/>
<link wikidata="Q208674" start="559" end="570" title="portmanteau" label="portmanteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q178794" start="645" end="650" title="watch" label="watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q192509" start="738" end="747" title="Romanization of Japanese" label="romanized"/>
<link wikidata="Q184253" start="1009" end="1023" title="Ig Nobel Prize" label="Ig Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="1028" end="1037" title="economics" label="economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q51338" start="1105" end="1113" title="keychain" label="keychain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187635" start="1120" end="1131" title="digital pet" label="virtual pet"/>
<link wikidata="Q18456682" start="1184" end="1192" title="heta-uma" label="heta-uma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135821" start="1261" end="1270" title="pixel art" label="pixel art"/>
<link wikidata="Q208674" start="1339" end="1350" title="portmanteau" label="portmanteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q10811" start="1397" end="1404" title="reptile" label="reptile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2102" start="1411" end="1416" title="snake" label="snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q181508" start="1834" end="1839" title="Extraterrestrial life" label="alien"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2267" end="2276" title="List of Tamagotchi releases#TamagoChu" label="TamagoChu"/>
<link wikidata="Q507269" start="2362" end="2368" title="Bandai" label="Bandai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747487" start="2504" end="2519" title="Digital Monster (virtual pet)" label="Digital Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q193884" start="2549" end="2556" title="Digimon" label="Digimon"/>
<link wikidata="Q39201" start="2751" end="2754" title="pet" label="pet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7802" start="3546" end="3551" title="bread" label="bread"/>
<link wikidata="Q6663" start="3555" end="3564" title="hamburger" label="hamburger"/>
<link wikidata="Q185583" start="3597" end="3602" title="candy" label="candy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13276" start="3606" end="3610" title="cake" label="cake"/>
<link wikidata="Q496" start="4274" end="4283" title="feces" label="droppings"/>
<link wikidata="Q165658" start="7026" end="7031" title="Adobe Flash" label="Flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q22645" start="7510" end="7520" title="smartphone" label="smartphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q155972" start="7526" end="7533" title="tablet computer" label="tablets"/>
<link wikidata="Q273353" start="7541" end="7565" title="near-field communication" label="near-field communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q7211" start="8892" end="8906" title="Taxonomy (general)" label="classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q18670161" start="10306" end="10312" title="mascot" label="mascot"/>
<link wikidata="Q48493" start="11116" end="11119" title="iOS" label="iOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q94" start="11124" end="11131" title="Android (operating system)" label="Android"/>
<link wikidata="Q839864" start="11718" end="11735" title="Party game" label="party-style games"/>
<link wikidata="Q170323" start="11867" end="11878" title="Nintendo DS" label="Nintendo DS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194689" start="11940" end="11952" title="Bandai Namco Entertainment" label="Namco Bandai"/>
<link wikidata="Q8093" start="11953" end="11961" title="Nintendo" label="Nintendo"/>
<link wikidata="Q76990601" start="11975" end="11997" title="Mario Kart Arcade GP 2" label="Mario Kart Arcade GP 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q113726751" start="12120" end="12131" title="arcade game" label="arcade game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198152" start="12138" end="12155" title="Taiko no Tatsujin" label="Taiko no Tatsujin"/>
<link wikidata="Q130879" start="12444" end="12451" title="Reuters" label="Reuters"/>
<link wikidata="Q875920" start="12900" end="12908" title="Toho" label="Toho Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="12992" end="13005" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q806252" start="13019" end="13039" title="Bandai Visual" label="Bandai Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816526" start="13201" end="13221" title="Madman Entertainment" label="Madman Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816526" start="13632" end="13652" title="Madman Entertainment" label="Madman Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13941" end="13978" title="Kamisama Minarai: Himitsu no Cocotama" label="Kamisama Minarai: Himitsu no Cocotama"/>
<link wikidata="Q104845027" start="14335" end="14346" title="Turning Red" label="Turning Red"/>
<link wikidata="Q55070915" start="14563" end="14572" title="Domee Shi" label="Domee Shi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107" start="14658" end="14663" title="anime" label="anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="15098" end="15105" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q3980545" start="15247" end="15279" title="Tamagotchi! (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Tamagotchi!&amp;quot; (たまごっち!)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5574515" start="15411" end="15414" title="9Go!" label="GO!"/>
<link wikidata="Q399643" start="15640" end="15651" title="GMA Network" label="GMA Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q3980545" start="15806" end="15833" title="Tamagotchi! (TV series)" label="Tamagotchi! Yume Kira Dream"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15941" end="15959" title="List of Tamagotchi releases#Tamagotchi Friends" label="Tamagotchi Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352256" start="16573" end="16578" title="Momus (musician)" label="Momus"/>
<link wikidata="Q30603573" start="16603" end="16612" title="Ping Pong (Momus album)" label="Ping Pong"/>
<link wikidata="Q25206076" start="16746" end="16772" title="Tamagotchi (Tschoopapa...)" label="Tamagotchi (Tschoopapa...)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572190" start="16810" end="16817" title="Sqeezer" label="Sqeezer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6405984" start="16848" end="16856" title="Kigurumi (band)" label="Kigurumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q216961" start="17089" end="17098" title="Eurodance" label="Eurodance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4347827" start="17105" end="17109" title="Daze (band)" label="Daze"/>
<link wikidata="Q6459542" start="17218" end="17224" title="Looner (band)" label="LOONER"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384910" start="17343" end="17354" title="Eraserheads" label="Eraserheads"/>
<link wikidata="Q4734189" start="17380" end="17395" title="Aloha Milkyway" label="Tamagotchi Baby"/>
<link wikidata="Q4734189" start="17411" end="17425" title="Aloha Milkyway" label="Aloha Milkyway"/>
<link wikidata="Q32645" start="17457" end="17466" title="Die Ärzte" label="Die Ärzte"/>
<link wikidata="Q258693" start="17541" end="17546" title="Lorie (singer)" label="Lorie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3980545" start="17633" end="17644" title="Tamagotchi! (TV series)" label="Tamagotchi!"/>
<link wikidata="Q850727" start="17780" end="17790" title="Kei Shindō" label="Kei Shindō"/>
<link wikidata="Q226008" start="17798" end="17806" title="Japanese idol" label="pop idol"/>
<link wikidata="Q9383157" start="17861" end="17875" title="Taco Hemingway" label="Taco Hemingway"/>
<link wikidata="Q19409897" start="17880" end="17891" title="Quebonafide" label="Quebonafide"/>
<link wikidata="Q10726664" start="18100" end="18126" title="Christmas Gift of the Year" label="Christmas Gift of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18134" end="18158" title="Swedish Retail Institute" label="Swedish Retail Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q3914" start="18253" end="18259" title="school" label="school"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747487" start="19094" end="19101" title="Digital Monster (virtual pet)" label="Digimon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5560154" start="19143" end="19151" title="Giga Pet" label="Giga Pet"/>
<link wikidata="Q119267" start="19190" end="19207" title="Tiger Electronics" label="Tiger Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q932209" start="19240" end="19245" title="Furby" label="Furby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415868" start="19350" end="19381" title="Fin Fin on Teo the Magic Planet" label="Fin Fin on Teo the Magic Planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q569172" start="19418" end="19425" title="Neopets" label="Neopets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187635" start="19459" end="19470" title="virtual pet" label="virtual pet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7199703" start="19478" end="19488" title="Pixel Chix" label="Pixel Chix"/>
<link wikidata="Q3393975" start="19533" end="19548" title="Pokémon Pikachu" label="Pokémon Pikachu"/>
<link wikidata="Q13609402" start="19607" end="19610" title="Pou (video game)" label="Pou"/>
<link wikidata="Q7680554" start="19685" end="19702" title="Tamagotchi effect" label="Tamagotchi effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q7857039" start="19763" end="19775" title="Tuttuki Bako" label="Tuttuki Bako"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="335215" wikidata="Q2565269" url="?curid=335215" title="ChuChu Rocket!">
<text>is a 1999 action puzzle game developed by Sonic Team and published by Sega for the Dreamcast. The objective is for the player to place arrows on a board to lead mice into escape rockets while avoiding cats. The game features single-player modes in which a player must save all the mice on a board, and a multiplayer mode in which players battle to collect the most mice.

Directed and produced by Yuji Naka, &quot;ChuChu Rocket!&quot; was developed to test the Dreamcast&#x27;s processing power by displaying many characters at once, and also to test the online functionality of the Dreamcast and Sega&#x27;s servers, as it was the first Dreamcast game designed to make use of online. The knowledge gained from the network portion of the project helped Sonic Team in their development of &quot;Phantasy Star Online&quot; (2000). When it arrived in the United States, Sega held an online tournament where players could battle against Sega and Sonic Team employees. In PAL regions, it was given free to subscribers of Sega&#x27;s online gaming service Dreamarena. Although Sega&#x27;s online services have long shut down, the game can still be played online via private servers.

&quot;ChuChu Rocket!&quot; was a commercial and critical success. Critics praised the chaotic and addictive multiplayer and the simple and cute Japanese aesthetic. Sega&#x27;s network gaming service received some criticism for lag. &quot;ChuChu Rocket!&quot; was ported to the Game Boy Advance as a launch game, and gathered interest as the first game published by Sega for Nintendo hardware. It was later ported to iOS and Android; both of these versions were delisted from their storefronts in 2015.

==Gameplay==

&quot;ChuChu Rocket!&quot; is an action puzzle game. The basic rules of the game require the player to guide mice, dubbed &quot;ChuChus&quot;, into a rocket while evading them from dangerous cats, dubbed &quot;KapuKapus&quot;. A brief premise is provided in the instruction manual, explaining that ChuChus are living on a space port that is invaded by KapuKapus one day. In their frantic state, the ChuChus begin running around in chaos, and so the player must guide them to their rockets to save them. Both ChuChus and KapuKapus run in a straight line, and turn right when they hit walls. A player can place up, down, left, and right arrows on the field of play, redirecting characters that step on them. Up to three arrows can be placed by a player at any time; placing a fourth arrow will make the player&#x27;s oldest arrow vanish, and all arrows fade away over time. If a KapuKapu hits an arrow twice, the arrow disappears.

There are several modes of play within &quot;ChuChu Rocket!&quot; including a single-player puzzle mode, a puzzle editing mode, a cooperative challenge mode, and competitive multiplayer modes. In the puzzle mode, the player is provided a limited set of arrows to place on the field to save all the ChuChus in play. The puzzle editing mode allows players to create their own puzzles like this. In the challenge mode, players are given 30 seconds to save the ChuChus in play without any arrow limitations as in puzzle mode. In the competition modes, each player has a rocket and must guide as many ChuChus as possible into their rocket in the time limit. This mode supports up to four players, either in free-for-all or team-based fashion.

&quot;ChuChu Rocket!&quot; is notable for being the first Dreamcast online multiplayer game. During the time Sega was operating its servers, players were able to play the competitive modes online, while also being able to upload their custom puzzles and download those made by other users. Players could use an onscreen or physical keyboard to chat with other players. Servers for the game&#x27;s online functionality were brought back online by fans in 2016.

==Development==
&quot;ChuChu Rocket!&quot; was developed by Sonic Team. Director and producer Yuji Naka conceived the game as a way to use the power of the Dreamcast to create 100 sprites moving at once. He believed there are two trends to use evolving hardware: one is to make increasingly beautiful graphics, while the other is to squeeze as much processing power to use it to its fullest; he chose the latter in this case. Naka and his team found difficulty working on the networking component, but believed it was a good learning experience. Part of &quot;ChuChu Rocket!&quot;″s purpose was to test the capabilities of online multiplayer gaming on the Dreamcast; the team used what they learned to help drive the development of &quot;Phantasy Star Online&quot; (2000). A NAOMI arcade version of the game was also planned, but later scrapped.

==Promotion and release==

Sega announced &quot;ChuChu Rocket!&quot; on September 2, 1999 as Sonic Team&#x27;s second game for the Dreamcast after &quot;Sonic Adventure&quot; (1998). Prior to the game&#x27;s release in Japan in November 1999, Sega promoted the game with a website dedicated to &quot;ChuChu Rocket!&quot;, and a 15-second commercial advertising the game was solicited to television stations across the country, with the commercial also made available to download through the website. &quot;ChuChu Rocket!&quot; released in Japan on November 11, 1999 and climbed to the top of the Japanese sales charts in its first week on sale, selling 35,000 copies and knocking the PlayStation release of &quot;Chrono Trigger&quot; off the top spot. That December, video game magazine &quot;Famitsu&quot; held a contest using a &quot;ChuChu&quot;-themed minigame for the Dreamcast Visual Memory Unit (VMU) that could be downloaded from the internet. Players who completed the minigame were given a password to send to &quot;Famitsu&quot;. Various prizes were given out to winners of the contest, including Dreamcast controllers, VMU stickers, and pens.

In January 2000, Sega of America announced it would bring &quot;ChuChu Rocket!&quot; to North America on March 2, 2000, three months earlier than the original anticipated release in June. Prior to the North American release of the game, a Shockwave demo featuring 30 levels from the game&#x27;s puzzle mode was made available to play on personal computers through Sega&#x27;s website. &quot;ChuChu Rocket!&quot; was released in North America on March 7, 2000, a week later than had been announced earlier. It retailed for $29.99 in America — below the average for new Dreamcast games. Sega held an online tournament on March 25, 2000 where players could battle with members of Sonic Team, the Dreamcast network team, and other Sega employees in online matches.

The European and PAL versions were not released until months after the North American release, on June 9, 2000. In Europe, &quot;ChuChu Rocket!&quot; was mailed free to subscribers of Dreamarena, the European Dreamcast online gaming service. At the time of the game&#x27;s release in Europe, Dreamarena had over 25,000 subscribers, despite the absence of online play beforehand.

===Ports===
A port of &quot;ChuChu Rocket!&quot; was released as a launch game for the Game Boy Advance in Japan on March 21, 2001. The release garnered interest as the first game Sega published for a Nintendo system. This version retains all the gameplay modes of the Dreamcast version except online play. Players can use Game Link Cables to connect up to four systems together to play using only one cartridge. Sonic Team also selected 2,500 of the 17,000 custom puzzles uploaded to the Dreamcast servers to include in the game. The polygonal graphics from the Dreamcast version are replaced with animated sprites. Players can also edit their own character sprites. This version of &quot;ChuChu Rocket!&quot; was re-released on the Wii U in Japan on October 21, 2015. &quot;ChuChu Rocket!&quot; was also included as part of a 2-in-1 Sonic Advance cartridge for the Gameboy Advance released on 11 November 2005.

Sega released iOS and Android ports of &quot;ChuChu Rocket!&quot; in 2010 and 2011. The iOS version featured local multiplayer over Wi-Fi. Both were removed from purchase in 2015.

==Reception==

The Dreamcast version of &quot;ChuChu Rocket!&quot; received positive reviews. Critics highlighted the multiplayer modes as being great fun and addictive. Stuart Taylor of &quot;Dreamcast Magazine&quot; (UK) called the multiplayer the &quot;bread and butter&quot; of &quot;ChuChu Rocket!&quot;, and praised it for being easy to pick up and put down. He concluded the game was &quot;shamelessly retro and monstrously addictive.&quot; Other critics also picked up on the game&#x27;s Japanese and retro aesthetics, citing the simple, cute, and kawaii graphics. Some reviewers drew attention to the game&#x27;s &quot;chaos&quot; and &quot;insanity&quot;, such as Nick Jones writing for &quot;Arcade&quot;, who said the game was &quot;complete madness and rates as an example of Japanese gaming eccentricity at its very finest&quot;. In addition critics also praised the game for its low retail price, giving a great fresh experience to gamers on a budget. The most common complaints were in regards to the game&#x27;s network component. Some critics noted problems with lag in their games, as well as difficulty getting logged in. Concluding their thoughts, IGN staff called it &quot;quite simply the best multiplayer effort [they]&#x27;ve played in years, on any console.&quot; Chris Simpson of &quot;AllGame&quot; said: &quot;&quot;ChuChu Rocket!&quot; is the most rapidly paced game I have ever had the pleasure of playing...The multiplayer will become a benchmark of quality.&quot; Jeff Lundrigan for &quot;Next Generation&quot; stated that it is a &quot;terrific little puzzler every Dreamcast owner should have&quot;.

The Game Boy Advance port of &quot;ChuChu Rocket!&quot; also received generally favorable reviews. The game is almost identical to the Dreamcast version, and thus reviewers generally shared the same thoughts as those on the Dreamcast version. Some complaints were made about the D-pad controls being inferior to the Dreamcast&#x27;s analog stick. However, praise was given for the ability to hook up four Game Boy Advances and play multiplayer using only one cartridge, and also for the inclusion of 2,500 user-created stages uploaded to the Dreamcast servers. &quot;Next Generation&quot; called the hundreds of maps in puzzle mode the &quot;main draw&quot; of the game.

==Legacy==
A follow-up to &quot;ChuChu Rocket!&quot;, &quot;Dee Dee Planet&quot;, was in development and scheduled for release on the Dreamcast in 2001. The game similarly focused on online multiplayer with gameplay similar to the &quot;Worms&quot; series. It was reportedly cancelled due to the bugs and problems with its network play. In 2021, a near-complete beta copy of the game was obtained and leaked onto the internet. Fans eventually fixed the bugs, making it completely playable online the following year.

In the original GameCube release of &quot;Billy Hatcher and the Giant Egg&quot; (2003), a limited version of the Game Boy Advance port can be unlocked and played via the GameCube – Game Boy Advance link cable. Minigames inspired by &quot;ChuChu Rocket!&quot; were included in &quot;Sega Superstars&quot; (2004) and &quot;Sega Superstars Tennis&quot; (2008). ChuBei, Chuih, ChuPea, and ChuBach are also playable characters in &quot;Sonic &amp; Sega All-Stars Racing&quot; and &quot;Sega Heroes&quot;.

===ChuChu Rocket! Universe===
A sequel, &quot;ChuChu Rocket! Universe&quot;, developed by Hardlight, was released on September 19, 2019 for iOS, macOS and tvOS as a launch game for Apple Arcade. It was removed in September 2022 without warning.

==References==
Notes
Citations
==External links==
* (Archived)</text><links>
<link wikidata="None" start="10" end="28" title="Puzzle video game#Action puzzle" label="action puzzle game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140960" start="42" end="52" title="Sonic Team" label="Sonic Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q122741" start="70" end="74" title="Sega" label="Sega"/>
<link wikidata="Q184198" start="83" end="92" title="Dreamcast" label="Dreamcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q726119" start="397" end="406" title="Yuji Naka" label="Yuji Naka"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094073" start="555" end="561" title="Online console gaming" label="online"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084882" start="794" end="814" title="Phantasy Star Online" label="Phantasy Star Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q105973" start="967" end="977" title="PAL region" label="PAL region"/>
<link wikidata="Q131399811" start="1050" end="1060" title="Dreamarena" label="Dreamarena"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246248" start="1160" end="1175" title="Server emulator" label="private servers"/>
<link wikidata="Q281639" start="1317" end="1340" title="Kawaii" label="cute Japanese aesthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347898" start="1405" end="1408" title="lag (video games)" label="lag"/>
<link wikidata="Q188642" start="1455" end="1471" title="Game Boy Advance" label="Game Boy Advance"/>
<link wikidata="Q48493" start="1594" end="1597" title="iOS" label="iOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q94" start="1602" end="1609" title="Android (operating system)" label="Android"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1728" end="1746" title="Puzzle video game#Action puzzle" label="action puzzle game"/>
<link wikidata="Q184198" start="3422" end="3431" title="Dreamcast" label="Dreamcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094073" start="3432" end="3450" title="Online console gaming" label="online multiplayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140960" start="3885" end="3895" title="Sonic Team" label="Sonic Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q726119" start="3919" end="3928" title="Yuji Naka" label="Yuji Naka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333015" start="4005" end="4012" title="Sprite (computer graphics)" label="sprites"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084882" start="4563" end="4583" title="Phantasy Star Online" label="Phantasy Star Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q16111625" start="4600" end="4605" title="List of Sega arcade system boards" label="NAOMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140960" start="4765" end="4775" title="Sonic Team" label="Sonic Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069059" start="4825" end="4840" title="Sonic Adventure" label="Sonic Adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q10677" start="5356" end="5367" title="PlayStation (console)" label="PlayStation"/>
<link wikidata="Q761815" start="5385" end="5399" title="Chrono Trigger" label="Chrono Trigger"/>
<link wikidata="Q591573" start="5465" end="5472" title="Famitsu" label="Famitsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540152" start="5555" end="5573" title="Visual Memory Unit" label="Visual Memory Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061837" start="6067" end="6076" title="Adobe Shockwave" label="Shockwave"/>
<link wikidata="Q16338" start="6165" end="6182" title="personal computer" label="personal computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q131399811" start="6774" end="6784" title="Dreamarena" label="Dreamarena"/>
<link wikidata="Q188642" start="7057" end="7073" title="Game Boy Advance" label="Game Boy Advance"/>
<link wikidata="Q603583" start="7293" end="7308" title="Game Link Cable" label="Game Link Cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q56942" start="7704" end="7709" title="Wii U" label="Wii U"/>
<link wikidata="Q48493" start="7898" end="7901" title="iOS" label="iOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q94" start="7906" end="7913" title="Android (operating system)" label="Android"/>
<link wikidata="Q29643" start="8016" end="8021" title="Wi-Fi" label="Wi-Fi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125949" start="8574" end="8579" title="Retrogaming" label="retro"/>
<link wikidata="Q281639" start="8621" end="8627" title="kawaii" label="kawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347898" start="9146" end="9149" title="lag (video games)" label="lag"/>
<link wikidata="Q207708" start="9234" end="9237" title="IGN" label="IGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118540" start="9378" end="9385" title="All Media Network" label="AllGame"/>
<link wikidata="Q7021002" start="9587" end="9602" title="Next Generation (magazine)" label="Next Generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445850" start="9980" end="9985" title="D-pad" label="D-pad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629760" start="10034" end="10046" title="analog stick" label="analog stick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7021002" start="10268" end="10283" title="Next Generation (magazine)" label="Next Generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7903060" start="10610" end="10615" title="Worms (series)" label="Worms"/>
<link wikidata="Q182172" start="10906" end="10914" title="GameCube" label="GameCube"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330052" start="10932" end="10963" title="Billy Hatcher and the Giant Egg" label="Billy Hatcher and the Giant Egg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3009653" start="11060" end="11098" title="GameCube – Game Boy Advance link cable" label="GameCube – Game Boy Advance link cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192658" start="11100" end="11108" title="Minigame" label="Minigame"/>
<link wikidata="Q4049259" start="11172" end="11187" title="Sega Superstars" label="Sega Superstars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451357" start="11211" end="11233" title="Sega Superstars Tennis" label="Sega Superstars Tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q162707" start="11321" end="11354" title="Sonic &amp;amp; Sega All-Stars Racing" label="Sonic &amp;amp; Sega All-Stars Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q58205269" start="11371" end="11382" title="Sega Heroes" label="Sega Heroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q48493" start="11531" end="11534" title="iOS" label="iOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="11536" end="11541" title="macOS" label="macOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q20965967" start="11546" end="11550" title="tvOS" label="tvOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023663" start="11556" end="11567" title="launch game" label="launch game"/>
<link wikidata="Q62513347" start="11572" end="11584" title="Apple Arcade" label="Apple Arcade"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="335217" wikidata="Q499916" url="?curid=335217" title="Brooch">
<text>A brooch (, ) is a decorative jewellery item designed to be attached to garments, often to fasten them together. It is usually made of metal, often silver or gold or some other material. Brooches are frequently decorated with enamel or with gemstones and may be solely for ornament or serve a practical function as a clothes fastener. The earliest known brooches are from the Bronze Age. As fashions in brooches changed rather quickly, they are important chronological indicators. In archaeology, ancient European brooches are usually referred to by the Latin term fibula. One example is the Tara Brooch.

==Ancient brooches==
Brooches from antiquity and before the Middle Ages are often called fibula (plural fibulae), especially in Continental contexts. British archaeologists tend to distinguish between bowed &quot;fibulae&quot; and flatter brooches, even in antiquity. They were necessary as clothes fasteners, but also often highly decorative, and important markers of social status for both men and women, from the Bronze Age onwards. In Europe, during the Iron Age, metalworking technology had advanced dramatically. The newer techniques of casting, metal bar-twisting and wire making were the basis for many new objects, including the fibula. In Europe, Celtic craftsmen were creating fibulae decorated in red enamel and coral inlay, as early as 400 BC.

The earliest manufacture of brooches in Great Britain was during the period from 600 to 150 BC. The most common brooch forms during this period were the bow, the plate and in smaller quantities, the penannular brooch. Iron Age brooches found in Britain are typically cast in one piece, with the majority made in copper alloy or iron. Prior to the late Iron Age, gold and silver were rarely used to make jewellery.

==Medieval brooches==
===Migration period===
The distinctive metalwork that was created by the Germanic peoples from the fourth through the eighth centuries belong to the art movement known as Migration period art. During the 5th and 6th centuries, five Germanic tribes migrated to and occupied four different areas of Europe and England after the collapse of the Roman Empire. The tribes were the Visigoths who settled in Spain, the Ostrogoths in Eastern Germany and Austria, the Franks in West Germany, the Lombards in Northern Italy and the Anglo-Saxons in England. Because the tribes were closely linked by their origins, and their jewellery techniques were strikingly similar, the work of these people was first referred to as Barbarian art. This art style is now called Migration period art.

Brooches dating from this period were developed from a combination of Late Roman and new Germanic art forms, designs and technology. Metalworkers throughout western Europe created some of the most colourful, lively and technically superior jewellery ever seen. The brooches of this era display techniques from Roman art: repoussé, filigree, granulation, enamelling, openwork and inlay, but it is inlay that the Migration period artists are famous for. Their passion for colour makes their jewellery stand out. Colour is the primary feature of Migration period jewellery. The precious stone most often used in brooches was the almandine, a burgundy variety of garnet, found in Europe and India.
According to J. Anderson Black, &quot;designers would cover the entire surface of an object with the tiny geometric shapes of precious stones or enamel which were then polished flat until they were flush with the cloisonné settings, giving the appearance of a tiny stained glass window.&quot;

Brooch designs were many and varied: geometric decoration, intricate patterns, abstract designs from nature, bird motifs and running scrolls. Zoomorphic ornamentation was a common element during this period, in Anglo-Saxon England as well as in Europe. Intertwined beasts were a signature feature of these lively, intricately decorated brooches. Bow shaped, S-shaped, radiate-headed and decorated disc brooches were the most common brooch styles during the Migration period, which spanned the 5th through the 7th centuries.
===Anglo-Saxon===

The majority of brooches found in early Anglo-Saxon England were Continental styles that had migrated from Europe and Scandinavia. The long brooch style was most commonly found in 5th- and 6th-century England. Circular brooches first appeared in England in the middle of the 5th century. During the 6th century, craftsmen from Kent began manufacturing brooches using their own distinctive styles and techniques. The circular form was the preferred brooch type by the end of the 6th century. During the 7th century, all brooches in England were in decline. They reappeared in the 8th century and continued to be fashionable through the end of the Anglo-Saxon era.

Brooch styles were predominantly circular by the middle to late Anglo-Saxon era. During this time period, the preferred styles were the annular and jewelled (Kentish) disc brooch styles. The circular forms can be divided generally into enamelled and non-enamelled styles. A few non-circular style were fashionable during the 8th to 11th centuries. The ansate, the safety-pin, the strip and a few other styles can be included in this group. Ansate brooches were traditional brooches from Europe migrated to England and became fashionable in the late Anglo-Saxon period. Safety- pin brooches, more abundant in the early Anglo-Saxon period became more uncommon by the 7th century and by the 8th century, evolve into the strip brooch. Miscellaneous brooches during this time period include the bird, the ottonian, the rectangle and the cross motif.
===Celtic===

Celtic brooches represent a distinct tradition of elaborately decorated penannular and pseudo-penannular brooch types developed in Early Medieval Ireland and Scotland. Techniques, styles and materials used by the Celts were different from Anglo-Saxon craftsmen. Certain attributes of Celtic jewellery, such as inlaid millefiori glass and curvilinear styles have more in common with ancient brooches than contemporary Anglo-Saxon jewellery. The jewellery of Celtic artisans is renowned for its inventiveness, complexity of design and craftsmanship. The Tara Brooch is a well-known example of a Celtic brooch.

===Scandinavian===
Germanic Animal Style decoration was the foundation of Scandinavian art that was produced during the Middle Ages. The lively decorative style originated in Denmark in the late fifth century as an insular response to Late Roman style metalwork. During the early medieval period, Scandinavian craftsmen created intricately carved brooches with their signature animal style ornamentation. The brooches were generally made of copper alloy or silver.

Beginning in the eighth century and lasting until the eleventh century, Scandinavian seafarers were exploring, raiding and colonising Europe, Great Britain and new lands to the west. This era of Scandinavian expansion is known as the Viking Age, and the art created during this time period is known as Viking art. Metalwork, including brooches, produced during this period were decorated in one or more of the Viking art styles. These five sequential styles are: Oseberg, Borre, Jellinge, Mammen, Ringerike and Urnes.

A variety of Scandinavian brooch forms were common during this period: circular, bird-shaped, oval, equal-armed, trefoil, lozenge-shaped, and domed disc. The most common Scandinavian art styles of the period are the Jellinge and Borre art styles. Some of the characteristics of these related art styles are: interlaced gripping beasts, single animal motifs, ribbon-shaped animals, knot and ring-chain patterns, tendrils, and leaf, beast and bird motifs.

===Late medieval===

Brooches found during the late medieval era, (1300 to 1500 AD), were worn by both men and women. Brooch shapes were generally: star-shaped, pentagonal, lobed, wheel, heart-shaped, and ring. Rings were smaller than other brooches, and often used to fasten clothing at the neck. Brooch decoration usually consisted of a simple inscription or gems applied to a gold or silver base. Inscriptions of love, friendship and faith were a typical feature of ring brooches of this period. The heart-shaped brooch was a very popular gift between lovers or friends.
Amulet brooches were very common prior to medieval times. In late antiquity, they were embellished with symbols of pagan deities or gems that held special powers to protect the wearer from harm. These pagan inspired brooches continued to be worn after the spread of Christianity. Pagan and Christian symbols were often combined to decorate brooches during the Middle Ages. Beginning in the fourteenth century, three-dimensional brooches appeared for the first time. The Dunstable Swan Brooch is a well-known example of a three-dimensional brooch.

==Early modern brooches==
The early modern period of jewellery extended from 1500 to 1800. Global exploration and colonisation brought new prosperity to Europe and Great Britain along with new sources of diamonds, gems, pearls, and precious metals. The rapid changes in clothing fashion during this era generated similar changes in jewellery styles. The demand for new jewellery resulted in the deconstruction and melting down of many old jewellery pieces to create new jewellery. Because of this, there are very few surviving jewellery pieces from this era. The primary jewellery styles during this time period are: Renaissance, Georgian and Neoclassical.

===Renaissance===
The Renaissance period in jewellery (1300–1600) was a time of wealth and opulence. Elaborate brooches covered in gemstones or pearls were in fashion, especially with the upper classes. Gemstones commonly used for brooches were emeralds, diamonds, rubies, amethyst and topaz. Brooches with religious motifs and enamelled miniature portraits were popular during this time period. Gems were often selected for their protective properties as well as their vibrant colours. During the fifteenth century, new cutting techniques inspired new gemstone shapes.
===Georgian===
The Georgian jewellery era (1710–1830) was named after the four King Georges of England. In the early 1700s, ornate brooches with complex designs were fashionable. By the mid- to late 1700s, simpler forms and designs were more common, with simpler themes of nature, bows, miniature portraits and animals. Georgian jewellery was typically handmade in gold or silver. Diamonds and pearls continued to be fashionable during this period. 
===Neoclassical===
The Neoclassical era (1760–1830) in jewellery design was inspired by classical themes of ancient Greece and Rome. The main difference between Renaissance jewellery and neoclassical jewellery was that Renaissance jewellery was created primarily for the upper class and neoclassical jewellery was made for the general public. An important innovation in jewellery making during this era was the technique of producing cameos with hard pastes called black basalt and jasper. English pottery manufacturer Josiah Wedgwood is responsible for this important contribution to jewellery making. Cameos and brooches with classical scenes were fashionable during this period. Pearls and gemstones continued to be used in brooches, but were less popular than before. The beginning of the French Revolution halted the manufacture and demand for opulent jewellery.

==Late modern brooches==
The late modern era of jewellery covers the period from 1830 to 1945. The major jewellery styles of this period are: Victorian (1835–1900), Art Nouveau (1895–1914), Edwardian (1901–1910) and Art deco (1920–1939).

===Victorian===
This period was named for Queen Victoria of the United Kingdom, who reigned from 1837 to 1901. Cameos, locket brooches, flowers, nature, animal and hearts were popular jewellery styles in the early Victorian era. When Victoria&#x27;s husband, Prince Albert, died in 1861, jewellery fashion changed to reflect the queen in mourning. Styles turned heavier and more sombre, using materials like black enamel, jet, and black onyx. Mourning brooches were commonly worn until the end of the Victorian period.

It was fashionable during this period to incorporate hair and portraiture into a brooch. The practice began as an expression of mourning, then expanded to keepsakes of loved ones who were living. Human hair was encased within the brooch or braided and woven into a band to which clasps were affixed. 
===Art Nouveau===
The Art Nouveau period of jewellery spanned a short period from 1895 to 1905. The style began in France as a reaction to the heavy, sombre jewellery of the Victorian era. Innovative, flowing designs were now in fashion along with nature, flowers, insects and sensuous women with flowing hair. The jewellery style was fashionable for fifteen years, and ended with the beginning of World War I.

===Edwardian===
The Edwardian era of jewellery (1901–1910) began after the death of Queen Victoria. This period marked the first time platinum was used in jewellery. Because of platinum&#x27;s strength, new jewellery pieces were created with delicate filigree to look like lace and silk. The main gemstones used in brooches were diamonds, typically with platinum or white gold, and coloured gemstones or pearls. Platinum and diamond brooches were a common brooch style. Small brooches continued to be fashionable. Popular brooch forms were bows, ribbons, swags, and garlands, all in the delicate new style.

===Art Deco===
The Art Deco period lasted from 1920 to 1939. Cubism and Fauvism, early 20th century art movements, were inspirations for this new art style, along with Eastern, African and Latin American art. Art Deco was named after the International Exhibition of Modern Decorative and Industrial Arts, a decorative and industrial arts exhibition held in Paris in 1925. Common brooch decoration of this period are: geometric shapes, abstract designs, designs from Cubism, Fauvism, and art motifs from Egypt and India. Black onyx, coral, quartz, lapis and carnelian were used with classic stones such as diamonds, rubies, emeralds, and sapphires.

==See also==
*Medieval art
*Anglo-Saxon art
*Migration period art
*Jewellery
* Lapel pin
* Badge
* Pin-back button

== Notes ==
==References==
* Hellenic Ministry of Culture: Katie Demakopoulou, &quot;Bronze Age Jewellery in Greece&quot;
*
* 
*
*

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q499916" start="2" end="8" title="Brooch" label="brooch"/>
<link wikidata="Q161439" start="30" end="39" title="jewellery" label="jewellery"/>
<link wikidata="Q11426" start="135" end="140" title="metal" label="metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="148" end="154" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="158" end="162" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q213371" start="226" end="232" title="vitreous enamel" label="enamel"/>
<link wikidata="Q83437" start="241" end="249" title="gemstone" label="gemstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q161439" start="273" end="281" title="jewellery" label="ornament"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="376" end="386" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q324926" start="565" end="571" title="Fibula (brooch)" label="fibula"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="666" end="677" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q324926" start="695" end="718" title="Fibula (brooch)" label="fibula (plural fibulae)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="1022" end="1032" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="1064" end="1072" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q496098" start="1149" end="1156" title="casting" label="casting"/>
<link wikidata="Q914395" start="1263" end="1269" title="Celtic art" label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="1404" end="1417" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117448" start="1563" end="1580" title="penannular brooch" label="penannular brooch"/>
<link wikidata="Q22633" start="1874" end="1890" title="Germanic peoples" label="Germanic peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q897054" start="1972" end="1992" title="Migration period art" label="Migration period art"/>
<link wikidata="Q22633" start="2033" end="2048" title="Germanic peoples" label="Germanic tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="2098" end="2104" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="2109" end="2116" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q608613" start="2127" end="2155" title="Fall of the Western Roman Empire" label="collapse of the Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q134313" start="2511" end="2520" title="Barbarian" label="Barbarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q897054" start="2555" end="2575" title="Migration period art" label="Migration period art"/>
<link wikidata="Q217050" start="2648" end="2658" title="Late antiquity" label="Late Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q22633" start="2667" end="2675" title="Germanic peoples" label="Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q656884" start="2899" end="2907" title="repoussé" label="repoussé"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001313" start="2909" end="2917" title="filigree" label="filigree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543258" start="2919" end="2930" title="Granulation (jewellery)" label="granulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q213371" start="2932" end="2942" title="enamelling" label="enamelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859462" start="2944" end="2952" title="openwork" label="openwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281067" start="2957" end="2962" title="inlay" label="inlay"/>
<link wikidata="Q131192" start="2989" end="3005" title="Migration Period" label="Migration period"/>
<link wikidata="Q273663" start="3204" end="3213" title="almandine" label="almandine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102226" start="3485" end="3494" title="cloisonné" label="cloisonné"/>
<link wikidata="Q220304" start="3708" end="3718" title="Zoomorphic" label="Zoomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q131192" start="4023" end="4039" title="Migration Period" label="Migration period"/>
<link wikidata="Q32768" start="4149" end="4160" title="Anglo-Saxons" label="Anglo-Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="4161" end="4168" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="4174" end="4185" title="Europe" label="Continental"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="4216" end="4222" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="4227" end="4238" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="4355" end="4362" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="4436" end="4440" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117448" start="5632" end="5647" title="Penannular brooches" label="Celtic brooches"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="5845" end="5850" title="Celts" label="Celts"/>
<link wikidata="Q748940" start="5949" end="5959" title="millefiori" label="millefiori"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922572" start="6184" end="6195" title="Tara Brooch" label="Tara Brooch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6260" end="6292" title="Animal style#Germanic animal style" label="Germanic Animal Style decoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q222466" start="6315" end="6331" title="Viking art" label="Scandinavian art"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="6361" end="6372" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q217050" start="6476" end="6486" title="Late antiquity" label="Late Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q12567" start="6538" end="6550" title="Vikings" label="Scandinavian"/>
<link wikidata="Q213649" start="6941" end="6951" title="Viking Age" label="Viking Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q222466" start="7009" end="7019" title="Viking art" label="Viking art"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7170" end="7177" title="Viking art#Styles" label="Oseberg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7442" end="7450" title="Viking art#Styles" label="Jellinge"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7455" end="7460" title="Viking art#Styles" label="Borre"/>
<link wikidata="Q131557" start="8255" end="8261" title="Amulet" label="Amulet"/>
<link wikidata="Q217050" start="8316" end="8330" title="late antiquity" label="late antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q29536" start="8456" end="8461" title="Paganism" label="pagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="8521" end="8533" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="8615" end="8626" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q5315707" start="8725" end="8746" title="Dunstable Swan Jewel" label="Dunstable Swan Brooch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308718" start="8833" end="8852" title="early modern period" label="early modern period"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="8956" end="8962" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="8967" end="8980" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="9483" end="9494" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006877" start="10050" end="10058" title="Georgian era" label="Georgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="10597" end="10603" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="10608" end="10612" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="11274" end="11291" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6495391" start="11379" end="11394" title="Late modern period" label="late modern era"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="11631" end="11645" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q152245" start="11848" end="11861" title="Albert, Prince Consort" label="Prince Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q34636" start="12432" end="12443" title="Art Nouveau" label="Art Nouveau"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="12906" end="12920" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q880" start="12956" end="12964" title="platinum" label="platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001313" start="13073" end="13081" title="filigree" label="filigree"/>
<link wikidata="Q173782" start="13449" end="13457" title="Art Deco" label="Art Deco"/>
<link wikidata="Q42934" start="13491" end="13497" title="Cubism" label="Cubism"/>
<link wikidata="Q166593" start="13502" end="13509" title="Fauvism" label="Fauvism"/>
<link wikidata="Q968159" start="13530" end="13542" title="art movement" label="art movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q205653" start="13598" end="13605" title="Oriental" label="Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q386302" start="13607" end="13614" title="African art" label="African"/>
<link wikidata="Q6496268" start="13619" end="13637" title="Latin American art" label="Latin American art"/>
<link wikidata="Q173782" start="13639" end="13647" title="Art Deco" label="Art Deco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384763" start="13668" end="13733" title="International Exhibition of Modern Decorative and Industrial Arts" label="International Exhibition of Modern Decorative and Industrial Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q180884" start="13956" end="13960" title="onyx" label="onyx"/>
<link wikidata="Q43010" start="13969" end="13975" title="quartz" label="quartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q216798" start="13977" end="13982" title="Lapis lazuli" label="lapis"/>
<link wikidata="Q324369" start="13987" end="13996" title="carnelian" label="carnelian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283" start="14035" end="14043" title="diamonds" label="diamonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q43088" start="14045" end="14051" title="Ruby" label="rubies"/>
<link wikidata="Q43513" start="14053" end="14060" title="emerald" label="emerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q127583" start="14067" end="14075" title="sapphire" label="sapphire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624153" start="14093" end="14105" title="Medieval art" label="Medieval art"/>
<link wikidata="Q958255" start="14107" end="14122" title="Anglo-Saxon art" label="Anglo-Saxon art"/>
<link wikidata="Q897054" start="14124" end="14144" title="Migration period art" label="Migration period art"/>
<link wikidata="Q161439" start="14146" end="14155" title="Jewellery" label="Jewellery"/>
<link wikidata="Q213426" start="14158" end="14167" title="Lapel pin" label="Lapel pin"/>
<link wikidata="Q799000" start="14170" end="14175" title="Badge" label="Badge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7132937" start="14178" end="14193" title="Pin-back button" label="Pin-back button"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="335223" wikidata="Q898570" url="?curid=335223" title="Plastination">
<text>Plastination is a technique or process used in anatomy to preserve bodies or body parts, first developed by Gunther von Hagens in 1977. The water and fat are replaced by certain plastics, yielding specimens that can be touched, do not smell or decay, and even retain most properties of the original sample.

==Process==

Four steps are followed in the standard process of plastination: fixation, dehydration, forced impregnation in a vacuum, and hardening. Water and lipid tissues are replaced by curable polymers, which include silicone, epoxy, and polyester-copolymer.

The first step of plastination, fixation, frequently uses a formaldehyde-based solution, and serves two functions. Dissecting the specimen to show specific anatomical elements can be time-consuming. Formaldehyde or other preserving solutions help prevent decomposition of the tissues. They may also confer a degree of rigidity. This can be beneficial in maintaining the shape or arrangement of a specimen. A stomach might be inflated or a leg bent at the knee, for example.

After any necessary dissections have taken place, the specimen is placed in a bath of acetone (freezing point ) at . The volume of the bath should be 10 times that of the specimen. The acetone is renewed two times over the course of six weeks. The acetone draws out all the water and replaces it inside the cells.

In the third step, the specimen is then placed in a bath of liquid polymer, such as silicone rubber, polyester, or epoxy resin. In a partial vacuum, the acetone is made to boil at a low temperature. As the acetone vaporizes and leaves the cells, it draws the liquid polymer in behind it, leaving a cell filled with liquid plastic.

The plastic must then be cured with gas, heat, or ultraviolet light, to harden it.

Specimens, which can vary from a full human body to a small piece of an animal organ, are known as &#x27;plastinates&#x27;. Once plastinated, the specimens and bodies are further manipulated and positioned prior to curing (hardening) of the polymer chains.

==History==

In November 1979, Gunther von Hagens applied for a German patent, proposing the idea of preserving animal and vegetable tissues permanently by synthetic resin impregnation. Since then, von Hagens has applied for further US patents regarding work on preserving biological tissues with polymers.

With the success of his patents, von Hagens went on to form the Institute for Plastination in Heidelberg, Germany in 1993. The Institute for Plastination, along with von Hagens, made their first showing of plastinated bodies in Japan in 1995, which drew more than three million visitors. The institute maintains three international centres of plastination, in Germany, Kyrgyzstan, and China.

==Related preservation methods==
Other methods have been in place for thousands of years to halt the decomposition of the body. Mummification used by the ancient Egyptians is a widely known method which involves the removal of body fluid and wrapping the body in linens. Prior to mummification, Egyptians would lay the body in a shallow pit in the desert and allow the sun to dehydrate the body.

Formalin, an important solution to body preservation, was introduced in 1896 to help with body preservation. Soon to follow formalin, color-preserving embalming solutions were developed to preserve lifelike color and flexibility to aid in the study of the body.

Paraffin impregnation was introduced in 1925, and the embedding of organs in plastic was developed in the 1960s.

Body preservation methods current to the 21st century are cryopreservation, which involves the cooling of the body to very low temperatures to preserve the body tissues, plastination, and embalming.

Other methods used in modern times include the Silicone S 10 Standard Procedure, the Cor-Tech Room temperature procedure, the Epoxy E 12 procedure, and the Polyester P 35 (P 40) procedure. The Silicone S 10 is the procedure most often used in plastination and creates opaque, natural-looking specimen. Dow Corning Corporation&#x27;s Cor-Tech Room Temperature Procedure is designed to allow plastination of specimen at room temperature to various degrees of flexibility using three combinations of polymer, crosslinker, and catalyst. According to the International Society for Plastination, the Epoxy E 12 procedure is used &quot;for thin, transparent, and firm body and organ slices&quot;, while the Polyster P 35 (P 40) preserves &quot;semitransparent and firm brain slices&quot;. Samples are prepared for fixation through the first method by deep freezing, while the second method works best following 4–6 weeks of preparation in a formaldehyde mixture.

==Uses of plastinated specimens==
Plastination is useful in anatomy, serving as models and teaching tools. It is used at more than 40 medical and dental schools throughout the world as an adjunct to anatomical dissection.

Students enrolled in introductory animal science courses at many universities learn animal science through collections of multispecies large-animal specimens. Plastination allows students to have hands-on experience in this field, without exposure to chemicals such as formalin. For example, plastinated canine gastrointestinal tracts are used to help in the teaching of endoscopic technique and anatomy. The plastinated specimens retain their dilated conformation by a positive pressure air flow during the curing process, which allows them to be used to teach both endoscopic technique and gastrointestinal anatomy.

With the use of plastination as a teaching method of animal science, fewer animals have to be killed for research, as the plastination process allows specimens to be studied for a long time.

TTT sheet plastinates for school teaching and lay instruction provide a thorough impression of the complexity of an animal body in just one specimen.
North Carolina State University&#x27;s College of Veterinary Medicine in Raleigh, North Carolina, uses both plastic coating (PC) and plastination (PN) to investigate and compare the difference in the two methods. The PC method was simple and inexpensive, but the PN specimens were more flexible, durable, and lifelike than those preserved by the PC method. The use of plastination allowed the use of many body parts such as muscle, nerves, bones, ligaments, and central nervous system to be preserved.

The University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio was the first school in the United States to use this technique to prepare gross organ specimens for use in teaching. The New York University College of Dentistry, Philadelphia College of Osteopathic Medicine, University of Warwick, and University of Northumbria use collections of plastinates as teaching aids. The University of Vienna and the University of Sheffield have their own plastination laboratories. The first medical school in India to have a plastination lab was A.I.I.M.S, New Delhi with others following suit like Christian Medical College, Vellore, Government Institute of Medical Sciences, Greater Noida etc.

==Ethical concerns==
Concern over consent of bodies being used in the plastination process has arisen. Over 20 years ago, von Hagens set up a body donation program in Germany and has signed over 9,000 donors into the plastinate program: 531 have already died. The program has reported an average of one body a day being released to the plastination process. About 90% of the donors registered are German. Von Hagens&#x27; body donations are now being managed by the Institute for Plastination (IfP) established in 1993.

===Religious opposition===
A number of religious sects prohibit organ donation. Ultra-Orthodox Jews oppose &quot;post mortem&quot; organ donation, and have tried to pass laws against unclaimed cadavers being used in research.
A number of religious organizations, including Catholic and Jewish ones, object to the display of plastinated body parts at public exhibitions.

==Plastination exhibitions==
For the first 20 years, plastination was used to preserve small specimens for medical study. In the early 1990s, the equipment was developed to make plastinating whole body specimens possible, each specimen taking up to 1,500-man-hours to prepare. The first exhibition of whole bodies was displayed by von Hagens in Japan in 1995.

Over the next two years, Von Hagens developed the &quot;Körperwelten&quot; (Body Worlds) public exhibitions, showing whole bodies plastinated in lifelike poses and dissected to show various structures and systems of human anatomy. The earliest exhibitions were presented in the Far East and in Germany, and Gunther von Hagens&#x27; exhibitions have subsequently been hosted by museums and venues in more than 50 cities worldwide, attracting more than 29 million visitors..

Gunther von Hagens&#x27; Body Worlds exhibitions are the original, precedent-setting public anatomical exhibitions of real human bodies, and the only anatomical exhibits that use donated bodies, willed by donors to the Institute for Plastination for the express purpose of serving the Body Worlds mission to educate the public about health and anatomy. To date, more than 10,000 people have agreed to donate their bodies to Institute for Plastination.

In 2004, Premier Exhibitions began their &quot;Bodies Revealed&quot; exhibition in Blackpool, England, which ran from August through October 2004. In 2005 and 2006, the company opened their &quot;Bodies Revealed&quot; and &quot;Bodies...The Exhibition&quot; in Seoul, Tampa, and New York City. The West Coast exhibition site opened on 22 June 2006 at the Tropicana Resort and Casino Las Vegas. , BODIES... The Exhibition is showing at the Ambassador Theatre (Dublin) in Dublin, Ireland. The exhibition was in Istanbul, Turkey, until the end of March 2011.

Plastination galleries are offered in several college medical schools, including the University of Michigan (said to possess the nation&#x27;s largest such lab), Vienna University, and the JSS Medical College Gunther von Hagens maintains a permanent exhibition of plastinates and plastination at the Plastinarium in Guben, Germany.

==See also==
* Écorché
* Freeze drying
* Moulage
* Girolamo Segato

==References==
==Further reading==
* First published as 
* 
* 
* Ottone NE et al. (2015). &quot;New contributions to the development of a plastination technique at room temperature with silicone.&quot; Anatomical Science International 2015; 90(2):126–35. 
* Ottone NE et al. (2018). &quot;E12 sheet plastination: Techniques and applications.&quot; Clinical Anatomy, 31(5):742–756. 
* Ottone NE et al. (2020). Extraction of DNA from plastinated tissues. Forensic Science International, 309:110199. 
* Ottone NE (2020). Micro-Plastination. Technique for Obtaining Slices below 250 μm for the Visualization of Microanatomy in Morphological and Pathological Morphology Protocols. International Journal of Morphology, 38( 2 ): 389–91. 

==External links==
* True Anatomy for New Ways of Teaching von Hagens Plastination offers one-of-a-kind, real human teaching specimens!
* Plastination technique, on Body Worlds page
* Plastination website by Dr. Selcuk Tunali
* Laboratory of Plastination &amp; Anatomical Techniques, Universidad de La Frontera, Temuco, Chile (Dr. Nicolas E. Ottone)
* Plastination Models Inc.
* Plastination in India by Dr. N. M. Shama Sundar.
* Plastination: Silicone Impregnation of Specimens (the standard S10 technique)
* Plastination: The Sheet Plastination Technique
* International Society for Plastination
* The New Plastination Index Online
* The New Plastination Index on-line: Subject Index
* &quot;Exhibit Human&quot; a documentary on plastination by Aaron Edell
* Learn About PCOM&#x27;s Plastination Process
*https://plastodur.com/</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q898570" start="0" end="12" title="Plastination" label="Plastination"/>
<link wikidata="Q514" start="47" end="54" title="anatomy" label="anatomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q65896" start="108" end="126" title="Gunther von Hagens" label="Gunther von Hagens"/>
<link wikidata="Q127980" start="150" end="153" title="fat" label="fat"/>
<link wikidata="Q11474" start="178" end="185" title="plastic" label="plastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q339062" start="244" end="249" title="bacterial decay" label="decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q194290" start="396" end="407" title="dehydration" label="dehydration"/>
<link wikidata="Q11475" start="434" end="440" title="vacuum" label="vacuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11367" start="467" end="472" title="lipid" label="lipid"/>
<link wikidata="Q146439" start="529" end="537" title="silicone" label="silicone"/>
<link wikidata="Q143983" start="539" end="544" title="epoxy" label="epoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q188245" start="550" end="559" title="polyester" label="polyester"/>
<link wikidata="Q421281" start="560" end="569" title="copolymer" label="copolymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q161210" start="632" end="644" title="formaldehyde" label="formaldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q339062" start="827" end="840" title="decomposition" label="decomposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q116646" start="1067" end="1077" title="dissection" label="dissection"/>
<link wikidata="Q49546" start="1133" end="1140" title="acetone" label="acetone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868" start="1354" end="1359" title="Cell (biology)" label="cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115245" start="1446" end="1461" title="silicone rubber" label="silicone rubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q188245" start="1463" end="1472" title="polyester" label="polyester"/>
<link wikidata="Q143983" start="1477" end="1488" title="epoxy resin" label="epoxy resin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11475" start="1503" end="1509" title="vacuum" label="vacuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452502" start="1576" end="1585" title="vaporization" label="vaporizes"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="1744" end="1761" title="ultraviolet light" label="ultraviolet light"/>
<link wikidata="Q23852" start="1816" end="1826" title="human body" label="human body"/>
<link wikidata="Q65896" start="2067" end="2085" title="Gunther von Hagens" label="Gunther von Hagens"/>
<link wikidata="Q43616" start="2865" end="2878" title="Mummy" label="Mummification"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="2891" end="2904" title="ancient Egypt" label="ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q161210" start="3134" end="3142" title="Formalin" label="Formalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q177540" start="3397" end="3405" title="Paraffin wax" label="Paraffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144664" start="3569" end="3585" title="cryopreservation" label="cryopreservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q332997" start="3699" end="3708" title="embalming" label="embalming"/>
<link wikidata="Q325037" start="4013" end="4036" title="Dow Corning Corporation" label="Dow Corning Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q111092" start="4129" end="4145" title="room temperature" label="room temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q898597" start="4217" end="4228" title="crosslinker" label="crosslinker"/>
<link wikidata="Q82264" start="4234" end="4242" title="catalyst" label="catalyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q494230" start="4802" end="4809" title="medical school" label="medical"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259432" start="4814" end="4827" title="dental school" label="dental school"/>
<link wikidata="Q168091" start="4925" end="4939" title="animal science" label="animal science"/>
<link wikidata="Q144" start="5195" end="5201" title="dog" label="canine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="5202" end="5218" title="gastrointestinal" label="gastrointestinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q212809" start="5262" end="5272" title="endoscopy" label="endoscopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q331466" start="5361" end="5378" title="positive pressure" label="positive pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q38344" start="5604" end="5623" title="animal research" label="killed for research"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132346" start="5852" end="5883" title="North Carolina State University" label="North Carolina State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q41087" start="5925" end="5948" title="Raleigh, North Carolina" label="Raleigh, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q39888" start="6299" end="6308" title="ligaments" label="ligaments"/>
<link wikidata="Q47273" start="6314" end="6336" title="central nervous system" label="central nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q4005868" start="6359" end="6415" title="University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio" label="University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339066" start="6538" end="6578" title="New York University College of Dentistry" label="New York University College of Dentistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3378846" start="6580" end="6624" title="Philadelphia College of Osteopathic Medicine" label="Philadelphia College of Osteopathic Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q865528" start="6626" end="6647" title="University of Warwick" label="University of Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q165980" start="6732" end="6752" title="University of Vienna" label="University of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q823917" start="6761" end="6784" title="University of Sheffield" label="University of Sheffield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662770" start="7185" end="7198" title="body donation" label="body donation"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="7210" end="7217" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311415" start="7619" end="7642" title="Religious views on organ donation" label="prohibit organ donation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7671" end="7709" title="Organ donation in Jewish law#Ultra-Orthodox opposition" label="&amp;quot;post mortem&amp;quot; organ donation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796694" start="8372" end="8383" title="Body Worlds" label="Body Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q42225" start="8574" end="8582" title="Far East" label="Far East"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240292" start="9232" end="9251" title="Premier Exhibitions" label="Premier Exhibitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q170377" start="9306" end="9324" title="Blackpool, England" label="Blackpool, England"/>
<link wikidata="Q8684" start="9484" end="9489" title="Seoul" label="Seoul"/>
<link wikidata="Q49255" start="9491" end="9496" title="Tampa" label="Tampa"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="9502" end="9515" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086908" start="9619" end="9643" title="BODIES... The Exhibition" label="BODIES... The Exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q4741059" start="9662" end="9689" title="Ambassador Theatre (Dublin)" label="Ambassador Theatre (Dublin)"/>
<link wikidata="Q230492" start="9865" end="9887" title="University of Michigan" label="University of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q165980" start="9942" end="9959" title="Vienna University" label="Vienna University"/>
<link wikidata="Q494747" start="10096" end="10101" title="Guben" label="Guben"/>
<link wikidata="Q273666" start="10128" end="10135" title="Écorché" label="Écorché"/>
<link wikidata="Q723912" start="10138" end="10151" title="Freeze drying" label="Freeze drying"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950206" start="10154" end="10161" title="Moulage" label="Moulage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135516" start="10164" end="10179" title="Girolamo Segato" label="Girolamo Segato"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796694" start="11078" end="11089" title="Body Worlds" label="Body Worlds"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="335224" wikidata="Q316868" url="?curid=335224" title="Bombing of Hamburg in World War II">
<text>The Allied bombing of Hamburg during World War II included numerous attacks on civilians and civic infrastructure. As a large city and industrial centre, Hamburg&#x27;s shipyards, U-boat pens, and the Hamburg-Harburg area oil refineries were attacked throughout the war.

As part of a sustained campaign of strategic bombing during World War II, the attack during the last week of July 1943, code named Operation Gomorrah, created one of the largest firestorms raised by the Royal Air Force and United States Army Air Forces in World War II, killing an estimated 37,000 people in Hamburg, wounding 180,000 more, and destroying 60% of the city&#x27;s houses.

Hamburg was selected as a target because it was considered particularly susceptible to attack with incendiaries, which, from the experience of the Blitz, were known to inflict more damage than just high explosive bombs. Hamburg also contained a high number of targets supporting the German war effort and was relatively easy for navigators to find. Careful research was done on behalf of both the RAF and USAAF to discover the optimum mix of high explosives and incendiaries. Before the development of the firestorm in Hamburg, there had been no rain for some time and everything was very dry. The unusually warm weather and good conditions ensured that the bombing was highly concentrated around the intended targets, and helped the resulting conflagration create a vortex and whirling updraft of super-heated air which became a tornado of fire.

Various other previously used techniques and devices were instrumental as well, such as area bombing, Pathfinders, and H2S radar, which came together to work with particular effectiveness. An early form of chaff, code named &quot;Window&quot;, was successfully used for the first time by the RAFclouds of aluminium foil strips dropped by Pathfinders as well as the initial bomber streamin order to completely cloud German radar. The raids inflicted severe damage to German armaments production in Hamburg.

==Naming==
The name &quot;Gomorrah&quot; comes from that of one of the two Canaanite cities of Sodom and Gomorrah whose destruction is recorded in the Bible: &quot;Then the Lord rained brimstone and fire on Sodom and Gomorrah, from the Lord out of the heavens.&quot;Genesis 19:24

==Background==

===Political and military pressure===
RAF Bomber Command had made raids on Germany from the early days of World War II. Initially, only military targets were attacked. Navigation to the target over a blacked-out wartime landscape was extremely poor, as was bombing accuracy if the target city (let alone the actual military target) could be found. Consequently bombing operations were very open to criticism as a waste of resources, since such poor results were achieved. The extent of this failure was exposed to the War Cabinet in August 1941 by the Butt Report, which by analysing 600 photographs of raids in the previous three months, found that only a third of crews that claimed to have reached their targets had actually dropped their bombs within of them.

Opinion on targeting steadily shifted as the war progressed, and by November 1940, the view was developing that the civilian population of Germany was a legitimate target in &quot;total war&quot;. By June 1941, RAF thinking had been reversed from seeing any civilian casualties as collateral damage when attacking a military target, to deliberately targeting civilians in an attempt to destroy their morale. This was expected to reduce industrial production and therefore hinder the German war effort. The target was no longer factories, but the people who worked in them and their homes in the surrounding area. This became known as &quot;area bombing&quot;. This change was not driven by the inaccuracy of bombing at this stage, but by studying which aspects of the German Blitz on Britain had had most effect. Factories had been found to be relatively difficult to destroy, but workers needed somewhere to live, and their housing was much more easily made unusable. The absenteeism of de-housed workers was considered to have a bigger effect on industrial production than the level of damage that could be caused, with the same effort, to the factories in which they worked.

Air Marshal Arthur &quot;Bomber&quot; Harris had taken charge of the RAF Bomber Command in February 1942. In the same month, the USAAF 8th Bomber Command set up a headquarters in the United Kingdom ready for the deployment of American units to Britain. Roosevelt was optimistic that bombing had war-winning potential, despite his appeal to Hitler in September 1939 to avoid bombing civilians. Winston Churchill was similarly enthusiastic to bomb Germany. This gave both air forces the political support to deal, at this stage, with criticism of their ineffectiveness.

The build up of the 8th Bomber Command was slow and though some small scale raids were made in France during the latter half of 1942, capability to attack Germany was not obtained until 1943. The British resources were also limited. The Western Allies had had to tell the Soviet Union that any idea of opening a second front in Europe in the summer of 1942 was unfeasible. The only thing Churchill had to offer Stalin was a bombing campaign against Germany. This was hard for the RAF to deliver, but it meant that the bombing of Germany could not be abandoned, so Harris would ultimately get the heavy bombers needed. By the time of the big raid on Hamburg at the end of July 1943, both air forces needed a significant success to justify their existence.

===Firebombing research===
Britain&#x27;s experience of being bombed in the Blitz had contributed to the RAF&#x27;s thinking on how to conduct a bombing campaign. It had become clear that incendiaries could inflict much more damage than high explosive bombs. Detailed study of this was carried out by the Research and Experiment unit, RE8, (set up in November 1941). The details of how German houses were constructed were examined and tests were carried out on models to determine how effective an incendiary attack would be. The precise ratio of high explosive bombs and incendiaries was calculated. The high explosive was to blow out windows and make fire fighting dangerous. High explosive bombs with delayed action fuses were included in the mix to further suppress any fire fighting effort. The quantity of incendiaries delivered had to be high enough to totally overwhelm any fire fighting capability, so that a conflagration could become established.

The Americans took a high level of interest in the British research on the effect of incendiaries. American expertise and experiments added to the planning of fire bombing raids. Despite belief to the contrary, US aircraft also carried a carefully considered mix of high explosive and incendiary bombs. Large quantities of US-made oil-based incendiaries went into service with the 8th Bomber Command shortly before the Hamburg raid – this was preferred by the Americans to the magnesium-cased thermite bomb used by the British.

It is clear that the effectiveness of the Hamburg raid relied to a large extent on the careful research on how best to cause a large fire in a German city – as opposed to the popular view that it was some sort of accidental occurrence due to unusual weather conditions.

===Target selection===
A number of factors led to Hamburg being chosen for the planned firebombing raid. The construction of the city meant its vulnerability was considered &quot;outstanding&quot;. It was Germany&#x27;s second largest city. The city&#x27;s shipbuilding industry made it a priority target. It also had more industrial targets of interest to the Ministry of Economic Warfare than most other German cities. It was reasonably close to the bomber bases in Britain, so giving a short flight, with less exposure to anti-aircraft fire and fighters. Hamburg&#x27;s position, close to the coast and on a prominent river made the target easy to find.

== Operation Gomorrah ==


Operation Gomorrah, was a campaign of air raids which began on 24 July 1943 and lasted for eight days and seven nights. It was at the time the heaviest assault in the history of aerial warfare.

Before July 1943, RAF Bomber Command&#x27;s focus had been on the Ruhr industrial region which had been the target of a five-month-long campaign.

Operation Gomorrah was carried out by RAF Bomber Command (including RCAF, RAAF and Polish Squadrons) and the USAAF Eighth Air Force. The British conducted night raids and the USAAF daylight raids.

The initial attack on Hamburg included two new introductions to the British planning: they used &quot;Window&quot;, later known as chaff, to confuse the German radar, while the Pathfinder Force aircraft, which normally kept radio silence, reported the winds they encountered, and this information was processed and relayed to the bomber force navigators.

=== First RAF raid 24/25 July ===
The first raid on Hamburg was planned for the night of 23 July, but the raid was delayed by one day because of bad weather. Between 21:45 and 23:00 on 24 July 791 bombers took off from their airfields. At 00:57 Pathfinder aircraft, guided only by H2S radar, started to drop yellow target indicators and flares. This was followed by others dropping red target indicators visually by the light of the flares. No. 35 Squadron led the target marking and, thanks to the clear weather and H2S radar, accuracy was good, with markers falling close to the aiming point scattered over five districts. At 01:02 the main force started to bomb; this continued until 01:50 in six waves. Less than half of the bombers dropped their bombs within a three mile radius of the aiming point. Around Hamburg the Germans had lit red decoy fires which caused a hundred bombers to bomb those in error. Still, large areas were set on fire in the five districts marked by the Pathfinders. During the raid a large (6-mile) creepback developed which saved the city centre from catastrophe but caused other districts to the north to be set on fire as well. While some 40,000 firemen were available to tackle fires, control of their resources was damaged when the telephone exchange caught fire and rubble blocked the passage of fire engines through the city streets; fires were still burning three days later. During the early stages of the raid, some bombs fell on the Blohm and Voss shipyard, where three U-boats were destroyed: &quot;U-1011&quot; and &quot;U-1012&quot; were hit on their slipways and never repaired, and &quot;U-996&quot; sank at the dockside. The local police estimated the number of deaths at 1500.

=== First USAAF raid 25 July ===
A second, daylight, raid by the USAAF was conducted on 25 July. 323 aircraft attacked Hamburg, Kiel and Warnemünde. 127 aircraft were assigned to bomb the Blohm and Voss shipyard and the Klöckner aero-engine factory in Hamburg. On the outward leg of the raid, the formation was attacked by about 30 German fighters. Only two bombers were lost before reaching the target. 90 out of 127 Boeing B-17 Flying Fortresses reached Hamburg at 16:40. Despite being partly covered in smoke from the previous night bombing, some buildings in the shipyard were hit but the vital U-boat construction slipways were not damaged. The aero-engine factory was completely covered by smoke and secondary targets were bombed instead, including a generating station. Two large liners used as a depot and barracks ship were hit and sunk. German flak damaged 78 aircraft; ten of the damaged bombers that had to leave the formation were finished off by fighters. Over the North Sea on the way back to bases, the formation was attacked by eight night-fighters operating from Holland but they achieved nothing, whilst losing one of their number

Air reconnaissance on 25 July at 18:30 revealed that Hamburg was still covered in smoke from the previous raids, so another attack by the main force of bomber command on Hamburg for that night was cancelled and instead 705 bombers raided Essen that night. Six De Havilland Mosquitos of No. 139 Squadron RAF Light Night Striking Force (LNSF) carried out a nuisance raid in order to keep the city on a state of alert.

=== Second USAAF raid 26 July ===
On 26 July the USAAF continued its attacks against targets in North-Germany. The same six bombardment groups that had bombed Hamburg the previous day, were ordered to bomb the same targets. The other bombardment groups attacked the Conti rubber plant in Hanover. Due to problems with the formation of the combat boxes and many early returns, only 54 aircraft bombed Hamburg. There was no cloud nor much smoke from burning buildings, but the Germans managed in time to conceal the harbour with artificial smoke. Again secondary targets were bombed: some buildings on the Howaldtswerke-Deutsche Werft U-boat shipyard were hit but no important installations were damaged. The power station in Neuhof was put out of order for one month and deprived Hamburg of 40% of its electricity capacity at a critical moment. All planes bombarded within a minute at 12:00. The German flak managed to damage only two airplanes, which were lost during the homebound journey to England. German fighters concentrated their attacks against the Hanover raid which lost 22 airplanes. The results of the bombing in Hanover were amplified by the fact that most of the firemen were sent as reinforcement to Hamburg.

=== Second RAF raid 27/28 July ===
There was no RAF raid by the main force in the night of 26 July; Bomber Command rarely sent out its main force on three consecutive nights. Six Mosquitos of No. 139 Squadron RAF carried out a nuisance strike. 

On the night of 27 July, shortly before midnight, 787 RAF aircraft74 Vickers Wellingtons, 116 Short Stirlings, 244 Handley Page Halifaxes and 353 Avro Lancastersbombed Hamburg. The aiming points were the dense housing of the working-class districts of Billwerder, Borgfelde, Hamm, Hammerbrook, Hohenfelde and Rothenburgsort. The unusually dry and warm weather, the concentration of the bombing in one area and firefighting limitations due to blockbuster bombs used in the early part of the raid – and the recall of Hanover&#x27;s firecrews to their own city – culminated in a firestorm. The tornadic fire created a huge inferno with winds of up to reaching temperatures of and up to altitudes in excess of , incinerating more than of the city. Asphalt streets appeared to burst into flame (in fact, it was the phosphorus from the fire bombs that was burning), and fuel oil from damaged and destroyed ships, barges and storage tanks spilled into the water of the canals and the harbour, causing them to ignite as well.

An estimated 18,474 people died on this night. A large number of those killed were seeking safety in air raid shelters and cellars. The firestorm consumed the oxygen in the burning city above and the carbon monoxide poisoned those sheltering below. The furious winds created by the firestorm had the power to sweep people up off the streets like dry leaves. of the city&#x27;s center were ablaze just 30 minutes after the start of the firestorm.

=== Third RAF raid 29/30 July ===
Hamburg was only attacked in the night of 28 July by four Mosquitos executing a nuisance raid, a raid by the main force was impossible because of the smoke of the previous bombardment which would hide target indicators. On 29 July a photo reconnaissance Spitfire from No. 542 Squadron RAF reported good weather and no problems with smoke so a third RAF raid was ordered. 777 bombers took off, of which 707 reached Hamburg. There were still fires burning which made visual marking possible, but still the Pathfinders used H2S radar to execute their markings. The Pathfinders missed the aiming point by two miles and marked a district South of the region destroyed in the previous raid. Bombers flew in from the North and because a creepback of four miles developed, the districts Barmbek and Wandsbek were very hard hit. Small fires developed easily into large fires as by this time the firefighting effort had collapsed because of the earlier raids. The Germans did not record specific data for this raid, the number of victims is unknown but on this night 370 people died by carbon monoxide poisoning in a large public shelter.

=== Fourth RAF raid 2/3 August ===
On 30 July Bomber Command was ordered to attack towns in Italy. These raids were canceled the same day, but too late to mount a raid to Hamburg. A planned raid on 31 July was cancelled due to thunderstorms over the UK. 

Because of bad weather, the next attack on Hamburg was delayed until 2 August. Despite weather reconnaissance reports about possible storms close to Hamburg, 737 bombers took off. Five bombers were shot down by night fighters over the North Sea. Just before reaching the German coast, the bomber stream met a severe storm which forced many aircraft to abort or to bomb alternative targets. Cuxhaven, Bremerhaven, Bremen, Wilhelmshaven, Heligoland and other towns as far as 100 miles away from Hamburg reported bombs. At least four bombers crashed because of the storm. Only 400 bombers reached Hamburg but as the Pathfinders could not execute an effective marking, most of the bombs fell scattered over the city and its environments. During this raid, the Germans further developed tactics to counter the effects of &quot;Window&quot;: a running commentary was broadcasting all available data about the bomber stream. Some night fighters operated independently from ground radar guidance and used this information to search for targets. This tactic would later be further developed into what became known as &quot;Zahme Sau&quot;. Five bombers were shot down by night fighters over the North Sea, eight were destroyed around Hamburg and a further eleven were lost on the homebound journey. Because of the storm, the bomber stream became less concentrated and some bombers lost the protection of &quot;Window&quot; and fell victim to night fighters operating in the Kammhuber Line.

== Overview Operation Gomorrah ==
Approximately 3,000 sorties were flown, 9,000 tons of bombs were dropped and over 250,000 homes and houses were destroyed. 
==Casualties==
The death toll from Operation Gomorrah will always be uncertain, but the most accepted single number is now 37,000. If a range is stated, this is generally between 34,000 (from police records) and 40,000 (a commonly used figure in Germany before the end of the war). Most of the dead were unidentified. By 1 December 1943, there were 31,647 confirmed dead, but of these only 15,802 were based on the identification of a body. In some cases, the numbers of people who had perished in cellars converted into &quot;air protection rooms&quot; could only be estimated from the quantity of ash left on the floor. Those who died represented about 2.4% of the total population of Hamburg at the time.

==Other effects==
In the first week after the raid, about one million people evacuated the city. 61% of the housing stock was destroyed or damaged. The city&#x27;s labour force was reduced by ten percent. No subsequent city raid shook Germany as did that on Hamburg; documents show that German officials were thoroughly alarmed and there is some indication from later Allied interrogations of Nazi officials that Hitler stated that further raids of similar weight would force Germany out of the war. The industrial losses were severe: Hamburg never recovered to full production, only doing so in essential armaments industries (in which maximum effort was made). Figures given by German sources indicate that 183 large factories were destroyed out of 524 in the city and 4,118 smaller factories out of 9,068 were destroyed.

Other losses included damage to or destruction of 580 industrial concerns and armaments works, 299 of which were important enough to be listed by name. Local transport systems were completely disrupted and did not return to normal for some time. Dwellings destroyed amounted to 214,350 out of 414,500. Hamburg was hit by air raids another 69 times before the end of World War II. In total, the RAF dropped 22,580 long tons of bombs on Hamburg.

===Military consequences===
The huge amount of damage to Hamburg precipitated a number of large changes to German air defence systems. Priority was given to fighter production. Research was intensified for more effective radar technology. Both aircraft and guns were diverted away from the front line to defend Germany. By August of 1943, 45 per cent of all German fighters were now located on the home front, with additional units in northern France. At the same time, heavy anti-aircraft guns in Germany were increased by over 25 per cent.

The reallocation of much of the industrial war production of Germany to home defence was an unintended consequence of Operation Gomorrah. The fighting fronts suffered due to a lack of air support as resource was devoted to fighter aircraft back in the Reich. Anti-aircraft units in Germany made greatly increased demands for personnel and, later in the war, used 25 per cent of all ammunition. It can therefore be argued that the military results of the overall bombing campaign was greater than anything arising from economic or morale effects.

=== Contemporary press reports ===
There was press coverage of the Hamburg raids as they were taking place, with for instance both &quot;The Times&quot; of London and &quot;The New York Times&quot; running stories on 26 July 1943, after the raids had commenced but a day before the firestorm raid took place, that emphasized the large size and coordinated British-American nature of the bombing campaign against the city.
The destruction of Hamburg became a major news story at the time and caused a great impression as to the extent of the damage and loss of life. By 3 August 1943, just as the raids were concluding, military expert George Fielding Eliot was analyzing the subject at length in his syndicated column published in US newspapers. Newspaper editorials and cartoons also referred to the complete destruction of Hamburg. A report from the Newspaper Enterprise Association&#x27;s London correspondent on 9 August speculated on how quickly Berlin could &quot;be eliminated&quot; in the same fashion. At the same time in Germany itself, the Hamburg raids were seen as a far worse development than major German military reverses then taking place on the Eastern Front and in Sicily and Italy.

Initial eyewitness accounts by foreign nationals who had been in Hamburg did not attempt to give numerical figures for the destruction, instead describing it as beyond belief. As one 9 August 1943 United Press story about a Swiss merchant&#x27;s account related, it was a &quot;hell released&quot; by a &quot;devil&#x27;s concert&quot; that amounted to &quot;Hamburg&#x27;s ceaseless, inescapable destruction on a scale that defies the imagination.&quot; Even the German press, which had previously downplayed or not discussed bombings of German cities, here emphasized the effects on Hamburg and the numbers of refugees coming from there. Later in August, &quot;New York Times&quot; foreign correspondent C. L. Sulzberger relayed a German belief that there had been 200,000 deaths, which he viewed as credible. By November 1943, a Swiss dispatch to Swedish newspapers gave a figure of 152,000 killed in the Hamburg bombing, but without supplying an explanation for the source of the number.

Just a few months after the European war&#x27;s conclusion, newspaper accounts described the findings of the United States Strategic Bombing Survey (USSBS), publicly released on 30 October 1945, which gave the German estimates of 60,000–100,000 deaths in the Hamburg bombings. And even higher numbers sometimes were still used. During the 1949–50 debate within the U.S. government about whether to proceed with development of the hydrogen bomb, arguments based on morality were made against developing a weapon whose main utility seemed to be killing massive numbers of civilians with one detonation. Objecting to this line of reasoning, Senator Brien McMahon, chairman of the United States Congressional Joint Committee on Atomic Energy, wrote a letter to President Harry S. Truman in which he asked, &quot;Where is the valid ethical distinction between the several Hamburg raids that produced 135,000 fatalities,&quot; the March 1945 firebombing of Tokyo, the atomic bombing of Hiroshima, and the proposed thermonuclear weapon. McMahon concluded that &quot;There is no moral dividing line that I can see&quot; between any of these.

==Aftermath==

===Cityscape===
The totally-destroyed quarter of Hammerbrook, in which mostly port workers lived, was rebuilt not as a housing area but as a commercial area. The adjoining quarter of Rothenburgsort shared the same fate since only a small area of housing was rebuilt. The underground line that connected both areas with the central station was not rebuilt, either.

In the destroyed residential areas, many houses were rebuilt across the street and so no longer form connected blocks. The hills of the Öjendorfer Park are formed by the debris of destroyed houses.

In January 1946, Major Cortez F. Enloe, a surgeon in the USAAF who worked on the USSBS, said that the fire effects of the atomic bomb dropped on Nagasaki &quot;were not nearly as bad as the effects of the R.A.F. raids on Hamburg on July 27th 1943&quot;. He estimated that more than 40,000 people died in Hamburg.

===Memorials===
Several memorials in Hamburg are reminders of the air raids of World War II:
* The ruins of the Nikolaikirche (St Nicholas Church), which was largely destroyed during the bombing, have been made into a memorial against war. The spire of the church survived the attacks.
* Memorial at the Hamburger Strasse for those who died in a shelter under the Karstadt department store at the corner of Desenißstrasse and Hamburger Strasse. The department store was hit by a bomb on the night of 29 July. The people in the air raid shelter below were killed by the heat and carbon monoxide poisoning.
* The victims of the air raids were buried on the Ohlsdorf Cemetery in mass graves. The memorial &quot;Passage over the Styx&quot; by Gerhard Marcks is in the centre and shows how Charon ferries a young couple, a mother with her child, a man and a person who is despairing over the river Styx.
* Many houses rebuilt after World War II have a memorial plaque with the inscription &quot;Destroyed 1943 – 19** Rebuilt,&quot; as a reminder of their destruction during the air raids of July 1943.
==Timeline==
==Notes==
==References==
===Sources===
* 
*
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==Further reading==
* 
* Hansen, Randall (2009), &quot;Fire and Fury: The Allied Bombing of Germany&quot;. New York: New American Library. 
* Middlebrook, Martin. &quot;The Battle of Hamburg: allied bomber forces against a German city in 1943&quot; (1981) online
* 

===Primary sources===
* Interrogation of Captured Prisoners, United States Strategic Bombing Survey, Summary Report, (European War), 30 September 1945
* (Spaight was Principal Assistant Secretary of the UK Air Ministry)
* Memories of a 24-year-old woman (in German)
* Memories of a 12 year-old girl

==External links==
*
* An eyewitness account
* Remnants from world war II in Hamburg</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="4" end="10" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q316868" start="11" end="49" title="Bombing of Hamburg in World War II" label="bombing of Hamburg during World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="154" end="161" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q190928" start="169" end="177" title="shipyard" label="shipyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q452020" start="180" end="190" title="U-boat pen" label="U-boat pen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909622" start="222" end="236" title="Oil campaign of World War II" label="oil refineries"/>
<link wikidata="Q715695" start="307" end="344" title="strategic bombing during World War II" label="strategic bombing during World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q316868" start="403" end="421" title="Bombing of Hamburg in World War II" label="Operation Gomorrah"/>
<link wikidata="Q918145" start="450" end="459" title="firestorm" label="firestorm"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="475" end="490" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="495" end="524" title="United States Army Air Forces" label="United States Army Air Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900329" start="802" end="811" title="the Blitz" label="the Blitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q640438" start="1595" end="1607" title="Area bombing directive" label="area bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q442038" start="1609" end="1620" title="Pathfinder (RAF)" label="Pathfinders"/>
<link wikidata="Q521916" start="1626" end="1635" title="H2S radar" label="H2S radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115049" start="1713" end="1718" title="Chaff (radar countermeasure)" label="chaff"/>
<link wikidata="Q180141" start="2109" end="2127" title="Sodom and Gomorrah" label="Sodom and Gomorrah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="2165" end="2170" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073326" start="2199" end="2217" title="fire and brimstone" label="brimstone and fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q9184" start="2280" end="2287" title="Book of Genesis" label="Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5118241" start="2829" end="2840" title="Churchill war ministry" label="War Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q222099" start="2863" end="2874" title="Butt Report" label="Butt Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q154605" start="3256" end="3265" title="total war" label="total war"/>
<link wikidata="Q4788547" start="3716" end="3728" title="area bombing" label="area bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900329" start="3851" end="3856" title="the Blitz" label="Blitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q372052" start="4267" end="4299" title="Arthur Harris" label="Arthur &amp;quot;Bomber&amp;quot; Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235891" start="4324" end="4342" title="RAF Bomber Command" label="RAF Bomber Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q270921" start="4390" end="4408" title="Eighth Air Force" label="8th Bomber Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="4508" end="4517" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="4648" end="4665" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="5235" end="5241" title="Stalin" label="Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q168983" start="6498" end="6511" title="conflagration" label="conflagration"/>
<link wikidata="Q660" start="7016" end="7025" title="magnesium" label="magnesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q337192" start="7032" end="7040" title="thermite" label="thermite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3037850" start="7700" end="7728" title="Ministry of Economic Warfare" label="Ministry of Economic Warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q26215037" start="8191" end="8216" title="history of aerial warfare" label="history of aerial warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q151993" start="8285" end="8289" title="Ruhr" label="Ruhr"/>
<link wikidata="Q329506" start="8337" end="8363" title="Battle of the Ruhr" label="a five-month-long campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q25456" start="8434" end="8438" title="RCAF" label="RCAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q823635" start="8440" end="8444" title="RAAF" label="RAAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209859" start="8449" end="8455" title="Polish Air Forces in France and Great Britain" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="8475" end="8480" title="USAAF" label="USAAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115049" start="8695" end="8700" title="Chaff (countermeasure)" label="chaff"/>
<link wikidata="Q442038" start="8741" end="8757" title="Pathfinder Force" label="Pathfinder Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q521916" start="9201" end="9210" title="H2S radar" label="H2S radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7685897" start="9235" end="9251" title="target indicator" label="target indicator"/>
<link wikidata="Q12064264" start="9361" end="9376" title="No. 35 Squadron RAF" label="No. 35 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q5183916" start="9949" end="9958" title="creepback" label="creepback"/>
<link wikidata="Q256132" start="10187" end="10205" title="telephone exchange" label="telephone exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q218715" start="10394" end="10408" title="Blohm+Voss" label="Blohm and Voss"/>
<link wikidata="Q428661" start="10431" end="10437" title="U-boat" label="U-boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q104869902" start="10461" end="10467" title="German submarine U-1011" label="U-1011"/>
<link wikidata="Q361945" start="10515" end="10522" title="slipway" label="slipway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707" start="10774" end="10778" title="Kiel" label="Kiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q311849" start="10783" end="10793" title="Warnemünde" label="Warnemünde"/>
<link wikidata="Q218715" start="10834" end="10848" title="Blohm + Voss" label="Blohm and Voss"/>
<link wikidata="Q322338" start="10866" end="10874" title="Klöckner &amp;amp; Co SE" label="Klöckner"/>
<link wikidata="Q185000" start="11064" end="11091" title="Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress" label="Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066" start="12035" end="12040" title="Essen" label="Essen"/>
<link wikidata="Q221344" start="12057" end="12078" title="De Havilland Mosquito" label="De Havilland Mosquito"/>
<link wikidata="Q7042936" start="12083" end="12103" title="No. 139 Squadron RAF" label="No. 139 Squadron RAF"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12104" end="12130" title="Pathfinder (RAF)#Light Night Striking Force" label="Light Night Striking Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q4940492" start="12338" end="12356" title="Bombardment group" label="bombardment groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q163241" start="12480" end="12485" title="Continental AG" label="Conti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1715" start="12502" end="12509" title="Hanover" label="Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q5150698" start="12553" end="12563" title="combat box" label="combat box"/>
<link wikidata="Q700418" start="12818" end="12846" title="Howaldtswerke-Deutsche Werft" label="Howaldtswerke-Deutsche Werft"/>
<link wikidata="Q850244" start="13754" end="13772" title="Vickers Wellington" label="Vickers Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q875139" start="13779" end="13793" title="Short Stirling" label="Short Stirling"/>
<link wikidata="Q502034" start="13800" end="13820" title="Handley Page Halifax" label="Handley Page Halifax"/>
<link wikidata="Q203622" start="13831" end="13845" title="Avro Lancaster" label="Avro Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2386" start="13937" end="13947" title="Billwerder" label="Billwerder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564" start="13949" end="13958" title="Borgfelde" label="Borgfelde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569" start="13960" end="13964" title="Hamm, Hamburg" label="Hamm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570" start="13966" end="13977" title="Hammerbrook" label="Hammerbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147" start="13979" end="13989" title="Hohenfelde, Hamburg" label="Hohenfelde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1580" start="13994" end="14008" title="Rothenburgsort" label="Rothenburgsort"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414936" start="14127" end="14143" title="blockbuster bomb" label="blockbuster bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q918145" start="14261" end="14270" title="firestorm" label="firestorm"/>
<link wikidata="Q189259" start="14429" end="14436" title="Asphalt concrete" label="Asphalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q214199" start="14549" end="14557" title="fuel oil" label="fuel oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q389959" start="14805" end="14821" title="air raid shelter" label="air raid shelter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025" start="14904" end="14919" title="carbon monoxide" label="carbon monoxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q29190" start="15439" end="15447" title="Supermarine Spitfire" label="Spitfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043621" start="15453" end="15473" title="No. 542 Squadron RAF" label="No. 542 Squadron RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q808342" start="15964" end="15971" title="Barmbek" label="Barmbek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633" start="15976" end="15984" title="Wandsbek" label="Wandsbek"/>
<link wikidata="Q4197" start="16961" end="16969" title="Cuxhaven" label="Cuxhaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706" start="16971" end="16982" title="Bremerhaven" label="Bremerhaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q24879" start="16984" end="16990" title="Bremen" label="Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3857" start="16992" end="17005" title="Wilhelmshaven" label="Wilhelmshaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q3038" start="17007" end="17017" title="Heligoland" label="Heligoland"/>
<link wikidata="Q9385964" start="17685" end="17694" title="Zahme Sau" label="Zahme Sau"/>
<link wikidata="Q283965" start="18036" end="18050" title="Kammhuber Line" label="Kammhuber Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="21417" end="21426" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="21453" end="21471" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q5539263" start="21915" end="21936" title="George Fielding Eliot" label="George Fielding Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q58432485" start="22132" end="22164" title="Newspaper Enterprise Association" label="Newspaper Enterprise Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q709484" start="22436" end="22456" title="Belgorod–Kharkov offensive operation" label="on the Eastern Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q217981" start="22461" end="22480" title="Allied invasion of Sicily" label="in Sicily and Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q493845" start="22680" end="22692" title="United Press" label="United Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q5201118" start="23189" end="23205" title="C. L. Sulzberger" label="C. L. Sulzberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q929571" start="23585" end="23623" title="United States Strategic Bombing Survey" label="United States Strategic Bombing Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q625107" start="23906" end="23919" title="hydrogen bomb" label="hydrogen bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1659644" start="24122" end="24135" title="Brien McMahon" label="Brien McMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889644" start="24153" end="24213" title="United States Congressional Joint Committee on Atomic Energy" label="United States Congressional Joint Committee on Atomic Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="24243" end="24258" title="Harry S. Truman" label="Harry S. Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q51881408" start="24401" end="24432" title="Bombing of Tokyo (10 March 1945)" label="March 1945 firebombing of Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q488" start="24438" end="24465" title="atomic bombing of Hiroshima" label="atomic bombing of Hiroshima"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537445" start="24704" end="24716" title="Stevedore" label="port workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6445" start="24897" end="24913" title="Hamburg U-Bahn" label="underground line"/>
<link wikidata="Q248992" start="25127" end="25142" title="Öjendorfer Park" label="Öjendorfer Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q488" start="25312" end="25343" title="atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki" label="atomic bomb dropped on Nagasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q425622" start="25616" end="25629" title="St. Nikolai (Hamburg)" label="Nikolaikirche"/>
<link wikidata="Q182910" start="25868" end="25876" title="Karstadt" label="Karstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q562211" start="26159" end="26176" title="Ohlsdorf Cemetery" label="Ohlsdorf Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26197" end="26239" title="Ohlsdorf Cemetery#Monument for the victims of the Hamburg firestorm" label="memorial &amp;quot;Passage over the Styx&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q61507" start="26243" end="26257" title="Gerhard Marcks" label="Gerhard Marcks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6612" start="26289" end="26295" title="Charon (mythology)" label="Charon"/>
<link wikidata="Q542758" start="26391" end="26401" title="river Styx" label="river Styx"/>
<link wikidata="Q15176490" start="26704" end="26719" title="Randall Hansen" label="Hansen, Randall"/>
<link wikidata="Q407586" start="27152" end="27164" title="Air Ministry" label="Air Ministry"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="335230" wikidata="Q57558" url="?curid=335230" title="Islam Karimov">
<text>Islam Abduganiyevich Karimov (; ; 30 January 1938 – 2 September 2016) was an Uzbek politician who served as the first president of Uzbekistan, from the country&#x27;s independence in 1991 until his death in 2016. He was the last First Secretary of the Communist Party of Uzbekistan from 1989 to 1991, when the party was reconstituted as the People&#x27;s Democratic Party of Uzbekistan (O‘zXDP); he led the O‘zXDP until 1996. He was the President of the Uzbek SSR from 24 March 1990 until he declared the independence of Uzbekistan on 1 September 1991.

He declared Uzbekistan as an independent nation on 31 August 1991. He subsequently won the presidential election on 29 December 1991, with 86% of the vote. Foreign observers and the opposition cited voting irregularities, alleging state-run propaganda and a falsified vote count. Karimov&#x27;s first presidential term was extended to 2000 by way of a referendum, and he was re-elected in 2000, 2007 and 2015, each time receiving over 90% of the vote. He died from a stroke on 2 September 2016, after being president of the country for 25 years.

He ruled a repressive authoritarian regime in Uzbekistan where political opponents were assassinated, human rights were repressed, and dissent was prohibited; however, capital punishment was repealed in 1998.

==Early life and career==

Karimov was born in Samarkand to Uzbek parents who were civil servants. According to official data his father was Abdug&#x27;ani Karimov, an Uzbek, and his mother was Sanobar Karimova. He was sent to an orphanage in 1941, brought back in 1942, and then returned to the orphanage in 1945. In 1955, he graduated from high school. In 1960, he graduated from the Central Asian Polytechnic Institute (now Tashkent State Technical University) with a degree in mechanical engineering. He started his career as an engineer, eventually joining the Ministry of Water Resources of the Uzbek Soviet Socialist Republic. In 1967, he earned a master&#x27;s degree in economics from Tashkent State University of Economics.

From 1966 to 1986, he worked his way up the ranks in the Uzbek State Planning Committee, from chief specialist, to department head, to Minister of Finance of the Uzbek SSR, chairman of the State Planning Committee and deputy chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Uzbek SSR. In 1986, Karimov assumed the post of first secretary of the Kashkadarya Regional Committee of the Communist Party of Uzbekistan Committee of the Communist Party of the Uzbek SSR. In 1989, he became first secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Uzbek SSR, after his predecessor Rafiq Nishonov failed to quell inter-ethnic clashes and instability in the Fergana Region. From 1990 to 1991, he served as a member of the Central Committee and Politburo. On 24 March 1990, he was elected the first President of the Republic by the Uzbek Supreme Soviet.

On 31 August 1991, 10 days after the attempted coup in Moscow, Karimov declared Uzbekistan to be an independent republic, the second of the Central Asian republics to do so (after neighboring Kyrgyzstan); 1 September was declared Uzbekistan&#x27;s Independence Day. The Uzbek Communist Party (UCP) changed its name to the People&#x27;s Democratic Party of Uzbekistan (O‘zXDP). In the December 1991 presidential election, 86 percent of the public cast their votes for Karimov and 12.3 percent for his rival Muhammad Salih, chairman of the Erk (Freedom) Party.

==Presidency==

Uzbekistan under the Karimov government was classified as a hard authoritarian state. The state&#x27;s primary legitimacy claims are anti-Islamism and ethnic identity. Karimov&#x27;s primary authoritarian measures that were implemented following the brief period of &quot;thaw&quot; and political tolerance include the thwarting of alternative political leaders from coalition building.

In 1992, he accomplished the hajj.

===Election controversies===
In 1995, a few months before Karimov&#x27;s term was due to expire, his term was extended until 2000 through a referendum. Results showed 99.6 percent of voters favoured extending Karimov&#x27;s term. The United States criticised the referendum for its &quot;lack of public debate,&quot; and noted several instances where one person cast the votes of an entire family. Following the referendum, in 1996, restrictions on opposition were further tightened through the Law on Political Parties. This law ensured the right to meetings, publications and elections of opposition parties, but only to those who had registered with the Ministry of Justice. This policy allowed for government blockage of unapproved parties. Political parties based on ethnic, religious, military or subversive ideas were prohibited.
At the time, Karimov publicly stated that he considered the referendum to be a re-election to a second term, which under the Constitution would have required him to leave office in 2000. However, the legislature passed a resolution opposing the decision, leading Karimov to announce he would run for reelection in 2000. In the election held at 9 January, he was reelected with 91.9% of the vote. The United States said that this election &quot;was neither free nor fair and offered Uzbekistan&#x27;s voters no true choice&quot;. The sole opposition candidate, Abdulhafiz Jalalov, implicitly admitted that he entered the race only to make it seem democratic and publicly stated that he voted for Karimov. According to dissident writer Alisher Ilkhamov from the Open Society Foundations, 99.6% had elected to keep Karimov in office after his term had expired, but ballots had been created such that it was much easier for voters to cast a &quot;yes&quot; vote than a &quot;no&quot; vote. Unmarked ballots, as well as ballots of those who did not vote, were automatically counted as &quot;yes&quot; votes, while a full black mark, under the supervision of authorities, was necessary to count as a &quot;no&quot; vote. 

===Administrative policies===

Karimov took fewer foreign visits, especially to the West, in comparison to his Kazakh counterpart. There were few foreign embassies in Tashkent as of 2016, with only 44 in all: 29 from countries not part of the former Soviet Union and seven from the West.

Under the Karimov government, a heavy regulation policy of NGOs led to the creation of paradoxically named GONGOs, or Government-Organised Non-Governmental Organisations. Trade unions became &quot;an instrument of management rather than a means of interest group-based collective bargaining&quot;. The Karimov government required universities to serve a strictly pedagogical purpose and not as a branch of civil society; they had to provide students with skills for the workplace without an emphasis on the skill of critique of public issues.

===Policies towards Islam===
Karimov had originally cultivated Islamic symbols after independence in order to coopt religious opposition. In May 1999, as a response to the threat of Islamic radicalism, the Oliy Majlis revised the &#x27;Law on Freedom of Conscience and Religious Organizations&#x27; to impose new restrictions on religious groups. The construction of mosques, for example, required permission and specific documentation. An assassination attempt on Karimov in 1999 elicited even more repression of Islamic groups. After the September 11 attacks in 2001, Uzbekistan was considered a strategic ally in the United States&#x27; &quot;War on Terror&quot; campaign because of a mutual opposition to the Taliban. Uzbekistan hosted an 800-strong U.S. troop presence at the Karshi-Khanabad base, also known as &quot;K2&quot;, which supported U.S.-led efforts in the 2001 invasion of Afghanistan. The move was criticized by Human Rights Watch which said the U.S. government subordinated the promotion of human rights to assistance in the War in Afghanistan. U.S.-Uzbek relations deteriorated in May 2005 when Karimov&#x27;s government strongly encouraged the abandonment of the U.S. base in the face of U.S. government criticism of the government killings of protestors in Andijan. In July 2005 U.S. military forces left Karshi-Khanabad.
Karimov mobilized against the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan and Hizb ut-Tahrir, two Islamist organizations which have been designated as terrorist by his government. The Uzbek government sentenced Tohir Yoʻldosh and Juma Namangani, leaders of the IMU, to death &quot;in absentia&quot;. Namangani died in Afghanistan in 2001, and Tohir Yoʻldosh was killed in an air strike on 27 August 2009. From 1991 to 2004, the government imprisoned over 7,000 Uzbeks for &quot;Islamist extremism&quot;, and silenced Imams like Muhammad Rajab, who advocated for more open democracy in the early 1990s. These fears of extremism arose out of discourse among the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan (IMU) of a &quot;Jihad against the Karimov regime&quot;. The government of Uzbekistan retains fears of &quot;large-scale all-encompassing anti-state conspiracies&quot; and &quot;echoes of Basmachi&quot; Among Karimov&#x27;s anti-Islamist policies was the purge of Muslim leaders. Karimov led a crackdown on Adolat, a league of Muslim activists. Explicit fears of threats of Islamic extremism also led to a crackdown of displays of Islamic practice in public. The term &quot;Wahhabis&quot; became the umbrella term to refer to all strains of &quot;extremist&quot; Islam; it did not necessarily refer to the Islamic sect that originated in Saudi Arabia. Ordinary practicing Muslims have been targeted and jailed without trial, and frequent use of torture and occasional &quot;disappearances&quot; have been reported. In 2005 Karimov banned the Muslim call to prayer from being broadcast in the country; the ban was lifted in November 2017 by his successor, Shavkat Mirziyoyev.

===Re-elections===
Karimov sought another term in the December 2007 presidential election, despite arguments that he was ineligible because of the two-term limit on the presidency. On 6 November 2007, Karimov accepted the nomination of the Uzbekistan Liberal Democratic Party to run for a third term. On 19 November, the Central Election Commission announced the approval of Karimov&#x27;s candidacy, a decision that Karimov&#x27;s opponents condemned as illegal.

Following the election on 23 December 2007, preliminary official results showed Karimov winning with 88.1% of the vote, on a turnout rate that was placed at 90.6%. Observers from groups allied to the Karimov administration such as the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation and the Commonwealth of Independent States gave the election a positive assessment. However, observers from the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe criticized the election as lacking a &quot;genuine choice&quot;, while others deemed the election, a &quot;political charade&quot;, given that all three of Karimov&#x27;s rivals began their campaign speeches by singing Karimov&#x27;s praises.

Karimov was reelected for a new term in the 2015 presidential election. He won 90.39% of votes from a voter turnout of 91.08%. This was his third term under Uzbekistan&#x27;s current constitution. The election was criticized by the Western media and observers as being rigged, while the Commonwealth of Independent States and the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation deemed the election open and democratic.

=== Foreign policy ===

His isolationism defined foreign policy. Karimov was courted by the big powers for geopolitical leverage and Uzbekistan&#x27;s gas supplies, but he kept all at arms&#x27; length, suspicious of Russia&#x27;s post-colonial aims and the US-led &quot;democratization&quot; agenda. In 1999, he criticised the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) for paying too much attention to the protection of Human rights in Uzbekistan, rather than concentrating on the security issues facing Central Asia and the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS). &quot;As long as war continues in Afghanistan, the threat to peace, security and democratic reforms in the neighbouring states of Central Asia will remain, and the source of international terrorism and its expansion well beyond the region&#x27;s boundaries will be preserved.&quot;

== Criticism ==

===Human rights and press freedom===

Western states repeatedly criticised the Karimov administration&#x27;s record on human rights and press freedom. In particular, Craig Murray, the British Ambassador from 2002 to 2004, described widespread torture, kidnapping, murder, rape by the police, financial corruption, religious persecution, censorship and other human rights abuses. This included the case of Karimov&#x27;s security forces executing prisoners Muzafar Avazov and Khuzniddin Alimov by boiling them alive in 2002. Murray became noted within the British government for memos disagreeing with official UK and US policy, which was at the time to back up Karimov as part of the global war on terror. Uzbekistan was used for extraordinary rendition and for the air base in Karshi-Khanabad. Murray wrote a memoir about his experiences; &quot;Murder in Samarkand&quot;, retitled &quot;Dirty Diplomacy&quot; in the United States.

The United Nations found torture &quot;institutionalized, systematic, and rampant&quot; in Uzbekistan&#x27;s judicial system. For several years, &quot;Parade&quot; magazine selected Karimov as one of the world&#x27;s worst dictators, citing his tactics of torture, media censorship and fake elections.

Karimov&#x27;s Party apparatus gained effective control over the media during the immediate independence period. Because of a poor human rights and democratization record, the Karimov administration worked to improve its image by allowing broadcasts from Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. A tarnished record had harmed the efforts to gain greater access to developmental aid and foreign investment.

According to the Uzbek Constitution freedom of expression in the media is nominally guaranteed; Article 67 explicitly states, &quot;Censorship is not permitted.&quot; However, under the Karimov government, all media publications had to be &quot;held accountable for the reliability&quot; of the information released. This &quot;accountability&quot; actually introduces an opportunity for government censorship, as the definition of &quot;accountability&quot; was left to the Karimov and now is left to the successive Presidential administration&#x27;s discretion. Article 29 states that all freedom of media expression is to be allowed with the exceptions of releasing state secrets and statements against the Constitution. The printed media of Uzbekistan has a high number of publications, but is dominated by three: &quot;Khalq Sozi&quot;, its Russian edition &quot;Narodnoye Slovo&quot;, and another Russian-language publication, &quot;Pravda Vostoka&quot;. The state owns almost all media, and the State Control Inspecorate, located in Tashkent, secures tight editorial control. Topics deemed &quot;sensitive&quot; are not considered for publishing. A ban is in place that prevents publications that give space to &quot;unregistered opinions&quot;. Arrests of journalists have been documented in Tashkent and Samarkand.

As a propaganda tool, the state strictly controls the tone and subject material of all published works. State censors give preference to works that provide a positive, uplifting ideology to its readers. Criticism that passes the censors is limited to low and mid-level officers. Although the Karimov regime during the 1990s assumed a greater tolerance for foreign media, the state has heavily limited foreign publications during the past decade. There has been a considerable reduction of Russian-sponsored broadcasting, and Western media has diminished in publication as well.

Banned publications under the Karimov administration included &quot;Mustaqil Haftalik&quot; and &quot;Erk&quot;, the respective publications of the Birilik and Erk opposition parties. The Karimov government charged each publication on the grounds of being &quot;disloyal to the current regime&quot;. In December 1995, Karimov was quoted in describing local journalists as &quot;toothless&quot;. Karimov had essentially called for more criticism in printed material, but only &quot;approved&quot; criticism.

In May 2002, the Karimov administration lifted the pre-publication censorship, and fined the chief censor, Ervin Kamilov. The State Inspectorate for the Protection of State Secrets was disbanded. Two days later, the administration proceeded to reinstate further censorship measures. Among topics prohibited in Uzbekistan&#x27;s publications are official corruption, opposition political parties and Islamic organizations. Radio Liberty lost its broadcast rights. Uzbekistan has one state-run internet server, UZPAK, that blocks prohibited websites.

In November 2014, Uzbek students published a letter on the opposition party website, Dunyo Uzbeklari (World of Uzbeks) to protest the use of students as unpaid labour to pick the nation&#x27;s cotton harvest every year.

In 2015, Karimov came under widespread criticism when he was elected to a fourth term in office from the Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe.

===2005 Andijan unrest===

According to detailed accounts, on 13 May 2005, some 400 of the 500 protesters staging an anti-government demonstration were killed after being driven deliberately into a trap – authorities had blocked all the exits from Bobur Square with armoured personnel carriers, preventing people from dispersing home. Instead, they drove the crowd into a closed street, Chulpon Avenue, where snipers and police shot to kill. These scenes of deliberate killings prompted eyewitnesses to allege that troops not only shot to disperse the demonstration, but to summarily execute anyone who took part in it. Later, some tortured detainees recounted that police said they had received orders supposedly emanating from the president himself to shoot to kill.

According to Ikram Yakubov, a major in Uzbekistan&#x27;s secret service who defected to Britain in 2007, the government had &quot;propped up&quot; the Islamist organization Akramia, which the Uzbek government blamed for fomenting the incident that led to the protests. He believes that the attacks were a pretext to repress dissenters. According to Yakubov, President Karimov personally ordered government troops to fire on the protestors.

In response to the military sanctions imposed by the US and Europe, Karimov expelled US forces from the Karshi-Khanabad Military Base.

==Personal life==
Karimov married his first wife, Natalya Petrovna Kuchmi, in 1964 and they had a son together, Petr, before divorcing.

Karimov&#x27;s wife, Tatyana Akbarovna Karimova, whom he married in 1967, is of Tatar origin. She is an economist. They had two daughters and five grandchildren.

His elder daughter Gulnara Karimova is an Uzbekistani diplomat, professor and businessperson. She is the founder and chairperson of The Forum of Culture and Arts of Uzbekistan Foundations Board of Trustees and a number of NGOs focused on cultural and social aspects of life in Uzbekistan. However, his first daughter is seen as less than altruistic and allegations that her &quot;organizations&quot; are mere front organizations for her vast business holdings and image propping propaganda are well documented.

It has been reported that since February 2014, Gulnara has been under house arrest. She has been under investigation on charges of corruption, but has said that the &quot;charges against her are politically motivated&quot;.

Karimov&#x27;s second daughter, Lola Karimova-Tillyaeva, is known in Uzbekistan for her role in promoting education and sports, as well as championing the rights of children. She is the founder of major charity organizations in Uzbekistan: &quot;You are not alone&quot;, Republican Social Children&#x27;s Fund for helping orphans, and Republican Center for Social Adaptation of Children, mainly focusing on disabled children and those from vulnerable groups.

Karimov and his second wife Tatyana Akbarovna Karimova share five grandchildren: (Islam Karimova Jr., Iman Karimova, Mariam Tillyaeva, Umar Tillyaev, Safiya Tillyaeva).

==Illness and death==

Karimov&#x27;s health problems were a public conversation, but until 2016, Karimov&#x27;s health was never discussed by government officials and any information was closely guarded. There were rumors in March 2013 that he had suffered a heart attack, which were denied.

At approximately 9 a.m. on 27 August 2016, an unconscious Karimov was taken to the Central Clinical Hospital, according to the official medical report by the government of Uzbekistan. He underwent a CT scan that revealed he had suffered a &quot;massive subarachnoid hemorrhage&quot; (stroke). He went into cardiac arrest but cardiac activity was restored after 20 minutes of resuscitation attempts. He was in an &quot;atonic coma with inhibition of the functions of the brain stem&quot; and put on a ventilator. His daughter Lola Karimova-Tillyaeva reported that he was in stable condition at an intensive care ward.

According to the official medical report, numerous experts were consulted on Karimov&#x27;s condition on 27 and 28 August, including Gilles Dreyfus, medical director of the Cardiothoracic Center of Monaco; Juha Hernesniemi, professor emeritus of neurosurgery at the University of Helsinki; Amir Samii, medical director of the International Neuroscience Institute in Hannover; Hugo Katus of University Hospital Heidelberg and Leo Bokeria, the head of the Department of Cardiovascular Surgery at Moscow State Medical University.

On 29 August 2016, there were unconfirmed reports from the Ferghana News Agency, which represents the opposition, that he had died that day at 15:30 UZT. On 31 August, Karimova-Tillyaeva cited possible &quot;recovery&quot;, thus implying that her father was still alive. On 1 September, the 25th anniversary of Uzbekistan&#x27;s independence, Karimov&#x27;s speech was read on TV by a presenter. Karimova-Tillyaeva stated that public support was helping him recover and pleaded with the public not to speculate on his condition.

On the morning of 2 September, it was announced that Karimov was in a &quot;critical condition&quot; and his condition has deteriorated sharply. A few hours later Reuters reported the death of Karimov citing three diplomatic sources. Around 16:00 UZT the Prime Minister of Turkey Binali Yıldırım expressed his condolences for the death of Karimov in a televised meeting becoming the first official to confirm the death. According to the government report, Karimov was in stable neurological condition in a coma, but progressively began to experience multiple organ failure. He suffered another cardiac arrest at 20:15 UZT on 2 September and attempts to resuscitate him failed, and he was pronounced dead at 20:55 UZT (15:55 UTC).

===Funeral and tributes===
After the death of Karimov, the prime minister, Shavkat Mirziyoyev, was appointed the head of the committee organizing the funeral of the president. A large number of world leaders, including the Presidents of the United States, China, Russia, and India immediately expressed their condolences. Uzbekistan declared three days of mourning and Uzbek embassies opened the book of condolences. Azeri President Ilham Aliyev, Latvian President Raimonds Vejonis, Chinese Prime Minister Li Keqiang, and Pakistani Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif visited Uzbek embassies to sign the book.

On 3 September, thousands of people lined the streets of Tashkent for Karimov&#x27;s funeral procession, throwing flowers at the cortege, as he was taken to the airport to be flown to his native Samarkand, where he was buried. His funeral service was held at Registan Square, a UNESCO World Heritage site. The ceremony was attended by delegations of 17 foreign countries, including Emomali Rahmon, president of Tajikistan, Gurbanguly Berdimuhamedow, president of Turkmenistan and Ashraf Ghani, president of Afghanistan, as well as Russian Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev, Kazakh Prime Minister Karim Massimov, Georgian Prime Minister Giorgi Kvirikashvili, Deputy Prime Minister of Turkey Yıldırım Tuğrul Türkeş, and Iranian Foreign Minister Mohammad Javad Zarif, among other various level state representatives from the People&#x27;s Republic of China, India, South Korea, Ukraine, Azerbaijan, Armenia, Japan, and the United Arab Emirates. The State Council of Cuba declared 5 September as an official day of mourning due to the death of the President of Uzbekistan.

On 6 September, Russian President Vladimir Putin arrived in Samarkand to pay tribute to Karimov. Kneeling in front of the grave of the first President of Uzbekistan, the Russian leader laid a bouquet of red roses. In addition, Putin met with the relatives of the deceased and expressed condolences to them. On 12 September, Kazakh President Nursultan Nazarbayev also visited Karimov&#x27;s burial site. He laid a bouquet of red roses, prayed beside his grave, and met Karimov&#x27;s wife. On 6 October, Belarusian President Alexander Lukashenko paid a working visit to Uzbekistan. He laid roses to Karimov&#x27;s grave, met his wife, and held talks with Interim President Mirziyoyev. Turkish Foreign Minister Mevlüt Çavuşoğlu laid a wreath at Karimov&#x27;s grave on 20 October. Other high-ranking officials of Azerbaijan, India, the United Arab Emirates, as well as Under Secretary for Political Affairs of the United States Thomas Shannon also paid tribute to Karimov. On 1 November, a square in the Yakimanka district in the center of Moscow was named after Islam Karimov. Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi paid tribute to Karimov in Samarkand on 12 November. President of Turkey Recep Tayyip Erdogan visited the grave of Islam Karimov on 18 November, as a part of his official visit to Uzbekistan. Kyrgyz President Almazbek Atambayev paid tribute to Karimov on 24 December, during his working visit to Uzbekistan. On 7 March 2017, Presidents of Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan Shavkat Mirziyoyev and Gurbanguly Berdimuhamedow opened the first monument of Islam Karimov in the Turkmen city of Türkmenabat. On 10 June, during his official visit to Uzbekistan, UN Secretary General António Guterres visited Karimov&#x27;s grave.

==Awards==

===USSR===
===Domestic===
===Foreign===
==See also==

*Politics of Uzbekistan
*Jamshid Karimov
*Shavkat Mirziyoyev, 2nd President of Uzbekistan after I. Karimov
==References==
==Notes==
==Bibliography==
* 

==External links==
*Official biography
*Profile on BBC News
*Obituary: Uzbekistan President Islam Karimov, BBC Online</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q57558" start="0" end="28" title="Islam Karimov" label="Islam Abduganiyevich Karimov"/>
<link wikidata="Q265" start="131" end="141" title="Uzbekistan" label="Uzbekistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3218145" start="252" end="281" title="Communist Party of Uzbekistan" label="Communist Party of Uzbekistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029663" start="341" end="385" title="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Party of Uzbekistan" label="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Party of Uzbekistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945275" start="645" end="686" title="1991 Uzbek presidential election" label="presidential election on 29 December 1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945245" start="904" end="916" title="1995 Uzbek presidential term referendum" label="a referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945302" start="943" end="947" title="2000 Uzbek presidential election" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q7904742" start="949" end="953" title="2007 Uzbek presidential election" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q17049086" start="958" end="962" title="2015 Uzbek presidential election" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q6229" start="1123" end="1136" title="Authoritarianism" label="authoritarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5753" start="1358" end="1367" title="Samarkand" label="Samarkand"/>
<link wikidata="Q483047" start="1479" end="1484" title="Uzbeks" label="Uzbek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3162985" start="1738" end="1773" title="Tashkent State Technical University" label="Tashkent State Technical University"/>
<link wikidata="Q484578" start="1912" end="1943" title="Uzbek Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Uzbek Soviet Socialist Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428356" start="2005" end="2043" title="Tashkent State University of Economics" label="Tashkent State University of Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q487577" start="2386" end="2453" title="Qashqadaryo Region" label="Kashkadarya Regional Committee of the Communist Party of Uzbekistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q668980" start="2628" end="2642" title="Rafiq Nishonov" label="Rafiq Nishonov"/>
<link wikidata="Q487089" start="2703" end="2717" title="Fergana Region" label="Fergana Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971373" start="2767" end="2784" title="Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="Central Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q842008" start="2789" end="2798" title="Politburo of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="Politburo"/>
<link wikidata="Q221382" start="2936" end="2960" title="1991 Soviet coup d&amp;#x27;état attempt" label="attempted coup in Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3218145" start="3169" end="3190" title="Communist Party of Uzbekistan" label="Uzbek Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029663" start="3221" end="3265" title="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Party of Uzbekistan" label="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Party of Uzbekistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945275" start="3283" end="3318" title="1991 Uzbek presidential election" label="December 1991 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q751112" start="3405" end="3419" title="Muhammad Salih" label="Muhammad Salih"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981737" start="3437" end="3456" title="Erk Democratic Party" label="Erk (Freedom) Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q234915" start="3892" end="3896" title="hajj" label="hajj"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945245" start="4039" end="4049" title="1995 Uzbek presidential term referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945302" start="5059" end="5089" title="2000 Uzbek presidential election" label="the election held at 9 January"/>
<link wikidata="Q786194" start="5496" end="5520" title="Open Society Foundations" label="Open Society Foundations"/>
<link wikidata="Q79913" start="6301" end="6305" title="Non-governmental organization" label="NGOs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583318" start="6992" end="7003" title="Oliy Majlis" label="Oliy Majlis"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="7326" end="7346" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q185729" start="7432" end="7445" title="War on Terror" label="War on Terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q42418" start="7499" end="7506" title="Taliban" label="Taliban"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444594" start="7567" end="7587" title="Karshi-Khanabad base" label="Karshi-Khanabad base"/>
<link wikidata="Q182865" start="7659" end="7687" title="War in Afghanistan (2001–present)" label="2001 invasion of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q764967" start="8028" end="8072" title="Andijan massacre" label="government killings of protestors in Andijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q973179" start="8160" end="8190" title="Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan" label="Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q493302" start="8195" end="8209" title="Hizb ut-Tahrir" label="Hizb ut-Tahrir"/>
<link wikidata="Q189746" start="8215" end="8223" title="Islamism" label="Islamist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348035" start="8328" end="8342" title="Tohir Yoʻldosh" label="Tohir Yoʻldosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993323" start="8347" end="8361" title="Juma Namangani" label="Juma Namangani"/>
<link wikidata="Q336289" start="8398" end="8409" title="trial in absentia" label="in absentia"/>
<link wikidata="Q255352" start="8996" end="9004" title="Basmachi" label="Basmachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q163140" start="9282" end="9290" title="Wahhabis" label="Wahhabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q165494" start="9650" end="9671" title="Adhan" label="Muslim call to prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q57808" start="9763" end="9781" title="Shavkat Mirziyoyev" label="Shavkat Mirziyoyev"/>
<link wikidata="Q7904742" start="9838" end="9873" title="2007 Uzbek presidential election" label="December 2007 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146334" start="10024" end="10059" title="Uzbekistan Liberal Democratic Party" label="Uzbekistan Liberal Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q485207" start="10484" end="10517" title="Shanghai Cooperation Organisation" label="Shanghai Cooperation Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7779" start="10526" end="10560" title="Commonwealth of Independent States" label="Commonwealth of Independent States"/>
<link wikidata="Q81299" start="10630" end="10682" title="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe" label="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q17049086" start="10971" end="10997" title="2015 Uzbek presidential election" label="2015 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q81299" start="11661" end="11713" title="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe" label="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4350438" start="11772" end="11798" title="Human rights in Uzbekistan" label="Human rights in Uzbekistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="11856" end="11868" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7779" start="11877" end="11911" title="Commonwealth of Independent States" label="Commonwealth of Independent States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519107" start="11936" end="11949" title="War in Afghanistan (1978–present)" label="war continues"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="11953" end="11964" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283" start="12107" end="12116" title="terrorism" label="terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="12257" end="12271" title="Western states" label="Western states"/>
<link wikidata="Q22688" start="12355" end="12368" title="press freedom" label="press freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q726260" start="12385" end="12397" title="Craig Murray" label="Craig Murray"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12715" end="12733" title="Death by boiling#Modern times" label="boiling them alive"/>
<link wikidata="Q185729" start="12903" end="12923" title="global war on terror" label="global war on terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385398" start="12949" end="12972" title="extraordinary rendition" label="extraordinary rendition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444594" start="12997" end="13012" title="Karshi-Khanabad Air Base" label="Karshi-Khanabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q6937756" start="13065" end="13084" title="Murder in Samarkand" label="Murder in Samarkand"/>
<link wikidata="Q132781" start="13177" end="13184" title="torture" label="torture"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13243" end="13276" title="Judiciary of Uzbekistan" label="Uzbekistan&amp;#x27;s judicial system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189399" start="13297" end="13324" title="Parade (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Parade&amp;quot; magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q543" start="13417" end="13433" title="media censorship" label="media censorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q40231" start="13438" end="13452" title="Election" label="fake elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q485500" start="13710" end="13741" title="Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty" label="Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4231554" start="13871" end="13889" title="Constitution of Uzbekistan" label="Uzbek Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893745" start="15906" end="15913" title="Unity (Uzbekistan)" label="Birilik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981737" start="15918" end="15921" title="Erk Democratic Party" label="Erk"/>
<link wikidata="Q485500" start="16688" end="16701" title="Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty" label="Radio Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992941" start="17142" end="17193" title="Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights" label="Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q4407246" start="17522" end="17548" title="armoured personnel carrier" label="armoured personnel carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q16211115" start="18039" end="18052" title="Ikram Yakubov" label="Ikram Yakubov"/>
<link wikidata="Q78056626" start="18083" end="18097" title="State Security Service (Uzbekistan)" label="secret service"/>
<link wikidata="Q189746" start="18177" end="18185" title="Islamism" label="Islamist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811318" start="18199" end="18206" title="Akramia" label="Akramia"/>
<link wikidata="Q26772600" start="18761" end="18787" title="Tatyana Karimova" label="Tatyana Akbarovna Karimova"/>
<link wikidata="Q35565" start="18820" end="18825" title="Tatars" label="Tatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q541680" start="18922" end="18938" title="Gulnara Karimova" label="Gulnara Karimova"/>
<link wikidata="Q7734926" start="19035" end="19090" title="Forum of Culture and Arts of Uzbekistan Foundation" label="The Forum of Culture and Arts of Uzbekistan Foundations"/>
<link wikidata="Q58336" start="19672" end="19695" title="Lola Karimova-Tillyaeva" label="Lola Karimova-Tillyaeva"/>
<link wikidata="Q26772600" start="20128" end="20154" title="Tatyana Karimova" label="Tatyana Akbarovna Karimova"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20217" end="20233" title="Mariam Tillyaeva" label="Mariam Tillyaeva"/>
<link wikidata="Q58336" start="21089" end="21112" title="Lola Karimova-Tillyaeva" label="Lola Karimova-Tillyaeva"/>
<link wikidata="Q3106208" start="21315" end="21329" title="Gilles Dreyfus" label="Gilles Dreyfus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944919" start="21355" end="21386" title="Cardiothoracic Center of Monaco" label="Cardiothoracic Center of Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q13569941" start="21388" end="21404" title="Juha Hernesniemi" label="Juha Hernesniemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q28695" start="21448" end="21470" title="University of Helsinki" label="University of Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q324206" start="21572" end="21602" title="University Hospital Heidelberg" label="University Hospital Heidelberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1962613" start="21676" end="21707" title="I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University" label="Moscow State Medical University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5444138" start="21769" end="21789" title="Ferghana Information Agency" label="Ferghana News Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q21384906" start="22021" end="22051" title="Independence Day (Uzbekistan)" label="Uzbekistan&amp;#x27;s independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q130879" start="22403" end="22410" title="Reuters" label="Reuters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430415" start="22495" end="22519" title="Prime Minister of Turkey" label="Prime Minister of Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q863496" start="22520" end="22535" title="Binali Yıldırım" label="Binali Yıldırım"/>
<link wikidata="Q57808" start="23046" end="23064" title="Shavkat Mirziyoyev" label="Shavkat Mirziyoyev"/>
<link wikidata="Q57371" start="23404" end="23416" title="Ilham Aliyev" label="Ilham Aliyev"/>
<link wikidata="Q2416022" start="23436" end="23452" title="Raimonds Vējonis" label="Raimonds Vejonis"/>
<link wikidata="Q18111" start="23477" end="23487" title="Li Keqiang" label="Li Keqiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q134068" start="23518" end="23530" title="Nawaz Sharif" label="Nawaz Sharif"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373583" start="23833" end="23848" title="Registan" label="Registan Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q57366" start="23956" end="23970" title="Emomali Rahmon" label="Emomali Rahmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q863" start="23985" end="23995" title="Tajikistan" label="Tajikistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q57530" start="23997" end="24022" title="Gurbanguly Berdimuhamedow" label="Gurbanguly Berdimuhamedow"/>
<link wikidata="Q874" start="24037" end="24049" title="Turkmenistan" label="Turkmenistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q172388" start="24054" end="24066" title="Ashraf Ghani" label="Ashraf Ghani"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="24081" end="24092" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q23530" start="24128" end="24143" title="Dmitry Medvedev" label="Dmitry Medvedev"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="24145" end="24151" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q209639" start="24167" end="24181" title="Karim Massimov" label="Karim Massimov"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="24183" end="24190" title="Georgia (country)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15277881" start="24207" end="24227" title="Giorgi Kvirikashvili" label="Giorgi Kvirikashvili"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261074" start="24229" end="24260" title="Deputy Prime Minister of Turkey" label="Deputy Prime Minister of Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602515" start="24261" end="24283" title="Yıldırım Tuğrul Türkeş" label="Yıldırım Tuğrul Türkeş"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="24289" end="24293" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q10296812" start="24314" end="24334" title="Mohammad Javad Zarif" label="Mohammad Javad Zarif"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="24393" end="24424" title="China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="24426" end="24431" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="24433" end="24444" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="24446" end="24453" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q227" start="24455" end="24465" title="Azerbaijan" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q399" start="24467" end="24474" title="Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="24476" end="24481" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q878" start="24491" end="24511" title="United Arab Emirates" label="United Arab Emirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="24534" end="24538" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="24657" end="24663" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q218295" start="24665" end="24674" title="President of Russia" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747" start="24675" end="24689" title="Vladimir Putin" label="Vladimir Putin"/>
<link wikidata="Q57394" start="24982" end="25002" title="Nursultan Nazarbayev" label="Nursultan Nazarbayev"/>
<link wikidata="Q2866" start="25165" end="25185" title="Alexander Lukashenko" label="Alexander Lukashenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q249206" start="25350" end="25366" title="Mevlüt Çavuşoğlu" label="Mevlüt Çavuşoğlu"/>
<link wikidata="Q227" start="25452" end="25462" title="Azerbaijan" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="25464" end="25469" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q878" start="25475" end="25495" title="United Arab Emirates" label="United Arab Emirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q7786914" start="25567" end="25581" title="Thomas A. Shannon Jr." label="Thomas Shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="25679" end="25685" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q701801" start="25742" end="25749" title="Wang Yi (politician)" label="Wang Yi"/>
<link wikidata="Q39259" start="25823" end="25843" title="Recep Tayyip Erdoğan" label="Recep Tayyip Erdogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q24692" start="25959" end="25977" title="Almazbek Atambayev" label="Almazbek Atambayev"/>
<link wikidata="Q57808" start="26117" end="26135" title="Shavkat Mirziyoyev" label="Shavkat Mirziyoyev"/>
<link wikidata="Q57530" start="26140" end="26165" title="Gurbanguly Berdimuhamedow" label="Gurbanguly Berdimuhamedow"/>
<link wikidata="Q487684" start="26232" end="26243" title="Türkmenabat" label="Türkmenabat"/>
<link wikidata="Q311440" start="26319" end="26335" title="António Guterres" label="António Guterres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153843" start="26434" end="26456" title="Politics of Uzbekistan" label="Politics of Uzbekistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6148233" start="26458" end="26473" title="Jamshid Karimov" label="Jamshid Karimov"/>
<link wikidata="Q57808" start="26475" end="26493" title="Shavkat Mirziyoyev" label="Shavkat Mirziyoyev"/>
<link wikidata="Q747860" start="26693" end="26703" title="BBC Online" label="BBC Online"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="335237" wikidata="Q6651505" url="?curid=335237" title="Little Red River (Arkansas)">
<text>The Little Red River is a river in White, Van Buren, Searcy, Stone and Cleburne counties of north-central Arkansas.

==History==
During the American Civil War, the Battle of Whitney&#x27;s Lane took place near Searcy on the banks of the Little Red River.

==Location==

The upper tributaries of the Little Red River are known as the South Fork, the Middle Fork, and the Devils Fork. Prior to the impoundment of Greers Ferry Lake the three tributaries converged just east of Sugarloaf Mountain.

The South Fork begins in the Ozark National Forest near Scotland in Van Buren County and flows into Greers Ferry Lake near Clinton.

The Middle Fork begins only a few miles from the South Fork near Tilly in Van Buren County but flows northward into Searcy County. In Searcy County the river turns east and flows into Stone County where it turns south and flows to meet Greers Ferry Lake in Cleburne County.

The Devils Fork begins in northeastern Cleburne County, and flows southwest to meet Greers Ferry Lake near Ida.

The three forks converge into the north section of Greers Ferry Lake, which is connected to the south section of the lake by The Narrows, the site of the former Little Red River. The Little Red River begins to flow again at the Greers Ferry Dam at Heber Springs.
:Mouth: Confluence with the White River in White County, Arkansas 
:Source: At the Greers Ferry Dam in Cleburne County 

==Discharge==
The Little Red River has an average discharge of 1,830 cubic feet per second at Dewey, Arkansas.

==Below the dam==
The single channel runs from Greers Ferry Dam to its mouth at the White River near Georgetown. The area around the mouth of the river is within the Henry Gray/Hurricane Lake Wildlife Management Area south of Augusta in White County.

The water level of the lower sections varies greatly because of releases of cold water from the dam at Greers Ferry during power generation. These water releases can be challenging for boaters. The lower section has a varied geography with areas of gravelly rapids, boulder-strewn areas, and slow, deep pools.

The stretch just below the Greers Ferry Dam on the river is well known for its excellent trout fishing. The US Fish and Wildlife Service maintains a trout hatchery just below the dam and releases large numbers of mature trout regularly. The Little Red River was the home of the world-record brown trout (40 pounds 4 ounces (18.3 kg)) from 1992 until 2009.

Because cold water flows from beneath the dam, many native warm-water fish are no longer plentiful. &quot;We had 40 miles of river that was basically worthless,&quot; said Tom Lowery of Judsonia, referring to the section of river downstream from Pangburn. &quot;It was pretty to look at, but there was no fishing.&quot; While trout thrive near the dam, the cold water drove out many native species. Largemouth bass, crappie, and bream populations may never return to normal.

However, recent attempts have been made to reintroduce sport fish, such as walleye and smallmouth bass, to the section of the Little Red River near Searcy. Tom Bly (District Fisheries Biologist for the Arkansas Game and Fish Commission) noted that the walleye and smallmouth bass were chosen for their coveted taste and renowned fighting abilities, respectively.

Tom Lowery and Bly also mentioned the lack of public access to the river between Pangburn and Searcy and that the recent influx of oil and gas companies to the area may influence this: 
“We know they are going to drill and they are going to need water, which is a renewable resource,” Bly said. “They want to work with us to make it environmentally and resource friendly. They may be able to help find areas for public access. They seem willing to work on that. It’s a win-win situation.&quot;

Carl Garner, in his job as manager of the Little Red River and Greers Ferry Lake, sought participation from the local citizenry to collect trash scattered about the waterways. However, he was without sufficient funding for a staffed cleanup. Eventually, his efforts resulted in the Carl Garner Federal Lands Cleanup Day promoted by Keep America Beautiful.

==See also==
*List of Arkansas rivers
*Little Red River (Texas)

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6651505" start="4" end="20" title="Little Red River (Arkansas)" label="Little Red River"/>
<link wikidata="Q61170" start="35" end="40" title="White County, Arkansas" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q61502" start="42" end="51" title="Van Buren County, Arkansas" label="Van Buren"/>
<link wikidata="Q61379" start="53" end="59" title="Searcy County, Arkansas" label="Searcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q61165" start="61" end="66" title="Stone County, Arkansas" label="Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q61039" start="71" end="79" title="Cleburne County, Arkansas" label="Cleburne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612" start="106" end="114" title="Arkansas" label="Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="140" end="158" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872732" start="164" end="193" title="Battle of Whitney&amp;#x27;s Lane" label="Battle of Whitney&amp;#x27;s Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q79709" start="210" end="216" title="Searcy, Arkansas" label="Searcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5605148" start="411" end="428" title="Greers Ferry Lake" label="Greers Ferry Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7635009" start="474" end="492" title="Sugarloaf_Mountain_(Cleburne_County,_Arkansas)" label="Sugarloaf Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q94443" start="524" end="545" title="Ozark National Forest" label="Ozark National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435616" start="551" end="559" title="Scotland, Arkansas" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q61502" start="563" end="579" title="Van Buren County, Arkansas" label="Van Buren County"/>
<link wikidata="Q80062" start="618" end="625" title="Clinton, Arkansas" label="Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7802890" start="693" end="698" title="Tilly, Arkansas" label="Tilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q61379" start="744" end="757" title="Searcy County, Arkansas" label="Searcy County"/>
<link wikidata="Q61165" start="812" end="824" title="Stone County, Arkansas" label="Stone County"/>
<link wikidata="Q61039" start="885" end="900" title="Cleburne County, Arkansas" label="Cleburne County"/>
<link wikidata="Q5986881" start="1010" end="1013" title="Ida, Arkansas" label="Ida"/>
<link wikidata="Q5605145" start="1244" end="1260" title="Greers Ferry Dam" label="Greers Ferry Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q80096" start="1264" end="1277" title="Heber Springs, Arkansas" label="Heber Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q723748" start="1287" end="1297" title="Confluence" label="Confluence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813795" start="1307" end="1318" title="White River (Arkansas)" label="White River"/>
<link wikidata="Q61170" start="1322" end="1344" title="White County, Arkansas" label="White County, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1494" end="1509" title="Dewey, Arkansas" label="Dewey, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813795" start="1596" end="1607" title="White River (Arkansas)" label="White River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661270" start="1613" end="1623" title="Georgetown, Arkansas" label="Georgetown"/>
<link wikidata="Q79483" start="1738" end="1745" title="Augusta, Arkansas" label="Augusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q61170" start="1749" end="1761" title="White County, Arkansas" label="White County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258881" start="2164" end="2169" title="trout" label="trout"/>
<link wikidata="Q674113" start="2183" end="2211" title="US Fish and Wildlife Service" label="US Fish and Wildlife Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q79287" start="2618" end="2626" title="Judsonia, Arkansas" label="Judsonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q80152" start="2678" end="2686" title="Pangburn, Arkansas" label="Pangburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q79709" start="3056" end="3062" title="Searcy, Arkansas" label="Searcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16089926" start="3767" end="3778" title="Carl Garner" label="Carl Garner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5605148" start="3830" end="3847" title="Greers Ferry Lake" label="Greers Ferry Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q16089926" start="4049" end="4086" title="Carl Garner Federal Lands Cleanup Day" label="Carl Garner Federal Lands Cleanup Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382935" start="4099" end="4121" title="Keep America Beautiful" label="Keep America Beautiful"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308654" start="4138" end="4161" title="List of Arkansas rivers" label="List of Arkansas rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q20858073" start="4163" end="4187" title="Little Red River (Texas)" label="Little Red River (Texas)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="335240" wikidata="Q700837" url="?curid=335240" title="List of universities in Austria">
<text>The system on higher education in Austria distinguishes between federal universities (Universitäten), private universities (Privatuniversitäten), and universities of applied science (Fachhochschulen). The three types are based on different laws. One of the main differences—but not the only one—is funding. Two institutions in Lower Austria have a special legal status. Since 2012, the &quot;Agentur für Qualitätssicherung und Akkreditierung Austria&quot; (AQ Austria) is responsible for the educational accreditation of universities. 

List of universities in Austria:

==By state==

===Burgenland===
Private university:
*European Peace University in Stadtschlaining
University of applied sciences:
*University of Applied Sciences Burgenland in Eisenstadt and Pinkafeld

===Carinthia===
Federal university:
*University of Klagenfurt
University of applied science:
* Carinthia University of Applied Sciences () in Spittal an der Drau, Klagenfurt, Villach, and Feldkirchen in Kärnten

===Lower Austria===
University for continuing education:
*University for Continuing Education Krems in Krems
Private universities:
*Benedict XVI Philosophical-Theological University, Heiligenkreuz
*Danube Private University in Krems
*New Design University in Sankt Pölten
* Karl Landsteiner University of Health Sciences in Krems
* Bertha von Suttner Private University in Sankt Pölten
Universities of applied science:
*IMC University of Applied Sciences Krems in Krems
*University of Applied Sciences in Wiener Neustadt
*St. Pölten University of Applied Sciences in Sankt Pölten
*Theresian Military Academy in Wiener Neustadt
Not a university, but an institution with PhD programmes:
*Institute of Science and Technology Austria in Klosterneuburg

===Salzburg===
Federal universities:
*University of Salzburg
*Mozarteum University Salzburg
Private universities:
*Paracelsus Medical University in Salzburg
*Alma Mater Europaea in Salzburg and campuses in other countries
*Private University Seeburg Castle in Seekirchen am Wallersee
University of applied sciences:
*Salzburg University of Applied Sciences in Puch bei Hallein and in Kuchl

===Styria===
Federal universities:
*University of Graz
*Graz University of Technology
*Medical University of Graz
*University of Leoben
*University of Music and Performing Arts Graz
Universities of applied science:
*FH Joanneum in Graz
*Campus 02 University of Applied Sciences in Graz
University college:
*University College of Teacher Education Styria

===Tyrol===
Federal universities:
*University of Innsbruck (&quot;Leopold-Franzens-Universität Innsbruck&quot;)
*Medical University of Innsbruck
Private university:
*UMIT Tirol - Private University for Health Sciences and Health Technology in Hall in Tirol
Universities of applied science:
*University of Applied Sciences in Kufstein
*MCI Management Center Innsbruck
*FH Gesundheit in Innsbruck

===Upper Austria===
Federal universities:
*Johannes Kepler University Linz
*University of Art and Design Linz
Private universities:
*Catholic Private University Linz
*Anton Bruckner Private University, Linz
University of Applied Sciences
*University of Applied Sciences Upper Austria in Hagenberg im Mühlkreis, Linz, Steyr and Wels

===Vienna===
Federal universities:
*University of Vienna
*TU Wien
*Medical University of Vienna
*Vienna University of Economics and Business (&quot;Vienna University of Economics and Business Administration&quot; prior to 2008)
*Academy of Fine Arts Vienna
*University of Applied Arts Vienna
*University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences, Vienna
*University of Music and Performing Arts Vienna
*University of Veterinary Medicine Vienna
Private universities:
*Jam Music Lab
*Music and Arts University of the City of Vienna
*Sigmund Freud Private University
*Modul University Vienna 
*Webster Vienna Private University
*Central European University
Universities of Applied Sciences:
*Fachhochschule des bfi Wien
*University of Applied Sciences Technikum Wien
*FH Campus Wien
*FHWien
*Lauder Business School
*Ferdinand Porsche Fern FH-Studiengänge

===Vorarlberg===
University of Applied Sciences:
*Vorarlberg University of Applied Sciences in Dornbirn

==See also==
* List of schools in Austria
* List of colleges and universities by country
* List of colleges and universities
* Open access in Austria

==External links==
*https://web.archive.org/web/20030801135019/http://www.univie.ac.at/links/uni_uniinoe.html</text><links>
<link wikidata="None" start="14" end="41" title="Education in Austria#Higher education" label="higher education in Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q700837" start="64" end="84" title="List of universities in Austria" label="federal universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q700837" start="102" end="122" title="List of universities in Austria" label="private universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q700837" start="150" end="181" title="List of universities in Austria" label="universities of applied science"/>
<link wikidata="Q419911" start="492" end="517" title="educational accreditation" label="educational accreditation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918" start="545" end="557" title="university" label="universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="561" end="568" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q43210" start="588" end="598" title="Burgenland" label="Burgenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q875466" start="623" end="648" title="European Peace University" label="European Peace University"/>
<link wikidata="Q256307" start="652" end="667" title="Stadtschlaining" label="Stadtschlaining"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="701" end="742" title="University of Applied Sciences Burgenland" label="University of Applied Sciences Burgenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q126321" start="746" end="756" title="Eisenstadt" label="Eisenstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q257428" start="761" end="770" title="Pinkafeld" label="Pinkafeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q37985" start="775" end="784" title="Carinthia (state)" label="Carinthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q690639" start="809" end="833" title="University of Klagenfurt" label="University of Klagenfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391200" start="867" end="907" title="Carinthia University of Applied Sciences" label="Carinthia University of Applied Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q487500" start="914" end="933" title="Spittal an der Drau" label="Spittal an der Drau"/>
<link wikidata="Q41753" start="935" end="945" title="Klagenfurt" label="Klagenfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q483522" start="947" end="954" title="Villach" label="Villach"/>
<link wikidata="Q507533" start="960" end="982" title="Feldkirchen in Kärnten" label="Feldkirchen in Kärnten"/>
<link wikidata="Q42497" start="987" end="1000" title="Lower Austria" label="Lower Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q508048" start="1042" end="1083" title="University for Continuing Education Krems" label="University for Continuing Education Krems"/>
<link wikidata="Q131266" start="1087" end="1092" title="Krems an der Donau" label="Krems"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088264" start="1116" end="1165" title="Benedict XVI Philosophical-Theological University" label="Benedict XVI Philosophical-Theological University"/>
<link wikidata="Q665159" start="1167" end="1180" title="Heiligenkreuz, Lower Austria" label="Heiligenkreuz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165104" start="1182" end="1207" title="Danube Private University" label="Danube Private University"/>
<link wikidata="Q131266" start="1211" end="1216" title="Krems an der Donau" label="Krems"/>
<link wikidata="Q1448536" start="1218" end="1239" title="New Design University" label="New Design University"/>
<link wikidata="Q82500" start="1243" end="1255" title="Sankt Pölten" label="Sankt Pölten"/>
<link wikidata="Q131266" start="1308" end="1313" title="Krems an der Donau" label="Krems"/>
<link wikidata="Q82500" start="1357" end="1369" title="Sankt Pölten" label="Sankt Pölten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029517" start="1404" end="1444" title="IMC University of Applied Sciences Krems" label="IMC University of Applied Sciences Krems"/>
<link wikidata="Q131266" start="1448" end="1453" title="Krems an der Donau" label="Krems"/>
<link wikidata="Q771432" start="1455" end="1485" title="University of Applied Sciences Wiener Neustadt" label="University of Applied Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q131612" start="1489" end="1504" title="Wiener Neustadt" label="Wiener Neustadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391228" start="1506" end="1547" title="St. Pölten University of Applied Sciences" label="St. Pölten University of Applied Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q82500" start="1551" end="1563" title="Sankt Pölten" label="Sankt Pölten"/>
<link wikidata="Q568705" start="1565" end="1591" title="Theresian Military Academy" label="Theresian Military Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131612" start="1595" end="1610" title="Wiener Neustadt" label="Wiener Neustadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665176" start="1670" end="1713" title="Institute of Science and Technology Austria" label="Institute of Science and Technology Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q487522" start="1717" end="1731" title="Klosterneuburg" label="Klosterneuburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q34713" start="1736" end="1744" title="Salzburg" label="Salzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q27265" start="1771" end="1793" title="University of Salzburg" label="University of Salzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q871369" start="1795" end="1824" title="Mozarteum University Salzburg" label="Mozarteum University Salzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476364" start="1848" end="1877" title="Paracelsus Medical University" label="Paracelsus Medical University"/>
<link wikidata="Q34713" start="1881" end="1889" title="Salzburg" label="Salzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q14594755" start="1891" end="1910" title="Alma Mater Europaea" label="Alma Mater Europaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q34713" start="1914" end="1922" title="Salzburg" label="Salzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624003" start="1956" end="1989" title="Private University Seeburg Castle" label="Private University Seeburg Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q280588" start="1993" end="2016" title="Seekirchen am Wallersee" label="Seekirchen am Wallersee"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2050" end="2089" title="Salzburg University of Applied Sciences" label="Salzburg University of Applied Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q700662" start="2093" end="2109" title="Puch bei Hallein" label="Puch bei Hallein"/>
<link wikidata="Q255581" start="2117" end="2122" title="Kuchl" label="Kuchl"/>
<link wikidata="Q41358" start="2127" end="2133" title="Styria" label="Styria"/>
<link wikidata="Q622683" start="2160" end="2178" title="University of Graz" label="University of Graz"/>
<link wikidata="Q689775" start="2180" end="2209" title="Graz University of Technology" label="Graz University of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q872543" start="2211" end="2237" title="Medical University of Graz" label="Medical University of Graz"/>
<link wikidata="Q674568" start="2239" end="2259" title="University of Leoben" label="University of Leoben"/>
<link wikidata="Q875147" start="2261" end="2305" title="University of Music and Performing Arts Graz" label="University of Music and Performing Arts Graz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388308" start="2340" end="2351" title="FH Joanneum" label="FH Joanneum"/>
<link wikidata="Q13298" start="2355" end="2359" title="Graz" label="Graz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2361" end="2401" title="Campus 02 University of Applied Sciences" label="Campus 02 University of Applied Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q13298" start="2405" end="2409" title="Graz" label="Graz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120206" start="2431" end="2477" title="University College of Teacher Education Styria" label="University College of Teacher Education Styria"/>
<link wikidata="Q42880" start="2482" end="2487" title="State of Tyrol" label="Tyrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q875788" start="2514" end="2537" title="University of Innsbruck" label="University of Innsbruck"/>
<link wikidata="Q686772" start="2592" end="2623" title="Medical University of Innsbruck" label="Medical University of Innsbruck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111097" start="2645" end="2718" title="UMIT Tirol - Private University for Health Sciences and Health Technology" label="UMIT Tirol - Private University for Health Sciences and Health Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q302745" start="2722" end="2735" title="Hall in Tirol" label="Hall in Tirol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388310" start="2770" end="2800" title="University of Applied Sciences Kufstein" label="University of Applied Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q486341" start="2804" end="2812" title="Kufstein" label="Kufstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q684775" start="2814" end="2845" title="MCI Management Center Innsbruck" label="MCI Management Center Innsbruck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735" start="2864" end="2873" title="Innsbruck" label="Innsbruck"/>
<link wikidata="Q41967" start="2878" end="2891" title="Upper Austria" label="Upper Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q682739" start="2918" end="2949" title="Johannes Kepler University Linz" label="Johannes Kepler University Linz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516259" start="2951" end="2984" title="University of Art and Design Linz" label="University of Art and Design Linz"/>
<link wikidata="Q179640" start="3008" end="3040" title="Catholic Private University Linz" label="Catholic Private University Linz"/>
<link wikidata="Q461551" start="3042" end="3075" title="Anton Bruckner Private University" label="Anton Bruckner Private University"/>
<link wikidata="Q41329" start="3077" end="3081" title="Linz" label="Linz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3114" end="3158" title="University of Applied Sciences Upper Austria" label="University of Applied Sciences Upper Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q242020" start="3162" end="3184" title="Hagenberg im Mühlkreis" label="Hagenberg im Mühlkreis"/>
<link wikidata="Q41329" start="3186" end="3190" title="Linz" label="Linz"/>
<link wikidata="Q260320" start="3192" end="3197" title="Steyr" label="Steyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q178582" start="3202" end="3206" title="Wels" label="Wels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="3211" end="3217" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q165980" start="3244" end="3264" title="University of Vienna" label="University of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q689400" start="3266" end="3273" title="TU Wien" label="TU Wien"/>
<link wikidata="Q700731" start="3275" end="3303" title="Medical University of Vienna" label="Medical University of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q278044" start="3305" end="3348" title="Vienna University of Economics and Business" label="Vienna University of Economics and Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q414219" start="3437" end="3464" title="Academy of Fine Arts Vienna" label="Academy of Fine Arts Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q877686" start="3466" end="3499" title="University of Applied Arts Vienna" label="University of Applied Arts Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q876520" start="3501" end="3558" title="University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences, Vienna" label="University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences, Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q686522" start="3560" end="3606" title="University of Music and Performing Arts Vienna" label="University of Music and Performing Arts Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q877421" start="3608" end="3648" title="University of Veterinary Medicine Vienna" label="University of Veterinary Medicine Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1679805" start="3672" end="3685" title="Jam Music Lab" label="Jam Music Lab"/>
<link wikidata="Q876640" start="3687" end="3734" title="Music and Arts University of the City of Vienna" label="Music and Arts University of the City of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157899" start="3736" end="3768" title="Sigmund Freud Private University" label="Sigmund Freud Private University"/>
<link wikidata="Q872071" start="3770" end="3793" title="Modul University Vienna" label="Modul University Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553612" start="3796" end="3829" title="Webster Vienna Private University" label="Webster Vienna Private University"/>
<link wikidata="Q757391" start="3831" end="3858" title="Central European University" label="Central European University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3894" end="3921" title="Fachhochschule des bfi Wien" label="Fachhochschule des bfi Wien"/>
<link wikidata="Q971426" start="3923" end="3968" title="University of Applied Sciences Technikum Wien" label="University of Applied Sciences Technikum Wien"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388304" start="3970" end="3984" title="FH Campus Wien" label="FH Campus Wien"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3986" end="3992" title="FHWien" label="FHWien"/>
<link wikidata="Q145656" start="3994" end="4016" title="Lauder Business School" label="Lauder Business School"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4018" end="4056" title="Ferdinand Porsche Fern FH-Studiengänge" label="Ferdinand Porsche Fern FH-Studiengänge"/>
<link wikidata="Q38981" start="4061" end="4071" title="Vorarlberg" label="Vorarlberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391237" start="4108" end="4149" title="Vorarlberg University of Applied Sciences" label="Vorarlberg University of Applied Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q171219" start="4153" end="4161" title="Dornbirn" label="Dornbirn"/>
<link wikidata="Q17099278" start="4178" end="4204" title="List of schools in Austria" label="List of schools in Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3682368" start="4207" end="4251" title="List of colleges and universities by country" label="List of colleges and universities by country"/>
<link wikidata="Q1846117" start="4254" end="4287" title="List of colleges and universities" label="List of colleges and universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q50825453" start="4290" end="4312" title="Open access in Austria" label="Open access in Austria"/>
</links>
</doc>
