<doc id="331643" wikidata="Q36965" url="?curid=331643" title="Ante Pavelić">
<text>Ante Pavelić (; 14 July 1889 – 28 December 1959) was a Croatian politician who founded and headed the fascist ultranationalist organization known as the Ustaše in 1929 and was dictator of the Independent State of Croatia (NDH), a fascist puppet state built out of parts of occupied Yugoslavia by the authorities of Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy, from 1941 to 1945. Pavelić and the Ustaše persecuted many racial minorities and political opponents in the NDH during the war, including Serbs, Jews, Romani, and anti-fascists, becoming one of the key figures of the genocide of Serbs, the Porajmos and the Holocaust in the NDH.

At the start of his career, Pavelić was a lawyer and a politician of the Croatian Party of Rights in the Kingdom of Yugoslavia known for his nationalist beliefs and support for an independent Croatia. By the end of the 1920s, his political activity became more radical as he called on Croats to revolt against Yugoslavia, and schemed an Italian protectorate of Croatia separate from Yugoslavia. After King Alexander I declared his 6 January Dictatorship in 1929 and banned all political parties, Pavelić went abroad and plotted with the Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization (IMRO) to undermine the Yugoslav state, which prompted the Yugoslav authorities to try him in absentia and sentence him to death. In the meantime, Pavelić had moved to Fascist Italy where he founded the Ustaše, a Croatian nationalist movement with the goal of creating an independent Croatia by any means, including the use of terror. Pavelić incorporated terrorist actions in the Ustaše program, such as train bombings and assassinations, staged a small uprising in Lika in 1932, culminating in the assassination of King Alexander in 1934 in conjunction with the IMRO. Pavelić was once again sentenced to death after being tried in France in absentia and, under international pressure, the Italians imprisoned him for 18 months, and largely obstructed the Ustaše in the following period.

At the behest of the Germans, senior Ustaša Slavko Kvaternik declared the NDH&#x27;s establishment on 10 April 1941 in the name of Pavelić. Calling himself the &quot;Poglavnik,&quot; or supreme leader, Pavelić returned from Italy and took control of the puppet government. He created a political system similar to that of Fascist Italy and Nazi Germany. The NDH, though constituting a Greater Croatia, was forced by the Italians to relinquish several territorial concessions to the latter. After taking control, Pavelić imposed largely anti-Serbian and antisemitic policies that resulted in the deaths of over 100,000 Serbs and Jews in concentration and extermination camps in the NDH, murdering and torturing several hundred thousand Serbs, along with tens of thousands of Roma and Jews. These persecutions and killings have been described as the &quot;single most disastrous episode in Yugoslav history&quot;.

In 1945, Pavelić ordered the executions of prominent NDH politicians Mladen Lorković and Ante Vokić on charges of treason when they were arrested for plotting to oust him and align the NDH with the Allies. Following the surrender of Germany that May, Pavelić ordered his troops to keep fighting even after the surrender. He subsequently ordered the NDH to flee to Austria to surrender their armed forces to the advancing British Army, which refused and directed them to surrender to the Partisans. Sparked by attacks on their position, the Partisans began carrying out killings of the Ustaše. 

Pavelić fled to Austria before obtaining a false passport from the Vatican and escaping to Argentina, where he continued to engage in fascist activities. He later served as a security advisor to Juan Perón, the President of Argentina, who provided sanctuary for many fascist war criminals. On 10 April 1957, a Serbian hotel owner attempted to kill Pavelić by shooting him. The resulting injuries eventually led to his death on 28 December 1959, aged 70, after spending the last two and a half years in Francoist Spain.

== Early life ==
=== Birth and education ===
Ante Pavelić was born in the Herzegovinian village of Bradina on the slopes of Ivan Mountain north of Konjic, roughly southwest of Hadžići, then part of the Ottoman Empire occupied by the Austro-Hungarian Empire. His parents had moved to Bosnia and Herzegovina from the village of Krivi Put in the central part of the Velebit plain, in southern Lika (in today&#x27;s Croatia), to work on the Sarajevo-Metković railway line.

Searching for work, his family moved to the village of Jezero outside Jajce, where Pavelić attended primary school, or &quot;maktab&quot;. Here Pavelić learned Muslim traditions and lessons that influenced his attitude towards Bosnia and its Muslims. Pavelić&#x27;s sense of Croat nationalism grew from a visit to Lika with his parents, where he heard townspeople speaking Croatian, and realised it was not just the language of peasants. While attending school in Travnik he became an adherent of the nationalist ideologies of Ante Starčević and his successor as the leader of the Party of Rights, Josip Frank.

Health problems briefly interrupted his education in 1905. In summer he found work on the railway in Sarajevo and Višegrad. He continued his education in Zagreb, the home city of his elder brother Josip. In Zagreb, Pavelić attended high school. His failure to complete his fourth-year classes meant he had to retake the exam. Early in his high school days, he joined the Pure Party of Rights as well as the &quot;Frankovci&quot; students&#x27; organization, founded by Josip Frank, the father-in-law of Slavko Kvaternik, an Austro-Hungarian colonel. Later he attended high school in Senj at the classical gymnasium, where he completed his fifth-year classes. Health problems again interrupted his education, and he took a job on the road in Istria, near Buzet. In 1909 he finished his sixth-year classes in Karlovac. His seventh-year classes were completed in Senj. Pavelić graduated in Zagreb in 1910 and entered the Law Faculty of the University of Zagreb. In 1912 Pavelić was arrested on suspicion of involvement in the attempted assassination of the Ban of Croatia-Slavonia, Slavko Cuvaj. He completed his law degree in 1914 and obtained his doctorate in July 1915. From 1915 until 1918 he worked as a clerk in the office of , president of the Party of Rights. After completing his clerkship, he became a lawyer in Zagreb.

=== Political rise ===
During World War I, Pavelić played an active role in the Party of Rights. As an employee and friend of its leader Horvat, he often attended important party meetings, taking over Horvat&#x27;s duties when he was absent. In 1918, Pavelić entered the party leadership and its Business Committee. After the unification of the State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs with the Kingdom of Serbia on 1 December 1918, the Party of Rights held a day of public protest claiming that the Croatian people were against having a Serbian king, and that their highest state authorities had not agreed to unification. Further, the party expressed their wish for a Croatian republic in a program from March 1919, signed by president of the party, Vladimir Prebeg and Pavelić. At the 1921 local elections in Zagreb, Pavelić was elected member of the city assembly. In the name of the party, he contacted Nikola Pašić, the Yugoslav Prime Minister and member of the People&#x27;s Radical Party, with the goal of weakening the Croatian Peasant Party (HSS), the dominant Croatian party in the interwar period.

Pavelić was a member of the &quot;Frankovci&quot; faction of the Party of Rights. Ivica Peršić, a Croatian politician from the competing &quot;Milinovci&quot; faction, wrote in his memoir how Pavelić&#x27;s 1921 election significantly raised the standing of his law office in Zagreb – a number of rich Jewish clients paid him to obtain Yugoslav citizenship, and Pavelić subsequently started to make frequent visits to Belgrade, where he would procure those documents through his increasing number of connections to the members of the ruling People&#x27;s Radical Party.

In 1921, 14 Party of Rights members, including Pavelić, Ivo Pilar and Milan Šufflay, were arrested for anti-Yugoslav activities, for their alleged contacts with the Croatian Committee, a Croatian nationalist organization that was based in Hungary at the time. Pavelić acted as the defence lawyer at the subsequent trial and was released.

On 12 August 1922, in St. Mark&#x27;s Church, Zagreb, Pavelić married Maria Lovrenčević. They had three children, daughters Višnja and Mirjana and son Velimir. Maria was Jewish through her mother&#x27;s family and her father, Martin Lovrenčević, was a member of the Party of Rights and a well-known journalist.

Later Pavelić became vice-president of the Croatian Bar Association, the professional body representing Croatian lawyers.

In his speeches to the Yugoslav Parliament he opposed Serbian nationalism and spoke in favor of Croatian independence. He was active with the youth of the Croatian Party of Rights and began contributing to the &quot;Starčević&quot; and &quot;Kvaternik&quot; newspapers.

Serbian members of the Yugoslav Parliament disliked him and when a Serbian member said &quot;Good night&quot; to him in parliament, Pavelić responded:

In 1927, Pavelić became the vice president of the party.

In June 1927, Pavelić represented Zagreb County at the European Congress of Cities in Paris. When he was returning from Paris, he visited Rome and submitted a memorandum in the name of HSP to the Italian ministry of foreign affairs in which he offered to cooperate with Italy in dismembering Yugoslavia. In order to obtain Italian support for Croatian independence, the memorandum effectively made any such Croatia &#x27;little more than an Italian protectorate&#x27;. The memorandum also stated that the Party of Rights recognised the existing territorial settlements between Italy and Yugoslavia, thus giving up all Croatian claims to Istria, Rijeka, Zadar and the Adriatic islands which Italy had annexed after World War I. These areas contained between 300,000 and 400,000 Croats. Further, the memorandum also agreed to cede the Bay of Kotor and Dalmatian headlands of strategic importance to Italy, and agreed that a future Croatia would not establish a navy.

As the most radical politician of the Croatian Bloc, Pavelić sought opportunities to internationalize the &quot;Croatian question&quot; and highlight Yugoslavia&#x27;s unsustainability. In December 1927, Pavelić defended four Macedonian students in Skopje who were accused of belonging to the Macedonian Youth Secret Revolutionary Organization founded by Ivan Mihailov. During the trial, Pavelić accused the court of setting them up and stressed the right to self-determination. This trial received public attention in Bulgaria and Yugoslavia.

Following his election as a member of the Croatian Bloc in the 1927 election, Pavelić became his party&#x27;s liaison with Nikola Pašić. He was one of two elected Croatian Bloc candidates alongside Ante Trumbić, one of the key politicians in the creation of a Yugoslav state. From 1927 until 1929, he was part of the minuscule delegation of the Party of Rights in the Yugoslav Parliament.

In 1927, he secretly contacted the fascist dictator of Italy, Benito Mussolini, and presented his separatist ideas to him. Pavelić proposed an independent Greater Croatia that should cover the entire historical and ethnic area of the Croats. In mid-1928, the leaders of the Croatian Bloc, Trumbić and Pavelić, addressed the Italian consul in Zagreb to gain support for the Croatian struggle against regime of King Alexander. On 14 July, they received a positive response, after which Pavelić maintained contact.

Historian Rory Yeomans claimed that there are indications that Pavelić had been considering the formation of some kind of nationalist insurgency group as early as 1928. After the assassination of Croatian politicians in the National Assembly, of which he was an eyewitness, Pavelić joined the Peasant-Democratic Coalition and started to publish a magazine called &quot;&quot; in which he advocated Croatian independence. His political party radicalised after the assassination. He found support in the Croatian Rights Republican Youth (&quot;Hrvatska pravaška republikanska omladina&quot;), a youth wing of the Party of Rights led by Branimir Jelić. On 1 October 1928 he founded an armed group with the same name, an act through which he openly called on Croatians to revolt. This group trained as part of a legal sport society. Yugoslav authorities declared the organization illegal and banned its activities.

== In exile ==
Pavelić held the position of the Party of Rights secretary until 1929, the beginning of the 6 January Dictatorship in the Kingdom of Yugoslavia.
According to Croatian historian Hrvoje Matković, after the King declared his dictatorship Pavelić&#x27;s house was under constant police watch.

At this time, Pavelić started to organize the Ustaša (&quot;Ustaša – Hrvatski revolucionarni pokret&quot;) as an organization with military and conspiratorial principles. Its official foundation was 7 January 1929. The Ustaša movement was &quot;founded on the principles of racialism and intolerance&quot;.

Because of the threat of arrest, Pavelić escaped during a surveillance lapse and went to Austria on the night of 19/20 January 1929. According to Tomasevich, Pavelić left for Vienna to &quot;seek medical aid&quot;.

=== Initial exile and trial ===
He contacted other Croatian emigrants, mainly political émigrés, former Austrian-Hungarian officers, who gathered around Stjepan Sarkotić and refused to return to Yugoslavia. After a short stay in Austria, alongside Gustav Perčec, Pavelić moved to Budapest.

In March 1929, the Ustaše commenced a campaign of terrorism within Yugoslavia with the assassination of Toni Schlegel in Zagreb. Schlegel was a pro-Yugoslav editor of the newspaper &quot;Novosti&quot; who was also a close confidante of King Alexander.

After establishing contact with the Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization in April 1929, he and Perčec went to Sofia in Bulgaria. On 29 April 1929, Pavelić and Ivan Mihailov signed the Sofia Declaration in which they formalized cooperation between their movements. In the declaration, they obligated themselves to separate Croatia and Macedonia from Yugoslavia. Yugoslavia protested to Bulgaria. Pavelić was found guilty of high treason and sentenced to death &quot;in absentia&quot; along with Perčec on 17 August 1929.

Because of the Yugoslav verdict, on 25 September 1929 Pavelić was arrested in Vienna and expelled to Germany. Pavelić&#x27;s stay in Germany was constrained by opposition from the German ambassador to Yugoslavia, Adolf Köster, a supporter of Yugoslavia. A friend of King Alexander, he did his best to prevent Croatian nationalist activity in Yugoslavia.

=== Exile in Italy ===
Pavelić left Germany under a false passport and went to Italy, where his family already lived. In Italy he frequently changed location and lived under false names, most often as &quot;Antonio Serdar&quot;. Since he had been in contact with Italian authorities since 1927, he easily established contact with the fascists. In autumn 1929 he established contacts with Italian journalists and Mussolini&#x27;s brother Arnaldo, who supported Croatian independence without any territorial concession. Pavelić created sympathy and understanding of Croats among Italians.

That autumn Pavelić published a brochure called &quot;Establishment of the Croatian State: Lasting Peace in the Balkans&quot; which summarized important events of Croatian history. The Italian authorities did not want to formally support Ustaše or Pavelić, to protect their reputation; nevertheless, the group received support from Mussolini, who saw them as a means to help destroy Yugoslavia and expand Italian influence in the Adriatic. Mussolini allowed Pavelić to live in exile in Rome and train his paramilitaries for war with Yugoslavia. In the Ustaša organization of 1929–1930, Pavelić&#x27;s closest associates were Gustav Perčec, Branimir Jelić, Ivan Perčević and later Mladen Lorković and Mile Budak.

The Ustaše began with the creation of military formations trained for sabotage and terrorism.
With financial help from Mussolini, in 1931 Pavelić established terrorist training camps, first in Bovegno in the Brescia region, and encouraged the foundation of such camps all around Italy. Camps were founded in Borgotaro, Lepari and Janka-Puszta in Hungary. The Ustaše were involved with smuggling weapons and propaganda into Yugoslavia from their camps in Italy and Hungary. At the demands of Italian authorities, the camps were often moved. The main Ustaše headquarters was at first in Torino, and later in Bologna.

On Pavelić&#x27;s initiative, his associates established Ustaše associations in Belgium, Netherlands, France, Germany, Argentina, Uruguay, Bolivia, Brazil and North America. Pavelić also encouraged publishing magazines in various countries.

The series of bombings and shootings by the Ustaše in Yugoslavia resulted in a severe crackdown on political activity as the state met terror with terror. Impoverished Croat peasants were hardest hit by the counter-terror, usually meted out by Serb policemen.

In 1932 he started a newspaper named the &quot;Ustaša – –Herald of Croatian Revolutionaries&quot; (). From its very first publication, Pavelić announced that the use of violence was central to the Ustaše: ‘&quot;The dagger, revolver, machine-gun and time bomb; these are the bells that will announce the dawn and the resurrection of the Independent State of Croatia.&quot;’ According to Ivo Goldstein, there were no instances of antisemitism in the newspaper in the beginning. Goldstein suggests there were three reasons for this; the total focus of the Ustaše on the Belgrade government, lack of the necessary intellectual capacity within the early Ustaše movement to properly develop their ideology, and the active involvement of Jews with the Ustaše. Goldstein points out that as Ustaše ideology developed in later years it became more anti-Semitic.

At a meeting held in Spittal in Austria in 1932, Pavelić, Perčec and Vjekoslav Servatzy decided to start a small uprising. It began at midnight on 6 September 1932 and was known as the Velebit uprising. Led by Andrija Artuković, the insurgency involved around 20 Ustaše members armed with Italian equipment. They attacked a police station and half an hour later pulled back to Velebit with no casualties. This uprising was to scare Yugoslav authorities. Despite the small scale the Yugoslav authorities were unnerved because the power of the Ustaše had been unknown. As a result, major security measures were introduced. This action appeared in the foreign press, especially in Italy and Hungary.

On 1 June 1933 and 16 April 1941, the Ustaša program and &quot;The Seventeen Principles of the Ustaše Movement&quot; were published in Zagreb by the Propaganda Department of the Supreme Ustaša Headquarters. The main goal was the creation of an independent Croatian state based on its historical and ethnic areas, with Pavelić stating that Ustaše must pursue this end by any means necessary, even by force of arms. According to his rules he would organize actions, assassinations and diversions. With this document the organization changed its name from &quot;Ustaša – Croatian Revolutionary Movement&quot; to &quot;Ustaša – Croatian Revolutionary Organization&quot; (; abbreviated to UHRO).

=== Assassination of King Alexander and aftermath ===
By killing the king of Yugoslavia, Pavelić saw an opportunity to cause riots in Yugoslavia and eventual collapse of the state. In December 1933, Pavelić ordered the assassination of King Alexander. The assassin was caught by the police and the assassination attempt failed. However, Pavelić tried again in October 1934 in Marseille.

On 9 October 1934, King Alexander I of Yugoslavia and French foreign minister Louis Barthou were assassinated in Marseille. The perpetrator Vlado Chernozemski, a Bulgarian revolutionary, was killed right after the assassination by French police. Three Ustaša members, who had been waiting at different locations for the king, were captured and sentenced to life imprisonment by a French court. Pavelić along with Eugen Kvaternik and Ivan Perčević were subsequently sentenced to death &quot;in absentia&quot; by a French court. That the security was lax even though one attempt had already been made on Alexander&#x27;s life testified to Pavelić&#x27;s organizational abilities; he had apparently been able to bribe a high official in the Sûreté General. The Marseilles Prefect of Police, Jouhannaud, was subsequently removed from office. The Ustaša believed that the assassination of King Alexander had effectively &quot;broken the backbone of Yugoslavia&quot; and that it was their &quot;most important achievement.&quot;

Under pressure from France, the Italian police arrested Pavelić and several Ustaša emigrants on 17 October 1934. Pavelić was imprisoned in Turin and released in March 1936. After he met with Eugen Dido Kvaternik on Christmas 1934 in prison, he stated that assassination was &quot;the only language Serbs understand&quot;. During his time in prison, Pavelić was informed about the situation in Yugoslavia and the 5 May 1935 election, in which a coalition of opposition parties was led by HSS leader Vladko Maček. Pavelić declared the election results as a &quot;success of the Ustaše actions&quot;. By the mid-1930s, graffiti with the initials &quot;ŽAP&quot; meaning &quot;Long live Ante Pavelić&quot; () had begun to appear on the streets of Zagreb.

After Pavelić&#x27;s released from prison, he remained under surveillance by the Italian authorities, and his Ustaše were interned. Disappointed with relations between the Italians and the Ustaše organization, Pavelić became closer to Nazi Germany, who promised to change the map of Europe fixed under the 1919 Treaty of Versailles. In October 1936 he finished a survey for the German Ministry of Foreign Affairs called the &quot;Croatian Question&quot; (; ). According to Ivo Goldstein, the survey deemed the &quot;Serbian state authorities, international Freemasonry, Jews and communism&quot;’ as enemies and stated that:

According to Matković, after 1937 Pavelić paid more attention to the Ustaše in Yugoslavia than elsewhere, since the emigrants had become passive after the assassination. In 1938 he instructed the Ustaše to form stations in Yugoslav towns. The fall of Stojadinović&#x27;s government and the creation of the Banovina of Croatia in 1939 further increased Ustaše activity; they founded &quot;Uzdanica&quot; (Hope), a savings co-operative. Under &quot;Uzdanica&quot;, Ustaše founded Ustaše University Headquarters and the illegal association Matija Gubec. However, Pavlowitch observes that Pavelić had few contacts with the Ustaše within Yugoslavia, and that his esteemed position within the Ustaše was partly due to his isolation in Italy. Despite their rise in activity in the 1930s, the movement experienced only moderate growth of popularity, and remained a marginal group.

In the late 1930s, about half of the 500 Ustaša in Italy were voluntarily repatriated to Yugoslavia, went underground and increased their activities. During the intensification of ties with Nazi Germany in the 1930s, Pavelić&#x27;s concept of the Croatian nation became increasingly race-oriented.

On 1 April 1937, after the Stojadinović-Ciano agreement, all Ustaše units were dissolved by the Italian government. After that, Pavelić was put under house arrest in Siena, where he lived until 1939. During this period he penned his anti-Bolshevik work &quot;Horrors and Mistakes&quot; (; ) which was published in 1938. It was immediately seized by the authorities. At the onset of World War II he moved to a villa near Florence under police watch until spring 1941.

After Italy occupied Albania and prepared an attack on Yugoslavia, Ciano invited Pavelić to negotiations. They discussed Croatian armed revolt, Italian military intervention and the creation of a Croatian state with monetary, customs and personal unions with Italy, which Pavelić later refused.

In 1940 Pavelić negotiated with the Italians for military assistance in creating a separate Croatian state which would have had strong ties to Italy, but this plan was postponed by the invasion of France, and subsequently derailed by Adolf Hitler.

== Ustaše regime ==
=== Establishment ===
On 25 March 1941, Yugoslavia signed the Tripartite Pact, but two days later the government was overthrown in a bloodless military coup by opponents who were motivated by a range of factors.

Two days after the Belgrade coup, Mussolini invited Pavelić from Florence to his private residence in Rome, the Villa Torlonia; this was their first meeting since Pavelić&#x27;s arrival in Italy. Pavelić was escorted by Matija Bzik, but Mussolini received only Pavelić. Acting Foreign Minister Filippo Anfuso was present during the meeting.

Pavelić and Mussolini discussed Croatia&#x27;s position after Yugoslav capitulation. Mussolini was concerned that Italian designs on Dalmatia be achieved, and in response Pavelić acknowledged the agreements he had made earlier and reassured him. Pavelić requested the release of the remaining interned Ustaše, an Italian liaison officer was allocated to him, and the Italians also lent him a radio station in Florence so he could conduct late evening broadcasts. On 1 April 1941 Pavelić called for the liberation of Croatia.

On 6 April 1941 the Axis invaded Yugoslavia from multiple directions, rapidly overwhelming the under-prepared Royal Yugoslav Army which capitulated 11 days later. The German operational plan included making &#x27;political promises to the Croats&#x27; to increase internal discord.

The Germans generally preferred to collaborate with non-fascists who were willing to work with them, and only placed out-and-out fascists in charge as a last resort. Croatia was no exception. The Nazis wanted any Croatian puppet government to have popular support, so that they could control their zone of occupation with minimal forces and exploit the available resources peacefully. The administration of Banovina Croatia had been under the control of an alliance of Vladko Maček&#x27;s HSS and the mostly Croatian Serb Independent Democratic Party. Maček was very popular among Croats, had been vice-premier in the Yugoslav Cvetković government, was a supporter of Yugoslav accession to the Axis and had a ready made para-military force in the form of the HSS Croatian Peasant Defence. As a result, the Germans attempted to get Maček to proclaim an &quot;independent Croatian state&quot; and form a government. When he refused to cooperate, the Germans decided they had no alternative other than to support Pavelić, even though they considered that the Ustaše could not provide an assurance they could govern in the way the Germans wanted.
It was estimated by the Germans that Pavelić had around 900 sworn Ustaše in Yugoslavia at the time of the invasion, and the Ustaše themselves considered that their supporters only numbered some 40,000. The Germans also considered Pavelić to be an Italian agent or &quot;Mussolini&#x27;s man&quot;, but considered that other senior Ustašas such as deputy leader () Slavko Kvaternik were sufficiently pro-German to ensure their interests would be supported by any regime led by Pavelić.

On 10 April 1941, Kvaternik declared an Independent State of Croatia in the name of the &quot;Poglavnik&quot; Ante Pavelić via the Zagreb Radio Station. Kvaternik was acting on the orders of &quot;SS-Brigadeführer&quot; (Brigadier) Edmund Veesenmayer. The proclamation was viewed favourably by a significant portion of the population, particularly those living in Zagreb, western Herzegovina and Lika. The Croatian Peasant Defence, which had been infiltrated by the Ustaše, assisted by disarming Royal Yugoslav Army units and imposing some control. However, the Ustashe received limited support from ordinary Croats. The commander of German forces in the NDH estimated that only around 2% of the country&#x27;s population supported the Ustashe regime.

The Ustaše that had been interned in Italy had been concentrated at Pistoia, about 50 km from Florence where they were issued with Italian uniforms and small arms. They were joined by Pavelić on 10 April and listened to radio broadcasts announcing the proclamation of the NDH. Pavelić&#x27;s visit to Pistoia was actually his first meeting with the Ustaše after the assassination in Marseilles. In Pistoia, Pavelić gave a speech in which he announced that their struggle for an independent Croatia was near the end. After that he returned to his home in Florence where he heard Kvaternik&#x27;s proclamation on a radio broadcast from Vienna. On 11 April, Pavelić went to Rome, where he was hosted by Anfuso, after which he was received by Mussolini. During the meeting Pavelić was guaranteed that his government would be recognized immediately after he arrived in Zagreb.

After a meeting in Rome, Pavelić boarded the train with his Ustaše escort and went to Zagreb via Trieste and Rijeka. He arrived at Karlovac on 13 April with about 250—400 Ustaše where was greeted by Veesenmayer who was appointed by German foreign minister Joachim von Ribbentrop to supervise the state&#x27;s creation. In Karlovac, Pavelić was asked to confirm that he had not made any commitments to the Italians, but Mussolini&#x27;s envoy arrived while he was there and negotiations ensued to ensure that his messages to Hitler and Mussolini would deal satisfactorily with the questions of Dalmatia and recognition by the Axis powers. This issue was the first sign of Italo-German tensions over the NDH.
Diplomatic recognition of the NDH by the Axis was delayed to ensure that Pavelić made the promised territorial concessions to Italy. These concessions meant that Pavelić handed to Italy some 5,400 square kilometres of territory with a population of 380,000, consisting of about 280,000 Croats, 90,000 Serbs, 5,000 Italians and 5,000 others. Once this was completed Pavelić travelled to Zagreb on 15 April, and Axis recognition was also granted to the NDH on that day.

On 16 April 1941, Pavelić signed a decree appointing the new Croatian State Government. He was the first to take an oath, after which he stated:

Pavelić thus presented the NDH as the embodiment of the &quot;historical aspirations of the Croatian people&quot;. The decree named Osman Kulenović as the vice-president of the government, and Slavko Kvaternik as Pavelić&#x27;s deputy, and appointed eight other senior Ustaše as ministers. The Ustaše made use of the existing bureaucracy of the Banovina of Croatia, after it had been purged and &quot;ustašised&quot;. The new regime drew upon the concept of an uninterrupted Croatian state since the arrival of the Croats in their contemporary homeland, and reflected extreme Croat nationalism mixed with Nazism and Italian Fascism, Catholic clerical authoritarianism and the peasantism of the Croatian Peasant Party.

When the anti-Serb atrocities were under way, Pavelić remained a devoted Catholic: he participated in mass in his chapel, worshipped and confessed his sins.
Pavelić tried to prolong the negotiations with Italy about the boundary between the two states. At the time, he was receiving support from Berlin. Ciano insisted that Italy must annex the whole Croatian littoral, and after some time the Germans pulled back to protect German-Italian relations. On 25 April, Pavelić and Ciano met in Ljubljana again discussing borders. Ciano&#x27;s first proposal was Italian annexation of the whole Croatian littoral and hinterland all the way to Karlovac. Another proposal was somewhat less demanding but with closer ties with Italy, including a monetary, customs and personal union. Pavelić refused and instead demanded that Croatian gain the towns of Trogir, Split and Dubrovnik. Ciano did not respond, but promised another meeting. Pavelić was still counting on German support, but without success. On 7 May 1941, Pavelić and Mussolini met in Tržič and agreed to discuss the matter in Rome. On 18 May 1941 Pavelić went to Rome with his delegation and signed a Treaty of Rome in which Croatia gave up part of Dalmatia, Krk, Rab, Korčula, Biograd, Šibenik, Trogir, Split, Čiovo, Veliki i Mali Drvenik, Šolta, Mljet and parts of Konavle and the Bay of Kotor to Italy. A Croatian proposal that Split and Korčula Island be jointly administered was ignored. These annexations shocked the people and led to the only public demonstration recorded in the Independent State of Croatia&#x27;s history.

Hundreds of citizens, members of the Ustaše Movement and the &quot;Domobranstvo&quot; (Army) protested on 25 December 1941. Pavelić tried to retrieve the lost areas, but kept his real feelings and those of the people from the Italians to maintain the pretext of good relations.

=== Prime minister ===
Pavelić agreed to name Prince Aimone, Duke of Spoleto, as King of Croatia to avoid a union with the Kingdom of Italy, but delayed the formalities in the hope of gaining more territory in return for accepting the new king. Aimone was officially declared King of the Independent State of Croatia on 18 May 1941 under the name of Tomislav II, and he appointed Pavelić as Prime Minister. In March 1942, Aimone succeeded his brother to become The 4th Duke of Aosta. However, the King&#x27;s powers were purely ceremonial, to the point that he never even visited Croatia during his reign, but preferred to deal with his royal duties from an office in Rome. On 10 July 1941, Pavelić accepted the annexation of Međimurje by Hungary.

==== Legislation ====
On 14 April 1941, in one of his first acts after assuming power, Pavelić signed the &#x27;Decree-Law concerning the Preservation of Croatian National Property&#x27;, which annulled all large property transactions made by Jews in the two months prior to the proclamation of the NDH.

He signed the Law-Decree on Protection of the Nation and the State on 17 April 1941, which came into effect immediately, was retrospective, and imposed the death penalty for any actions causing harm to the honour or vital interests of the NDH. This law was the first of three decrees that effectively placed the Serb, Jewish and Roma populations of the NDH outside the law and lead to their persecution and destruction.

On 19 and 22 April, the Ustashe issued decrees suspending all employees of state and local governments, and state enterprises. This allowed the new regime to get rid of all unwanted employees – &quot;in principle this meant all Jews, Serbs and all Yugoslav-oriented Croats&quot;

On 25 April 1941, he signed into law a decree prohibiting the use of the Cyrillic alphabet, which directly impacted on the Serbian Orthodox population of the NDH, as the rites of the church were written in Cyrillic.

On 30 April 1941, Pavelić enacted the &#x27;Law concerning Nationality&#x27;, which essentially made all Jews non-citizens, and this was followed by further laws restricting their movement and residency. From 23 May all Jews were required to wear yellow identification tags, and on 26 June Pavelić issued a decree which blamed Jews for activities against the NDH and ordered their internment in concentration camps.

==== Poglavnik ====
As Prime Minister of the NDH, Pavelić had full control over the state. The oath taken by all government employees declared that Pavelić represented the sovereignty of the NDH. His title &quot;Poglavnik&quot; represented the close ties between the Croatian state and the Ustaše movement, since he had the same title as leader of the Ustaše. Moreover, Pavelić made all significant decisions, including naming state ministers and leaders of the Ustaše. As the NDH had no functional legislature, Pavelić approved all of the laws, which made him the most powerful person in the state. Through the incorporation of the extreme right-wing of the popular HSS, Pavelić&#x27;s regime was initially accepted by the majority of Croats in the NDH. The regime also attempted to re-write history by falsely claiming the legacy of the founder of the HSS Stjepan Radić, and that of Croatian nationalist Ante Starčević.

Soon afterwards, Pavelić visited Pope Pius XII in May 1941, attempting to win Vatican recognition, but failed (although the Papacy placed a legat in Zagreb). The Vatican maintained relations with the Yugoslav Government-in-exile.
On 9 June 1941, Pavelić visited Hitler at the Berghof. Hitler impressed on Pavelić that he should maintain a policy of &quot;national intolerance&quot; for fifty years. Hitler also encouraged Pavelić to accept Slovenian immigrants and deport Serbs to the Territory of the Military Commander in Serbia. Over the next few months, the Ustaše deported around 120,000 Serbs.

In July 1941, the German Plenipotentiary General in the NDH, Edmund Glaise von Horstenau met with Pavelić to express his &quot;grave concern over the excesses of the Ustaše&quot;. This was the first of many occasions over the next three years during which von Horstenau and Pavelić clashed over the conduct of the Ustaše. By the end of 1941, the acceptance of the Ustaše regime by most Croats had been transformed into disappointment and discontent, and as a result of the terror perpetrated by the regime some pro-Yugoslav sentiment was beginning to re-emerge, along with pro-communist feelings. The discontent was made worse when Pavelić had Vladko Maček arrested and sent to Jasenovac concentration camp in October 1941. By the end of 1941 HSS propaganda leaflets were urging peasants to be patient as the &quot;day of liberation is near!&quot;

In the public arena there were efforts to create a cult of personality around Pavelić. These efforts included the imposition of a Nazi-style salute, emphasising that he had been sentenced to death in absentia by a Yugoslav court, and repeatedly claiming that he had undergone great hardship to achieve the independence of the NDH. Pavelić summoned the Sabor on 24 January 1942. It met between 23 and 28 February, but it had little influence and after December 1942 was never called again.


On 3 March 1942, Hitler awarded Pavelić the Grand Cross of the Order of the German Eagle. Siegfried Kasche, the German envoy, handed it to him in Zagreb. Eugen Dido Kvaternik, son of Slavko Kvaternik, and one of the main protagonists in the Ustaše genocide of the Serbs stated that Pavelić directed Croat nationalism against the Serbs in order to distract the Croat population from a potential backlash against the Italians over his territorial concessions to them in Dalmatia. The worst policies directed against minorities were Ustaše-run concentration and forced labor camps. The most notorious camp was the Jasenovac concentration camp, where 80,000–100,000 people died, including around 18,000 Croatian Jews, or around 90% of the pre-World War II Jewish community.
Pavelić founded the Croatian Orthodox Church with the aim of pacifying the Serbs. However, the underlying ideology behind the creation of the Croatian Orthodox Church was connected to the ideas of Ante Starčević, who considered that Serbs were &quot;Orthodox Croats&quot;, and reflected a desire to create a Croatian state comprising three main religious groupings, Roman Catholic, Muslim and Croatian Orthodox. There is some evidence that the status of Sarajevo Serbs improved after they joined the Croatian Orthodox Church in significant numbers. Through both forcible and voluntary conversions between 1941 and 1945, 244,000 Serbs were converted to Catholicism.

In June 1942, Pavelić met with General Roatta and they agreed that Ustaše administration could be returned to Zone 3 except in towns with Italian garrisons. Pavelić agreed to the continued presence of the Chetnik Anti-Communist Volunteer Militia in this zone, and that the Italians would intervene in Zone 3 if they considered that was necessary. The result of this agreement was that Italian forces largely withdrew from areas that the NDH had virtually no presence and no means by which to reimpose their authority. This created a wide no-man&#x27;s land from the Sandžak to western Bosnia in which the Chetniks and Partisans could operate. By mid-1942, Pavelić&#x27;s regime effectively controlled only the Zagreb region along with some larger towns that were home to strong NDH and German garrisons.

Pavelić loyalists, mainly Ustaše, wanted to fight the Communist-led partisans while others, unnerved by the idea of a new Yugoslavia, also supported him. In 1941–42, the majority of Partisans in Croatia were Serbs, but by October 1943 the majority were Croats. This change was partly due to the decision of a key Croatian Peasant Party member, Božidar Magovac, to join the Partisans in June 1943, and partly due to the capitulation of Italy.

Pavelić and his government devoted attention to culture. Although most literature was propaganda, many books did not have an ideological basis, which allowed Croatian culture to flourish. The Croatian National Theatre received many world-famous actors as visitors. The major cultural milestone was the publication of the &quot;Croatian Encyclopedia&quot;, a work later outlawed under the Communist regime. In 1941 the Croatian Football Association joined FIFA.

On 16 December 1941, Pavelić met with Italian Foreign Minister Ciano in Venice and advised him that there were no more than 12,000 Jews left in the NDH.

In the second half of 1942, the Wehrmacht Commander-in-Chief of the South East, Generaloberst Alexander Löhr and Glaise urged Hitler to have Pavelić remove both the incompetent Slavko Kvaternik and his son the bloodthirsty Eugen &quot;Dido&quot; Kvaternik from power. When Pavelić visited Hitler in Ukraine in September 1942, he agreed. The following month Slavko Kvaternik was allowed to retire to Slovakia, and Eugen went with him. Pavelić then used the Kvaternik&#x27;s as scapegoats for both the terror of 1941–42 and the failure of NDH forces to impose law and order within the state.

In January 1943, Glaise told Pavelić that it would be better for everyone &quot;if all concentration camps in the NDH were closed and their inmates sent to work in Germany&quot;. Löhr also tried to get Hitler to remove Pavelić, disband the Ustaše and appoint Glaise as plenipotentiary general with supreme authority over the territory of the NDH. By March Hitler had decided to give the task of pacifying the NDH to the &quot;Reichsführer-SS&quot; (Field Marshal) Heinrich Himmler, who appointed his own plenipotentiary, &quot;Generalleutnant der Polizei&quot; (Major General of Police) Konstantin Kammerhofer. Kammerhofer brought the 7th SS Volunteer Mountain Division Prinz Eugen to the NDH and established a 20,000-strong German gendarmerie with a core of 6,000 &quot;Volksdeutsche&quot; reinforced by Croats taken from the NDH Home Guard and police. This new gendarmerie swore allegiance to Hitler, not Pavelić.

Shortly before the Italian capitulation, Pavelić appointed a new government led by Nikola Mandić as prime minister, which included Miroslav Navratil as Minister of the Armed Forces. Navratil was suggested by Glaise, and was appointed by Pavelić to placate the Germans. As a direct result, the 170,000-strong armed forces of the NDH were reorganised under German control into smaller units with greater mobility and the size of the Ustaše militia was also increased to 45,000.

In September 1944, Pavelić met with Hitler for the last time. Pavelić requested that the Germans stop arming and supplying Chetnik units, and asked that the Germans disarm the Chetniks or allow the NDH to disarm them. Hitler agreed that the Chetniks could not be trusted, and issued orders to German forces to stop cooperating with the Chetniks and assist NDH authorities to disarm them. However, German commanders were given sufficient leeway that they were able to avoid carrying out the orders.

=== After the Italian capitulation ===
Following the fall of Fascism in Italy, Tomislav II abdicated as King of Croatia on the orders of Victor Emmanuel III. With the King officially gone, Pavelić assumed functions as Head of State of the NDH under the title of &quot;Poglavnik&quot; and appointed Nikola Mandić as new prime minister. Italy was later invaded and occupied by the Germans in Operation Achse.

As soon as the Italians capitulated in September 1943, Pavelić was quick to amalgamate Italian-annexed Dalmatia into the NDH and offer an amnesty to Croats that had joined the rebels. However, the Germans occupied the previously Italian-occupied zone themselves, including the mines and key agricultural areas. By November 1943, Pavelić and his regime controlled little of the territory of the NDH, and by March 1944 &quot;SS-Brigadeführer und Generalmajor der Waffen-SS&quot; (Brigadier) Ernst Fick observed that &quot;In terms of power, Dr. Ante Pavelić is only mayor of the city of Zagreb, excluding the suburbs&quot;.

One of the key events in the history of the Independent State of Croatia was the Lorković-Vokić coup of 1944. Minister Mladen Lorković and army officer Ante Vokić suggested a plan whereby Croatia would change sides in the war and Pavelić would no longer be head of state in accordance with British demands. At first, Pavelić supported their ideas but changed his mind following a visit from a local Gestapo officer who told him that Germany would win the war with new weapons under development.

Pavelić arrested Lorković and Vokić along with others involved in the coup (some representatives of the Croatian Peasant Party and a number of &quot;Domobran&quot; officers). Lorković and Vokić were shot at the end of April 1945 in the Lepoglava prison. After plans for an &quot;Anglo-American&quot; coup were discovered, from September 1944 until February 1945, Pavelić negotiated with the Soviet Union. The Soviets agreed to recognize the Croatian state on condition that the Red Army had free access and Communists were allowed free rein. Pavelić refused their proposal and remained allied with Nazi Germany until the end of the war.

=== Genocide ===
As leader of the Independent State of Croatia, Pavelić was the main instigator of the genocidal crimes committed in the NDH, and was responsible for a campaign of terror against Serbs, Jews, Roma and anti-Axis Croats and Bosniaks which included a network of concentration camps. Numerous testimonies from the Nuremberg Trials along with records in German, Italian and Austrian war archives bear witness to atrocities perpetrated against the civilian population. The NDH&#x27;s racial policies greatly contributed to their rapid loss of control over Croatia as they fed the ranks of both the Chetniks and Partisans and caused even the Nazis to attempt to restrain Pavelić and his genocidal campaign.

In terms of the proportion of the state population killed by its own government, the Pavelić regime was the most murderous in Europe after Stalin&#x27;s Soviet Union, Hitler&#x27;s Germany, and outside of Europe has only been exceeded by the Khmer Rouge in Cambodia and some genocides in African states. As the main instigator of the genocide, Pavelić was supported by his closest associate Eugen Dido Kvaternik and Minister of Interior Andrija Artuković, who were responsible for planning and organization, and Vjekoslav Luburić, who executed the orders.

In late April 1941, Pavelić was interviewed by an Italian journalist, Alfio Russo. Pavelić stated that Serb rebels would be killed. In response, Russo asked him, &quot;what if all Serbs rebel?&quot; Pavelić answered, &quot;We shall kill them all.&quot; Around this time the first mass atrocities occurred, the Gudovac, Veljun and Glina massacres, which were committed by groups of Ustaše under the direct command of Luburić.

Serbian, Jewish, and Romani men, women, and children were hacked to death. Whole villages were razed and people driven into barns, which the Ustaše then set on fire. Synagogues were also destroyed, most notably, the main one in Zagreb, which was completely razed. General Edmund von Glaise-Horstenau reported to the German Army Command OKW on 28 June 1941.

... according to reliable reports from countless German military and civil observers during the last few weeks the Ustaše have gone raving mad.

On 10 July, General Glaise-Horstenau added:Our troops have to be mute witnesses of such events; it does not reflect well on their otherwise high reputation ... I am frequently told that German occupation troops would finally have to intervene against Ustaše crimes. This may happen eventually. Right now, with the available forces, I could not ask for such action. Ad hoc intervention in individual cases could make the German Army look responsible for countless crimes which it could not prevent in the past.

A report (to SS chief Heinrich Himmler, dated 17 February 1942) on increased partisan activities stated that &quot;Increased activity of the bands is chiefly due to atrocities carried out by Ustaše units in Croatia against the Orthodox population.&quot; The Ustaše committed their crimes not only against males of conscript age, but especially against helpless elderly people, women and children.

Between 172,000 and 290,000 Serbs, 31,000 of the 40,000 Jews, and almost all of the 25,000—40,000 Roma were killed in the Independent State of Croatia by the Ustaše and their Axis allies. Both Jews and Gypsies were subject to a policy of extermination. According to an official Yugoslav report, only 1,500 out of 30,000 Croatian Jews remained alive at the end of World War II. Approximately 26,000 Gypsies were murdered of approximately 40,000 residents. Some 26,000 Croatian anti-fascists (Partisans, political opponents and civilians) were also killed by the NDH regime, including an estimated 5,000-12,000 Croat anti-fascists and other dissidents that were killed at the Jasenovac concentration camp alone.

=== End of the NDH ===
Seeing Germany&#x27;s collapse and aware that the Croatian army could not resist the Communists, Pavelić started a move of his forces to Austria, causing several groups of tens of thousands of Croatian soldiers as well as civilians to start a major northward march without a clear strategy. Pavelić left the country on 6 May 1945, and on 8 May, he convened a final meeting of the NDH government in Rogaška Slatina. At the meeting, General Alexander Löhr informed the government of Germany&#x27;s capitulation and handed command of the NDH forces to Pavelić. Pavelić subsequently named General Vjekoslav Luburić commander. Later that day Pavelić&#x27;s convoy passed into the Soviet occupation zone in Austria, separate from the rest of the NDH government which went to the British occupation zone. The group made it into the American occupation zone and by 18 May arrived at the village of Leingreith near Radstadt where Pavelić&#x27;s wife Mara and their two daughters had been living after leaving the NDH in December 1944.

On 8 May, Pavelić ordered that the columns from NDH continue to Austria, and that they refuse to surrender to the advancing Yugoslav Army, instead planning to surrender to the British. However, they were instead turned back in the mid-May Bleiburg repatriations, and many were subsequently killed by the Yugoslav Army. The sheer number of civilians slowed down the retreat, made the surrender unfeasible to the Allies, and ultimately led to the belief that they were nothing more than a human shield to the Ustashe. For his abandonment of Croatian soldiers and civilians, later Croatian emigrants would accuse Pavelić of cowardice.

Several members of the NDH government were executed after a one-day trial in Zagreb on 6 June. Shortly after this, Pavelić moved to the village of Tiefbrunau closer to Salzburg. In September, American officials – believing the family were refugees and unaware of their identity – resettled them in the village of St. Gilgen. After St Gilgen, Pavelić stayed with the family of a prewar Macedonian revolutionary for several weeks before settling in Obertrum. Pavelić stayed there until April 1946.

== Post-war ==

=== Italy ===
He entered Italy disguised as a priest with a Peruvian passport. Passing Venice and Florence, he arrived in Rome in the spring of 1946 disguised as a Catholic priest and using the name Don Pedro Gonner. On arrival in Rome he was given shelter by the Vatican and stayed at a number of residences that belonged to the Vatican while in Rome where he started to gather his associates. Pavelić formed the Croatian State Committee () headed by Lovro Sušić, Mate Frković and Božidar Kavran.

Tito and his new Communist government accused the Catholic Church of harboring Pavelić who they stated, along with the Western &quot;imperialists&quot;, wanted to &quot;revive Nazism&quot; and take over communist Eastern Europe. The Yugoslav press claimed that Pavelić had stayed at the papal summer residence at Castel Gandolfo, while CIA information states that he stayed at a monastery near the papal residence in the summer and autumn of 1948.

For some time, Pavelić hid in a Jesuit house near Naples. In the autumn of 1948 he met Krunoslav Draganović, a Roman Catholic priest, who helped him obtain a Red Cross passport in the Hungarian name of &quot;Pál Aranyos&quot;. Draganović allegedly planned to deliver Pavelić to the Italian police, but Pavelić avoided capture and fled to Argentina. The US never had any intention to have Pavelić extradited to Yugoslavia, even if they had known his location.

=== Argentina, Chile and attempted assassination ===
Pavelić arrived in Buenos Aires on 6 November 1948 on the Italian merchant ship &quot;Sestriere&quot;, where he initially lived with the former Ustaša and writer Vinko Nikolić. In Buenos Aires Pavelić was joined by his son Velimir and daughter Mirjana. Soon afterwards, his wife Maria and older daughter Višnja also arrived.

Pavelić took up employment as a security advisor to Argentinian president Juan Perón. Pavelić&#x27;s arrival documents show the assumed name of &quot;Pablo Aranjos&quot;, which he continued to use. In 1950 Pavelić was given amnesty and allowed to stay in Argentina along with 34,000 other Croats, including former Nazi collaborators and those who had fled from the Allied advance. Following this, Pavelić reverted to his earlier pseudonym &quot;Antonio Serdar&quot; and continued to live in Buenos Aires.

According to Robert B. McCormick, the Vatican saw Pavelić as a man who had made mistakes but had fought for the just cause.

As for most other political immigrants in Argentina, life was hard and he had to work (as a bricklayer). His best contact with the Peróns was another former Ustaša Branko Benzon, who enjoyed good relations with Evita Perón, wife of the president. Benzon had briefly been the Croatian ambassador to Germany during World War II and had known Hitler personally, which benefited Croatian-German relations. Thanks to Benzon&#x27;s friendship with Evita Perón, Pavelić became the owner of an influential building company. Not long after arriving he joined the Ustaše-related &quot;Croatian Home Guard&quot; () organization.

At the end of the 1940s, many former Ustaše split from Pavelić because they believed that Croats, now under new circumstances, needed new political direction. Many who split from Pavelić continued to call themselves Ustaše and sought the revival of the Independent State of Croatia. The most well known of these separatists was the former Ustaše officer and head of the NDH concentration and extermination camp network, Vjekoslav Luburić, who lived in Spain. In Argentina, Pavelić used the &quot;Croatian Home Guard&quot; to gather Croatian political emigrants. Pavelić tried to expand the activities of this organization, and in 1950 founded the Croatian Statehood Party, which ceased to exist that year.

On 10 April 1951, on the 10th anniversary of the Independent State of Croatia, Pavelić announced the Croatia State Government. This new government considered itself to be a government in exile. Other Ustaše emigrants continued to arrive in Argentina, and they united under Pavelić&#x27;s leadership, increasing their political activities. Pavelić himself remained politically active, publishing various statements, articles, and speeches in which he claimed that the Yugoslav Communist regime promoted Serbian hegemony.

In 1954, Pavelić met with Milan Stojadinović, a former Royal Yugoslav Prime Minister, who also lived in Buenos Aires. The subject of their meeting was trying to find a solution for the historic conciliation between the Serbs and Croats. The meeting stirred controversy, but had no practical significance. On 8 June 1956, Pavelić and other Ustaše immigrants founded the Croatian Liberation Movement ( or HOP), which aimed to re-establish Nazism and the NDH. The HOP saw itself as &quot;a determined adversary of communism, atheism and Yugoslavism in any possible form&quot;.

On 10 April 1957, the 16th anniversary of the founding of the Independent State of Croatia, Pavelić was grievously wounded in an assassination attempt by the Serbian Blagoje Jovović, a hotel owner and former Royal Yugoslav officer who had been in the Montenegrin Chetniks during the war.

Jovović had tried to assassinate Pavelić multiple times, planning it as early as 1946, when he learned Pavelić was in hiding inside the Vatican. Jovović shot Pavelić in the back and collar bone while the latter was exiting a bus in El Palomar, a Buenos Aires suburb near his home. Pavelić was transferred to the Syrian-Lebanese hospital, where his true identity was established. After Perón&#x27;s fall from power, Pavelić fell out of favour with the Argentine government; Yugoslavia again requested his extradition. Pavelić refused to stay in hospital, even though a bullet was lodged in his spine. Two weeks after the shooting, as the Argentine authorities agreed to grant the Yugoslav government&#x27;s extradition request, he moved to Chile. He spent four months in Santiago, and then moved to Spain. Reports circulated that Pavelić had fled to Paraguay to work for the Stroessner regime; his Spanish asylum became known only in late 1959.

=== Death in Spain ===

Pavelić arrived in Madrid on 29 November 1957. He continued contacts with members of the Croatian Liberation Movement and received visitors from around the world. Pavelić lived secretly with his family, probably by agreement with the Spanish authorities. Though he was granted asylum, the Spanish authorities did not allow him public appearances. In the middle of 1958, he sent a message from Madrid to the Assembly of Croatian Societies in Munich.

He expressed his wish that all Croats unite with the goal of re-establishing the Independent State of Croatia. Some groups distanced themselves from Pavelić and others did so after his death. In his will, he named as his successor as the president of the Croatian Liberation Movement. Pavelić died on 28 December 1959 at the Hospital Alemán in Madrid at the age of 70 from the wounds he sustained in the assassination attempt by Jovović. He was buried in San Isidro Cemetery, Madrid&#x27;s oldest private burial ground.

== In popular culture ==
* Harry Turtledove&#x27;s short story &quot;Ready for the Fatherland&quot; is set in an alternate history where the Independent State of Croatia continues to exist in 1979. Pavelić is revered as the first &quot;Poglavnik&quot; and his image appears on the State&#x27;s primary currency, but no further details are shared as to how his life played out in that timeline, which diverged from ours in February 1943.
* In a 2015 Croatian comedy film &quot;National Hero Lily Vidić&quot;, Pavelić is portrayed by . The movie follows a group of Yugoslav partisans, led by a young poet Lily Vidić, who compete in the NDH&#x27;s fictional talent show &quot;Factor X&quot; whose winner wins the chance to perform at the Pavelić&#x27;s reception for Hitler. Partisans see it as an opportunity to kill both Hitler and Pavelić, and thus end WWII. In 2017, the movie was adapted into a theatrical play where Pavelić was portrayed by Boris Mirković.

== References ==
Notes
Bibliography
::Books
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
::Journal articles
* 
* 
* 
* 
::News articles
* 
* 

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q36965" start="0" end="12" title="Ante Pavelić" label="Ante Pavelić"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="102" end="109" title="fascist" label="fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q38352698" start="110" end="126" title="ultranationalist" label="ultranationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q151179" start="153" end="159" title="Ustaše" label="Ustaše"/>
<link wikidata="Q153128" start="192" end="220" title="Independent State of Croatia" label="Independent State of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17008789" start="238" end="250" title="List of World War II puppet states" label="puppet state"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="282" end="292" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="315" end="327" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q48742118" start="332" end="345" title="Fascist Italy" label="Fascist Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280677" start="484" end="489" title="Serbs of Croatia" label="Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509326" start="491" end="495" title="Jews in Croatia" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502513" start="497" end="503" title="Romani people in Croatia" label="Romani"/>
<link wikidata="Q155198" start="509" end="522" title="Yugoslav Partisans" label="anti-fascists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278544" start="563" end="580" title="Genocide of Serbs in the Independent State of Croatia" label="genocide of Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q117571" start="586" end="594" title="Genocide of Romani people in the Independent State of Croatia" label="Porajmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q4144567" start="603" end="623" title="The Holocaust in the Independent State of Croatia" label="Holocaust in the NDH"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250281" start="708" end="723" title="Party of Rights" label="Party of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="731" end="752" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Kingdom of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="767" end="778" title="Nationalism" label="nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q12632688" start="791" end="825" title="Croatian question" label="support for an independent Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="963" end="970" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q164142" start="971" end="983" title="protectorate" label="protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q256036" start="1027" end="1031" title="King of Yugoslavia" label="King"/>
<link wikidata="Q207384" start="1032" end="1043" title="Alexander I of Yugoslavia" label="Alexander I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436252" start="1057" end="1079" title="6 January Dictatorship" label="6 January Dictatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q650723" start="1163" end="1209" title="Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization" label="Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q336289" start="1301" end="1312" title="Trial in absentia" label="in absentia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265120" start="1423" end="1443" title="Croatian nationalist" label="Croatian nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782463" start="1566" end="1575" title="Right-wing terrorism" label="terrorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q832295" start="1657" end="1681" title="Velebit uprising" label="a small uprising in Lika"/>
<link wikidata="Q207384" start="1710" end="1741" title="Assassination of Alexander I of Yugoslavia" label="assassination of King Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q70802" start="1843" end="1849" title="French Third Republic" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q532975" start="2044" end="2060" title="Slavko Kvaternik" label="Slavko Kvaternik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048318" start="2166" end="2175" title="Poglavnik" label="Poglavnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589400" start="2254" end="2271" title="Government of the Independent State of Croatia" label="puppet government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2384816" start="2385" end="2400" title="Greater Croatia" label="Greater Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888258" start="2432" end="2474" title="Treaties of Rome (1941)" label="relinquish several territorial concessions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284134" start="2536" end="2548" title="Anti-Serb sentiment in Croatia" label="anti-Serbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4775242" start="2553" end="2564" title="Antisemitism in Europe" label="antisemitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351708" start="2636" end="2673" title="Concentration camps in the Independent State of Croatia" label="concentration and extermination camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q36704" start="2888" end="2904" title="History of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslav history"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263175" start="2982" end="2997" title="Mladen Lorković" label="Mladen Lorković"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134160" start="3002" end="3012" title="Ante Vokić" label="Ante Vokić"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="3111" end="3117" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q700983" start="3133" end="3153" title="surrender of Germany" label="surrender of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q681681" start="3180" end="3190" title="Croatian Armed Forces (Independent State of Croatia)" label="his troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q298770" start="3277" end="3284" title="Austria within Nazi Germany" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="3334" end="3346" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q312388" start="3482" end="3504" title="Bleiburg repatriations" label="killings of the Ustaše"/>
<link wikidata="Q237" start="3575" end="3582" title="Vatican City" label="Vatican"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="3599" end="3608" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q93330" start="3703" end="3713" title="Juan Perón" label="Juan Perón"/>
<link wikidata="Q12969145" start="3719" end="3741" title="President of Argentina" label="President of Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q699862" start="3756" end="3796" title="Ratlines (World War II)" label="sanctuary for many fascist war criminals"/>
<link wikidata="Q12628011" start="3816" end="3837" title="Blagoje Jovović" label="a Serbian hotel owner"/>
<link wikidata="Q13474305" start="4010" end="4025" title="Francoist Spain" label="Francoist Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q189863" start="4102" end="4115" title="Herzegovina" label="Herzegovinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268908" start="4127" end="4134" title="Bradina (Konjic)" label="Bradina"/>
<link wikidata="Q6097854" start="4152" end="4165" title="Ivan Mountain" label="Ivan Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q974745" start="4175" end="4181" title="Konjic" label="Konjic"/>
<link wikidata="Q939528" start="4204" end="4211" title="Hadžići" label="Hadžići"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="4230" end="4244" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="4261" end="4284" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austro-Hungarian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q609233" start="4311" end="4333" title="Austro-Hungarian rule in Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3514091" start="4354" end="4363" title="Krivi Put" label="Krivi Put"/>
<link wikidata="Q223275" start="4391" end="4398" title="Velebit" label="Velebit"/>
<link wikidata="Q142894" start="4418" end="4422" title="Lika" label="Lika"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="4440" end="4447" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11194" start="4465" end="4473" title="Sarajevo" label="Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q390588" start="4474" end="4482" title="Metković" label="Metković"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275581" start="4553" end="4559" title="Jezero, Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Jezero"/>
<link wikidata="Q258429" start="4568" end="4573" title="Jajce" label="Jajce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618571" start="4623" end="4629" title="Maktab (education)" label="maktab"/>
<link wikidata="Q940348" start="4740" end="4747" title="Bosniaks" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q571619" start="5025" end="5039" title="Ante Starčević" label="Ante Starčević"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250281" start="5079" end="5094" title="Party of Rights" label="Party of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578160" start="5096" end="5107" title="Josip Frank" label="Josip Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q11194" start="5211" end="5219" title="Sarajevo" label="Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q239266" start="5224" end="5232" title="Višegrad" label="Višegrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250281" start="5481" end="5501" title="Party of Rights (1861–1929)" label="Pure Party of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578160" start="5579" end="5590" title="Josip Frank" label="Josip Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q532975" start="5613" end="5629" title="Slavko Kvaternik" label="Slavko Kvaternik"/>
<link wikidata="Q259466" start="5693" end="5697" title="Senj" label="Senj"/>
<link wikidata="Q55043" start="5715" end="5724" title="gymnasium (school)" label="gymnasium"/>
<link wikidata="Q639912" start="5851" end="5857" title="Istria" label="Istria"/>
<link wikidata="Q695767" start="5864" end="5869" title="Buzet" label="Buzet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3617" start="5917" end="5925" title="Karlovac" label="Karlovac"/>
<link wikidata="Q675848" start="6047" end="6067" title="University of Zagreb" label="University of Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q577017" start="6164" end="6167" title="Ban (title)" label="Ban"/>
<link wikidata="Q533558" start="6171" end="6187" title="Kingdom of Croatia-Slavonia" label="Croatia-Slavonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504454" start="6189" end="6201" title="Slavko Cuvaj" label="Slavko Cuvaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q959320" start="6256" end="6265" title="Doctor of law" label="doctorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="6468" end="6479" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250281" start="6518" end="6533" title="Party of Rights" label="Party of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q718374" start="6783" end="6818" title="State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs" label="State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q241748" start="6828" end="6845" title="Kingdom of Serbia" label="Kingdom of Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q61128743" start="7185" end="7200" title="Vladimir Prebeg" label="Vladimir Prebeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q23020231" start="7221" end="7241" title="1921 Zagreb local elections" label="1921 local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q313843" start="7341" end="7353" title="Nikola Pašić" label="Nikola Pašić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282536" start="7401" end="7428" title="People&amp;#x27;s Radical Party" label="People&amp;#x27;s Radical Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q638194" start="7461" end="7483" title="Croatian Peasant Party" label="Croatian Peasant Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282536" start="8085" end="8112" title="People&amp;#x27;s Radical Party" label="People&amp;#x27;s Radical Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3888272" start="8171" end="8180" title="Ivo Pilar" label="Ivo Pilar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280614" start="8185" end="8198" title="Milan Šufflay" label="Milan Šufflay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187106" start="8280" end="8298" title="Croatian Committee" label="Croatian Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637186" start="8476" end="8506" title="St. Mark&amp;#x27;s Church, Zagreb" label="St. Mark&amp;#x27;s Church, Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="8624" end="8630" title="Jews" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q17097756" start="8943" end="8962" title="Serbian nationalism" label="Serbian nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q27038" start="9404" end="9417" title="Zagreb County" label="Zagreb County"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="9640" end="9645" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q639912" start="10007" end="10013" title="Istria" label="Istria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647" start="10015" end="10021" title="Rijeka" label="Rijeka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3370" start="10023" end="10028" title="Zadar" label="Zadar"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="10037" end="10045" title="Adriatic Sea" label="Adriatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="10084" end="10095" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q207468" start="10203" end="10215" title="Bay of Kotor" label="Bay of Kotor"/>
<link wikidata="Q528042" start="10220" end="10228" title="Dalmatia" label="Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187094" start="10374" end="10387" title="Croatian Bloc (coalition)" label="Croatian Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886313" start="10562" end="10572" title="Macedonians (Bulgarians)" label="Macedonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q384" start="10585" end="10591" title="Skopje" label="Skopje"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408138" start="10629" end="10679" title="Macedonian Youth Secret Revolutionary Organization" label="Macedonian Youth Secret Revolutionary Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q672922" start="10691" end="10704" title="Ivan Mihailov" label="Ivan Mihailov"/>
<link wikidata="Q156595" start="10795" end="10813" title="self-determination" label="self-determination"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187094" start="10923" end="10936" title="Croatian Bloc (coalition)" label="Croatian Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501365" start="10944" end="10957" title="1927 Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes parliamentary election" label="1927 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q571638" start="11079" end="11091" title="Ante Trumbić" label="Ante Trumbić"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="11306" end="11313" title="fascist" label="fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="11333" end="11349" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q194236" start="11369" end="11379" title="separatism" label="separatist"/>
<link wikidata="Q85464025" start="11794" end="11806" title="Rory Yeomans" label="Rory Yeomans"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12077" end="12105" title="Peasant-Democratic Coalition" label="Peasant-Democratic Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12286" end="12318" title="Croatian Rights Republican Youth" label="Croatian Rights Republican Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4957379" start="12418" end="12432" title="Branimir Jelić" label="Branimir Jelić"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436252" start="12803" end="12825" title="6 January Dictatorship" label="6 January Dictatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q12632714" start="12888" end="12903" title="Hrvoje Matković" label="Hrvoje Matković"/>
<link wikidata="Q151179" start="13047" end="13053" title="Ustaša" label="Ustaša"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="13484" end="13490" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q4989857" start="13613" end="13619" title="émigré" label="émigré"/>
<link wikidata="Q84874" start="13678" end="13694" title="Stjepan Sarkotić" label="Stjepan Sarkotić"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13773" end="13786" title="Gustav Perčec" label="Gustav Perčec"/>
<link wikidata="Q650723" start="14105" end="14151" title="Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization" label="Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q472" start="14189" end="14194" title="Sofia" label="Sofia"/>
<link wikidata="Q672922" start="14238" end="14251" title="Ivan Mihailov" label="Ivan Mihailov"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14263" end="14280" title="Sofia Declaration" label="Sofia Declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q336289" start="14544" end="14555" title="trial in absentia" label="in absentia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656872" start="15007" end="15021" title="Identity document forgery" label="false passport"/>
<link wikidata="Q549097" start="15392" end="15399" title="Arnaldo Mussolini" label="Arnaldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="15973" end="15981" title="Adriatic" label="Adriatic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16199" end="16212" title="Ivan Perčević" label="Ivan Perčević"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263175" start="16223" end="16238" title="Mladen Lorković" label="Mladen Lorković"/>
<link wikidata="Q701960" start="16243" end="16253" title="Mile Budak" label="Mile Budak"/>
<link wikidata="Q193518" start="16326" end="16334" title="sabotage" label="sabotage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283" start="16339" end="16348" title="terrorism" label="terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q103603" start="16449" end="16456" title="Bovegno" label="Bovegno"/>
<link wikidata="Q6221" start="16464" end="16471" title="Brescia" label="Brescia"/>
<link wikidata="Q100767" start="16564" end="16573" title="Borgo Val di Taro" label="Borgotaro"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16575" end="16581" title="Lepari" label="Lepari"/>
<link wikidata="Q20526225" start="16586" end="16598" title="Janka-Puszta" label="Janka-Puszta"/>
<link wikidata="Q495" start="16841" end="16847" title="Turin" label="Torino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891" start="16862" end="16869" title="Bologna" label="Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q945901" start="17762" end="17775" title="Ivo Goldstein" label="Ivo Goldstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q487500" start="18250" end="18257" title="Spittal an der Drau" label="Spittal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3514556" start="18298" end="18316" title="Vjekoslav Servatzy" label="Vjekoslav Servatzy"/>
<link wikidata="Q832295" start="18414" end="18430" title="Velebit uprising" label="Velebit uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q511329" start="18439" end="18456" title="Andrija Artuković" label="Andrija Artuković"/>
<link wikidata="Q23482" start="19995" end="20004" title="Marseille" label="Marseille"/>
<link wikidata="Q207384" start="20031" end="20056" title="Alexander I of Yugoslavia" label="Alexander I of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q271887" start="20085" end="20098" title="Louis Barthou" label="Louis Barthou"/>
<link wikidata="Q371355" start="20147" end="20165" title="Vlado Chernozemski" label="Vlado Chernozemski"/>
<link wikidata="Q626389" start="20745" end="20751" title="Sûreté" label="Sûreté"/>
<link wikidata="Q495" start="21170" end="21175" title="Turin" label="Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q667819" start="21222" end="21242" title="Eugen Dido Kvaternik" label="Eugen Dido Kvaternik"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504383" start="21443" end="21462" title="1935 Yugoslavian parliamentary election" label="5 May 1935 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q254114" start="21529" end="21541" title="Vladko Maček" label="Vladko Maček"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668049" start="21905" end="21913" title="internment" label="interned"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="22018" end="22030" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="22094" end="22114" title="Treaty of Versailles" label="Treaty of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q56034" start="22161" end="22195" title="German Ministry of Foreign Affairs" label="German Ministry of Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q601252" start="22714" end="22733" title="Banovina of Croatia" label="Banovina of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331684" start="23356" end="23367" title="repatriation" label="repatriated"/>
<link wikidata="Q8461" start="23565" end="23569" title="racism" label="race"/>
<link wikidata="Q648570" start="23608" end="23620" title="Milan Stojadinović" label="Stojadinović"/>
<link wikidata="Q220105" start="23621" end="23626" title="Galeazzo Ciano" label="Ciano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751" start="23747" end="23752" title="Siena" label="Siena"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="24001" end="24009" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125321" start="24265" end="24273" title="monetary union" label="monetary"/>
<link wikidata="Q218819" start="24275" end="24282" title="customs union" label="customs"/>
<link wikidata="Q188800" start="24287" end="24301" title="personal union" label="personal union"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="24530" end="24548" title="Battle of France" label="invasion of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="24579" end="24591" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q153122" start="24676" end="24691" title="Tripartite Pact" label="Tripartite Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118311" start="24757" end="24770" title="Yugoslav military coup of March 27, 1941" label="military coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="24929" end="24933" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q474857" start="24939" end="24953" title="Villa Torlonia (Rome)" label="Villa Torlonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q202546" start="25121" end="25135" title="Filippo Anfuso" label="Filippo Anfuso"/>
<link wikidata="Q2514216" start="25490" end="25505" title="liaison officer" label="liaison officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308846" start="25805" end="25824" title="Royal Yugoslav Army" label="Royal Yugoslav Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q601252" start="26385" end="26401" title="Banovina Croatia" label="Banovina Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q254114" start="26447" end="26459" title="Vladko Maček" label="Vladko Maček"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280677" start="26486" end="26499" title="Serbs of Croatia" label="Croatian Serb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252274" start="26500" end="26528" title="Independent Democratic Party (Yugoslavia)" label="Independent Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26741" end="26765" title="Croatian Peasant Defence" label="Croatian Peasant Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q532975" start="27485" end="27501" title="Slavko Kvaternik" label="Slavko Kvaternik"/>
<link wikidata="Q153128" start="27647" end="27675" title="Independent State of Croatia" label="Independent State of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q155435" start="27804" end="27820" title="SS-Brigadeführer" label="SS-Brigadeführer"/>
<link wikidata="Q215942" start="27839" end="27857" title="Edmund Veesenmayer" label="Edmund Veesenmayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q189863" start="27987" end="27998" title="Herzegovina" label="Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q142894" start="28003" end="28007" title="Lika" label="Lika"/>
<link wikidata="Q13376" start="28428" end="28435" title="Pistoia" label="Pistoia"/>
<link wikidata="Q546" start="29330" end="29337" title="Trieste" label="Trieste"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647" start="29342" end="29348" title="Rijeka" label="Rijeka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3617" start="29364" end="29372" title="Karlovac" label="Karlovac"/>
<link wikidata="Q101886" start="29489" end="29511" title="Joachim von Ribbentrop" label="Joachim von Ribbentrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589400" start="30470" end="30495" title="Government of the Independent State of Croatia" label="Croatian State Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446865" start="30687" end="30702" title="Osman Kulenović" label="Osman Kulenović"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="31160" end="31166" title="Nazism" label="Nazism"/>
<link wikidata="Q747081" start="31171" end="31186" title="Italian Fascism" label="Italian Fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q747439" start="31188" end="31222" title="Clericalism" label="Catholic clerical authoritarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424084" start="31699" end="31723" title="German-Italian relations" label="German-Italian relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q437" start="31763" end="31772" title="Ljubljana" label="Ljubljana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3617" start="31911" end="31919" title="Karlovac" label="Karlovac"/>
<link wikidata="Q189161" start="32118" end="32124" title="Trogir" label="Trogir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663" start="32126" end="32131" title="Split, Croatia" label="Split"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722" start="32136" end="32145" title="Dubrovnik" label="Dubrovnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638131" start="32311" end="32316" title="Tržič" label="Tržič"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888258" start="32428" end="32442" title="Treaties of Rome (1941)" label="Treaty of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q528042" start="32476" end="32484" title="Dalmatia" label="Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6059" start="32486" end="32489" title="Krk (island)" label="Krk"/>
<link wikidata="Q13277" start="32491" end="32494" title="Rab (island)" label="Rab"/>
<link wikidata="Q13288" start="32496" end="32503" title="Korčula (island)" label="Korčula"/>
<link wikidata="Q399139" start="32505" end="32512" title="Biograd" label="Biograd"/>
<link wikidata="Q3549" start="32514" end="32521" title="Šibenik" label="Šibenik"/>
<link wikidata="Q189161" start="32523" end="32529" title="Trogir" label="Trogir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663" start="32531" end="32536" title="Split, Croatia" label="Split"/>
<link wikidata="Q341554" start="32538" end="32543" title="Čiovo" label="Čiovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165734" start="32545" end="32551" title="Drvenik Veli" label="Veliki"/>
<link wikidata="Q612209" start="32554" end="32566" title="Drvenik Mali" label="Mali Drvenik"/>
<link wikidata="Q392225" start="32568" end="32573" title="Šolta" label="Šolta"/>
<link wikidata="Q211306" start="32575" end="32580" title="Mljet" label="Mljet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781214" start="32594" end="32601" title="Konavle" label="Konavle"/>
<link wikidata="Q207468" start="32610" end="32622" title="Bay of Kotor" label="Bay of Kotor"/>
<link wikidata="Q9296449" start="32927" end="32939" title="Army of the Independent State of Croatia" label="Domobranstvo"/>
<link wikidata="Q169902" start="33185" end="33215" title="Prince Aimone, Duke of Aosta" label="Prince Aimone, Duke of Spoleto"/>
<link wikidata="Q252619" start="33220" end="33235" title="King of Croatia" label="King of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="33262" end="33278" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Kingdom of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q153128" start="33427" end="33455" title="Independent State of Croatia" label="Independent State of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q169902" start="33489" end="33500" title="Tomislav II" label="Tomislav II"/>
<link wikidata="Q429367" start="33608" end="33621" title="Duke of Aosta" label="Duke of Aosta"/>
<link wikidata="Q986843" start="33851" end="33885" title="Hungarian occupation of Yugoslav territories" label="annexation of Međimurje by Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048318" start="35740" end="35749" title="Poglavnik" label="Poglavnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q347471" start="36386" end="36399" title="Stjepan Radić" label="Stjepan Radić"/>
<link wikidata="Q571619" start="36434" end="36448" title="Ante Starčević" label="Ante Starčević"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604" start="36484" end="36497" title="Pope Pius XII" label="Pope Pius XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="36529" end="36536" title="Holy See" label="Vatican"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737008" start="36591" end="36596" title="Legation" label="legat"/>
<link wikidata="Q163181" start="36727" end="36734" title="Berghof (residence)" label="Berghof"/>
<link wikidata="Q15863" start="36891" end="36900" title="Slovenes" label="Slovenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q701914" start="36936" end="36981" title="Territory of the Military Commander in Serbia" label="Territory of the Military Commander in Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q112416" start="37113" end="37140" title="Edmund Glaise von Horstenau" label="Edmund Glaise von Horstenau"/>
<link wikidata="Q155032" start="37730" end="37758" title="Jasenovac concentration camp" label="Jasenovac concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q192914" start="37952" end="37971" title="cult of personality" label="cult of personality"/>
<link wikidata="Q153271" start="38031" end="38048" title="Nazi salute" label="Nazi-style salute"/>
<link wikidata="Q371576" start="38253" end="38258" title="Sabor" label="Sabor"/>
<link wikidata="Q94117" start="38436" end="38480" title="Grand Cross of the Order of the German Eagle" label="Grand Cross of the Order of the German Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q215947" start="38482" end="38498" title="Siegfried Kasche" label="Siegfried Kasche"/>
<link wikidata="Q667819" start="38546" end="38566" title="Eugen Dido Kvaternik" label="Eugen Dido Kvaternik"/>
<link wikidata="Q532975" start="38575" end="38591" title="Slavko Kvaternik" label="Slavko Kvaternik"/>
<link wikidata="Q152081" start="38933" end="38946" title="concentration camp" label="concentration"/>
<link wikidata="Q628505" start="38951" end="38968" title="forced labor camp" label="forced labor camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q155032" start="39003" end="39031" title="Jasenovac concentration camp" label="Jasenovac concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="39131" end="39143" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q665241" start="39182" end="39206" title="Croatian Orthodox Church" label="Croatian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q979664" start="40041" end="40073" title="Anti-Communist Volunteer Militia" label="Anti-Communist Volunteer Militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q872672" start="40433" end="40441" title="Chetniks" label="Chetniks"/>
<link wikidata="Q638194" start="40946" end="40968" title="Croatian Peasant Party" label="Croatian Peasant Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q12628234" start="40977" end="40992" title="Božidar Magovac" label="Božidar Magovac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789619" start="41403" end="41424" title="Croatian Encyclopedia" label="Croatian Encyclopedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q253414" start="41531" end="41535" title="FIFA" label="FIFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q12789691" start="41772" end="41785" title="Generaloberst" label="Generaloberst"/>
<link wikidata="Q93367" start="41786" end="41800" title="Alexander Löhr" label="Alexander Löhr"/>
<link wikidata="Q667819" start="41915" end="41947" title="Dido Kvaternik" label="Eugen &amp;quot;Dido&amp;quot; Kvaternik"/>
<link wikidata="Q154401" start="42091" end="42099" title="Slovak Republic (1939–1945)" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q162312" start="42709" end="42724" title="Reichsführer-SS" label="Reichsführer-SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100519" start="42810" end="42837" title="Generalleutnant" label="Generalleutnant der Polizei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782705" start="42870" end="42892" title="Konstantin Kammerhofer" label="Konstantin Kammerhofer"/>
<link wikidata="Q160765" start="42918" end="42964" title="7th SS Volunteer Mountain Division Prinz Eugen" label="7th SS Volunteer Mountain Division Prinz Eugen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711450" start="43054" end="43067" title="Germans of Yugoslavia" label="Volksdeutsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q9296449" start="43114" end="43124" title="Croatian Home Guard (Independent State of Croatia)" label="Home Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1561127" start="43283" end="43296" title="Nikola Mandić" label="Nikola Mandić"/>
<link wikidata="Q695532" start="43331" end="43348" title="Miroslav Navratil" label="Miroslav Navratil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435190" start="43631" end="43645" title="Ustaše militia" label="Ustaše militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3885257" start="44229" end="44253" title="Fall of the Fascist regime in Italy" label="fall of Fascism in Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q169902" start="44255" end="44266" title="Tomislav II" label="Tomislav II"/>
<link wikidata="Q150642" start="44313" end="44332" title="Victor Emmanuel III of Italy" label="Victor Emmanuel III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1561127" start="44474" end="44487" title="Nikola Mandić" label="Nikola Mandić"/>
<link wikidata="Q714259" start="44566" end="44581" title="Operation Achse" label="Operation Achse"/>
<link wikidata="Q155435" start="45007" end="45023" title="Brigadeführer" label="SS-Brigadeführer"/>
<link wikidata="Q17321501" start="45073" end="45083" title="Ernst Otto Fick" label="Ernst Fick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134154" start="45288" end="45307" title="Lorković-Vokić coup" label="Lorković-Vokić coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134160" start="45359" end="45369" title="Ante Vokić" label="Ante Vokić"/>
<link wikidata="Q43250" start="45606" end="45613" title="Gestapo" label="Gestapo"/>
<link wikidata="Q638194" start="45807" end="45829" title="Croatian Peasant Party" label="Croatian Peasant Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q9296449" start="45852" end="45860" title="Army of the Independent State of Croatia" label="Domobran"/>
<link wikidata="Q6527775" start="45939" end="45955" title="Lepoglava prison" label="Lepoglava prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="46181" end="46189" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q127885" start="46536" end="46541" title="Serbs" label="Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="46549" end="46553" title="Romani people" label="Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q167420" start="46568" end="46574" title="Croats" label="Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q940348" start="46579" end="46587" title="Bosniaks" label="Bosniaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q80130" start="46667" end="46683" title="Nuremberg Trials" label="Nuremberg Trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q155198" start="46962" end="46971" title="Yugoslav Partisans" label="Partisans"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="47211" end="47223" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q191764" start="47300" end="47311" title="Khmer Rouge" label="Khmer Rouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="47315" end="47323" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q667819" start="47449" end="47469" title="Eugen Dido Kvaternik" label="Eugen Dido Kvaternik"/>
<link wikidata="Q511329" start="47495" end="47512" title="Andrija Artuković" label="Andrija Artuković"/>
<link wikidata="Q470694" start="47570" end="47587" title="Vjekoslav Luburić" label="Vjekoslav Luburić"/>
<link wikidata="Q5614677" start="47925" end="47932" title="Gudovac massacre" label="Gudovac"/>
<link wikidata="Q7919085" start="47934" end="47940" title="Veljun massacre" label="Veljun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290410" start="47945" end="47959" title="Glina massacre" label="Glina massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q34627" start="48207" end="48216" title="Synagogue" label="Synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q112416" start="48313" end="48340" title="Edmund Glaise-Horstenau" label="Edmund von Glaise-Horstenau"/>
<link wikidata="Q152412" start="48377" end="48380" title="OKW" label="OKW"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="49068" end="49070" title="SS" label="SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q43067" start="49077" end="49093" title="Heinrich Himmler" label="Heinrich Himmler"/>
<link wikidata="Q155032" start="50127" end="50155" title="Jasenovac concentration camp" label="Jasenovac concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502521" start="50585" end="50600" title="Rogaška Slatina" label="Rogaška Slatina"/>
<link wikidata="Q93367" start="50626" end="50640" title="Alexander Löhr" label="Alexander Löhr"/>
<link wikidata="Q700983" start="50668" end="50695" title="German Instrument of Surrender" label="Germany&amp;#x27;s capitulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q470694" start="50780" end="50797" title="Vjekoslav Luburić" label="Vjekoslav Luburić"/>
<link wikidata="Q312388" start="51453" end="51475" title="Bleiburg repatriations" label="Bleiburg repatriations"/>
<link wikidata="Q121397" start="51701" end="51713" title="human shield" label="human shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7839990" start="51905" end="51930" title="Trial of Mile Budak" label="a one-day trial in Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q34713" start="52015" end="52023" title="Salzburg" label="Salzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q264430" start="52160" end="52170" title="St. Gilgen" label="St. Gilgen"/>
<link wikidata="Q701171" start="52294" end="52302" title="Obertrum" label="Obertrum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="52812" end="52823" title="Lovro Sušić" label="Lovro Sušić"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="52825" end="52837" title="Mate Frković" label="Mate Frković"/>
<link wikidata="Q4953067" start="52842" end="52856" title="Božidar Kavran" label="Božidar Kavran"/>
<link wikidata="Q9161" start="52859" end="52863" title="Josip Broz Tito" label="Tito"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="52978" end="52985" title="Western world" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="53072" end="53086" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="53146" end="53151" title="Pope" label="papal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739100" start="53152" end="53187" title="Papal Palace of Castel Gandolfo" label="summer residence at Castel Gandolfo"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="53195" end="53198" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="53358" end="53364" title="Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q138591" start="53395" end="53415" title="Krunoslav Draganović" label="Krunoslav Draganović"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="53646" end="53655" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7932614" start="53983" end="53996" title="Vinko Nikolić" label="Vinko Nikolić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486" start="54001" end="54013" title="Buenos Aires" label="Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q93330" start="54221" end="54231" title="Juan Perón" label="Juan Perón"/>
<link wikidata="Q185943" start="54371" end="54378" title="amnesty" label="amnesty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4957457" start="54942" end="54955" title="Branko Benzon" label="Branko Benzon"/>
<link wikidata="Q40933" start="54989" end="55000" title="Evita Perón" label="Evita Perón"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187215" start="55153" end="55178" title="Croatian-German relations" label="Croatian-German relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q470694" start="55817" end="55834" title="Vjekoslav Luburić" label="Vjekoslav Luburić"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56044" end="56068" title="Croatian Statehood Party" label="Croatian Statehood Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589400" start="56205" end="56229" title="Government of the Independent State of Croatia" label="Croatia State Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q678116" start="56277" end="56296" title="government in exile" label="government in exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="56571" end="56596" title="SFR Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslav Communist regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q648570" start="56651" end="56669" title="Milan Stojadinović" label="Milan Stojadinović"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287076" start="56994" end="57022" title="Croatian Liberation Movement" label="Croatian Liberation Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q12628011" start="57366" end="57381" title="Blagoje Jovović" label="Blagoje Jovović"/>
<link wikidata="Q16343" start="57671" end="57682" title="clavicle" label="collar bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609530" start="57721" end="57731" title="El Palomar, Buenos Aires" label="El Palomar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042919" start="57874" end="57902" title="Revolución Libertadora" label="Perón&amp;#x27;s fall from power"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887" start="58259" end="58267" title="Santiago de Chile" label="Santiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q152534" start="58363" end="58373" title="Alfredo Stroessner" label="Stroessner"/>
<link wikidata="Q11283415" start="58394" end="58400" title="right of asylum" label="asylum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="58477" end="58483" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="58899" end="58905" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q5760351" start="59363" end="59382" title="Saint Isidore Cemetery" label="San Isidro Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q455780" start="59456" end="59472" title="Harry Turtledove" label="Harry Turtledove"/>
<link wikidata="Q224989" start="59542" end="59559" title="alternate history" label="alternate history"/>
<link wikidata="Q224989" start="59829" end="59847" title="point of divergence" label="diverged from ours"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60373" end="60387" title="Boris Mirković" label="Boris Mirković"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="331647" wikidata="Q599938" url="?curid=331647" title="Don McKinnon">
<text>Sir Donald Charles McKinnon (born 27 February 1939) is a New Zealand politician who served as the 12th deputy prime minister of New Zealand and the minister of Foreign Affairs of New Zealand. He was the secretary-general of the Commonwealth of Nations from 2000 until 2008.

==Early life==
McKinnon was born in Blackheath, London. His father was Major-General Walter McKinnon, CB CBE, a New Zealand Chief of the General Staff, and once Chairman of New Zealand Broadcasting Corporation. McKinnon&#x27;s brothers include the twins John McKinnon, the former New Zealand Secretary of Defence and a former Ambassador to China, and Malcolm McKinnon, an editor and academic, and Ian McKinnon, Pro-Chancellor of Victoria University of Wellington, School Headmaster of Scots College and former Deputy Mayor of Wellington. The McKinnon brothers are great-great-grandsons of John Plimmer, known as the &quot;father of Wellington&quot;.

McKinnon was educated at Khandallah School and then Nelson College from 1952 to 1953. In 1956, he graduated from Woodrow Wilson High School, in Washington, D.C. McKinnon later spent a &quot;lengthy period&quot; in the Bighorn Mountains in Wyoming. He undertook study at Lincoln Agricultural College, New Zealand. After leaving university, he became a farm manager, and later a farm management consultant. In 1974, he became a real estate agent. In his spare time, he also worked as a rehabilitation tutor in prisons.

==Member of Parliament==



In the elections of 1969 and 1972, McKinnon stood unsuccessfully as the National Party&#x27;s candidate in the Birkenhead electorate, having previously served on two of the party&#x27;s electorate committees. In the election of 1978, McKinnon won the newly established seat of Albany, which covered much of the same area.

In 1980, McKinnon was made the government&#x27;s junior Whip. Two years later, he was made senior Whip. When Prime Minister Robert Muldoon called the snap election of 1984, and was defeated by David Lange&#x27;s New Zealand Labour Party, McKinnon remained senior Whip for his party in Opposition. In September 1987, following National&#x27;s defeat at the August election, he became deputy leader of the National Party after defeating Ruth Richardson for the position by just one vote. He was also appointed Shadow Minister of Defence and Shadow Minister of Health by leader Jim Bolger.

===Cabinet minister===
When National, then led by Jim Bolger, won the 1990 election, McKinnon became Deputy Prime Minister. He also became Minister of Foreign Affairs and Trade and Minister of Pacific Island Affairs. During his tenure in the former role, he oversaw New Zealand&#x27;s election to the UN Security Council, increased activity in the Commonwealth of Nations, and attempts to broker a truce on the island of Bougainville. He received recognition as a result of the Bougainville negotiations.

In 1996, the National Party required the support of the New Zealand First party to form a government, and part of the coalition agreement gave the office of Deputy Prime Minister to New Zealand First leader Winston Peters. McKinnon kept his role as Minister of Foreign Affairs, however, and also became Minister of Disarmament and Arms Control. When the coalition with New Zealand First collapsed, McKinnon did not resume the Deputy Prime Minister&#x27;s role as he had been replaced beforehand as Deputy National Party leader by Wyatt Creech and therefore Creech became Deputy Prime Minister instead, although he did gain the minor responsibility of Minister in Charge of War Pensions. McKinnon retired from parliament shortly after the 1999 election, being replaced by Arthur Anae.

==Secretary-General of the Commonwealth==

During his time as New Zealand&#x27;s Minister of Foreign Affairs, McKinnon had been highly involved with the Commonwealth. At the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting 1999 (CHOGM), in Durban, he was elected to the office of Secretary General. Since that time, he has had to deal with issues such as Zimbabwe&#x27;s Robert Mugabe and George Speight&#x27;s attempted nationalist coup in Fiji. McKinnon has also placed an emphasis on supporting &quot;good governance&quot;.

In late 2003, New Zealand media reported that Zimbabwe was attempting to gather support from other Commonwealth members to remove McKinnon from the office of Secretary-General, presumably in retaliation for McKinnon&#x27;s views about the issue of Zimbabwean democracy. The government of Zimbabwe denied that it was making any such efforts.

At the opening of the 2003 CHOGM, in Nigeria on 5 December, McKinnon was challenged for the position of Secretary-General by Lakshman Kadirgamar, a former Foreign Minister of Sri Lanka. However, McKinnon defeated Kadirgamar in a vote reported to be 40–11 in McKinnon&#x27;s favour.

McKinnon received an Honorary Doctorate from Heriot-Watt University in 2005

In 2007 McKinnon attempted to mediate between Fiji and the Australian and New Zealand governments in their continuing dispute over the appropriate timetable and rules for the holding of Fijian election in 2008.

In a 2007 interview McKinnon criticised British public support for evicted white farmers in Zimbabwe as being &quot;a bit of a guilt thing&quot; and argued that the evictions were justified as there was &quot;no way you can justify a society where 15,000 white farmers control 80 per cent of the most fertile land&quot;.

In the 2008 New Year Honours, McKinnon was appointed as a Member of the Order of New Zealand, New Zealand&#x27;s highest civilian honour.

In 2009, McKinnon was appointed a Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order for services to the Commonwealth. He is a vice-president of the Royal Commonwealth Society.

==Legacy==
Don McKinnon Drive is named after McKinnon, in his former electorate of Albany.

In April 2013, McKinnon released his memoirs of his time as Secretary General of the Commonwealth, entitled &quot;In The Ring&quot;.

McKinnon is chairman of the Global Panel Foundation Australasia, a non-governmental organisation that works in crisis areas around the world.

==Personal life==
McKinnon is married to his second wife, former journalist Clare de Lore, and together they have a son. McKinnon also has four other children from a previous marriage.

==References==
===Footnotes===
===Citations===
===Bibliography===
* 
==External links==
*Profile: Don McKinnon - BBC news
*The Global Panel Foundation





|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q599938" start="0" end="27" title="Don McKinnon" label="Sir Donald Charles McKinnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261068" start="103" end="139" title="deputy prime minister of New Zealand" label="deputy prime minister of New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866148" start="148" end="175" title="Minister of Foreign Affairs (New Zealand)" label="minister of Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111221" start="203" end="220" title="Commonwealth Secretary-General" label="secretary-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="228" end="251" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q880861" start="311" end="329" title="Blackheath, London" label="Blackheath, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q17403881" start="360" end="375" title="Walter McKinnon" label="Walter McKinnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16891204" start="448" end="484" title="New Zealand Broadcasting Corporation" label="New Zealand Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6248026" start="529" end="542" title="John McKinnon (diplomat)" label="John McKinnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6742499" start="626" end="642" title="Malcolm McKinnon" label="Malcolm McKinnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5982327" start="672" end="684" title="Ian McKinnon" label="Ian McKinnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150437" start="704" end="737" title="Victoria University of Wellington" label="Victoria University of Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435779" start="760" end="773" title="Scots College, Wellington" label="Scots College"/>
<link wikidata="Q52988199" start="792" end="811" title="Mayor of Wellington" label="Mayor of Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809552" start="864" end="876" title="John Plimmer" label="John Plimmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976962" start="978" end="992" title="Nelson College" label="Nelson College"/>
<link wikidata="Q8033204" start="1039" end="1065" title="Jackson-Reed High School" label="Woodrow Wilson High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="1070" end="1086" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q643243" start="1144" end="1161" title="Bighorn Mountains" label="Bighorn Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214" start="1165" end="1172" title="Wyoming" label="Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048626" start="1196" end="1224" title="Lincoln University (New Zealand)" label="Lincoln Agricultural College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016148" start="1492" end="1496" title="1969 New Zealand general election" label="1969"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016151" start="1501" end="1505" title="1972 New Zealand general election" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q204716" start="1544" end="1558" title="New Zealand National Party" label="National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q865555" start="1583" end="1593" title="Birkenhead, New Zealand" label="Birkenhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q17055243" start="1688" end="1704" title="1978 New Zealand general election" label="election of 1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q4709281" start="1749" end="1755" title="Albany (New Zealand electorate)" label="Albany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433693" start="1851" end="1855" title="whip (politics)" label="Whip"/>
<link wikidata="Q737739" start="1919" end="1933" title="Robert Muldoon" label="Robert Muldoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333366" start="1945" end="1958" title="snap election" label="snap election"/>
<link wikidata="Q17055253" start="1962" end="1966" title="1984 New Zealand general election" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q367589" start="1988" end="1999" title="David Lange" label="David Lange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048192" start="2007" end="2031" title="New Zealand Labour Party" label="New Zealand Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193702" start="2080" end="2090" title="Parliamentary Opposition" label="Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3453636" start="2230" end="2245" title="Ruth Richardson" label="Ruth Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q139785" start="2370" end="2380" title="Jim Bolger" label="Jim Bolger"/>
<link wikidata="Q139785" start="2433" end="2443" title="Jim Bolger" label="Jim Bolger"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016159" start="2453" end="2466" title="1990 New Zealand general election" label="1990 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="2684" end="2703" title="UN Security Council" label="UN Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q201766" start="2804" end="2816" title="Bougainville Island" label="Bougainville"/>
<link wikidata="Q180059" start="2945" end="2962" title="New Zealand First" label="New Zealand First"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396178" start="3096" end="3110" title="Winston Peters" label="Winston Peters"/>
<link wikidata="Q105043637" start="3192" end="3232" title="Minister of Disarmament and Arms Control" label="Minister of Disarmament and Arms Control"/>
<link wikidata="Q8039486" start="3419" end="3431" title="Wyatt Creech" label="Wyatt Creech"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016166" start="3627" end="3640" title="1999 New Zealand general election" label="1999 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4797811" start="3660" end="3671" title="Arthur Anae" label="Arthur Anae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153777" start="3848" end="3893" title="Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting 1999" label="Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting 1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468" start="3906" end="3912" title="Durban" label="Durban"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="4021" end="4029" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q10707" start="4037" end="4050" title="Robert Mugabe" label="Robert Mugabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101930" start="4055" end="4069" title="George Speight" label="George Speight"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="4107" end="4111" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153779" start="4558" end="4568" title="Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting 2003" label="2003 CHOGM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="4573" end="4580" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q206638" start="4661" end="4680" title="Lakshman Kadirgamar" label="Lakshman Kadirgamar"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="4711" end="4720" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1610024" start="4864" end="4886" title="Heriot-Watt University" label="Heriot-Watt University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469058" start="5183" end="5208" title="white farmers in Zimbabwe" label="white farmers in Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q47508380" start="5437" end="5458" title="2008 New Year Honours (New Zealand)" label="2008 New Year Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q973829" start="5488" end="5522" title="Order of New Zealand" label="Member of the Order of New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q94050" start="5603" end="5650" title="Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order" label="Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374053" start="5715" end="5741" title="Royal Commonwealth Society" label="Royal Commonwealth Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q65962099" start="6189" end="6202" title="Clare de Lore" label="Clare de Lore"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="331649" wikidata="Q959577" url="?curid=331649" title="Emeka Anyaoku">
<text>Chief Emeka Anyaoku, GCON, GCVO, CFR (born 18 January 1933) is a Nigerian diplomat of Igbo descent. He was the third Commonwealth Secretary-General. Born in Obosi, Anyaoku was educated at Merchants of Light School, Oba, and attended the University College, Ibadan, then a college of the University of London, from which he obtained an honours degree in Classics as a College Scholar. Aside from his international career, Chief Anyaoku continues to fulfill the duties of his office as Ichie Adazie of Obosi, a traditional Ndichie chieftainship.

==Family background==
Eleazar Chukwuemeka &quot;Emeka&quot; Anyaoku was born on 18 January 1933 to Emmanuel and Cecilia Anyaoku in Obosi, then a very large village in the eastern part of Nigeria. Emmanuel Chukwuemeka Anyaoku had been educated to the middle school level after his primary education at the CMS school in Onitsha under the guardianship of Reverend William Blackett a Christian Missionary. After his education he worked first with the railways and later in the hospital in Kaduna in the Northern part of Nigeria before becoming a catechist. After serving for a number of years, he went back to his village to farm. He became Ononukpo (Head) of Okpuno Ire, a quarter in Ire, the largest village in Obosi.

Cecilia, née Adiba Ogbogu, was married as second wife by Emmanuel when he returned from Kaduna following the death of his first wife. Cecilia hailed from a family in Ugamuma quarter of Obosi. She grew up at the home of Rev. Ekpunobi, her guardian, who was the first Obosi citizen to be ordained as an Anglican Priest. He was regarded as one of the most enlightened and educated in the community then. Cecilia stayed with the Ekpunobi family as a ward. Rev. Ekpunobi, on learning of the death of Emmanuel&#x27;s wife, invited him to his home and subsequently convinced Emmanuel and Adiba to marry each other. Their first child, a girl, did not survive. Thereafter, Emeka was born and he has five siblings.

==Education==
Emeka Anyaoku at the age of seven was sent to live with his father&#x27;s only brother, Egwuenu Anyaoku, at Umuahia to start schooling in a very rural school. The highest class then at the school was standard four. The colonial dispensation then generally did not encourage pupils to go beyond standard four or standard six. At the age of 10, in 1943, Emeka was sent to stay with his father&#x27;s cousin, Nathaniel Enwezor who was Headmaster at CMS Central School at Agbor, 75 km from Obosi.

For his secondary education, the young Anyaoku attended Merchants of Light School (MOLS) at Oba. It was a boarding school founded by a friend of his father&#x27;s, Dr. Enoch Oli, a Nigerian educationist trained in London and Oxford. Mr. Oli taught Emeka and the other students the importance of hard work, good character and good inter-personal relations.

During this period of his formative years, Anyaoku had begun to stand out as a smart, brilliant young man. At Obosi village during holidays, especially Easter and Christmas times, when the students came home, one of his contemporaries, Chief Godfrey Eneli, recalled that they used to have debates and different kinds of students’ activities organized by the Obosi Students Association. Anyaoku, Eneli said, showed particular signs of leadership qualities. In his words, &quot;I had the idea that he would become a leader, which he exhibited every time we all went home on holidays.&quot; He said further, &quot; we used to call him ‘lawyer’, because he was always arguing, and logical in whatever he approached. We would be persuaded by his intellect and by his argument, and his approach to whatever discussions we had.&quot;

Another of his contemporaries, S.I. Metu, a classmate who later became a top banker and civil servant, extolled his interpersonal skills. He said of Anyaoku, &quot;one of his popularities was that he was a very good mixer, he virtually had no enemies because of his general friendliness….. from all we now know of Mr. Anyaoku, it is obvious that he was destined to be a diplomat, because he had all the makings – intelligence, friendliness, the ability to get things without offending anybody.&quot; Metu also recalled Anyaoku as a very studious student at the Merchants of Light School. He stated, &quot;Anyaoku cannot spare any moment for play – he was always reading or working on something. Or occasionally, when he was tired and wanted to relax, he would crack some very serious jokes and everybody would be laughing.&quot; Anyaoku was among the second intake of 60 boys. When they sat for the Cambridge School Certificate examination, he took 10 subjects and earned the school&#x27;s first grade pass, the highest level.

After his secondary education, Anyaoku in 1952 proceeded to teach at Emmanuel College, Owerri in the then Eastern Region, he was there until mid-1954 lecturing in mathematics, Latin and English. He was reputedly an assiduous young teacher, meticulous in preparing his lesson notes. He gave back to his students the best of what he had learned at MOLS while injecting humor into his teachings.

One of his teachers at MOLS had kindled in him an interest in the Classics. His Latin teacher had inspired in him a love for the languages, laws and culture of the ancient Greeks and Romans, and the classical roots of the English language. Anyaoku then decided to go and study Classics at the new University College of Ibadan, the premier higher institution of its kind in the country, which had been instituted in 1948 as an overseas college of the University of London.

During the mid-1950s when Anyaoku was an undergraduate at the University College, Ibadan, the Nigerian nation was embroiled in debates, discussions and demonstrations on the political future of the country. There were controversies on when Nigeria should gain independence from Britain and with what political structure it should seek independence whether as a unitary or federal state. The city of Ibadan was one of the main epicenters of these debates. And the University College, which had brought together brilliant students, lecturers and politicians from diverse parts of the country, became a centre of what was then described as national radicalism.

Anyaoku was in the thick of this as a student union leader. He along with like-minds in the union leadership campaigned in favour of unitary state, against federalism. They sent petitions and delegations to the three foremost political leaders in the country then, Dr. Nnamdi Azikiwe in the Eastern region of the country, Chief Obafemi Awolowo in the Western, and Sardauna of Sokoto, Sir Ahmadu Bello in the Northern region.

Anyaoku in 1959 obtained a London University Honours Degree in classics as a college scholar and joined the Commonwealth Development Corporation (CDC) in Lagos. The corporation sent him as an Executive Trainee to the CDC headquarters in London from where he went on a course at the Royal Institute for Public Administration in London. On 1 October 1960, Nigeria was granted independence by Britain. And Anyaoku was posted back to the CDC West Africa regional office in Lagos at the end of December 1960.

==Marriage==
In December 1961, Anyaoku then a CDC Executive Officer came in contact with a twenty year old Yoruba lady, Princess Ebunola Olubunmi Solanke, at a bachelor&#x27;s eve party which he and his flatmate hosted for a friend of theirs in Lagos. The princess, familiarly known by the diminutive &quot;Bunmi&quot;, was educated in England at a Christian girls boarding school, St. Mary&#x27;s School at Hastings. She thereafter attended Pitman College, London. Emeka and Bunmi were married at the Anglican Cathedral Church in Lagos on 10 November 1962.

==Career==
In 1959, Emeka Anyaoku joined the Commonwealth Development Corporation. In early 1962, Anyaoku came in contact with the then Prime Minister of Nigeria, Sir Abubakar Tafawa Belewa. He had accompanied his visiting boss, Lord Howick, Chairman of the Commonwealth Development Corporation, to a meeting with the Prime Minister on the activities of the corporation in Nigeria and the West African region. The Prime Minister, impressed by Anyaoku&#x27;s answers to some of his questions on the projects supported by the CDC in West Africa, took an interest in Anyaoku&#x27;s future and persuaded him to consider joining the Nigerian Foreign Service. After a grueling interview by the Federal Civil Service Commission, he was offered an appointment in the Foreign Service in April 1962. Within a month of his entry, he was appointed Personal Assistant to the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry for External Affairs. There he was closely involved in the process that led to the establishment of the Organisation for African Unity (OAU) in May 1963. Following Nigeria&#x27;s independence, he joined Nigeria&#x27;s diplomatic service, and in 1963 was posted to its Permanent Mission to the United Nations in New York.

In 1966, he joined the Commonwealth Secretariat as Assistant Director of International Affairs. In 1968-69 there was a campaign by the Nigerian military government for the recall of Anyaoku; which said he was not a suitable Nigerian nominee, and they were anxious about his loyalty &quot;to the country of his birth&quot;. But &quot;Emeka had resigned from the Nigerian Foreign Service and Arnold had no difficulty in turning aside the demand&quot;.

In 1977, the Commonwealth Heads of Government elected him as Deputy Secretary-General. In 1983, Nigeria&#x27;s civilian government appointed Anyaoku to become Nigeria&#x27;s Foreign Minister. After the overthrow of the government by the military later that year, he returned to his position as Deputy Secretary-General with the support of the new government in Nigeria and the endorsement of all Commonwealth governments.

At the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting at Kuala Lumpur on 24 October 1989, Anyaoku was elected the third Commonwealth Secretary-General. He was re-elected at the 1993 CHOGM in Limassol for a second five-year term, beginning on 1 April 1995.

==United Nations==
In July 1963, at age 30, he was posted to Nigeria&#x27;s Permanent Mission to the United Nations in New York. His first child, Adiba, was born in the New York Lying-In Hospital on 20 November 1963, two days before President John F. Kennedy of the United States was assassinated. A few weeks previously, Nigeria had become a Republic, with Nnamdi Azikiwe as the first President. At his duty post at the United Nations, Anyaoku as Nigeria&#x27;s alternative representative in the United Nations special committee on Apartheid drafted the resolution – presented to the General Assembly by Nigeria in 1965 – that established a trust fund to enable governments to contribute to the defense of political detainees in South Africa.

He got embroiled in the crisis triggered by the Ian Smith administration in the then Southern Rhodesia in Southern Africa, who announced Rhodesia&#x27;s Unilateral Declaration of Independence (UDI) from Britain. Anyaoku spoke at various forums to condemn this development. It was during one of these occasions that the news of Nigeria&#x27;s first military coup d&#x27;état of 15 January 1966 reached him. The Prime Minister, Sir Abubakar Tafawa Balewa, the powerful Premier of the Northern Region, Sir Ahmadu Bello, and a number of other leaders of the post-independence state were assassinated during the coup d&#x27;état. The coup d&#x27;état had taken place just one day after the Prime Minister hosted other Commonwealth leaders including the new Secretary-General, Arnold Smith, to a meeting in Lagos where they discussed the issue of Rhodesia.

==Commonwealth years==
In July 1965 the decision by Commonwealth Heads of Government to set up a Commonwealth Secretariat was implemented with the appointment of a very distinguished Canadian diplomat, Arnold Smith as the first Commonwealth Secretary-General. The Secretary-General was in the process of assembling a multi-national, multi-cultural team at the core of the new Secretariat.

On his visit to Nigeria in November 1965, Smith had met and told the Prime Minister, Sir Tafawa Balewa in the presence of the then Nigerian&#x27;s Foreign Minister and the Permanent Secretary, that he was looking for a young Nigerian foreign service officer who would &quot;help him to make nonsense of racist myths.&quot; After Smith left, the Prime Minister asked the Foreign Ministry to give him three names that would satisfy the Secretary-General&#x27;s request. Anyaoku was among the three names suggested and was selected by the Prime Minister for secondment to the new Commonwealth secretariat.
On arrival at the Secretariat in London in April 1966, Anyaoku was particularly impressed with the way the Secretary-General, Arnold Smith was handling the Rhodesia UDI issue. He was made Assistant Director of International Affairs which later became the Political Affairs Division. His first major assignment was to serve as Secretary of a Review Committee set up by the Secretary-General with the approval of Heads of Government to review all existing Commonwealth inter-governmental institutions with a view to determining which should be integrated into the newly established Commonwealth Secretariat.

In July 1967 the Nigerian Civil War broke out. During that period, he and his wife hosted many separate luncheons and dinners in their London home for the Nigerian and Biafran representatives at the peace talks sponsored by the Secretary-General, Arnold Smith. In the middle of the talks, he told the Secretary-General that he was willing to travel home to speak with the Biafran leader, Emeka Ojukwu about the Secretary-General&#x27;s peace proposals to the two warring parties. He and Ojukwu had been friends since their boyhood. Smith considered it a very risky venture but however, allowed Anyaoku to go.
When he was embarking on the journey, his third child, Obi, who was just about three months old, was very ill in the hospital. The doctors were worried that he might not survive the ailment. When he told his wife, Bunmi, that he had to travel, she was shocked by his seeming insensitivity to their son&#x27;s condition. Anyaoku told her, &quot;there are many more in worse state, dying every day, in Biafra.&quot; She was speechless.

Anyaoku left on a Red Cross flight to Nigeria via Amsterdam and Sao Tome. The day after his arrival at the Biafran enclave, he had a scary experience of a bomb raid during which he had to dive with his two interlocutors in the Biafran Foreign Ministry under the table. He eventually had a dramatic encounter with Ojukwu in his bunker at his headquarters. And when he left Biafra, after also seeing a number of his relations, he had a hair-raising exit on a flight that was evacuating children. It was an aircraft with no seats, which took off from Uli to Gabon.

Anyaoku continued to be involved in various Commonwealth initiatives and negotiations, such as the Gibraltar referendum of 1967, the St Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla constitutional crisis of 1969 to 1970, the problems following Commonwealth Games’ boycotts during the 1980s and the process leading to peace and democracy in Zimbabwe, Namibia and in particular, South Africa.

He also moved up the ladder within the Commonwealth Secretariat. He became the Director of the International Affairs Division in 1971 and in 1975 rose to the position of Assistant Secretary-General. In 1977, Commonwealth Governments elected him deputy secretary-general with responsibility for international affairs and the secretariat&#x27;s administration.

In October, 1983, he resigned from his post and returned to Nigeria at the invitation of the Civilian President Shehu Shagari to serve as the country&#x27;s foreign minister. On the overthrow of the government by the military on 31 December 1983, he went back with the unanimous support of the Commonwealth Governments to his previous position as Deputy Secretary-General. In 1989 at their meeting in Kuala-lumpur he was elected by Commonwealth Heads of Government the third Commonwealth Secretary-General. He was re-elected at the 1993 Limassol Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting for a second five-year term.

Apart from striving to strengthen intra-Commonwealth relations and promoting democracy and good governance, one of the major projects he tackled during his tenure was the establishment of democracy in South Africa. He tirelessly championed and spoke in favour of the struggle to rid South Africa of Apartheid. In 1990, on the release of former President Nelson Mandela from Pollsmoor Prison, Anyaoku hosted Madiba to his first official dinner as Commonwealth Secretary-General in London. Between 1 November 1991 and 17 November 1993, he visited South Africa 11 times, using his diplomatic skills to help in breaking deadlocks in the negotiation process that brought the end of apartheid in South Africa.

In 1998, in recognition of Chief Emeka Anyaoku&#x27;s contribution to the transition in South Africa, and the manner in which he had championed the cause of the progressive movements in Southern Africa, the President of South Africa accorded him the rare honour of addressing a joint sitting of the South African Parliament. President Nelson Mandela wrote the foreword of Chief Emeka Anyaoku&#x27;s biography, Eye of Fire authored by Phyllis Johnson as well as to Chief Emeka Anyaoku&#x27;s memoirs, The Inside Story of the Modern Commonwealth.

Anyaoku was involved in numerous interventions to broker peace between several Commonwealth leaders and opposition parties in their countries. He also initiated the use of Commonwealth observer groups to assist elections in various countries. Apart from exerting beneficial influence on the electoral process, the presence of Commonwealth observers made it easier for the parties who had lost to accept the result, if the election was judged by Commonwealth observers to be free and fair. In his ten years as Secretary-General, he sent 51 election observer groups to various Commonwealth countries.

Beginning with President Kaunda in 1991, he intervened to help Zambia and several other Commonwealth nations to transit from one-party state or military regime to multi-party democracies. For example, he in the same year, persuaded President Arap Moi of Kenya to have a constitutional expert come and help the country revise its constitution to adapt it to the requirements of a multi-party democracy and thereafter in early 1992, persuaded the three opposition parties leaders who had rejected the result of the presidential elections to accept it thereby saving the country from a serious political crisis.

These interventions were not limited to Africa. His intervention in Bangladesh was another example that demanded a lot of time and patience. The country&#x27;s two political leaders were Begum Zia and Sheikh Hasina. Begum Zia had become the prime minister following the assassination of her husband who was the Prime Minister. The leader of the opposition party, Sheikh Hasina, was the daughter of Sheik Abdul Rahman, the first Prime Minister of independent Bangladesh who with his entire family with the exception of daughter Hasina had been killed in a military coup d&#x27;état. Hasina was lucky to be out of the country on that fateful night. Anyaoku persuaded the two leaders to agree to his proposal to send an experienced representative to come to Bangladeshi to hold discussions with the Prime Minister, Begum Zia and the leader of the opposition Sheik Hasina with a view to finding a formula for mutual accommodation between their two parties. Anyaoku consequently sent as his special representative, Sir Ninian Steven, a former Australian Governor-General, who spent weeks in Dhaka brokering peace between the government and the opposition parties.

He also intervened in Pakistan during a potentially destabilizing disagreement between the then President, Mr. Farooq Leghari and the Prime Minister, Nawaz Sharif.

The most challenging of his interventions was the crisis in his country Nigeria that followed the annulment of the June 12, 1993 presidential election by the then military junta of General Ibrahim Babangida. The election had apparently been won by Chief Moshood Abiola. On the day after the annulment, Chief Anyaoku issued a strident statement, saying that the annulment was a &quot;severe setback to the cause of democracy, particularly at a time when all Commonwealth governments have pledged themselves to promote democratic rule in their countries&quot;; he called it &quot;a bitter disappointment&quot; to all those who had been looking forward to the assumption of office of a democratically elected government in Nigeria.

Anyaoku had a much tougher case when Babangida ‘stepped aside’ and General Sani Abacha after a few months of the contraption called Interim Government took over the administration of the country in a military coup d&#x27;état on 17 November 1993. Abacha instituted much more draconian measures. He arrested and jailed the presumed winner of the 12 June 1993 election, Abiola. And the country was thrown into a great turmoil with labour strikes and public demonstrations raging all over.

Abacha exacerbated the crisis further by arresting, detaining and putting on trial Ken Saro-Wiwa and other Ogoni activists on a charge of complicity in the murder of four Ogoni Chiefs who had opposed their campaign methodology. Later in March 1995, the Abacha regime alleged that a coup attempt had been hatched against it. Many observers dismissed this as a phantom coup. The regime, however, embarked on the arrest and detention of many serving and former officers, including erstwhile military Head of State, General Olusegun Obasanjo, and his previous deputy, General Shehu Musa Yar’Adua.

The alleged coup plotters were tried by a military tribunal and were sentenced variously, with Obasanjo being given life imprisonment, while Yar’Adua was sentenced to death. Anyaoku continued to campaign for a peaceful resolution of the crisis by sending messages to Abacha and making public statements, to no avail. The matter came to a boiling point when Ken Saro-Wiwa and eight of his fellow accused were also sentenced to death. Anyaoku made a passionate appeal to Abacha soliciting for clemency for the condemned activists. This appeal fell on Abacha&#x27;s deaf ears and he eventually had Ken Saro-Wiwa and his colleagues executed on the eve of a meeting of the Commonwealth Heads of Government in Auckland, New Zealand in November 1995.. In reaction, Commonwealth leaders decided to suspend Nigeria from its membership of the association.

In the meantime, Anyaoku had sought to engage Abacha in discussions aimed at resolving the political crisis in Nigeria. Anyaoku had with Abacha&#x27;s agreement met in July 1995 with Abiola in detention to discuss his proposal for a dialogue between the two parties with the aim of agreeing arrangements for the acceptance of the outcome of the annulled presidential elections. While Abiola on his part accepted the proposal, Abacha turned it down telling Anyaoku that he would prefer to seek a resolution of the crisis through a constitutional conference to be convened by him.

Following Abacha&#x27;s sudden death on 8 June 1998, a new military regime under General Abdulsalami Abubakar came in to facilitate a quick return of the country to democratic dispensation. Anyaoku with his Commonwealth team gave full support to this process, including especially the national elections that produced the civilian administration of President Olusegun Obasanjo.

In pursuance of his declared priority from the beginning of his tenure to make the Commonwealth a potent force for the promotion of democracy and good governance, Anyaoku in early 1997, organized the first African Commonwealth Heads of Government Roundtable to discuss democracy and good governance on the continent. He retired from his position as Commonwealth Secretary-General on 31 March 2000.

On his retirement, the University of London established a professional chair at its Institute of Commonwealth studies named after him, the Emeka Anyaoku Professor of Commonwealth Studies. He was also invited to be a Distinguished Visiting Fellow at the Centre for the Study of Global Governance, London School of Economics (2000-2002). He was awarded the Freedom of the City of London in 1998 and has received decorations from Nigeria CFR and CON, and the highest national civilian honours of Cameroon, Lesotho, Madagascar, Namibia and Trinidad &amp; Tobago&#x27;s Trinity Cross (TC) as well as Honorary Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order (GCVO) from her Majesty, The Queen in 2000. He was one of the fifty, and also one of the one hundred individuals who were awarded special gold medals for outstanding contribution to the country&#x27;s development by the Federal Government in the celebrations of Nigeria&#x27;s independence Golden Jubilee in 2010 and Centenary in 2014.

Emeka Anyaoku is a published author and now holds 33 honorary Doctorate degrees from top universities in Britain, Canada, Ghana, Republic of Ireland, Nigeria, South Africa, Switzerland and Zimbabwe.

Chief Emeka Anyaoku served under three democratically elected Presidents in Nigeria as Chairman of the Presidential Advisory Council on International Relations from 2000 to 2015. He along with Kofi Annan played a seminal role in getting all the presidential candidates and their political parties to commit themselves to a violence-free electoral process by signing in January the Abuja Accord that ensured a relatively peaceful election and transition to a new democratic dispensation in Nigeria of President Muhammadu Buhari in May 2015.

The positions in which Chief Emeka Anyaoku served/is still serving include the following:

1. 1975 Leader, Commonwealth Mission to Mozambique
2. 1979-90 Member of the Council of Overseas Development Institute in London.
3. 1984-90 Member of Governing Council of the Save the Children Fund 
4. 1992- Hon. Member of the Club of Rome
5. 1994-96 Member, World Commission on Forests
6. 2000-06 President, Royal Commonwealth Society
7. 2000- date President, Royal African Society
8. 2001- date Member, United Nations Eminent Persons Group to help advance the aims of the World Conference Against Racism
9. 2002-09 President, World Wide Fund for Nature, WWF
10. 2004-05 Chairman, United Nations Secretary-General&#x27;s Panel on International support to African Development (NEPAD)
11. 2002-10 Member of the Governing Board of the South Centre in Geneva
12. 2005-13 Trustee of the British Museum
13. 2000-15 Chairman, Presidential Advisory Council on International Relations in Nigeria.
14. 2013- date President, Metropolitan Club, Lagos.

==Personal life==
Installed in 1980 as the Ichie Adazie of Obosi, Chief Anyaoku has continued to fulfill the duties of the office of a traditional Ndichie chieftainship in Obosi. The Ichie Anyaoku has been married to Princess Bunmi Anyaoku since 1962. Princess Anyaoku is an Omoba of Abeokuta, Nigeria. Of their marriage, it was written in the &quot;Nigerian Sunday Times&quot;, then the widest circulating newspaper in the country, that 
They have four children, Adiba; their daughter– an attorney who serves on the board of Old Mutual plc –and three sons; Oluyemisi, Obiechina, and Emenike. Emeka has two grandchildren, born to Adiba and her husband; Irenne Ighodaro and Osita Ighodaro. In 1990, the heads of all the 19 communities of the Idemili Clan in his home State of Anambra accorded Anyaoku a unique honour by investing him with the title of Ugwumba Idemili. His wife, Bunmi, is also a chieftain – Ugoma Obosi and Idemili – in her own right, with a long involvement in welfare work in Nigeria and in the Commonwealth.

As part of his 91st birthday celebration on January 18, 2024, Anyaoku unveiled the Emeka and Bunmi Anyaoku Centre in Obosi, his home town. The center houses a library and museum he had built in the town as his contribution to education, practice of democracy and human rights. The collections in the museum include cultural artifacts from all over Nigeria, other Commonwealth countries and Africa while the library also has his personal papers from his days as Secretary General of the Commonwealth of Nations as well as books and other knowledge resources.

Emeka Anyaoku is an Anglican, his father having converted to that faith. He writes that he is 

He is also a vice-president of the Royal Commonwealth Society.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1259323" start="0" end="5" title="Chieftain" label="Chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q959577" start="6" end="19" title="Emeka Anyaoku" label="Emeka Anyaoku"/>
<link wikidata="Q2073340" start="21" end="25" title="Order of the Federal Republic" label="GCON"/>
<link wikidata="Q94050" start="27" end="31" title="Royal Victorian Order" label="GCVO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1866503" start="33" end="36" title="Nigerian National Honours" label="CFR"/>
<link wikidata="Q244157" start="86" end="90" title="Igbo people" label="Igbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111221" start="117" end="147" title="Commonwealth Secretary-General" label="Commonwealth Secretary-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075315" start="157" end="162" title="Obosi" label="Obosi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169487" start="237" end="263" title="University College of Ibadan" label="University College, Ibadan"/>
<link wikidata="Q170027" start="287" end="307" title="University of London" label="University of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q959577" start="484" end="496" title="Emeka Anyaoku" label="Ichie Adazie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075315" start="500" end="505" title="Obosi" label="Obosi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5986077" start="521" end="528" title="Ichie" label="Ndichie"/>
<link wikidata="Q85789094" start="529" end="542" title="Nigerian chieftaincy" label="chieftainship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="850" end="860" title="CMS School, Onitsha" label="CMS school"/>
<link wikidata="Q852238" start="864" end="871" title="Onitsha" label="Onitsha"/>
<link wikidata="Q203301" start="2091" end="2098" title="Umuahia" label="Umuahia"/>
<link wikidata="Q583619" start="4777" end="4783" title="Owerri" label="Owerri"/>
<link wikidata="Q181782" start="6481" end="6499" title="Nnamdi Azikiwe" label="Dr. Nnamdi Azikiwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q960892" start="6544" end="6559" title="Obafemi Awolowo" label="Obafemi Awolowo"/>
<link wikidata="Q401032" start="6604" end="6616" title="Ahmadu Bello" label="Ahmadu Bello"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116345" start="6750" end="6786" title="Commonwealth Development Corporation" label="Commonwealth Development Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17101487" start="6924" end="6965" title="Royal Institute of Public Administration" label="Royal Institute for Public Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q190168" start="7254" end="7260" title="Yoruba people" label="Yoruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q6734834" start="7529" end="7551" title="St Mary&amp;#x27;s School, Hastings District" label="St. Mary&amp;#x27;s School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116345" start="7751" end="7787" title="Commonwealth Development Corporation" label="Commonwealth Development Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q335684" start="7869" end="7895" title="Abubakar Tafawa Balewa" label="Sir Abubakar Tafawa Belewa"/>
<link wikidata="Q808630" start="7935" end="7946" title="Baron Howick of Glendale" label="Lord Howick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124560" start="8394" end="8426" title="Federal Civil Service Commission (Nigeria)" label="Federal Civil Service Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q191703" start="8708" end="8738" title="Organisation of African Unity" label="Organisation for African Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="8897" end="8911" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="8915" end="8923" title="New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q3954348" start="8949" end="8973" title="Commonwealth Secretariat" label="Commonwealth Secretariat"/>
<link wikidata="Q376421" start="9316" end="9322" title="Arnold Smith" label="Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247874" start="9390" end="9422" title="Commonwealth Heads of Government" label="Commonwealth Heads of Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153728" start="9438" end="9462" title="Commonwealth Deputy Secretary-General" label="Deputy Secretary-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q16753607" start="9551" end="9567" title="Foreign Minister of Nigeria" label="Foreign Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q3458201" start="9807" end="9847" title="Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting" label="Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865" start="9851" end="9863" title="Kuala Lumpur" label="Kuala Lumpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111221" start="9914" end="9944" title="Commonwealth Secretary-General" label="Commonwealth Secretary-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153774" start="9971" end="9981" title="Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting 1993" label="1993 CHOGM"/>
<link wikidata="Q185632" start="9985" end="9993" title="Limassol" label="Limassol"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="10294" end="10309" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="10584" end="10593" title="Apartheid" label="Apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q750583" start="10881" end="10898" title="Southern Rhodesia" label="Southern Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="11144" end="11169" title="Coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="military coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q376421" start="11567" end="11579" title="Arnold Smith" label="Arnold Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q217169" start="11637" end="11645" title="Rhodesia" label="Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q178469" start="13416" end="13422" title="Biafra" label="Biafra"/>
<link wikidata="Q380670" start="13636" end="13648" title="C. Odumegwu Ojukwu" label="Emeka Ojukwu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178" start="14310" end="14319" title="International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement" label="Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="14342" end="14351" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3932" start="14356" end="14364" title="São Tomé" label="Sao Tome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000" start="14847" end="14852" title="Gabon" label="Gabon"/>
<link wikidata="Q170108" start="14954" end="14974" title="1967 Gibraltar sovereignty referendum" label="Gibraltar referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="15170" end="15178" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="15180" end="15187" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q380668" start="15694" end="15707" title="Shehu Shagari" label="Shehu Shagari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865" start="15983" end="15995" title="Kuala Lumpur" label="Kuala-lumpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q185632" start="16119" end="16127" title="Limassol" label="Limassol"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023" start="16553" end="16567" title="Nelson Mandela" label="Nelson Mandela"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225734" start="16573" end="16589" title="Pollsmoor Prison" label="Pollsmoor Prison"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17314" end="17325" title="Eye of Fire" label="Eye of Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153815" start="17622" end="17650" title="Commonwealth Observer Groups" label="Commonwealth observer groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q105480" start="18075" end="18081" title="Kenneth Kaunda" label="Kaunda"/>
<link wikidata="Q193492" start="18292" end="18300" title="Daniel arap Moi" label="Arap Moi"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="18728" end="18738" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q234814" start="18847" end="18856" title="Khaleda Zia" label="Begum Zia"/>
<link wikidata="Q52183" start="18861" end="18874" title="Sheikh Hasina" label="Sheikh Hasina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356927" start="19670" end="19687" title="Ninian Stephen" label="Sir Ninian Steven"/>
<link wikidata="Q334059" start="19931" end="19945" title="Farooq Leghari" label="Farooq Leghari"/>
<link wikidata="Q134068" start="19970" end="19982" title="Nawaz Sharif" label="Nawaz Sharif"/>
<link wikidata="Q7033051" start="20100" end="20113" title="1993 Nigerian presidential election" label="June 12, 1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q333415" start="20174" end="20191" title="Ibrahim Babangida" label="Ibrahim Babangida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528125" start="20239" end="20253" title="Moshood Abiola" label="Moshood Abiola"/>
<link wikidata="Q207942" start="20790" end="20801" title="Sani Abacha" label="Sani Abacha"/>
<link wikidata="Q316292" start="21286" end="21299" title="Ken Saro-Wiwa" label="Ken Saro-Wiwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478209" start="21310" end="21315" title="Ogoni people" label="Ogoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q202006" start="21715" end="21740" title="Olusegun Obasanjo" label="General Olusegun Obasanjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509379" start="21775" end="21794" title="Shehu Musa Yar&amp;#x27;Adua" label="Shehu Musa Yar’Adua"/>
<link wikidata="Q37100" start="22501" end="22522" title="Auckland" label="Auckland, New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q262346" start="23313" end="23333" title="Abdulsalami Abubakar" label="Abdulsalami Abubakar"/>
<link wikidata="Q174570" start="24298" end="24324" title="London School of Economics" label="London School of Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254" start="25384" end="25394" title="Kofi Annan" label="Kofi Annan"/>
<link wikidata="Q361567" start="25701" end="25717" title="Muhammadu Buhari" label="Muhammadu Buhari"/>
<link wikidata="Q565054" start="25910" end="25940" title="Overseas Development Institute" label="Overseas Development Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q215934" start="25998" end="26020" title="Save The Children Fund" label="Save the Children Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q107569" start="26050" end="26062" title="Club of Rome" label="Club of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075315" start="26824" end="26829" title="Obosi" label="Obosi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5986077" start="26948" end="26953" title="Ichie" label="Ichie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3880442" start="27040" end="27045" title="Omoba" label="Omoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q206484" start="27049" end="27057" title="Abeokuta" label="Abeokuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q40348" start="27255" end="27263" title="lawyer" label="attorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q289704" start="27291" end="27305" title="Old Mutual plc" label="Old Mutual plc"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="28372" end="28380" title="Anglican" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374053" start="28483" end="28509" title="Royal Commonwealth Society" label="Royal Commonwealth Society"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="331650" wikidata="Q958984" url="?curid=331650" title="Shridath Ramphal">
<text>Sir Shridath Surendranath Ramphal OM (3 October 1928 – 30 August 2024), often known as Sir Sonny Ramphal, was a Guyanese politician who was the second Commonwealth Secretary-General, holding the position from 1975 to 1990. He was also the foreign minister of Guyana from 1972 to 1975, and assistant attorney general of the West Indies Federation from 1958 to 1962.

Ramphal was an Earth Charter International Commission member.

==Biography==
Ramphal was born in New Amsterdam, British Guiana, to an Indo-Guyanese family, and was the eldest of the five children of Grace and Jimmy Ramphal. One of his grandmothers left British India after refusing to commit the &quot;sati&quot; practice and emigrated to British Guiana under the Indian indenture system. After attending schools in Georgetown, Ramphal studied law at King&#x27;s College London, graduating with LL.B. and LL.M. degrees. He was called to the bar at Gray&#x27;s Inn in London in 1951. As a pupil barrister he worked with the British politician and lawyer Dingle Foot. Ramphal continued studying law for a year at Harvard Law School in the US on a 1962 Guggenheim Fellowship.

Ramphal started his legal career as a Crown Counsel in the Attorney-General&#x27;s Office in 1953, becoming Solicitor-General and then Assistant Attorney-General of the short-lived West Indies Federation. After a period in private practice in Jamaica, he returned to British Guiana in 1965 to be the Attorney General. Two years later, he was also appointed Minister of State in the Ministry of External Affairs, later becoming Minister of Justice (from 1973) and Minister of Foreign Affairs (from 1972). In 1975, he left Guyana to become Commonwealth Secretary-General.

He also served as the Chancellor of the University of Warwick from 1989 to 2002, of the University of the West Indies from 1989 to 2003, and of the University of Guyana from 1990 to 1992.

During Ramphal&#x27;s time as Commonwealth Secretary-General, the United Kingdom represented by Margaret Thatcher was found to be in a minority of one on the issue of economic sanctions against apartheid South Africa.

With Ingvar Carlsson, he was in 1995 one of the co-chairs of the Commission on Global Governance, which reported on issues of international development, international security, globalization and global governance.

Ramphal died on 30 August 2024, at the age of 95.

==Selected bibliography==
* &quot;Inseparable Humanity: An Anthology of Reflections&quot; (Hansib, 1988)
* &quot;Triumph for UNCLOS: The Guyana-Suriname Maritime Arbitration&quot; (Hansib, 2008)
* &quot;Caribbean Challenges: Sir Shridath Ramphal&#x27;s Collected Counsel&quot; (Hansib, 2012)

==Honours and awards==
Ramphal was appointed a Companion of the Order of St Michael and St George (CMG) in the 1966 Birthday Honours. He was knighted in the 1970 New Year Honours, and invested with his knighthood by the Queen at Buckingham Palace on 3 February. He was appointed Knight Grand Cross of the Order of St Michael and St. George (GCMG) in 1990.

On 26 February 1982, Ramphal was appointed an honorary Companion of the Order of Australia (AC). On 6 February 1990, Ramphal was the 19th appointee to the Order of New Zealand, New Zealand&#x27;s highest civil honour. He was decorated as a Member of the Order of the Caribbean Community (OCC) in the first conferment in 1992. In May 2006 Ramphal was appointed an Honorary Fellow of Royal Society of Arts. He was a vice-president of the Royal Commonwealth Society. The Ramphal Building at the University of Warwick was named in his honour.

In 2002, Rampal was awarded the Indira Gandhi Peace Prize. In 2003, he was awarded the Pravasi Bharatiya Samman by the President of India.

==In popular culture==
Ramphal is portrayed by Tony Jayawardena in the fourth season of the Netflix web television series &quot;The Crown&quot;.

==References==
==Further reading==
* Richard Bourne, &quot;Shridath Ramphal: The Commonwealth and the World&quot; (Hansib, 2009)

==External links==
**Transcript of the interview, part one
**Transcript of the interview, part two
*The Ramphal Institute - Official website for the continuation of the work of Sir Shridath Ramphal: promoting good governance, economic development and social justice around the world.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q958984" start="0" end="33" title="Shridath Ramphal" label="Sir Shridath Surendranath Ramphal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1714745" start="34" end="36" title="Order of Merit (Jamaica)" label="OM"/>
<link wikidata="Q958984" start="87" end="104" title="Shridath Ramphal" label="Sir Sonny Ramphal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111221" start="151" end="181" title="Commonwealth Secretary-General" label="Commonwealth Secretary-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q20901295" start="239" end="255" title="foreign minister" label="foreign minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q734" start="259" end="265" title="Guyana" label="Guyana"/>
<link wikidata="Q652560" start="323" end="345" title="West Indies Federation" label="West Indies Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q871256" start="381" end="394" title="Earth Charter" label="Earth Charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q923811" start="463" end="476" title="New Amsterdam, Guyana" label="New Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q918126" start="478" end="492" title="British Guiana" label="British Guiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q17054305" start="500" end="513" title="Indo-Guyanese" label="Indo-Guyanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="619" end="632" title="British Raj" label="British India"/>
<link wikidata="Q208088" start="668" end="672" title="Sati (practice)" label="sati"/>
<link wikidata="Q16252699" start="730" end="753" title="Indian indenture system" label="Indian indenture system"/>
<link wikidata="Q10717" start="782" end="792" title="Georgetown, Guyana" label="Georgetown"/>
<link wikidata="Q245247" start="817" end="843" title="King&amp;#x27;s College London" label="King&amp;#x27;s College London"/>
<link wikidata="Q798137" start="861" end="866" title="LL.B." label="LL.B."/>
<link wikidata="Q754848" start="871" end="876" title="LL.M." label="LL.M."/>
<link wikidata="Q5021687" start="893" end="910" title="called to the bar" label="called to the bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q157412" start="914" end="929" title="Gray&amp;#x27;s Inn" label="Gray&amp;#x27;s Inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260670" start="954" end="969" title="pupil barrister" label="pupil barrister"/>
<link wikidata="Q334651" start="1019" end="1030" title="Dingle Foot" label="Dingle Foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q49122" start="1077" end="1095" title="Harvard Law School" label="Harvard Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316544" start="1116" end="1137" title="Guggenheim Fellowship" label="Guggenheim Fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q56063486" start="1440" end="1456" title="Attorney General of Guyana" label="Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q865528" start="1751" end="1772" title="University of Warwick" label="University of Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q746153" start="1799" end="1828" title="University of the West Indies" label="University of the West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502975" start="1859" end="1879" title="University of Guyana" label="University of Guyana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="1930" end="1942" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="1996" end="2013" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248258" start="2067" end="2085" title="economic sanctions" label="economic sanctions"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="2094" end="2103" title="History of South Africa in the apartheid era" label="apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="2104" end="2116" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q53740" start="2124" end="2139" title="Ingvar Carlsson" label="Ingvar Carlsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152710" start="2184" end="2215" title="Commission on Global Governance" label="Commission on Global Governance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477868" start="2245" end="2270" title="international development" label="international development"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312693" start="2272" end="2294" title="international security" label="international security"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181" start="2296" end="2309" title="globalization" label="globalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524235" start="2314" end="2331" title="global governance" label="global governance"/>
<link wikidata="Q22276863" start="2476" end="2482" title="Hansib" label="Hansib"/>
<link wikidata="Q585087" start="2725" end="2775" title="Companion of the Order of St Michael and St George" label="Companion of the Order of St Michael and St George"/>
<link wikidata="Q16949384" start="2789" end="2810" title="1966 Birthday Honours" label="1966 Birthday Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q833163" start="2819" end="2827" title="Knight Bachelor" label="knighted"/>
<link wikidata="Q17009623" start="2835" end="2856" title="1970 New Year Honours" label="1970 New Year Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="2894" end="2903" title="Elizabeth II" label="the Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q42182" start="2907" end="2924" title="Buckingham Palace" label="Buckingham Palace"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2957" end="3017" title="Knight Grand Cross of the Order of St Michael and St. George" label="Knight Grand Cross of the Order of St Michael and St. George"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141149" start="3107" end="3125" title="Order of Australia" label="Order of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q973829" start="3190" end="3210" title="Order of New Zealand" label="Order of New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100651" start="3289" end="3321" title="Order of the Caribbean Community" label="Order of the Caribbean Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460885" start="3417" end="3438" title="Royal Society of Arts" label="Royal Society of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374053" start="3471" end="3497" title="Royal Commonwealth Society" label="Royal Commonwealth Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q865528" start="3527" end="3548" title="University of Warwick" label="University of Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241794" start="3607" end="3632" title="Indira Gandhi Peace Prize" label="Indira Gandhi Peace Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410056" start="3662" end="3686" title="Pravasi Bharatiya Samman" label="Pravasi Bharatiya Samman"/>
<link wikidata="Q313383" start="3694" end="3712" title="President of India" label="President of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q42902389" start="3762" end="3778" title="Tony Jayawardena" label="Tony Jayawardena"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="3807" end="3814" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q85861567" start="3843" end="3852" title="The Crown (season 4)" label="The Crown"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="331651" wikidata="Q376421" url="?curid=331651" title="Arnold Smith">
<text>Arnold Cantwell Smith (January 18, 1915 – February 7, 1994) was a Canadian diplomat. He was the first Commonwealth Secretary-General, serving from 1965–1975.

A talented student, he won a Rhodes Scholarship to Christ Church, Oxford.

From 1958 to 1961, he was the Canadian Ambassador to Egypt. From 1961 to 1963, he was the Canadian Ambassador to the USSR. During his time at the Commonwealth Secretariat, the Commonwealth flag was designed on his and Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau&#x27;s initiative.

In 1975 he was made a member of the Order of the Companions of Honour. In 1984, he was made an Officer of the Order of Canada for &quot;a long and distinguished diplomatic career&quot;.

Arnold Smith was the elder brother of Wilfred Cantwell Smith.

His published work includes &quot;Stitches In Time; the Commonwealth in World Politics&quot;.

==References==
==External links==
* Arnold Cantwell Smith at The Canadian Encyclopedia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q376421" start="0" end="21" title="Arnold Smith" label="Arnold Cantwell Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196645" start="66" end="74" title="Canadians" label="Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111221" start="102" end="132" title="Commonwealth Secretary-General" label="Commonwealth Secretary-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204346" start="188" end="206" title="Rhodes Scholarship" label="Rhodes Scholarship"/>
<link wikidata="Q745967" start="210" end="231" title="Christ Church, Oxford" label="Christ Church, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="287" end="292" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="351" end="355" title="USSR" label="USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q460072" start="410" end="427" title="Flag of the Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q8619" start="467" end="481" title="Pierre Trudeau" label="Pierre Trudeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137694" start="538" end="571" title="Order of the Companions of Honour" label="Order of the Companions of Honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q99700" start="612" end="627" title="Order of Canada" label="Order of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q8001760" start="727" end="749" title="Wilfred Cantwell Smith" label="Wilfred Cantwell Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q130334" start="908" end="933" title="The Canadian Encyclopedia" label="The Canadian Encyclopedia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="331654" wikidata="Q1096768" url="?curid=331654" title="Claude Gauvreau">
<text>Claude Gauvreau (August 19, 1925 – July 7, 1971 in Montreal, Quebec) was a Canadian playwright, poet, sound poet and polemicist. He was a member of the radical Automatist movement and a contributor to the revolutionary Refus Global Manifesto.

== Life and career ==
Gauvreau pursued classical studies at the Collège Sainte-Marie, and graduated with a B.A in Philosophy from Université de Montréal.

He discovered modern art through his brother Pierre, who attended l&#x27;École des beaux-arts, and met painter Paul-Émile Borduas, leader of Les Automatistes. He then became an unconditional advocate of the Automatist Movement of the Montreal Surrealists, and, in 1948 contributed to the Refus Global (&quot;Total Refusal&quot;) Manifesto, which would become a key document of Quebec and Canadian cultural history.

Between 1944 and 1947, he wrote &quot;Les Entrailles&quot;, a collection of 26 short plays or &quot;dramatic objects&quot;. In 1947, he staged one of these plays, &quot;Bien-être&quot;, with his muse, actress Muriel Guilbault.

Following Muriel Guilbault&#x27;s suicide in 1952, Gauvreau&#x27;s fragile emotional stability caused him to be institutionalized ten times over eight years in Montreal psychiatric hospital Saint-Jean-de-Dieu. He continued to write, though. While working for the radio, between 1952 and 1969, he wrote several of his best known works, beginning with &quot;Beauté baroque&quot; (1952), a novel depicting the life of Muriel, as well as several collections of poems, including &quot;Sur fil métamorphose&quot; (1956), &quot;Brochuges&quot; (1956), and &quot;Étal Mixte&quot; (1968). In 1958, two of Gauvreau&#x27;s short plays were performed at &quot;École des beaux-arts&quot;: &quot;La jeune fille et la lune&quot; and &quot;Les grappes lucides&quot;.

In 1956, at a time he believed he would die, Gauvreau wrote his best-known work, &quot;La charge de l&#x27;orignal épormyable&quot; (&quot;The Charge of the Expormidable Moose&quot;).

Set in a vaguely institutional communal home, the play revolves around Mycroft Mixeudeim, a poet who is envied, plagiarized, mocked and ultimately sacrificed by his fellow housemates. When the play finally premiered in 1970 at Le Gésu in Montreal, the production closed after only a few performances as a result of poor planning and sheer lack of audience. But three years after Gauvreau&#x27;s death, in 1974, the play received a successful production at Théâtre du Nouveau Monde, and went on to receive several more productions over time in Quebec, as well as a television adaptation for Radio-Canada Television in 1992.

On March 27, 1970, he participated to &quot;La Nuit de la poésie&quot;, the largest poetry festival in the history of Quebec. On July 7, 1971, Gauvreau fell to his death from the roof of his building. While some considered his death to be a suicide, the coroner ruled the death accidental.

Gauvreau&#x27;s final full-length play, &quot;Les oranges sont vertes&quot;, premiered posthumously in 1972 at Théâtre du Nouveau Monde, and six years after his death, in 1977, Gauvreau&#x27;s &quot;Complete Creative Works&quot;, containing over 1,500 pages of his poetry, prose and drama, was published in Montreal.

Gauvreau invented vocabulary through his own form of sound poetry, creating what he called &quot;explorean language&quot;. His life and work influenced a new generation of Canadian artists, including performance poets The Four Horsemen.

== Works ==
===In English translation===

* &quot;The Vampire and the Nymphomaniac / Le vampire et la nymphomane&quot; (1949), bilingual edition, translated by Ray Ellenwood. Toronto: One Little Goat Theatre Company, 2022. &quot;The Vampire&quot; at Canadian Play Outlet
* &quot;The Charge of the Expormidable Moose&quot; (&quot;La charge de l&#x27;orignal épormyable&quot;), translated by Ray Ellenwood. Toronto: Exile Editions, 1996. 
* &quot;Entrails&quot; (&quot;Entrailles&quot; - a collection of 26 &quot;dramatic objects&quot; by Claude Gauvreau, 1948), translated by Ray Ellenwood. Coach House Books, 1981, , Toronto: Exile Editions, 1991. 
*The Lucid Clusters: Poetics of Claude Gauvreau, translated, and with an introduction by, Ray Ellenwood. Calgary: no press, 2011

===In French===
* &quot;Le vampire et la nymphomane / The Vampire and the Nymphomaniac&quot; (1949), publication bilingue. Toronto: One Little Goat Theatre Company, 2022. 
* &quot;Les entrailles&quot; (1948), édition par Thierry Bissonnette. Bromont, Québec: Éditions de la Grenouillère, 2022. 
*&quot;Oeuvres créatrices complètes (Complete Creative Works)&quot;, Ottawa: Parti pris, 1977.
**Link to the 1991 edition
*List of Gauvreau&#x27;s works via French Wikipedia

== References ==

* W. H. New, ed. &quot;Encyclopedia of Literature in Canada.&quot; Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2002: 417–18.
* Ellenwood, Ray. &quot;Egregore: a history of the Montréal automatist movement.&quot; Toronto: Exile Editions, 1992.
**On Google Books

== External links ==
*&quot;The Charge of the Expormidable Moose&quot;, 2013 English language world premiere by One Little Goat Theatre Company 
*National Film Board of Canada documentary, &quot;Claude Gauvreau - Poète&quot; (1974) with footage from Gauvreau&#x27;s public appearances and interviews as well as scenes from the 1974 production of &quot;The Charge of the Expormidable Moose&quot;
* The Canadian Encyclopedia
* Encyclopædia Britannica
* The PIP (Project for Innovative Poetry) Blog
*List of Quebec authors</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1096768" start="0" end="15" title="Claude Gauvreau" label="Claude Gauvreau"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="51" end="59" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="61" end="67" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808721" start="102" end="112" title="sound poetry" label="sound poet"/>
<link wikidata="Q27406" start="117" end="127" title="polemicist" label="polemicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872628" start="160" end="170" title="Les Automatistes" label="Automatist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276275" start="219" end="241" title="Refus Global" label="Refus Global Manifesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="358" end="368" title="Philosophy" label="Philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q392189" start="374" end="396" title="Université de Montréal" label="Université de Montréal"/>
<link wikidata="Q38166" start="413" end="423" title="modern art" label="modern art"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749658" start="444" end="450" title="Pierre Gauvreau" label="Pierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q360286" start="510" end="528" title="Paul-Émile Borduas" label="Paul-Émile Borduas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872628" start="540" end="556" title="Les Automatistes" label="Les Automatistes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872628" start="606" end="625" title="Les Automatistes" label="Automatist Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q39427" start="642" end="653" title="Surrealism" label="Surrealists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276275" start="687" end="737" title="Refus Global" label="Refus Global (&amp;quot;Total Refusal&amp;quot;) Manifesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q986985" start="2570" end="2593" title="Radio-Canada Television" label="Radio-Canada Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808721" start="3266" end="3278" title="sound poetry" label="sound poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q15844924" start="3431" end="3448" title="The Four Horsemen (poetry)" label="The Four Horsemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7092817" start="3635" end="3666" title="One Little Goat Theatre Company" label="One Little Goat Theatre Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420274" start="3865" end="3879" title="Exile Editions" label="Exile Editions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137585" start="4041" end="4058" title="Coach House Books" label="Coach House Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420274" start="4077" end="4091" title="Exile Editions" label="Exile Editions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7092817" start="4362" end="4393" title="One Little Goat Theatre Company" label="One Little Goat Theatre Company"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4648" end="4698" title=":fr:Claude Gauvreau#.C5.92uvres" label="List of Gauvreau&amp;#x27;s works via French Wikipedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299081" start="4861" end="4869" title="Egregore" label="Egregore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420274" start="4933" end="4947" title="Exile Editions" label="Exile Editions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7092817" start="5086" end="5117" title="One Little Goat Theatre Company" label="One Little Goat Theatre Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242916" start="5471" end="5493" title="List of Quebec authors" label="List of Quebec authors"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="331657" wikidata="Q7647269" url="?curid=331657" title="Survivor (British TV series)">
<text>Survivor (also known as Survivor UK outside of the UK) is a British adventure reality game show based on the international &quot;Survivor&quot; format. Following the premise of other versions of the &quot;Survivor&quot; format, the show features a group of contestants, referred to as &quot;castaways&quot; as they are marooned in an isolated location. The castaways must provide food, water, fire, and shelter for themselves. The contestants compete in various challenges for rewards and immunity from elimination. The contestants are progressively eliminated from the game as they are voted off the island by their fellow castaways. The final castaway remaining is awarded the title of &quot;Sole Survivor&quot; and a large monetary prize.

The series aired for two seasons on the ITV network in 2001 and 2002, but the series was considered a ratings failure despite the programme having a higher viewership than other reality series at the time, including &quot;Big Brother&quot;. ITV cancelled &quot;Survivor&quot; after two seasons because it had failed to garner a loyal viewership. The network admitted fault for not supporting the series enough in its launch phase, highlighting the key issue with their approach to the scheduling of the series.

In September 2022, a revival of the series was announced by the BBC, and premiered on 28 October 2023 on BBC One and BBC iPlayer.

==Format==

The show follows the same general format as the other editions of &quot;Survivor&quot;. To begin, the players are split into two tribes and are taken to a remote, isolated location and are forced to live off the land with meagre supplies for a period of several weeks. Frequent physical and mental challenges are used to pit the tribes against each other for rewards, such as food or luxuries, or for immunity, forcing the other tribe to attend Tribal Council, where they must vote one of their tribemates out of the game by secret ballot.

About halfway through the game, the tribes are merged into a single tribe, and challenges are on an individual basis; winning immunity prevents that player from being voted out. Most players that are voted out during this stage become members of the Tribal Council Jury. When only two or three players remain, the Final Tribal Council is held. The finalists plead their case to the Jury as to why they should win the game. The jurors then have the opportunity to interrogate the finalists before casting their vote for which finalist should be considered the &quot;Sole Survivor&quot; and be awarded the grand prize. The prize on the 2001–2002 ITV iteration was £1,000,000 and is £100,000 on the 2023 BBC iteration.

Like other editions of the show, the British edition has introduced numerous modifications or twists on the core rules to prevent players from over-relying on strategies that succeeded in prior seasons or other editions of the show. Most notably, the Hidden Immunity Idols (small trinkets hidden on the island) were introduced part way through the third season. Players can use these hidden idols to save themselves or another player at the Tribal Council from being voted off. Also introduced was The Outpost, which exiles players for a predetermined amount of time while offering dilemmas and decisions that may help or hinder their game.

==History==
===Original run===
The first series, &quot;&quot;, premiered on ITV on 21 May 2001. Billboards were shown across the UK displaying the slogan &quot;You Don&#x27;t Win, You Survive&quot;. The billboards created confusion amongst viewers as it misled them into thinking people would die throughout the game. Executive producer Nigel Lythgoe complained to the &quot;Heat&quot; magazine about the decision. He said: &quot;The tagline when I left for Borneo was &#x27;Trust No One&#x27;, which is great. When I got back it was, &#x27;You Don&#x27;t Win, You Survive&#x27;. Well, you did win – you won a million pounds! And of course you survive, because we&#x27;re not going to let you die.&quot; Despite &quot;Survivor&quot; receiving initial media coverage, the debut episode opened with 6.6 million viewers, which was seen as a disappointment for ITV. Despite the figures, an ITV spokesperson said: &quot;We couldn&#x27;t have hoped for anything better. We never expected 10m on the first night although we hope it will build to this. You have got to remember that we introduced 16 strangers and a complicated gameshow to the audience and we are confident it will grow. It&#x27;s already a massive talking point, making the front pages.&quot; Ratings for the series then dropped to an average of 5 million, which was half of the audience that the network had expected. In response, ITV made the decision to transmit fewer episodes per week to allow the anticipation for the series to grow. However, their change failed to have an impact on viewing figures. Nevertheless, the finale of the first series received 7.7 million viewers, peaking at 9 million.

Despite being low in ratings by ITV&#x27;s expectations, &quot;Survivor&quot; was the most watched reality television series in the UK at its time of airing, such as &quot;Big Brother&quot;. After the first series had concluded, Julia Lamaison, ITV&#x27;s Head of Strategy, admitted that the network were too hopeful with their expectations for the series. They had hoped for a series average of 12 million viewers, accrediting their hopefulness to the success of the series in America. Lamaison also admitted that ITV had not supported &quot;Survivor&quot; enough in the first series, particularly with the time slot and the scheduling. Despite the low ratings for the first series, ITV aired the second series, &quot;&quot;, a year after the first. &quot;Survivor&quot; faced an overhaul, the changes of which included fewer contestants, audience participation and replacing presenters Mark Austin and John Leslie with one sole presenter, Mark Nicholas. It was aired every Wednesday at 9:45pm and episodes were repeated on Fridays at 8:30pm. The second series was also accompanied by &quot;Survivor: The Last Word&quot;, a televised interview with evictees, as well as a supporting series, &quot;Survivor: Raw&quot;, broadcast on sister channel ITV2. After &quot;Survivor&quot;″s viewership failed to increase, ITV cancelled it after two series.

===&quot;I&#x27;m a Celebrity&quot; ... lawsuit===
After &quot;Survivor&quot; was axed by ITV, the network began broadcasting &quot;I&#x27;m a Celebrity...Get Me Out of Here!&quot;, the format of which had many similarities to &quot;Survivor&quot;, and which received better ratings in August 2002. The show&#x27;s similarity in content to &quot;Survivor&quot; led many viewers to believe that the shows had some licensing agreement, however this was not the case. The production company behind &quot;Survivor&quot; attempted to take legal action, but this was later dropped. Legal action was also sought by CBS to prevent broadcast of a planned American version in the US, however the court ruled against, stating that &quot;Celebrity is different enough from Survivor that CBS would have difficulty prevailing in its underlying copyright infringement suit.&quot;

===2023 revival===
Following the Banijay Group&#x27;s acquisition of Castaway Productions, who own the &quot;Survivor&quot; format, it was said in 2017 that the company were looking to revive &quot;Survivor&quot; in the UK. Banijay&#x27;s CEO Peter Langenberg spoke to &quot;Broadcast&quot; about the potential return, stating that RDF, the largest British production company within Banijay, is attempting to rekindle interest in the format amongst broadcasters. He explained: &quot;Having hands on the format means we can polish it and come up with &quot;Survivor&quot; 2.0, because it needs a refresh&quot;.

Reports began circulating again in 2022 that the series would be revived, this time with BBC One said to be the potential new home of the series. &quot;Broadcast&quot; reported that the revival deal for &quot;Survivor&quot; is &quot;on the brink&quot;, and that if the deal is finalised, the third series of the programme will be filmed in 2023 with thirteen episodes. Digital Spy&#x27;s Daniel Kilkelly put forward his hopes for a revival of the programme. He felt that the key reasons for the series&#x27; initial failure lay with having a pre-recorded format which meant that viewers had no say into the events of the series. However, Kilkelly opined that the success of &quot;The Apprentice&quot; and &quot;The Great British Bake Off&quot;, both of which use pre-recorded formats, suggested that the British audience would now be ready to support a &quot;Survivor&quot; format. In September 2022, it was confirmed that Remarkable Entertainment (a subsidiary of Banijay) would produce a new series and would air on BBC One in 2023 consisting of 16 episodes. Contestant applications opened on 24 November. With the announcement of the application process, the prize of £100,000 was revealed. On 17 February 2023, Joel Dommett was confirmed as host of the revival.

===Cancellation===

In August 2024, the BBC had announced that &quot;Survivor&quot; has been axed after just one series due to a struggle in ratings.

==Series overview==
;Notes
== Production ==
=== Locations ===
==International broadcast==
The series airs on the following channels outside of the UK:

* In Australia, the BBC iteration of the series is available to stream on the 10 Play on the day after each episode has aired on BBC One. This is a companion to &quot;Australian Survivor&quot; aired by Network 10.
* In New Zealand, the BBC iteration is available to stream on TVNZ+.

==See also==
;Other versions:
*American &quot;Survivor&quot;
*&quot;Australian Survivor&quot;
*&quot;Survivor NZ&quot;
*&quot;Survivor South Africa&quot;

;Similar shows:
*&quot;Castaway 2000&quot;
*&quot;I&#x27;m a Celebrity...Get Me Out of Here!&quot;
*&quot;Shipwrecked&quot;
*&quot;The Island with Bear Grylls&quot;
==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1436734" start="68" end="77" title="adventure" label="adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q182415" start="78" end="95" title="reality game show" label="reality game show"/>
<link wikidata="Q755975" start="129" end="137" title="Survivor (franchise)" label="Survivor"/>
<link wikidata="Q182415" start="489" end="497" title="immunity (reality television)" label="immunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="783" end="786" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q549337" start="965" end="976" title="Big Brother (British TV series)" label="Big Brother"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="1319" end="1322" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q191472" start="1360" end="1367" title="BBC One" label="BBC One"/>
<link wikidata="Q2557489" start="1372" end="1383" title="BBC iPlayer" label="BBC iPlayer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1696" end="1706" title="Survivor (franchise)#Challenges" label="challenges"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1799" end="1807" title="Reality television#Immunity" label="immunity"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1843" end="1857" title="Survivor (franchise)#Tribal Council" label="Tribal Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q337987" start="1923" end="1936" title="secret ballot" label="secret ballot"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1986" end="1992" title="Survivor (franchise)#Tribal merge" label="merged"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2253" end="2273" title="Survivor (franchise)#Final Tribal Council" label="Final Tribal Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="3374" end="3377" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q12485481" start="3667" end="3692" title="Heat (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Heat&amp;quot; magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q549337" start="5135" end="5146" title="Big Brother (British TV series)" label="Big Brother"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766618" start="5851" end="5862" title="Mark Austin (journalist)" label="Mark Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6244641" start="5867" end="5878" title="John Leslie (TV presenter)" label="John Leslie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6769022" start="5904" end="5917" title="Mark Nicholas" label="Mark Nicholas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715155" start="6210" end="6214" title="ITV2" label="ITV2"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113852" start="6444" end="6486" title="I&amp;#x27;m a Celebrity...Get Me Out of Here!" label="I&amp;#x27;m a Celebrity...Get Me Out of Here!"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="6920" end="6923" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q806575" start="7211" end="7224" title="Banijay Group" label="Banijay Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972059" start="7453" end="7462" title="Broadcast (magazine)" label="Broadcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q3575678" start="7510" end="7513" title="RDF Media" label="RDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q191472" start="7878" end="7885" title="BBC One" label="BBC One"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972059" start="7941" end="7950" title="Broadcast (magazine)" label="Broadcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111380" start="8158" end="8169" title="Digital Spy" label="Digital Spy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7714064" start="8469" end="8483" title="The Apprentice (British TV series)" label="The Apprentice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737672" start="8500" end="8526" title="The Great British Bake Off" label="The Great British Bake Off"/>
<link wikidata="Q191472" start="8807" end="8814" title="BBC One" label="BBC One"/>
<link wikidata="Q16204224" start="9004" end="9016" title="Joel Dommett" label="Joel Dommett"/>
<link wikidata="Q22080661" start="9437" end="9444" title="10 Play (Network 10)" label="10 Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824734" start="9526" end="9545" title="Australian Survivor" label="Australian Survivor"/>
<link wikidata="Q767920" start="9561" end="9571" title="Network 10" label="Network 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672205" start="9635" end="9640" title="TVNZ+" label="TVNZ+"/>
<link wikidata="Q28856068" start="9674" end="9703" title="Survivor (American TV series)" label="American &amp;quot;Survivor&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824734" start="9711" end="9730" title="Australian Survivor" label="Australian Survivor"/>
<link wikidata="Q23001954" start="9744" end="9755" title="Survivor NZ" label="Survivor NZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647308" start="9769" end="9790" title="Survivor South Africa" label="Survivor South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5049611" start="9821" end="9834" title="Castaway 2000" label="Castaway 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113852" start="9848" end="9890" title="I&amp;#x27;m a Celebrity...Get Me Out of Here!" label="I&amp;#x27;m a Celebrity...Get Me Out of Here!"/>
<link wikidata="Q7498145" start="9904" end="9915" title="Shipwrecked (TV series)" label="Shipwrecked"/>
<link wikidata="Q17060809" start="9929" end="9956" title="The Island with Bear Grylls" label="The Island with Bear Grylls"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="331667" wikidata="Q946807" url="?curid=331667" title="Live Through This">
<text>Live Through This is the second studio album by the American alternative rock band Hole, released on April 12, 1994, by DGC Records. Recorded in late 1993, it departed from the band&#x27;s unpolished hardcore aesthetics to more refined melodies and song structure. Frontwoman Courtney Love said that she wanted the record to be &quot;shocking to the people who think that we don&#x27;t have a soft edge&quot;, but maintain a harsh sensibility. The album was produced by Sean Slade and Paul Q. Kolderie and mixed by Scott Litt and J Mascis. The lyrics and packaging reflect Love&#x27;s thematic preoccupations with beauty, and motifs of milk, motherhood, anti-elitism, and violence against women, while Love derived the album title from a quote in &quot;Gone with the Wind&quot; (1939).

&quot;Live Through This&quot; was met with critical acclaim, and charted in nine countries before going multi-platinum in the US in December 1994. Despite this, it was also the subject of some public discussion regarding unsubstantiated rumors that Love&#x27;s husband, Kurt Cobain—who died by suicide one week before the album&#x27;s release—helped ghostwrite the album. This claim has been disputed by the band members, producers, as well as music biographers, though the band confirmed that Cobain sang additional backing vocals on two tracks during a visit to the studio. It was also the only Hole album to feature bassist Kristen Pfaff, and the final album to be released during her lifetime, as she died two months after the album&#x27;s release.

In critical circles, &quot;Live Through This&quot; is considered a contemporary classic, and was included in &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;″s 2020 updated list of The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time at number 106. It has also been featured on the book &quot;1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die&quot; and on &quot;NME&quot;&#x27;s The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time list, where it ranked at the 84. As of 2010, it has sold over 1.6 million copies in the US.

==Background==
Hole released their debut studio album, &quot;Pretty on the Inside&quot;, in 1991. Despite moderate sales, the album was a critical success among English and American press. In March 1992, following the album tour, drummer Caroline Rue and bassist Jill Emery left the band due to artistic differences. In April 1992, vocalist Courtney Love and guitarist Eric Erlandson arranged auditions for a drummer at the Jabberjaw in Los Angeles and recruited drummer Patty Schemel. Following the 1992 Rodney King riots in Los Angeles, Love, Erlandson, and Schemel relocated to a Carnation, Washington home owned by Love and her husband, the Nirvana frontman Kurt Cobain, and began rehearsing and writing new material. &quot;We had been going more pop, less journal-entry noise stuff,&quot; said Erlandson. Love said: &quot;I was very competitive with Kurt because I wanted more melody. But I already wanted that before &quot;Live Through This&quot;.&quot;

Originally signed to Caroline Records in the United States and City Slang in Europe, Hole began record deal negotiations with Geffen Records in early 1992. In February 1992, they signed a seven-album deal with Geffen subsidiary DGC Records, reportedly with &quot;an advance of a million dollars and a royalty rate considerably higher than Nirvana&#x27;s&quot;. On November 8, 1992, Hole recorded &quot;Beautiful Son&quot;, &quot;20 Years in the Dakota&quot; and &quot;Old Age&quot; at Word of Mouth Recording in Seattle with producer Jack Endino. The songs were released in April 1993 as Hole&#x27;s fourth single on the City Slang label. On January 21, 1993, Love and Schemel recorded five demos at BMG Ariola Ltda. in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Produced by Craig Montgomery, the session had originally been scheduled as a demo session for Nirvana, who were recording material for their upcoming studio album &quot;In Utero&quot; (1993). During breaks in Nirvana&#x27;s session, Love and Schemel recorded a number of songs later featured on &quot;Live Through This&quot;, including &quot;Miss World&quot;, &quot;She Walks on Me&quot;, &quot;I Think That I Would Die&quot; and &quot;Softer, Softest&quot;.

In 1993, the band recruited former Janitor Joe bassist Kristen Pfaff, an accomplished cellist and classically trained musician who brought a new level of professionalism to the group. Erlandson said of Pfaff&#x27;s membership: &quot;That&#x27;s when we took off, all of a sudden we became a real band.&quot; After a brief tour of the United Kingdom in mid-1993, the band sent a series of demos to the record label. &quot;When we got the &quot;Live Through This&quot; demos, I realized very quickly that Hole had gotten a new rhythm section,&quot; said producer Sean Slade. &quot;It was much more musical.&quot;

==Recording==
The recording sessions for &quot;Live Through This&quot; began on October 8, 1993, at Triclops Sound Studios in Marietta, Georgia. The studio was booked at the recommendation of the Smashing Pumpkins, who had recorded their second studio album, &quot;Siamese Dream&quot; (1993), there. Hole hired the producers Paul Q. Kolderie and Sean Slade, as she and Cobain had enjoyed their work with Radiohead on their 1993 album &quot;Pablo Honey&quot;. Erlandson recalled that Hole continued to write material throughout the recording sessions over the ensuing weeks: &quot;We never finished writing; we were writing the whole time, trying to come up with more and more songs because even though it looked like we had a good, solid album, we knew we were missing some pieces. We were still writing intensely and frantically putting songs together. It wasn&#x27;t like, &quot;Oh we have these 12 songs, they&#x27;re done, and we&#x27;re going to go in and record now.&quot;&quot;

The first week of recording was spent recording basic tracks, including drums, bass, scratch guitars, and scratch vocals. After basic tracks were completed, Cobain visited Hole in the studio before Nirvana were set to tour to promote &quot;In Utero&quot;. While there, the band invited Cobain to sing backing vocals on several tracks, which he initially refused, due to being unfamiliar with the material. When Cobain asked, &quot;How can I sing on it if I haven&#x27;t heard it?&quot;, Love answered by encouraging him to &quot;just sing off the top of [his] head&quot;. Cobain provided backing vocals on &quot;Asking for It&quot; and &quot;Softer, Softest&quot;. Kolderie said Cobain sang on around five tracks, but could not remember exactly which. After taking a break for dinner, the session devolved into a jam with Cobain on drums, Love and Erlandson on guitars and Slade on bass.

Musician Dana Kletter sang backing vocals on seven songs, including &quot;Violet&quot;, &quot;Miss World&quot;, &quot;Asking for It&quot;, &quot;Doll Parts&quot;, &quot;Softer, Softest&quot;, and &quot;She Walks on Me&quot;. Slade said, &quot;I think one of the reasons that &#x27;Doll Parts&#x27; might have been a hit is that harmony Dana does on the &#x27;You will ache like I ache&#x27; part, it&#x27;s almost like an Appalachian close harmony against what Courtney is doing. It&#x27;s very melancholic.&quot; Slade and Koderie avoided double tracking Love&#x27;s vocals, as they felt it &quot;took the fierceness away&quot;. Certain imperfections were also left in the final mixes, including Love&#x27;s voice cracking in &quot;Doll Parts&quot;, which Geffen executives had asked to be removed.

According to Schemel, an employee at Triclops Sound Studios first introduced the band to crystal meth. Schemel, her brother Larry Schemel and Pfaff engaged in intense drug usage during recording. &quot;Miss World&quot; was one of the songs Schemel and Pfaff recorded while high and Schemel said &quot;that song was recorded a bit altered&quot;. Slade said that the basic tracks were completed within five days, and that Pfaff&#x27;s basslines were completed on the basic tracks: &quot;This has never happened on an album that we&#x27;ve done in all these years — every single bass track on &quot;Live Through This&quot; was from the basic tracks. There was no bass overdubs because there was no need to because they were perfect.&quot; Love completed between ten and twelve tracks of vocals for each song, which were then arranged by Slade and Kolderie.

The band finished recording on October 31, after which production and mixing lasted an additional nineteen days. The album was mixed by Scott Litt in Los Angeles and Seattle, except for &quot;Gutless&quot;, which was mixed by J Mascis of Dinosaur Jr. in New York City.

==Composition==
===Music===

&quot;Live Through This&quot; marked a departure from the band&#x27;s noise rock roots toward a more alternative rock format. Love had sought a more mellow sound for &quot;Live Through This&quot;, stating: &quot;I want this record to be shocking to the people who don&#x27;t think we have a soft edge, and at the same time, [to know] that we haven&#x27;t lost our very, very hard edge.&quot; The resulting music was starkly less aggressive than the band&#x27;s former work, blending more structured melodies and smoother arrangements with heavy guitar riffs. &quot;During the tour for &quot;Pretty on the Inside&quot;, we had been going more pop, less journal-entry noise stuff,&quot; recalled Erlandson. &quot;The whole industry was going, like, &quot;Look, you can be melodic and punky and be successful!&quot; We never said, &quot;Let&#x27;s do this, let&#x27;s copy this formula.&quot; It was natural.&quot;

Consequently, &quot;Live Through This&quot; featured a mixture of songwriting techniques, including use of power chords as well as arpeggios, and occasional use of keyboards. Musically, the album&#x27;s content ranged from heavier rock tracks such as &quot;Plump&quot; and &quot;Violet&quot; (noted by &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; for its &quot;startling gunshot-guitar chorus&quot;) to slower and more mellow rock ballads, such as &quot;Doll Parts&quot; and &quot;Softer, Softest&quot;, which featured the use of twelve-string electro-acoustic guitars and more stripped-down progressions and strumming.

A great deal of the songs on the album were written over a two-year period by Love, Erlandson, and Schemel, in both Los Angeles as well as in a makeshift studio Love had set up at her and Cobain&#x27;s secluded home in Carnation, Washington. Love also stated that &quot;half the fucking songs were written in the studio.&quot; According to Love, the songwriting process for the album was &quot;really easy&quot;: &quot;We started at [defunct L.A. punk club] Jabberjaw. I wrote &quot;Violet&quot; there. Then we moved to Seattle in the middle of that. &quot;Miss World&quot; was written in Seattle, if I remember correctly... We had this great rehearsal space [in Seattle]: It was just perfect, up on Capitol Hill, near the Urban Outfitters. Everyone got really close. There was just a great flow.&quot; Love also stated that she had been listening to The Breeders, Pixies, Echo and the Bunnymen, and Joy Division while recording the album, and that their work served as primary influences on her at the time.

The album features one cover song, &quot;Credit in the Straight World&quot; by Welsh post-punk band Young Marble Giants; the band&#x27;s frontman, Stuart Moxham reportedly &quot;hated&quot; Hole&#x27;s version of the song, saying they had turned it into a &quot;pornographic Led Zeppelin track&quot;.

===Lyrics and themes===
Though several lyrics featured on &quot;Live Through This&quot; make direct references to Love&#x27;s personal life, when reflecting on writing them, she felt the record was &quot;not as personal&quot; as the band&#x27;s previous work: &quot;You know, when women say, &quot;Well, I play music, and it&#x27;s cathartic,&quot; that applies to me to a degree, but I just wanted to write a good rock record. I would love to write a couple of great rock songs in my life, like Chrissie Hynde did. If you write something that will transcend a long period of time and make people feel a certain way, there&#x27;s really nothing like that.&quot; Recurrent themes noted on the record by critics and journalists include those of motherhood, depression, body image, child abuse, and elitism, as well as motifs of milk, pregnancy, and suicide.

The album&#x27;s opening track, &quot;Violet&quot;, was inspired by Love&#x27;s relationship with Billy Corgan, while songs like &quot;Plump&quot;, &quot;Miss World&quot;, and &quot;I Think That I Would Die&quot; contain the repeated themes of motherhood and post-partum depression. &quot;I Think That I Would Die&quot; makes specific references to the custody battle which Love and husband Cobain had endured over their daughter, Frances Bean Cobain, in 1992; according to Love, the line &quot;She says, &#x27;I am not a feminist&#x27;&quot; in the song was directly quoted from a Julia Roberts interview that she had read. &quot;Asking for It&quot; was inspired by an occurrence at a 1991 concert when Hole was touring with Mudhoney, in which Love was assaulted and had her clothes ripped off of her while crowdsurfing, leaving her entirely naked, and was written entirely during the album&#x27;s recording sessions. &quot;Doll Parts&quot;, the album&#x27;s most successful single, was written by Love in music executive Joyce Linehan&#x27;s apartment in Boston, Massachusetts in 1991, and was inspired by Love&#x27;s insecurity of Cobain&#x27;s romantic interest in her.
Love also drew on other filmic and literary influences while writing the album&#x27;s lyrics: The phrase &quot;live through this&quot; in &quot;Asking for It&quot;, which later became the album title, is derived from a quote in &quot;Gone with the Wind&quot; (1939), and the phrase &quot;kill-me pills&quot; references poet Anne Sexton, who, after overdosing on barbiturates and pentobarbital, called the drugs &quot;kill-me pills&quot;. The refrain in &quot;Plump&quot; in which Love sings, &quot;I&#x27;m eating you. I&#x27;m overfed&quot; also bears similarity to a line from Sexton&#x27;s poem &quot;The Ballad of the Lonely Masturbator&quot;, which reads: &quot;They are eating each other. They are overfed.&quot;
A song entitled &quot;Rock Star&quot; was originally slated to close the album, but a last-minute decision was made to replace the track with &quot;Olympia&quot;. Since the artwork had already been printed, however, the title of &quot;Rock Star&quot; remained and was also used for further releases. The track lyrically mocks the riot grrrl music scene of the Evergreen State College in Olympia, Washington, criticizing &quot;the hive mind of the Olympia scenester...  nonconformist outsiders... [who] ended up in a culture of homogeneous punk conformity.&quot; Alternate mixes of the song that later were released as B-sides included even more satirical lyrics, such as &quot;we took punk rock, and we got a grade.&quot;

In summarizing the record&#x27;s themes, &quot;Spin&quot; noted: 

==Packaging and artwork==

Fashion model Leilani Bishop is shown on the cover of the album, shot by photographer Ellen von Unwerth, dressed in beauty pageant attire with a tiara and a bouquet of flowers, with mascara running down her eyes in tears of joy. Love stated in an interview that she &quot;wanted to capture the look on a woman&#x27;s face as she&#x27;s being crowned...  this sort of ecstatic, blue eyeliner running, kind of &#x27;I am, I am—I won! I have hemorrhoid cream under my eyes and adhesive tape on my butt, and I had to scratch and claw and fuck my way up, but I won Miss Congeniality!&#x27;&quot; The band logo introduced on the front cover of the album shares stylistic similarity to the contemporary Mattel Barbie logo.

The back cover of the album features a family photo of Courtney Love during her childhood in Springfield, Oregon, with the individual track listings appearing to the right, printed on embossing tape. Music scholar Ronald Lankford commented on the contrast between the images on the front and back cover, interpreting the back image of Love as symbolizing the &quot;antithesis of the contest winner on the cover. The young girl, then, seems to represent femininity in its natural state, before the fall of adolescence.&quot;

==Release==

&quot;Live Through This&quot; was released on April 12, 1994, by DGC Records on compact disc and cassette in North America. Overseas, the album received a short-lived LP pressing by City Slang on a standard black vinyl and a limited white vinyl. The album was dedicated to the memory of Joe Cole, a roadie for Black Flag and the Rollins Band who was shot to death in a December 1991 robbery after attending a Hole concert at the Whisky a Go Go.

The album debuted on the U.S. &quot;Billboard 200&quot; at number 55, eventually peaking at number 52 in January 1995 during its 68-week stay. In December 1994, the record went gold, having sold a total of 500,000 copies, and went platinum six months later for having sold one million copies. As of 2010, the album had sold more than 1.6 million copies in the United States and has well over 2 million worldwide. It has also achieved platinum status in Canada and Australia.

In June 1994, just before Hole was scheduled to embark on an international tour to support the album, bassist Pfaff was found dead in her Seattle apartment of a heroin overdose. The tour was subsequently postponed until the end of the summer, after which Melissa Auf der Maur, a Canadian bassist from Montreal, was hired to join the band and accompany them on tour.

Four singles were released from the album and three promotional videos were shot, for &quot;Miss World&quot; (still with Kristen Pfaff), &quot;Doll Parts&quot; (with L7&#x27;s bassist Jennifer Finch replacing her) and &quot;Violet&quot; (already with Melissa Auf der Maur). &quot;Softer, Softest&quot; was also released as a single, and Hole&#x27;s performance of this song at their MTV Unplugged session was used as a promotional video.

===Authorship allegations===

Following the album&#x27;s release, rumors began circulating alleging that Love&#x27;s recently deceased husband, Cobain, had ghostwritten some of the songs. Although these rumors circulated for years to follow, multiple songs on &quot;Live Through This&quot; had been written and performed during Hole&#x27;s &quot;Pretty on the Inside&quot; tour: Both &quot;Violet&quot; and &quot;Doll Parts&quot;, among other tracks, were written in 1991 during the release of &quot;Pretty on the Inside&quot;. The first studio recordings of the songs took place during a BBC Radio broadcast for John Peel in 1991, in between US and European tours to promote &quot;Pretty on the Inside&quot;; these recordings would later appear on the group&#x27;s 1995 EP &quot;Ask for It&quot;.

In a 2006 &quot;Time&quot; magazine piece, it was noted that &quot;[the rumors] started immediately that it was Cobain, not his wife, Courtney Love, who wrote the majority of these churningly catchy songs. Forget that there&#x27;s no proof, that their marriage was collaborative and that it&#x27;s a nasty thing to say, &quot;Live Through This&quot; is clearly a woman&#x27;s work [and is] far more swaggering than any album any grunge man ever came up with. When Love sings, &quot;I went to school in Olympia / Where everyone&#x27;s the same,&quot; it&#x27;s obvious she thinks she&#x27;s not, and that she&#x27;s right.&quot; Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic wrote that the main reason &quot;Live Through This&quot; marked a drastic sonic departure from &quot;Pretty on the Inside&quot; (a reason cited in arguments that it had been ghostwritten) is &quot;Love&#x27;s desire to compete in the same commercial alternative rock arena as her husband... while [Cobain having ghostwritten] is unlikely, there&#x27;s no denying that his patented stop-start dynamics, barre chords, and punk-pop melodies provide the blueprint for &quot;Live Through This&quot;. Love adds her signature rage and feminist rhetoric to the formula.&quot;
Love made several responses to the songwriting allegations, first in 1998: &quot;All this time I have never addressed this. But here I am finally saying for the very first time that Kurt did not [write] &quot;Live Through This&quot;. I mean for fuck&#x27;s sake, his skills were much better than mine at the timethe songs would have been much better. That&#x27;s the first thing.&quot; Love later addressed the issue, stating: &quot;I wanted to be better than Kurt. I was really competing with Kurt. And that&#x27;s why it always offends me when people would say, &quot;Oh, he wrote &quot;Live Through This&quot;.&quot; I&#x27;d be proud as hell to say that he wrote something on it, but I wouldn&#x27;t let him. It was too Yoko [Ono] for me. It&#x27;s like, &quot;No fucking way, man! I&#x27;ve got a good band, I don&#x27;t fucking need your help.&quot; Drummer Patty Schemel, a longtime friend of Cobain&#x27;s, also denied this, commenting in 2011: &quot;There is that myth that Kurt wrote a lot of our songs— it&#x27;s not true. Eric [Erlandson] and Courtney wrote &quot;Live Through This&quot;.&quot; Although the band members denied Cobain&#x27;s involvement in the songwriting, they have openly stated that Cobain was briefly in the studio and performed uncredited backup vocals with Kristen Pfaff on two of the tracks: &quot;Asking for It&quot;, and &quot;Softer, Softest&quot;. Cobain biographer Charles R. Cross conducted interviews with everyone associated with the making of the record, and found that all parties agreed that Love and Erlandson wrote the songs.

The album&#x27;s liner notes collectively credit Hole as the sole composers of the album, aside from two tracks: &quot;I Think That I Would Die&quot;, on which Kat Bjelland served as a co-writer, and &quot;Credit in the Straight World&quot;, a Young Marble Giants cover written by Stuart Moxham. However, according to the BMI (Broadcast Music Incorporated) repertoire, the songwriting credits of the majority of the album&#x27;s tracks belong solely to Courtney Love and Eric Erlandson, while &quot;Doll Parts&quot; is credited to Love alone.

==Reception==
&quot;Live Through This&quot; was lauded by music critics and rock periodicals in 1994, and was included in various annual best-of lists: It was ranked the number one album of 1994 by critics in &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;, &quot;Spin&quot;, the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot;, and the &quot;Village Voice&#x27;s&quot; annual Pazz &amp; Jop critics&#x27; poll. It was also named among the best five albums of the year by several Canadian publications, including the &quot;Edmonton Journal&quot; and the &quot;Toronto Star&quot;.

In their review, &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; noted that &quot;Love delivers punk not only as insinuating as Nirvana&#x27;s but as corrosive as the Sex Pistols&#x27;. More significantly, &quot;Live Through This&quot; may be the most potent blast of female insurgency ever committed to tape.&quot; &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; gave the album a B+ rating, saying, &quot;What &quot;Live Through This&quot; makes perfectly clear, though, is that Love is a greater star. She has charisma and attitude to burn, and she knows it.&quot; &quot;NME&quot; called the album &quot;a personal but secretive thrash-pop opera of urban nihilism and passionate doublethinks&quot;, and &quot;Melody Maker&quot; called it &quot;the high watermark of the genre that survived the crass label of &#x27;foxcore&#x27;.&quot;

In &quot;The Village Voice&quot;, Robert Christgau noted the album&#x27;s less caustic sound but praised Love&#x27;s songwriting: &quot;Punk aesthetic or no punk aesthetic, Courtney Love&#x27;s songs wouldn&#x27;t be compromised and might be deepened by steeper momentum and more articulate guitar noise. But they prevail anyway. Their focus is sexual exploitation, and not just by the media, evil straights, and male predators of every cultural orientation. She&#x27;s also exploited by Courtney Love, and not only does she know it, she thinks about it.&quot;

&quot;Musician Magazine&quot; wrote, &quot;[Kurt] Cobain&#x27;s much-discussed, little heard other half finally gets the chance to escape gossip-column purgatory and succeeds with flying colors... Courtney Love&#x27;s foul, funny eloquence...cuts through all the bullshit with a mighty flourish.&quot; This sentiment was reassessed in a 2008 BBC review of the album, which stated, &quot;In 1994 and the years that followed, tragedy and controversy seemed to overshadow everything Courtney Love touched. Thankfully, with every year that passes, it becomes easier to put the record&#x27;s emotional baggage to one side and appraise it on the strength of its songs.&quot;

&quot;Since the last Hole LP... Courtney has learnt the art of writing a decent pop hook&quot;, observed &quot;Select&quot;″s Clark Collis. &quot;Disgorging your cathartic trauma in the studio is an admirable pastime but if you really want to compete with Corgan, Vedder or even &#x27;im indoors, then the Top 40 is still where it&#x27;s at.&quot; &quot;Spin&quot; reviewed &quot;Live Through This&quot; very favorably with a 9/10 rating, noting, &quot;Love rode her band&#x27;s gargantuan riffs through a shy loner&#x27;s air-guitar fantasy: rock stardom as revenge upon the entire human race.&quot;

===Reappraisal===
AllMusic praised the &quot;raw pain&quot; of the lyrics and described the album as an attempt to &quot;compete in the commercial alternative rock arena&quot;, stating that notwithstanding the lyrical rawness, &quot;&quot;Live Through This&quot; rarely sounds raw because of the shiny production and the carefully considered dynamics. Despite this flaw, the album retains its power because it was one of the few records patterned on &quot;Nevermind&quot; that gets the formula right, with a set of gripping hooks and melodies that retain their power even if they follow the predictable grunge pattern.&quot; John Peel listed it among his top twenty favorite albums of all time in 1997.

In 2003, &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; included &quot;Live Through This&quot; in its list of The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time, ranking it at number 466, with the ranking climbing slightly to number 460 in the 2012 revision. For the 2020 reboot of the list, the album&#x27;s ranking shot all the way up to number 106. In 2011, &quot;Kerrang!&quot; included the album in its &quot;666 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die!&quot; list. It was also included in &quot;Time&quot; magazine&#x27;s All-&quot;Time&quot; 100 Albums list, as well as the book &quot;1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die&quot; (2006). &quot;NME&quot; declared &quot;Live Through This&quot; the 84th greatest album of all time in its list of 500 albums, released in 2013.

In May 2014, &quot;Loudwire&quot; placed &quot;Live Through This&quot; at number seven on its &quot;10 Best Hard Rock Albums of 1994&quot; list. The album was also ranked at number 15 in &quot;Guitar World&quot; magazine&#x27;s &quot;Superunknown: 50 Iconic Albums That Defined 1994&quot; list. &quot;Spin&quot; named &quot;Live Through This&quot; 6 on their list &quot;Spin: Top 90 Albums of the 90&#x27;s&quot; and 19 on their list &quot;Spin 100 Greatest Albums 1985–2005&quot;. The album is ranked number 980 in the &quot;All-Time Top 1000 Albums&quot; (3rd. edition, 2000). In 2019, &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; ranked the album at number four on its list of the 50 greatest grunge albums. In 2024, &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; ranked the album&#x27;s cover at number 13 on its list of the 100 best album covers of all time.

==Commercial performance==
In the United States, &quot;Live Through This&quot; peaked at number 52 on the US &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 chart, and spent 68 weeks on the chart, making it the band&#x27;s longest charting album in the US. It was ranked at number 86 on the year end chart of the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200. It was certified Platinum in the US in 1995 with one million copies sold. The album has sold 1.6 million copies in the US to date.

The album peaked at number 13 in the UK and charted for 17 weeks. It was certified Gold in the UK in 2013, with 100,000 copies sold. In Australia, it peaked at number 13 and spent 16 weeks on the chart. It was certified Gold in the country, with 70,000 copies sold.

==Track listing==

*&quot;Rock Star&quot; is a mislabel of the outtake &quot;Olympia&quot;. 

==Personnel==
Hole
*Courtney Love – lead vocals, rhythm guitar 
*Eric Erlandson – lead guitar
*Kristen Pfaff – bass, backing vocals, piano
*Patty Schemel – drums

Guest musicians
*Dana Kletter – additional vocals (1, 2, 4, 6, 8, 9)
*Kurt Cobain – backing vocals (4, 8)

Technical
*Paul Q. Kolderie – producer, engineer
*Sean Slade – producer, engineer, mixing (3, 6, 7, 9, 10, 12)
*Scott Litt – mixing (1, 2, 4, 5, 8 at Record One, Los Angeles, and Bad Animals, Seattle)
*J Mascis – mixing (11 at Sear Sound, New York City)
*Bob Ludwig – mastering

Design
*Robin Sloane – creative direction
*Janet Wolsborn – art direction
*Ellen von Unwerth – photography (front artwork, portraits)
*Frank Rodriguez – photography (back artwork)
*Juergen Teller – inlay artwork
*Margaret Morton – inlay artwork
==Charts==

===Weekly charts===

===Year-end charts===

==Certifications==



==Notes==
==References==
===Bibliography===
*
*
*
*
*


==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11366" start="61" end="77" title="alternative rock" label="alternative rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q624790" start="83" end="87" title="Hole (band)" label="Hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311775" start="120" end="131" title="DGC Records" label="DGC Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q10922" start="200" end="208" title="hardcore punk" label="hardcore"/>
<link wikidata="Q222071" start="276" end="289" title="Courtney Love" label="Courtney Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q7441436" start="470" end="480" title="Sean Slade" label="Sean Slade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645322" start="485" end="501" title="Paul Q. Kolderie" label="Paul Q. Kolderie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354218" start="515" end="525" title="Scott Litt" label="Scott Litt"/>
<link wikidata="Q739681" start="530" end="538" title="J Mascis" label="J Mascis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1697305" start="626" end="631" title="motif (narrative)" label="motif"/>
<link wikidata="Q422933" start="654" end="666" title="anti-elitism" label="anti-elitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2875" start="753" end="771" title="Gone with the Wind (film)" label="Gone with the Wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503026" start="897" end="905" title="RIAA certification" label="platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q8446" start="1057" end="1068" title="Kurt Cobain" label="Kurt Cobain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616580" start="1073" end="1088" title="suicide of Kurt Cobain" label="died by suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q623386" start="1137" end="1147" title="ghostwriter" label="ghostwrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q240554" start="1414" end="1427" title="Kristen Pfaff" label="Kristen Pfaff"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="1656" end="1669" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q240550" start="1699" end="1734" title="Rolling Stone&amp;#x27;s 500 Greatest Albums of All Time" label="The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q164932" start="1794" end="1834" title="1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die" label="1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="1854" end="1857" title="NME" label="NME"/>
<link wikidata="Q18378807" start="1871" end="1906" title="NME&amp;#x27;s The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time" label="The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061242" start="2061" end="2081" title="Pretty on the Inside" label="Pretty on the Inside"/>
<link wikidata="Q624790" start="2238" end="2250" title="Caroline Rue" label="Caroline Rue"/>
<link wikidata="Q624790" start="2263" end="2273" title="Jill Emery" label="Jill Emery"/>
<link wikidata="Q222071" start="2341" end="2354" title="Courtney Love" label="Courtney Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351266" start="2369" end="2383" title="Eric Erlandson" label="Eric Erlandson"/>
<link wikidata="Q19462567" start="2424" end="2433" title="Jabberjaw (Los Angeles)" label="Jabberjaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q3331185" start="2471" end="2484" title="Patty Schemel" label="Patty Schemel"/>
<link wikidata="Q696187" start="2500" end="2522" title="1992 Los Angeles riots" label="1992 Rodney King riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191413" start="2583" end="2604" title="Carnation, Washington" label="Carnation, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q11649" start="2645" end="2652" title="Nirvana (band)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q8446" start="2662" end="2673" title="Kurt Cobain" label="Kurt Cobain"/>
<link wikidata="Q264137" start="2982" end="2998" title="Caroline Records" label="Caroline Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q319166" start="3024" end="3034" title="City Slang" label="City Slang"/>
<link wikidata="Q212699" start="3087" end="3101" title="Geffen Records" label="Geffen Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311775" start="3189" end="3200" title="DGC Records" label="DGC Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q3325582" start="3363" end="3376" title="Beautiful Son" label="Beautiful Son"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505000" start="3446" end="3469" title="Reciprocal Recording" label="Word of Mouth Recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="3473" end="3480" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q427917" start="3495" end="3506" title="Jack Endino" label="Jack Endino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8678" start="3681" end="3703" title="Rio de Janeiro, Brazil" label="Rio de Janeiro, Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5181255" start="3717" end="3733" title="Craig Montgomery" label="Craig Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q222001" start="3874" end="3882" title="In Utero (album)" label="In Utero"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395396" start="4047" end="4057" title="Miss World (song)" label="Miss World"/>
<link wikidata="Q3325466" start="4141" end="4156" title="Softer, Softest" label="Softer, Softest"/>
<link wikidata="Q6154745" start="4200" end="4211" title="Janitor Joe" label="Janitor Joe"/>
<link wikidata="Q240554" start="4220" end="4233" title="Kristen Pfaff" label="Kristen Pfaff"/>
<link wikidata="Q8371" start="4251" end="4258" title="cellist" label="cellist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7441436" start="4726" end="4736" title="Sean Slade" label="Sean Slade"/>
<link wikidata="Q852684" start="4903" end="4920" title="Marietta, Georgia" label="Marietta, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q184217" start="4969" end="4990" title="the Smashing Pumpkins" label="the Smashing Pumpkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q902233" start="5042" end="5055" title="Siamese Dream" label="Siamese Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645322" start="5102" end="5118" title="Paul Q. Kolderie" label="Paul Q. Kolderie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7441436" start="5123" end="5133" title="Sean Slade" label="Sean Slade"/>
<link wikidata="Q44190" start="5181" end="5190" title="Radiohead" label="Radiohead"/>
<link wikidata="Q221241" start="5217" end="5228" title="Pablo Honey" label="Pablo Honey"/>
<link wikidata="Q25210871" start="6375" end="6388" title="Asking for It (Hole song)" label="Asking for It"/>
<link wikidata="Q312543" start="6576" end="6579" title="Jam session" label="jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214767" start="6661" end="6673" title="Dana Kletter" label="Dana Kletter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780884" start="7074" end="7084" title="Appalachian music" label="Appalachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q124296467" start="7086" end="7099" title="Close and open harmony" label="close harmony"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300113" start="7192" end="7207" title="double tracking" label="double tracking"/>
<link wikidata="Q191924" start="7542" end="7554" title="crystal meth" label="crystal meth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760913" start="8113" end="8126" title="Overdubbing" label="bass overdubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354218" start="8444" end="8454" title="Scott Litt" label="Scott Litt"/>
<link wikidata="Q739681" start="8534" end="8542" title="J Mascis" label="J Mascis"/>
<link wikidata="Q622944" start="8546" end="8558" title="Dinosaur Jr." label="Dinosaur Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1130936" start="9627" end="9639" title="power chords" label="power chords"/>
<link wikidata="Q678090" start="10031" end="10044" title="Twelve-string guitar" label="twelve-string"/>
<link wikidata="Q988736" start="10045" end="10061" title="Acoustic-electric guitar" label="electro-acoustic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191413" start="10341" end="10362" title="Carnation, Washington" label="Carnation, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305815" start="10822" end="10834" title="Capitol Hill" label="Capitol Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552193" start="10845" end="10861" title="Urban Outfitters" label="Urban Outfitters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332134" start="10973" end="10985" title="The Breeders" label="The Breeders"/>
<link wikidata="Q188464" start="10987" end="10993" title="Pixies (band)" label="Pixies"/>
<link wikidata="Q925641" start="10995" end="11016" title="Echo and the Bunnymen" label="Echo and the Bunnymen"/>
<link wikidata="Q172763" start="11022" end="11034" title="Joy Division" label="Joy Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164036" start="11232" end="11251" title="Young Marble Giants" label="Young Marble Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331" start="11407" end="11419" title="Led Zeppelin" label="Led Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q239202" start="11930" end="11944" title="Chrissie Hynde" label="Chrissie Hynde"/>
<link wikidata="Q422933" start="12230" end="12237" title="elitism" label="elitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q10737" start="12281" end="12288" title="suicide" label="suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q311382" start="12389" end="12401" title="Billy Corgan" label="Billy Corgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q935129" start="12550" end="12572" title="post-partum depression" label="post-partum depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q426999" start="12722" end="12741" title="Frances Bean Cobain" label="Frances Bean Cobain"/>
<link wikidata="Q40523" start="12873" end="12886" title="Julia Roberts" label="Julia Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q898820" start="13017" end="13025" title="Mudhoney" label="Mudhoney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478034" start="13216" end="13226" title="Doll Parts" label="Doll Parts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2875" start="13699" end="13717" title="Gone with the Wind (film)" label="Gone with the Wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q270728" start="13789" end="13800" title="Anne Sexton" label="Anne Sexton"/>
<link wikidata="Q206348" start="13827" end="13839" title="barbiturates" label="barbiturates"/>
<link wikidata="Q409632" start="13844" end="13857" title="pentobarbital" label="pentobarbital"/>
<link wikidata="Q191609" start="13907" end="13914" title="refrain" label="refrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q677542" start="14514" end="14524" title="riot grrrl" label="riot grrrl"/>
<link wikidata="Q941731" start="14544" end="14567" title="Evergreen State College" label="Evergreen State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q42735" start="14571" end="14590" title="Olympia, Washington" label="Olympia, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q17085328" start="14756" end="14761" title="Audio mixing (recorded music)" label="mixes"/>
<link wikidata="Q128758" start="14829" end="14838" title="satirical" label="satirical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025912" start="14954" end="14958" title="Spin (magazine)" label="Spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3229188" start="15015" end="15029" title="Leilani Bishop" label="Leilani Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q65022" start="15087" end="15104" title="Ellen von Unwerth" label="Ellen von Unwerth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658935" start="15117" end="15131" title="beauty pageant" label="beauty pageant"/>
<link wikidata="Q41478" start="15440" end="15450" title="hemorrhoid" label="hemorrhoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q596139" start="15697" end="15703" title="Mattel" label="Mattel"/>
<link wikidata="Q167447" start="15704" end="15710" title="Barbie" label="Barbie"/>
<link wikidata="Q40268" start="15811" end="15830" title="Springfield, Oregon" label="Springfield, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721980" start="15902" end="15916" title="embossing tape" label="embossing tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q34467" start="16336" end="16348" title="compact disc" label="compact disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q149757" start="16353" end="16361" title="compact Cassette" label="cassette"/>
<link wikidata="Q16629185" start="16423" end="16425" title="gramophone record" label="LP"/>
<link wikidata="Q319166" start="16438" end="16448" title="City Slang" label="City Slang"/>
<link wikidata="Q30826393" start="16543" end="16551" title="Murder of Joe Cole" label="Joe Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q464476" start="16566" end="16576" title="Black Flag (band)" label="Black Flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891331" start="16581" end="16597" title="the Rollins Band" label="the Rollins Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277567" start="16685" end="16699" title="Whisky a Go Go" label="Whisky a Go Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="16738" end="16751" title="Billboard 200" label="Billboard 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q241365" start="16879" end="16883" title="Gold Record" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q60168" start="17339" end="17345" title="heroin" label="heroin"/>
<link wikidata="Q254510" start="17433" end="17453" title="Melissa Auf der Maur" label="Melissa Auf der Maur"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="17479" end="17487" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138185" start="17711" end="17713" title="L7 (band)" label="L7"/>
<link wikidata="Q10306650" start="17729" end="17743" title="Jennifer Finch" label="Jennifer Finch"/>
<link wikidata="Q10913761" start="17928" end="17941" title="MTV Unplugged" label="MTV Unplugged"/>
<link wikidata="Q623386" start="18140" end="18152" title="ghostwriter" label="ghostwritten"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061242" start="18330" end="18350" title="Pretty on the Inside" label="Pretty on the Inside"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="18573" end="18576" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q326542" start="18597" end="18606" title="John Peel" label="John Peel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732904" start="18764" end="18774" title="Ask for It" label="Ask for It"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="18799" end="18803" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q976031" start="19411" end="19434" title="Stephen Thomas Erlewine" label="Stephen Thomas Erlewine"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="19438" end="19446" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q117012" start="20739" end="20743" title="Yoko Ono" label="Yoko"/>
<link wikidata="Q3331185" start="20879" end="20892" title="Patty Schemel" label="Patty Schemel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4572489" start="21421" end="21437" title="Charles R. Cross" label="Charles R. Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638175" start="21751" end="21763" title="Kat Bjelland" label="Kat Bjelland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164036" start="21872" end="21885" title="Young Marble Giants" label="Stuart Moxham"/>
<link wikidata="Q891885" start="21913" end="21916" title="Broadcast Music Incorporated" label="BMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="22350" end="22363" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025912" start="22377" end="22381" title="Spin (magazine)" label="Spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="22399" end="22416" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q876158" start="22438" end="22451" title="Village Voice" label="Village Voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q4046553" start="22472" end="22486" title="Pazz &amp;amp; Jop" label="Pazz &amp;amp; Jop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396619" start="22618" end="22634" title="Edmonton Journal" label="Edmonton Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067299" start="22655" end="22667" title="Toronto Star" label="Toronto Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q82545" start="22821" end="22832" title="Sex Pistols" label="Sex Pistols"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="22976" end="22996" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="23212" end="23215" title="NME" label="NME"/>
<link wikidata="Q580896" start="23350" end="23362" title="Melody Maker" label="Melody Maker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5477103" start="23456" end="23463" title="foxcore" label="foxcore"/>
<link wikidata="Q876158" start="23487" end="23504" title="The Village Voice" label="The Village Voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q314382" start="23512" end="23528" title="Robert Christgau" label="Robert Christgau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035954" start="23876" end="23885" title="heterosexual" label="straights"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942594" start="24046" end="24063" title="Musician (magazine)" label="Musician Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="24382" end="24385" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5373781" start="24627" end="24644" title="emotional baggage" label="emotional baggage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061242" start="24722" end="24738" title="Pretty on the Inside" label="the last Hole LP"/>
<link wikidata="Q7447637" start="24821" end="24827" title="Select (magazine)" label="Select"/>
<link wikidata="Q311382" start="24966" end="24972" title="Billy Corgan" label="Corgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q221535" start="24974" end="24980" title="Eddie Vedder" label="Vedder"/>
<link wikidata="Q8446" start="24989" end="25005" title="Kurt Cobain" label="&amp;#x27;im indoors"/>
<link wikidata="Q6148929" start="25016" end="25022" title="Top 40" label="Top 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025912" start="25064" end="25068" title="Spin (magazine)" label="Spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="25330" end="25338" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q326542" start="25937" end="25946" title="John Peel" label="John Peel"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="26031" end="26044" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q240550" start="26105" end="26140" title="Rolling Stone&amp;#x27;s 500 Greatest Albums of All Time" label="The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q43281" start="26347" end="26355" title="Kerrang!" label="Kerrang!"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="26477" end="26481" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q164932" start="26568" end="26608" title="1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die" label="1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="26629" end="26632" title="NME" label="NME"/>
<link wikidata="Q6686082" start="26779" end="26787" title="Loudwire" label="Loudwire"/>
<link wikidata="Q930471" start="26953" end="26965" title="Guitar World" label="Guitar World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025912" start="27061" end="27065" title="Spin (magazine)" label="Spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4729825" start="27286" end="27310" title="All-Time Top 1000 Albums" label="All-Time Top 1000 Albums"/>
<link wikidata="Q222071" start="28416" end="28429" title="Courtney Love" label="Courtney Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351266" start="28461" end="28475" title="Eric Erlandson" label="Eric Erlandson"/>
<link wikidata="Q240554" start="28491" end="28504" title="Kristen Pfaff" label="Kristen Pfaff"/>
<link wikidata="Q3331185" start="28536" end="28549" title="Patty Schemel" label="Patty Schemel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214767" start="28576" end="28588" title="Dana Kletter" label="Dana Kletter"/>
<link wikidata="Q8446" start="28629" end="28640" title="Kurt Cobain" label="Kurt Cobain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645322" start="28677" end="28693" title="Paul Q. Kolderie" label="Paul Q. Kolderie"/>
<link wikidata="Q128124" start="28706" end="28714" title="Audio engineering" label="engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7441436" start="28716" end="28726" title="Sean Slade" label="Sean Slade"/>
<link wikidata="Q17085328" start="28749" end="28755" title="Audio mixing (recorded music)" label="mixing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354218" start="28778" end="28788" title="Scott Litt" label="Scott Litt"/>
<link wikidata="Q739681" start="28868" end="28876" title="J Mascis" label="J Mascis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7966115" start="28893" end="28903" title="Sear Sound" label="Sear Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q981970" start="28921" end="28931" title="Bob Ludwig" label="Bob Ludwig"/>
<link wikidata="Q421031" start="28934" end="28943" title="Audio mastering" label="mastering"/>
<link wikidata="Q667982" start="28968" end="28986" title="creative direction" label="creative direction"/>
<link wikidata="Q706364" start="29005" end="29018" title="art direction" label="art direction"/>
<link wikidata="Q65022" start="29020" end="29037" title="Ellen von Unwerth" label="Ellen von Unwerth"/>
<link wikidata="Q624903" start="29053" end="29066" title="Cover art" label="front artwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q458831" start="29126" end="29140" title="Juergen Teller" label="Juergen Teller"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="331672" wikidata="Q517750" url="?curid=331672" title="Shenzhen Stock Exchange">
<text>The Shenzhen Stock Exchange (SZSE; ) is a stock exchange based in the city of Shenzhen, in the People&#x27;s Republic of China. It is one of three stock exchanges operating independently in Mainland China, the others being the Beijing Stock Exchange and the Shanghai Stock Exchange. It is situated in the Futian district of Shenzhen. The SZSE is the world&#x27;s 6th largest stock exchange with a market capitalization exceeding US$4.4 trillion in July 2024.

== History ==

On 1 December 1990, Shenzhen Stock Exchange was founded. As an idea adapted from the capitalist countries, it was politically controversial in China. In support of the stock exchange, Deng Xiaoping rhetorically asked, &quot;Are securities and the stock markets good or bad? Do they entail dangers? Are they peculiar to capitalism? Can socialism make use of them?&quot; Deng contended that China must try them out and reserve judgment, because if securities and the stock market went well, they could be expanded, and if not, they could be stopped. 

In January 1992, Deng Xiaoping&#x27;s Southern Tour saved China&#x27;s capital market and the two stock exchanges (the other was the Shanghai Stock Exchange). 

Before 1997, the Shenzhen Stock Exchange was under municipal control and termed an &quot;experimental point&quot;.

In July 1997, the State Council of China decided that the Shenzhen Stock Exchange would be directly managed by the China Securities Regulatory Commission. It also affirmed that China&#x27;s stock exchanges had a legitimate role in the socialist market economy.

In 2004, the Small and Medium Enterprise Board was launched. 

In October 2009, the ChiNext market () was inaugurated.

==Hours==
The exchange has pre-market sessions from 09:15 am to 09:25 am and normal trading sessions from 09:30 am to 11:30 am and 1:00 pm to 3:00 pm China Standard Time (UTC+08:00) on all days of the week except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays declared by the Exchange in advance.

==ChiNext==
The exchange opened the ChiNext board (), a NASDAQ-type exchange for high-growth, high-tech start-ups, on 23 October 2009.

=== Overview ===
ChiNext is also called the second stock trading market. It refers to the securities trading market outside the main board. It provides growth space for small and medium-sized enterprises and emerging companies that cannot be listed in the main board. It is an effective supplement to the main board market. The biggest feature of the ChiNext is that it has low entry barriers and strict operation requirements, which help potential small and medium-sized enterprises obtain financing opportunities.

History

The establishment of the ChiNext was a response to the growing demand for alternative financing options for small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) in China. Prior to its creation, many SMEs had difficulty raising capital as they did not meet the strict listing requirements of China&#x27;s established stock exchanges in Shanghai and Shenzhen.

The ChiNext was launched with 28 listed companies and quickly gained attention from investors as a platform for investing in high-growth industries such as technology, healthcare, and renewable energy. Over time, the number of listed companies on the ChiNext has grown, and as of 2021, there are over 800 companies listed on the exchange.

In the years since its establishment, the ChiNext has undergone several reforms aimed at improving transparency, promoting more sustainable growth, and reducing risks associated with speculative trading. For example, in 2016, the exchange introduced a new registration-based IPO system, which simplified the listing process for new companies.

=== Influences ===
The influences of ChiNext includes boosting innovation and entrepreneurship and attracting foreign investment. Specifically, ChiNext has played a key role in promoting innovation and entrepreneurship in China by providing a platform for smaller and innovative companies to raise capital and grow their businesses. This has led to the development of startups and technology companies in China.

==Market data==
&quot;(As of January 2021)&quot;
*Listed companies: 2,375
*Market capitalization: RMB 34,463,161.66million (US$5.24 trillion)

==Listings==
=== Major listing requirements ===
The listing requirements for the Shenzhen Stock Exchange (SZSE) are established by the China Securities Regulatory Commission and are designed to ensure the quality of companies listed on the exchange. The major listing requirements for the SZSE include:

# Minimum size requirements: Companies seeking to list on the SZSE must have a certain level of size, as measured by net assets or revenue.
# Financial performance: Companies must demonstrate a strong financial performance, with a track record of profitability and positive cash flow. Specifically, one of the following requirements must be met: 1.The estimated market value is not less than 1 billion yuan, the net profit in the most recent year is positive, and the operating income is not less than 100 million yuan; 2. The estimated market value is not less than 5 billion yuan, and the operating income in the most recent year is not less than 300 million yuan.
# Corporate governance: Companies must demonstrate a commitment to good corporate governance, with a clear and transparent management structure. Specifically, the issuer&#x27;s basic accounting practice is proper and its preparation and disclosure of the financial statements is in compliance with the &quot;Accounting Standards for Business Enterprises&quot; and relevant information disclosure rules, and fairly reflects in all material respects its financial position, the results of operations and cash flows, and its financial report has been issued an unqualified opinion by a CPA in the last three years.
# Disclosure and transparency: Companies must provide full and timely disclosure of financial and other information, and must comply with all regulatory reporting requirements.

==Building==
The Shenzhen Stock Exchange building is a skyscraper with a height of and 49 floors. Its construction started in 2008 and was finished in 2013. The building was designed by Rem Koolhaas&#x27;s firm, the Office for Metropolitan Architecture. The building is located at 2012 Shennan Blvd., Futian District. With an area of 200,000 square metres, five high speed elevators and a futuristic design, the partners involved in the design and construction of this sky scraper included Rem Koolhaas, David Gianotten, Ellen van Loon and Shohei Shigematsu and construction by The Second Construction Co., Ltd of China Construction Third Engineering Bureau, a subsidiary of China State Construction Engineering Corporation.

==See also==
* China Securities Regulatory Commission
* Hong Kong Stock Exchange
*Shanghai Stock Exchange
* Untraded shares
*Deng Xiaoping&#x27;s Southern Tour

===Lists===
*List of companies of China
*List of East Asian stock exchanges
*List of stock exchanges

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q517750" start="4" end="27" title="Shenzhen Stock Exchange" label="Shenzhen Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q517750" start="29" end="33" title="Shenzhen Stock Exchange" label="SZSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q11691" start="42" end="56" title="stock exchange" label="stock exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q15174" start="78" end="86" title="Shenzhen" label="Shenzhen"/>
<link wikidata="Q19188" start="190" end="204" title="Mainland China" label="Mainland China"/>
<link wikidata="Q108393997" start="227" end="249" title="Beijing Stock Exchange" label="Beijing Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q739514" start="258" end="281" title="Shanghai Stock Exchange" label="Shanghai Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q572153" start="305" end="311" title="Futian" label="Futian"/>
<link wikidata="Q75024" start="350" end="389" title="List of stock exchanges" label="world&amp;#x27;s 6th largest stock exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q471719" start="397" end="418" title="market capitalization" label="market capitalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977" start="659" end="672" title="Deng Xiaoping" label="Deng Xiaoping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799880" start="1042" end="1076" title="Deng Xiaoping&amp;#x27;s southern tour" label="Deng Xiaoping&amp;#x27;s Southern Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q750458" start="1096" end="1110" title="capital market" label="capital market"/>
<link wikidata="Q739514" start="1158" end="1181" title="Shanghai Stock Exchange" label="Shanghai Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q59261" start="1320" end="1342" title="State council of china" label="State Council of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q642889" start="1417" end="1455" title="China Securities Regulatory Commission" label="China Securities Regulatory Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q13713793" start="1537" end="1561" title="socialist market economy" label="socialist market economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q187189" start="1834" end="1853" title="China Standard Time" label="China Standard Time"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1855" end="1864" title="UTC+08:00" label="UTC+08:00"/>
<link wikidata="Q16926163" start="2003" end="2010" title="ChiNext" label="ChiNext"/>
<link wikidata="Q82059" start="2023" end="2029" title="NASDAQ" label="NASDAQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q622439" start="2272" end="2306" title="small and medium-sized enterprises" label="small and medium-sized enterprises"/>
<link wikidata="Q471719" start="4149" end="4170" title="Market capitalization" label="Market capitalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056337" start="5771" end="5774" title="Certified Public Accountant" label="CPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q11303" start="6033" end="6043" title="skyscraper" label="skyscraper"/>
<link wikidata="Q232364" start="6164" end="6176" title="Rem Koolhaas" label="Rem Koolhaas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2015762" start="6194" end="6230" title="Office for Metropolitan Architecture" label="Office for Metropolitan Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q572153" start="6279" end="6285" title="Futian" label="Futian"/>
<link wikidata="Q642889" start="6719" end="6757" title="China Securities Regulatory Commission" label="China Securities Regulatory Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q496672" start="6760" end="6784" title="Hong Kong Stock Exchange" label="Hong Kong Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q739514" start="6786" end="6809" title="Shanghai Stock Exchange" label="Shanghai Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q2309239" start="6812" end="6827" title="Untraded shares" label="Untraded shares"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799880" start="6829" end="6863" title="Deng Xiaoping&amp;#x27;s Southern Tour" label="Deng Xiaoping&amp;#x27;s Southern Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242970" start="6878" end="6904" title="List of companies of China" label="List of companies of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q6569700" start="6906" end="6940" title="List of East Asian stock exchanges" label="List of East Asian stock exchanges"/>
<link wikidata="Q75024" start="6942" end="6965" title="List of stock exchanges" label="List of stock exchanges"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="331673" wikidata="Q1057667" url="?curid=331673" title="Great Unity">
<text>The Great Unity () is a Chinese utopian vision of the world in which everyone and everything is at peace. It is found in classical Chinese philosophy which has been invoked many times in the modern history of China.

==History==
The notion of the &quot;Great Unity&quot; appeared in the &quot;Lǐyùn&quot; (禮運) chapter of the &quot;Book of Rites&quot;, one of the Confucian Chinese classics. According to it, the society in Great Unity was ruled by the public, where the people elected men of virtue and ability to administer, and valued trust and amity. People did not only love their own parents and children, but others as well. People also secured the living of the elderly until their ends, let the adults be of use to the society, and helped the young grow. Those who were widowed, orphaned, childless, handicapped and diseased were all taken care of. Men took their responsibilities and women had their homes. People disliked seeing resources being wasted but did not seek to possess them; they wanted to exert their strength but did not do it for their own benefit. Therefore, selfish thoughts were dismissed, people refrained from stealing and robbery, and the outer doors remained open.

The concept was used by Kang Youwei in his visionary utopian treatise, &quot;The Book of Great Unity&quot; ().

The Great Unity is also often mentioned in the writings of Sun Yat-sen and is included in his lyrics of the National Anthem of the Republic of China, currently in official use in Taiwan.

This ideology can be reflected in the following examples, each from a national anthem of the Republic of China:

* (literal translation: &quot;Three Principles of the People, the aim of us (The Kuomintang), to build the Republic, to advance into Great Unity.&quot;) - National Anthem of the Republic of China 
* (literal translation: &quot;Never abandon in desperation, nor being complacent with achievement; Glorify our nation and work promoting Great Unity.&quot;) - National Flag Anthem of the Republic of China
The concept was invoked in prominent occasions several times by Mao Zedong, including in his address &quot;On the People&#x27;s Democratic Dictatorship&quot; in 1949, as the Communist Party prepared to assume control throughout mainland China.

== See also ==
* Harmonious Society
* Moderately prosperous society
* Great Peace (Baháʼí)
* Omega Point

== References ==
== Bibliography==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1057667" start="4" end="15" title="Great Unity" label="Great Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q645917" start="24" end="31" title="Chinese culture" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q131156" start="32" end="38" title="utopia" label="utopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q184663" start="131" end="149" title="Chinese philosophy" label="Chinese philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q82972" start="198" end="214" title="history of China" label="history of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q862758" start="331" end="344" title="Book of Rites" label="Book of Rites"/>
<link wikidata="Q576921" start="373" end="389" title="Chinese classics" label="Chinese classics"/>
<link wikidata="Q360135" start="1221" end="1232" title="Kang Youwei" label="Kang Youwei"/>
<link wikidata="Q8573" start="1368" end="1379" title="Sun Yat-sen" label="Sun Yat-sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q864979" start="1417" end="1457" title="National Anthem of the Republic of China" label="National Anthem of the Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="1488" end="1494" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q260998" start="1640" end="1670" title="Three Principles of the People" label="Three Principles of the People"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="1691" end="1701" title="Kuomintang" label="Kuomintang"/>
<link wikidata="Q864979" start="1765" end="1805" title="National Anthem of the Republic of China" label="National Anthem of the Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q703518" start="1966" end="2011" title="National Flag Anthem of the Republic of China" label="National Flag Anthem of the Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="2076" end="2086" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7091464" start="2119" end="2163" title="On the People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Dictatorship" label="On the People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Dictatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q249253" start="2274" end="2292" title="Harmonious Society" label="Harmonious Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q795154" start="2295" end="2324" title="Moderately prosperous society" label="Moderately prosperous society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016529" start="2327" end="2338" title="New world order (Baháʼí)" label="Great Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679" start="2340" end="2346" title="Baháʼí" label="Baháʼí"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552613" start="2350" end="2361" title="Omega Point" label="Omega Point"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="331675" wikidata="Q839800" url="?curid=331675" title="Foundation and Empire">
<text>Foundation and Empire is a science fiction novel by American writer Isaac Asimov originally published by Gnome Press in 1952. It is the second book in the &quot;Foundation&quot; series, and the fourth in the in-universe chronology. It takes place in two parts, originally published as separate novellas. The second part, &quot;The Mule,&quot; won a Retro Hugo Award in 1996.

&quot;Foundation and Empire&quot; saw multiple publications—it also appeared in 1955 as Ace Double (but not actually paired with another book) D-125 under the title &quot;The Man Who Upset the Universe&quot;. The stories composing this volume were originally published in &quot;Astounding Magazine&quot; (with different titles) in 1945. &quot;Foundation and Empire&quot; was the second book in the Foundation trilogy. Decades later, Asimov wrote two further sequel novels and two prequels. Later writers have added authorized, and unauthorized, tales to the series.

== Publication history ==
&quot;Foundation and Empire&quot; is composed of two stories: &quot;The General&quot; and &quot;The Mule&quot;. The former was first published in the April 1945 issue of &quot;Astounding Science Fiction&quot; under the title &quot;Dead Hand&quot;, while the latter was first published in the November and December 1945 issues of the same magazine.

== Plot summary ==

===&quot;The General&quot;===
General Bel Riose of the Galactic Empire governs the planet Siwenna. He comes across myths regarding the Foundation and attempts to confirm them by coercing the aid of Ducem Barr, a Siwennian whose father Onum met the Foundation trader Hober Mallow decades ago. After further research through visiting Foundation territory, Riose determines that they are a threat to the Empire and declares war upon them, both to fulfill his duty to the Empire and satisfy his personal pursuit of glory. Barr is familiar with Hari Seldon&#x27;s psychohistory and through it is confident of the Foundation&#x27;s inevitable victory, an assertion Riose repeatedly disputes.

Riose captures and interrogates Lathan Devers, a Foundation trader who reveals in private to Barr that he allowed himself to be taken in order to disrupt Riose&#x27;s operation from the inside. Devers is met by Ammel Brodrig, Emperor Cleon II&#x27;s Privy Secretary who was sent to Riose in order to keep an eye on the general. Devers tries to implicate Riose in an attempt to overthrow Cleon. However, Brodrig betrays Devers to Riose. Barr knocks out Riose before he can subject Devers to more effective interrogation and Devers and Barr escape in the latter&#x27;s ship. Barr only cooperated with Riose to prevent the discovery of a planned Siwennian uprising in the event of the Foundation&#x27;s triumph over Riose.

Devers and Barr head to Trantor in an attempt at turning Cleon II against Riose by implicating the latter in a conspiracy to overthrow the former with the help of Brodrig. However, in their attempt to bribe their way up the chain of bureaucracy, they are caught in the act by a member of the Secret Police, but manage to flee the planet before they are arrested. During their escape, they intercept news of Bel Riose and Brodrig&#x27;s recall and subsequent arrest for treason (both are later said to have been executed), which leads to Siwenna&#x27;s rebellion and the end of the threat to the Foundation.

During the festivities celebrating Siwenna joining the Foundation, Barr explains to Devers and the Foundation&#x27;s top merchant prince Sennet Forell that the social background of the Empire made the Foundation&#x27;s victory inevitable regardless of what actions they and Bel Riose took, as only a strong Emperor and a strong general could have threatened the Foundation, but an Emperor is only strong by not allowing strong subjects to thrive, and Bel Riose&#x27;s success made him into a threat that Cleon II needed to eliminate. With the Empire nearing its end and the Second Foundation not expected to be met until centuries later, the Foundation anticipates no further opposition. However, an internal conflict between the Foundation&#x27;s merchant princes and the traders is foreshadowed.

===&quot;The Mule&quot;===
Approximately one hundred years later, The Empire, after its final phase of decline and civil war, has ceased to exist, Trantor has suffered &quot;The Great Sack&quot; by a &quot;barbarian fleet,&quot; and only a small rump state of 20 agricultural planets remain. Most of galactic civilization has disintegrated into barbaric kingdoms. 

The Foundation has become the dominant power in the galaxy, controlling its territory through its trading network. The outline of the Seldon Plan has become widely known, and Foundationists and many others believe that as it has accurately predicted previous events, the Foundation&#x27;s formation of a Second Empire is inevitable. However, the leadership of the Foundation has become dictatorial and complacent, and many outer planets belonging to the Traders plan to revolt.

An external threat arises in the form of a mysterious man known only as the Mule. He is a mutant and can sense and manipulate the emotions of others, usually creating fear and/or total devotion within his victims. With this ability, he takes over the independent systems bordering the Foundation, and has them wage a war against it. In face of this new threat, the provincial Traders join with the central Foundation leaders against the Mule, believing him to be the new Seldon crisis.

As the Mule advances, the Foundation&#x27;s leaders assume that Seldon predicted this attack, and that the scheduled hologram crisis message appearance of Seldon will again tell them how to win. To their surprise, they learn that Seldon predicted a civil war with the Traders, not the rise of the Mule. The tape stops when Terminus loses all power in a Mule attack, and the Foundation falls.

Foundation citizens Toran and Bayta Darell, along with the psychologist Ebling Mis and &quot;Magnifico Giganticus,&quot; a clown fleeing the Mule&#x27;s service, travel to different worlds of the Foundation, and to the Great Library of Trantor. The Darells and Mis seek to contact the Second Foundation, which they believe can defeat the Mule. They also suspect the Mule wishes to know where the Second Foundation is as well, so that he can use the First Foundation&#x27;s technology to destroy it.

At the Great Library, Ebling Mis works until his health fatally deteriorates. As Mis lies dying, he tells Toran, Bayta, and Magnifico that he knows where the Second Foundation is. Before he can reveal its location, however, Bayta kills him. Bayta had realized, shortly before, that Magnifico was actually the Mule, who had used his powers in every planet they had previously visited. In the same way, he had forced Mis to continue working and find what the Mule was looking for. Bayta had killed Mis to prevent him from revealing the Second Foundation&#x27;s whereabouts to the Mule.

The Darells are left on Trantor. The Mule leaves to reign over the Foundation and the rest of his new empire. The existence of the Second Foundation, as an organization centered on the science of psychology and mentalics, in contrast to the Foundation&#x27;s focus on physical sciences, is now known to the Darells and the Mule. Now that the Mule has conquered the Foundation, he is the most powerful force in the galaxy, and the Second Foundation is the only threat to his eventual reign over the entire galaxy. The Mule promises that he will find the Second Foundation, while Bayta asserts that it has already prepared for him and thus that he will not have enough time before the Second Foundation reacts.

== Characters ==

=== &quot;The General&quot; / &quot;Dead Hand&quot; ===
* Bel Riose, the last strong general who attempted to capture the Foundation. Riose is based on the Roman general Belisarius.
* Ducem Barr, a Siwennian patrician, the only surviving son of Onum Barr, and a hostage of Riose.
* Lathan Devers, a trader sent to spy on Riose.
* Cleon II, the last strong emperor before &quot;The Great Sack&quot; of Trantor. Emperor Cleon II is based on the Roman emperor Justinian I.
* Ammel Brodrig, Cleon II&#x27;s Privy Secretary.

=== &quot;The Mule&quot; ===
* The Mule, a mutant who captures the Foundation and attempts to establish a Second Empire.
** Magnifico Giganticus, a fictitious identity assumed by the Mule to disguise himself and approach the unsuspecting Toran and Bayta Darell in Kalgan. Magnifico purports to be the former clown of the Mule, having escaped from his master.
* Toran and Bayta Darell, Husband and wife, Bayta a former citizen of The Foundation, Toran a trader of the periphery planet of Haven.
* Captain Han Pritcher, an intelligence agent for the Foundation, and the first to recognise the power of the Mule.
* Mayor Indbur III, Mayor of the Foundation during the Mule&#x27;s conquest.
* Ebling Mis, the psychologist who discovered the location of the Second Foundation.
* Dagobert IX, one of the last emperors on Neotrantor.

==Reception==
Groff Conklin described &quot;Foundation and Empire&quot; as &quot;fine swashbuckling galactic adventure [based] on some extremely hard-headed, scientific and mature social-political thinking.&quot; Boucher and McComas, however, panned the volume, declaring that &quot;Anyone with a nodding acquaintance with Gibbon, Breasted, or Prescott will find no new concepts [here] save the utterly incomprehensible ones contained in the author&#x27;s own personal science of &#x27;psycho-history&#x27;.&quot;

Although Hugo Awards were established only in 1953, too late for the novel to be eligible, both parts of &quot;Foundation and Empire&quot; originally published in &quot;Astounding Science Fiction&quot; were later retroactively nominated for Retro-Hugo Awards, one of them winning the 1946 Retro-Hugo Award for the Best Novel (of 1945): 
* &quot;Dead Hand&quot; (later retitled into &quot;The General&quot;) was 2nd among the novellas nominated for a retrospective 1946 Hugo Award for the Best Novella (of 1945) in 1996, losing to &quot;Animal Farm&quot; by George Orwell.
* &quot;The Mule&quot; won a retrospective 1946 Hugo Award for the Best Novel (of 1945) in 1996;

The &quot;Foundation trilogy&quot;, of which &quot;Foundation and Empire&quot; is the second book, won a Hugo Award in 1966 for Best All-Time Series.

==Sequels==
*The sequel, &quot;Second Foundation&quot;, tells the rest of the Mule&#x27;s story. 
*In the fourth book in the series, &quot;Foundation&#x27;s Edge&quot;, Asimov writes that the Mule had been a rogue member of the planet/society Gaia.
*The demise of the Empire&#x27;s remnant on Trantor is told in &quot;Trantor Falls&quot; by Harry Turtledove in &quot;Foundation&#x27;s Friends&quot;, a tribute collection.

==References in popular culture==
The Visi-Sonor inspired the Holophonor, a similar instrument that appears several times in the cartoon &quot;Futurama&quot;.

==References==
==Sources==

== External links ==
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="27" end="42" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q34981" start="68" end="80" title="Isaac Asimov" label="Isaac Asimov"/>
<link wikidata="Q5574338" start="105" end="116" title="Gnome Press" label="Gnome Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564644" start="155" end="184" title="Foundation (book series)" label="&amp;quot;Foundation&amp;quot; series"/>
<link wikidata="Q188914" start="355" end="365" title="Hugo Award" label="Hugo Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q42345" start="654" end="673" title="Astounding Magazine" label="Astounding Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q42345" start="1145" end="1171" title="Astounding Science Fiction" label="Astounding Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089250" start="1376" end="1385" title="Bel Riose" label="Bel Riose"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551232" start="1393" end="1408" title="Galactic Empire (Asimov)" label="Galactic Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q125216893" start="5070" end="5078" title="The Mule (Foundation)" label="the Mule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062870" start="5950" end="5960" title="Ebling Mis" label="Ebling Mis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551232" start="6114" end="6121" title="Trantor" label="Trantor"/>
<link wikidata="Q853927" start="6163" end="6180" title="Second Foundation" label="Second Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089250" start="7749" end="7758" title="Bel Riose" label="Bel Riose"/>
<link wikidata="Q174943" start="7861" end="7871" title="Belisarius" label="Belisarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062870" start="7875" end="7885" title="Ducem Barr" label="Ducem Barr"/>
<link wikidata="Q753894" start="7936" end="7945" title="Onum Barr" label="Onum Barr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062870" start="7973" end="7986" title="Lathan Devers" label="Lathan Devers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062870" start="8021" end="8029" title="Cleon II" label="Cleon II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551232" start="8092" end="8099" title="Trantor" label="Trantor"/>
<link wikidata="Q41866" start="8148" end="8159" title="Justinian I" label="Justinian I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062870" start="8163" end="8176" title="Ammel Brodrig" label="Ammel Brodrig"/>
<link wikidata="Q125216893" start="8243" end="8251" title="Mule (Foundation)" label="The Mule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062870" start="8573" end="8595" title="Toran and Bayta Darell" label="Toran and Bayta Darell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062870" start="8716" end="8728" title="Han Pritcher" label="Han Pritcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062870" start="8830" end="8840" title="Indbur III" label="Indbur III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062870" start="8901" end="8911" title="Ebling Mis" label="Ebling Mis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062870" start="8986" end="8997" title="Dagobert IX" label="Dagobert IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551232" start="9027" end="9037" title="Neotrantor" label="Neotrantor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5610108" start="9054" end="9067" title="Groff Conklin" label="Groff Conklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q246303" start="9253" end="9260" title="Anthony Boucher" label="Boucher"/>
<link wikidata="Q5923872" start="9265" end="9272" title="J. Francis McComas" label="McComas"/>
<link wikidata="Q161841" start="9363" end="9369" title="Edward Gibbon" label="Gibbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q365982" start="9371" end="9379" title="James Henry Breasted" label="Breasted"/>
<link wikidata="Q505844" start="9384" end="9392" title="William H. Prescott" label="Prescott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396889" start="10091" end="10102" title="Animal Farm" label="Animal Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335" start="10112" end="10125" title="George Orwell" label="George Orwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q853927" start="10407" end="10424" title="Second Foundation" label="Second Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q932592" start="10515" end="10537" title="Foundation&amp;#x27;s Edge" label="Foundation&amp;#x27;s Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q455780" start="10717" end="10733" title="Harry Turtledove" label="Harry Turtledove"/>
<link wikidata="Q3232655" start="10743" end="10768" title="Foundation&amp;#x27;s Friends" label="Foundation&amp;#x27;s Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551232" start="10837" end="10847" title="Visi-Sonor" label="Visi-Sonor"/>
<link wikidata="Q73622" start="10942" end="10950" title="Futurama" label="Futurama"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="331678" wikidata="Q691557" url="?curid=331678" title="Gangotri Glacier">
<text>Gangotri glacier (Sanskrit and ) is located in Uttarkashi District, Uttarakhand, India in a region bordering Tibet. This glacier, one of the primary sources of the Ganges, has a volume of over 27 cubic kilometers. The glacier is about 30 kilometres (19 miles) long and 2 to 4 km (1 to 2 mi) wide. Around the glacier are the peaks of the Gangotri Group, including several peaks notable for extremely challenging climbing routes, such as Shivling, Thalay Sagar, Meru, and Bhagirathi III. It flows roughly northwest, originating in a cirque below Chaukhamba, the highest peak of the group.

The terminus of the Gangotri Glacier is said to resemble a cow&#x27;s mouth, and the place is called [[Gomukh]] or Gaumukh (&quot;gou&quot;, cow + &quot;mukh&quot;, face). Gomukh, which is about from the town of Gangotri, is the precise source of the Bhagirathi river, an important tributary of the Ganges. Gomukh is situated near the base of Shivling; in between lies the Tapovan meadow.

The Gangotri glacier is a traditional Hindu pilgrimage site. Devout Hindus consider bathing in the icy waters near Gangotri town to be a holy ritual, and many made the trek to Gomukh, with a few continuing on to Tapovan. One needs to trek from Gangotri till Gaumukh, passing Devgadh, Chirbhasa, Bhojwasa en route. Currently accommodation is available only at Bhojwasa, although forest check posts are present at both Chirbhasa and Bhowasa. The 2013 North Indian Floods destroyed much of this trail, and access is now a little difficult beyond Chirbhasa due to trail deterioration and a 2 km wide rockfall site.

==Geology==

It is a valley-type glacier, situated in the Uttarkashi district of Garhwal Himalaya, Uttarakhand and it flows to the NW direction. This glacier is bound between 30°43&#x27;22&quot;–30°55&#x27;49&quot; (lat.) and 79°4&#x27;41&quot;–79°16&#x27;34&quot; (long.), extending in height from 4120 to 7000 m.a.s.l. This area is situated north of the Main Central Thrust (MCT) and is made up of bedrocks of granites, garnet mica schist, quartz biotite schist, kyanite schist, augen gneiss and banded augen gneiss. The glacier is composed of a variety of depositional features such as talus cones, snow-avalanche fans, snow-bridges, and dead ice mounds, and erosional features like pyramidal and conical peaks, serrated ridge crests, glacial troughs, smooth rock walls and tails, waterfalls, rock basins, gullies and glacial lakes. All along the Gangotri glacier, several longitudinal and transverse crevasses are formed along which ice blocks have broken down. The ablation zone of the Gangotri glacier is covered by a thick pile of supraglacial moraines and is characterized by several ice sections, melting into pools of supraglacial lakes. Because of subsidence and the fast degenerating nature of the glacier, its centre is full of supraglacial lakes. In this part of higher Himalaya, glacial melt-water dominates the fluvial system.

The total ice cover is approximately 200 km2 and has about 20 km3 of ice in volume.

==Tributaries==
This glacier has three main tributaries, namely Raktvarn (15.90 km), Chaturangi (including Kalindi bamak) (22.45 km) and Kirti (11.05 km) and more than 18 smaller tributary glaciers. The Raktvarn system contains 7 tributary glaciers; among them Thelu, Swetvarn, Nilambar and Pilapani are important. Similarly the Seeta, Suralaya and Vasuki are the major tributaries which make up the Chaturangi system, while the Kirti system is made up of only three tributary glaciers. Besides these three major tributary systems, some other tributary glaciers of this area drain directly into the Gangotri glacier; among them Swachand, Miandi, Sumeru and Ghanohim are important. Four other glaciers, Maitri, Meru, Bhrigupanth and Manda drain into the river Bhagirathi. The total glacierized area of the catchment is 258.56 km2, out of which the Gangotri system comprises 109.03 km2, followed by Chaturangi (72.91 km2), Raktvarn (45.34 km2) and Kirti (31.28 km2). The remaining four glaciers contain 29.41 km2 of glacierized area; among them maximum contribution is Bhirgupanth glacier (14.95 km2).

==Retreat==

NASA, in conjunction with scientists from United States Geological Survey (USGS) and the National Snow and Ice Data Center (NSIDC), is developing a global inventory of all the world&#x27;s glaciers to help researchers track each glacier&#x27;s history. According to them, the Gangotri glacier, currently 30.2 km long and between 0.5 and 2.5 km wide, is one of the largest in the Himalayas. This glacier has been constantly receding since measurements began in 1780. Data for 61 years (1936–96) showed the total recession of Gangotri glacier as 1147 m, with an average rate of 19 m per year. However over the last 25 years into the 21st century it has retreated more than 850 meters (34 meters per year), and 76 meters between 1996 and 1999 (25 meters per year)

==See also==
* List of glaciers
* Gomukh
* Bara Shigri

==Notes==
== References ==
* Bali, R., Awasthi, D.D. and Tiwari, N.K.2003 Neotectonic control on the geomorphic evolution of the Gangotri Glacier Valley, Garhwal Himalaya, Gondwana Research, 2003, Vol, 6 (4) pp. 829–838.
*Awasthi, D.D., Bali, R. and Tiwari, N.K. 2004. Relative dating by lichenometric and Schmidt Hammer techniques in the Gangotri glacier valley, Uttarkashi District, Uttaranchal. Spl. Pub. Pal. Soc. Ind no. 2 pp. 201– 206.
*Awasthi, D.D., Bali, R. and Tiwari, N.K. 2004. Growth rate of Lichen Dimelaena Orina in the Gangotri Glacier valley, Uttarkashi District, Uttaranchal: Some Significant Observations Geol. Sur. Ind. Spl. Pub. No. 80.
*Singh, Dhruv Sen 2004. Late Quaternary Morpho-Sedimentary Processes in the Gangotri Glacier Area, Garhwal Himalaya, India. Geol Surv India Spl. Pub. No.80, 2004: 97-103.
* Singh, Dhruv Sen and Mishra. A. 2002. Gangotri Glacier System, Garhwal Himalaya: An analysis using GIS technique. Aspects of Geology and Environment of the Himalaya. Edited by Pant, C. C. and Sharma, A. Gyanodaya Prakashan, Nainital, India, pp 349–358.
* Singh, Dhruv Sen and Mishra. A. 2002. Role of Tributary glaciers on landscape modification in the Gangotri Glacier area, Garhwal Himalaya, India. Current Science, 82 (5), 101-105. http://www.ias.ac.in/currsci/mar102002/567.pdf
* Singh, Dhruv Sen and Mishra, A. 2001. Gangotri Glacier characteristics, retreat and processes of sedimentation in the Bhagirathi valley. Geological Survey of India Spl. Pub.No.65 (III), 17-20.
*Lal, P.; Vaka, D. S.; Rao, Y. S. (15 November 2018). &quot;Mapping Surface Flow Velocities of Siachen and Gangotri Glaciers Using Terrasar-X and Sentinel-1A Data by Intensity Tracking&quot;. ISPRS Annals of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences. IV-5: 325–329. doi:10.5194/isprs-annals-IV-5-325-2018.

==External links==

* Retreat of the Gangotri Glacier, an article from NASA&#x27;s Earth Observatory
* Gaumukh and Gangotri Art Photos
* Save Gangotri, highlights localized ecological damage and conservation efforts in the region
* Geomorphological evidences of retreat of the Gangotri glacier and its characteristics, A Study by Department of Geology, HNB Garhwal University
* 283 photos 1280x960 of trekking from Gangotri to Gaumukh. You can see the retreat of the Gangotri glacier on picture gomukh141.jpg</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q691557" start="0" end="8" title="Gangotri Glacier" label="Gangotri"/>
<link wikidata="Q691557" start="9" end="16" title="Gangotri Glacier" label="glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="18" end="26" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773437" start="47" end="66" title="Uttarkashi District" label="Uttarkashi District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499" start="68" end="79" title="Uttarakhand" label="Uttarakhand"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="81" end="86" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q17252" start="109" end="114" title="Tibet" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5089" start="164" end="170" title="Ganges" label="Ganges"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777888" start="337" end="351" title="Gangotri Group" label="Gangotri Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q846263" start="436" end="444" title="Shivling (Garhwal Himalaya)" label="Shivling"/>
<link wikidata="Q686996" start="446" end="458" title="Thalay Sagar" label="Thalay Sagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q184368" start="531" end="537" title="cirque" label="cirque"/>
<link wikidata="Q5088154" start="544" end="554" title="Chaukhamba" label="Chaukhamba"/>
<link wikidata="Q556920" start="592" end="600" title="Glacier terminus" label="terminus"/>
<link wikidata="Q691557" start="689" end="699" title="Gangotri Glacier" label="[[Gomukh]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q691557" start="703" end="710" title="Gangotri Glacier" label="Gaumukh"/>
<link wikidata="Q818612" start="800" end="808" title="Gangotri" label="Gangotri"/>
<link wikidata="Q170218" start="839" end="849" title="Bhagirathi" label="Bhagirathi"/>
<link wikidata="Q159675" start="870" end="879" title="tributary" label="tributary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5089" start="887" end="893" title="Ganges River" label="Ganges"/>
<link wikidata="Q7684745" start="961" end="968" title="Tapovan" label="Tapovan"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="1016" end="1021" title="Hindu" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644573" start="1022" end="1032" title="pilgrimage" label="pilgrimage"/>
<link wikidata="Q13507070" start="1422" end="1446" title="2013 North Indian Floods" label="2013 North Indian Floods"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773437" start="1648" end="1667" title="Uttarkashi district" label="Uttarkashi district"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460406" start="1671" end="1678" title="Garhwal division" label="Garhwal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="1679" end="1687" title="Himalaya" label="Himalaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499" start="1689" end="1700" title="Uttarakhand" label="Uttarakhand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7935" start="2192" end="2206" title="Avalanche" label="snow-avalanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q7548378" start="2213" end="2224" title="snow-bridge" label="snow-bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420381" start="2718" end="2735" title="supraglacial lake" label="supraglacial lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="4133" end="4137" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q193755" start="4175" end="4206" title="United States Geological Survey" label="United States Geological Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216646" start="4222" end="4255" title="National Snow and Ice Data Center" label="National Snow and Ice Data Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273934" start="4910" end="4926" title="List of glaciers" label="List of glaciers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496251" start="4929" end="4935" title="Gomukh" label="Gomukh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858051" start="4938" end="4949" title="Bara Shigri" label="Bara Shigri"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="331680" wikidata="Q1513153" url="?curid=331680" title="Edge detection">
<text>Edge detection includes a variety of mathematical methods that aim at identifying edges, defined as curves in a digital image at which the image brightness changes sharply or, more formally, has discontinuities. The same problem of finding discontinuities in one-dimensional signals is known as &quot;step detection&quot; and the problem of finding signal discontinuities over time is known as &quot;change detection&quot;. Edge detection is a fundamental tool in image processing, machine vision and computer vision, particularly in the areas of feature detection and feature extraction.

== Motivations ==

The purpose of detecting sharp changes in image brightness is to capture important events and changes in properties of the world.
It can be shown that under rather general assumptions for an image formation model, discontinuities in image brightness are likely to correspond to:
* discontinuities in depth,
* discontinuities in surface orientation,
* changes in material properties and
* variations in scene illumination.
In the ideal case, the result of applying an edge detector to an image may lead to a set of connected curves that indicate the boundaries of objects, the boundaries of surface markings as well as curves that correspond to discontinuities in surface orientation.
Thus, applying an edge detection algorithm to an image may significantly reduce the amount of data to be processed and may therefore filter out information that may be regarded as less relevant, while preserving the important structural properties of an image.
If the edge detection step is successful, the subsequent task of interpreting the information contents in the original image may therefore be substantially simplified.
However, it is not always possible to obtain such ideal edges from real life images of moderate complexity.

Edges extracted from non-trivial images are often hampered by &quot;fragmentation&quot;, meaning that the edge curves are not connected, missing edge segments as well as &quot;false edges&quot; not corresponding to interesting phenomena in the image – thus complicating the subsequent task of interpreting the image data.

Edge detection is one of the fundamental steps in image processing, image analysis, image pattern recognition, and computer vision techniques.

== Edge properties ==

The edges extracted from a two-dimensional image of a three-dimensional scene can be classified as either viewpoint dependent or viewpoint independent.
A &quot;viewpoint independent edge&quot; typically reflects inherent properties of the three-dimensional objects, such as surface markings and surface shape.
A &quot;viewpoint dependent edge&quot; may change as the viewpoint changes, and typically reflects the geometry of the scene, such as objects occluding one another.

A typical edge might for instance be the border between a block of red color and a block of yellow. In contrast a line (as can be extracted by a ridge detector) can be a small number of pixels of a different color on an otherwise unchanging background. For a line, there may therefore usually be one edge on each side of the line.

== A simple edge model ==
Although certain literature has considered the detection of ideal step edges, the edges obtained from natural images are usually not at all ideal step edges. Instead they are normally affected by one or several of the following effects:
* focal blur caused by a finite depth-of-field and finite point spread function.
* penumbral blur caused by shadows created by light sources of non-zero radius.
* shading at a smooth object
A number of researchers have used a Gaussian smoothed step edge (an error function) as the simplest extension of the ideal step edge model for modeling the effects of edge blur in practical applications.
Thus, a one-dimensional image formula_1 that has exactly one edge placed at formula_2 may be modeled as:

:formula_3

At the left side of the edge, the intensity is formula_4, and right of the edge it is
formula_5. The scale parameter formula_6 is called the blur scale of the edge. Ideally this scale parameter should be adjusted based on the quality of image to avoid destroying true edges of the image.

== Difficulty ==

Outside of images with simple objects or featuring well-controlled lighting, edge detection is not a trivial task, since it can be difficult to determine what threshold should be used to define an edge between two pixels. For example, in the following one-dimensional signal, most would intuitively say there is an edge between the 4th and 5th pixels:

However, if the intensity difference between the 4th and the 5th pixels were smaller, it would not be as easy to say that there should be an edge in the corresponding region. Similarly, if the intensity differences between the adjacent neighboring pixels were higher, one could argue that more than one edge should be considered to exist, or even none at all.

== Approaches ==
There are many methods for edge detection, but most of them can be grouped into two categories, search-based and zero-crossing based.
The search-based methods detect edges by first computing a measure of edge strength, usually a first-order derivative expression such as the gradient magnitude, and then searching for local directional maxima of the gradient magnitude using a computed estimate of the local orientation of the edge, usually the gradient direction.
The zero-crossing based methods search for zero crossings in a second-order derivative expression computed from the image in order to find edges, usually the zero-crossings of the Laplacian or the zero-crossings of a non-linear differential expression. As a pre-processing step to edge detection, a smoothing stage, typically Gaussian smoothing, is almost always applied (see also noise reduction).

The edge detection methods that have been published mainly differ in the types of smoothing filters that are applied and the way the measures of edge strength are computed. As many edge detection methods rely on the computation of image gradients, they also differ in the types of filters used for computing gradient estimates in the &quot;x&quot;- and &quot;y&quot;-directions.

A survey of a number of different edge detection methods can be found in (Ziou and Tabbone 1998); see also the encyclopedia articles on edge detection in &quot;Encyclopedia of Mathematics&quot; and Encyclopedia of Computer Science and Engineering.

=== Canny ===

John Canny considered the mathematical problem of deriving an optimal smoothing filter, given the criteria of detection, localization and minimizing multiple responses to a single edge. He showed that the optimal filter, given these assumptions, is a sum of four exponential terms. He also showed that this filter can be well approximated by first-order derivatives of Gaussians.
Canny also introduced the notion of non-maximum suppression, which means that, given the presmoothing filters, edge points are defined as points where the gradient magnitude assumes a local maximum in the gradient direction.
Looking for the zero crossing of the 2nd derivative along the gradient direction was first proposed by Haralick.
It took less than two decades to find a modern geometric variational meaning for that operator, that links it to the Marr–Hildreth (zero crossing of the Laplacian) edge detector.
That observation was presented by Ron Kimmel and Alfred Bruckstein.

Although his work was done in the early days of computer vision, the Canny edge detector (including its variations) is still a state-of-the-art edge detector. Edge detectors that perform better than the Canny usually require longer computation times or a greater number of parameters.

=== Kovalevsky ===
Vladimir A. Kovalevsky has suggested a quite different approach. He uses a preprocessing of the image with the Sigma filter and with a special filter for the dilution of the ramps. This method uses no brightness of the image but only the intensities of the color channels which is important for detecting an edge between two adjacent pixels of equal brightness but different colors. The method scans the image two times: first along the horizontal lines and second along the vertical columns. In each horizontal line six consequent adjacent pixels are considered and five color difference between each two adjacent pixels are calculated. Each color difference is the sum of absolute differences of the intensities of the color channels Red, Green, and Blue of the corresponding adjacent pixels. If this sum is greater than a given threshold, then the sign of the color difference is set equal to the sign of the difference of the green intensities. If the green difference is zero, then the sign of the color difference is set equal to the sign of the difference of the red intensities. If, however, both the green and the red differences are zero, then the sign of the color difference is set equal to the sign of the blue difference which in this case cannot be zero since the sum is greater than the threshold. 
Certain conditions for the values and signs of the five color differences are specified in such way that if the conditions are fulfilled, then a short vertical stroke is put between the third and the fourth of the six pixels as the label of the edge.
Similar calculations are performed for the vertical columns. In this case a short horizontal stroke is put between the third and the fourth of the six subsequent pixels. The vertical and horizontal strokes (being the one-dimensional cells of an abstract cell complex corresponding to the image) mostly compose a connected sequence representing the edge.
This method is robust and very fast and, what is more important, it can detect edges between adjacent pixels of equal brightness’s if the color difference between these pixels is greater than the threshold.

The Canny–Deriche detector was derived from similar mathematical criteria as the Canny edge detector, although starting from a discrete viewpoint and then leading to a set of recursive filters for image smoothing instead of exponential filters or Gaussian filters.

The differential edge detector described below can be seen as a reformulation of Canny&#x27;s method from the viewpoint of differential invariants computed from a scale space representation leading to a number of advantages in terms of both theoretical analysis and sub-pixel implementation. In that aspect, Log Gabor filter have been shown to be a good choice to extract boundaries in natural scenes.

=== Other first-order methods ===
Different gradient operators can be applied to estimate image gradients from the input image or a smoothed version of it. The simplest approach is to use central differences:

:formula_7

corresponding to the application of the following filter masks to the image data:

:formula_8

The well-known and earlier Sobel operator is based on the following filters:

:formula_9

Given such estimates of first-order image derivatives, the gradient magnitude is then computed as:

:formula_10

while the gradient orientation can be estimated as

:formula_11

Other first-order difference operators for estimating image gradient have been proposed in the Prewitt operator, Roberts cross, Kayyali operator and Frei–Chen operator.

It is possible to extend filters dimension to avoid the issue of recognizing edge in low SNR image. The cost of this operation is loss in terms of resolution. Examples are Extended Prewitt 7×7.

=== Thresholding and linking ===

Once we have computed a measure of edge strength (typically the gradient magnitude), the next stage is to apply a threshold, to decide whether edges are present or not at an image point. The lower the threshold, the more edges will be detected, and the result will be increasingly susceptible to noise and detecting edges of irrelevant features in the image. Conversely a high threshold may miss subtle edges, or result in fragmented edges.

If the edge is applied to just the gradient magnitude image, the resulting edges will in general be thick and some type of edge thinning post-processing is necessary. For edges detected with non-maximum suppression however, the edge curves are thin by definition and the edge pixels can be linked into edge polygon by an edge linking (edge tracking) procedure. On a discrete grid, the non-maximum suppression stage can be implemented by estimating the gradient direction using first-order derivatives, then rounding off the gradient direction to multiples of 45 degrees, and finally comparing the values of the gradient magnitude in the estimated gradient direction.

A commonly used approach to handle the problem of appropriate thresholds for thresholding is by using thresholding with hysteresis. This method uses multiple thresholds to find edges. We begin by using the upper threshold to find the start of an edge. Once we have a start point, we then trace the path of the edge through the image pixel by pixel, marking an edge whenever we are above the lower threshold. We stop marking our edge only when the value falls below our lower threshold. This approach makes the assumption that edges are likely to be in continuous curves, and allows us to follow a faint section of an edge we have previously seen, without meaning that every noisy pixel in the image is marked down as an edge. Still, however, we have the problem of choosing appropriate thresholding parameters, and suitable thresholding values may vary over the image.

=== Connectivity of gradients without using (high) magnitude thresholds ===
This method finds connected set of pixels having a directional derivative magnitude larger than a fairly small threshold. It considers only presence of gradients instead of strength of gradients. After applying a dramatically small threshold (i.e. 5), a binary image is obtained. The morphological opening operation and the morphological closing operation are applied to the binary image to close gaps. Then, the distance transform operation is applied to the binary image to clear the pixels far from the background, so blob-like shapes or other false labeled regions are deleted from the edge map. 

=== Edge thinning ===

Edge thinning is a technique used to remove the unwanted spurious points on the edges in an image. This technique is employed after the image has been filtered for noise (using median, Gaussian filter etc.), the edge operator has been applied (like the ones described above, Canny or Sobel) to detect the edges and after the edges have been smoothed using an appropriate threshold value.
This removes all the unwanted points, and if applied carefully, results in one pixel thick edge elements.

Advantages:
# Sharp and thin edges lead to greater efficiency in object recognition.
# If Hough transforms are used to detect lines and ellipses, then thinning could give much better results.
# If the edge happens to be the boundary of a region, then thinning could easily give the image parameters like perimeter without much algebra.

There are many popular algorithms used to do this, one such is described below:

# Choose a type of connectivity, like 8, 6 or 4.
# 8 connectivity is preferred, where all the immediate pixels surrounding a particular pixel are considered.
# Remove points from North, south, east and west.
# Do this in multiple passes, i.e. after the north pass, use the same semi processed image in the other passes and so on.
# Remove a point if:The point has no neighbors in the North (if you are in the north pass, and respective directions for other passes).The point is not the end of a line.The point is isolated.Removing the points will not cause to disconnect its neighbors in any way.
# Otherwise, keep the point.
The number of passes across direction should be chosen according to the level of accuracy desired.

=== Second-order approaches ===

Some edge-detection operators are instead based upon second-order derivatives of the intensity. This essentially captures the rate of change in the intensity gradient. Thus, in the ideal continuous case, detection of zero-crossings in the second derivative captures local maxima in the gradient.

The early Marr–Hildreth operator is based on the detection of zero-crossings of the Laplacian operator applied to a Gaussian-smoothed image. It can be shown, however, that this operator will also return false edges corresponding to local minima of the gradient magnitude. Moreover, this operator will give poor localization at curved edges. Hence, this operator is today mainly of historical interest.

==== Differential ====
A more refined second-order edge detection approach which automatically detects edges with sub-pixel accuracy, uses the following &quot;differential approach&quot; of detecting zero-crossings of the second-order directional derivative in the gradient direction:

Following the differential geometric way of expressing the requirement of non-maximum suppression proposed by Lindeberg, let us introduce at every image point a local coordinate system formula_12, with the formula_13-direction parallel to the gradient direction. Assuming that the image has been pre-smoothed by Gaussian smoothing and a scale space representation formula_14 at scale formula_15 has been computed, we can require that the gradient magnitude of the scale space representation, which is equal to the first-order directional derivative in the formula_13-direction formula_17, should have its first order directional derivative in the formula_13-direction equal to zero
:formula_19
while the second-order directional derivative in the formula_13-direction of formula_17 should be negative, i.e.,
:formula_22
Written out as an explicit expression in terms of local partial derivatives formula_23, this edge definition can be expressed as the zero-crossing curves of the differential invariant

:formula_24

that satisfies a sign-condition on the following differential invariant

:formula_25

where formula_26 denote partial derivatives computed from a scale space representation formula_27 obtained by smoothing the original image with a Gaussian kernel. In this way, the edges will be automatically obtained as continuous curves with sub-pixel accuracy. Hysteresis thresholding can also be applied to these differential and subpixel edge segments.

In practice, first-order derivative approximations can be computed by central differences as described above, while second-order derivatives can be computed from the scale space representation formula_27 according to:

:formula_29

corresponding to the following filter masks:

:formula_30

Higher-order derivatives for the third-order sign condition can be obtained in an analogous fashion.

=== Phase congruency-based ===
A recent development in edge detection techniques takes a frequency domain approach to finding edge locations. Phase congruency (also known as phase coherence) methods attempt to find locations in an image where all sinusoids in the frequency domain are in phase. These locations will generally correspond to the location of a perceived edge, regardless of whether the edge is represented by a large change in intensity in the spatial domain. A key benefit of this technique is that it responds strongly to Mach bands, and avoids false positives typically found around roof edges. A roof edge, is a discontinuity in the first order derivative of a grey-level profile.

=== Phase Stretch Transform (PST) ===
The phase stretch transform or PST is a physics-inspired computational approach to signal and image processing. One of its utilities is for feature detection and classification. PST is a spin-off from research on the time stretch dispersive Fourier transform. PST transforms the image by emulating propagation through a diffractive medium with engineered 3D dispersive property (refractive index). The operation relies on symmetry of the dispersion profile and can be understood in terms of dispersive eigenfunctions or stretch modes. PST performs similar functionality as phase contrast microscopy but on digital images. PST is also applicable to digital images as well as temporal, time series, data.

=== Subpixel ===
To increase the precision of edge detection, several subpixel techniques had been proposed, including curve-fitting, moment-based, reconstructive, and partial area effect methods. These methods have different characteristics. Curve fitting methods are computationally simple but are easily affected by noise. Moment-based methods use an integral-based approach to reduce the effect of noise, but may require more computations in some cases. Reconstructive methods use horizontal gradients or vertical gradients to build a curve and find the peak of the curve as the sub-pixel edge. Partial area effect methods are based on the hypothesis that each pixel value depends on the area at both sides of the edge inside that pixel, producing accurate individual estimation for every edge pixel. Certain variants of the moment-based technique have been shown to be the most accurate for isolated edges.

=== The Marr-Hildreth Edge Detector ===
The Marr-Hildreth edge detector is distinguished by its use of the Laplacian of Gaussian (LoG) operator for edge detection in digital images. Unlike other edge detection methods, the LoG approach combines Gaussian smoothing with second derivative operations, allowing for simultaneous noise reduction and edge enhancement. The key advantage of this method lies in its ability to detect edges at various scales by adjusting the standard deviation of the Gaussian kernel, enabling detection of fine details as well as broader transitions. Moreover, the technique leverages zero-crossing detection on the LoG response to precisely locate edges, offering robustness against noise and maintaining edge continuity. This approach is particularly effective for detecting edges with clear boundaries in images while minimizing false positives due to noise, making it a valuable tool in computer vision applications where accurate edge localization is crucial.

== Code for Edge Detection using Prewitt, Scharr and Sobel Operator ==

Source:

=== Edge detection using Prewitt operator ===

% MATLAB code for prewitt
% operator edge detection
k = imread(&quot;logo.png&quot;);
k = rgb2gray(k);
k1 = double(k);
p_msk = [-1 0 1; -1 0 1; -1 0 1];
kx = conv2(k1, p_msk, &#x27;same&#x27;);
ky = conv2(k1, p_msk&#x27;, &#x27;same&#x27;);
ked = sqrt(kx.^2 + ky.^2);

% display the images.
imtool(k,[]);

% display the edge detection along x-axis.
imtool(abs(kx), []);

% display the edge detection along y-axis.
imtool(abs(ky),[]);

% display the full edge detection.
imtool(abs(ked),[]);
=== Edge detection using Scharr operator ===

% Scharr operator -&gt; edge detection
k = imread(&quot;logo.png&quot;);
k = rgb2gray(k);
k1 = double(k);
s_msk = [-3 0 3; -10 0 10; -3 0 3];
kx = conv2(k1, s_msk, &#x27;same&#x27;);
ky = conv2(k1, s_msk&#x27;, &#x27;same&#x27;);
ked = sqrt(kx.^2 + ky.^2);
% display the images.
imtool(k,[]);
% display the edge detection along x-axis.
imtool(abs(kx), []);
% display the edge detection along y-axis.
imtool(abs(ky), []);
% display the full edge detection.
imtool(abs(ked), []);

=== Edge Detection using Sobel operator ===

% MATLAB code for Sobel operator
% edge detection
k = imread(&quot;logo.png&quot;);
k = rgb2gray(k);
k1 = double(k);
s_msk = [-1 0 1; -2 0 2; -1 0 1];
kx = conv2(k1, s_msk, &#x27;same&#x27;);
ky = conv2(k1, s_msk&#x27;, &#x27;same&#x27;);
ked = sqrt(kx.^2 + ky.^2);

% display the images.
imtool(k,[]);

% display the edge detection along x-axis.
imtool(abs(kx), []);

% display the edge detection along y-axis.
imtool(abs(ky), []);

% display the full edge detection.
imtool(abs(ked), []);
==See also==
*Edge-preserving filtering
*Feature detection (computer vision) for other low-level feature detectors
*Image derivative
*Gabor filter
*Image noise reduction
*Kirsch operator for edge detection in the compass directions
*Ridge detection for relations between edge detectors and ridge detectors
*Log Gabor filter
*Phase stretch transform

==References==
M. Gupta, S.N. Tazi, A. Jain and Deepika, &quot;Edge Detection Using Modified Firefly Algorithm&quot;, Computational Intelligence and Communication Networks (CICN) 2014 International onference on, pp. 167-173, 14-16 Nov. 2014.
View Article
Google Scholar
==Further reading==
*Entry on edge detection in Encyclopedia of Computer Science and Engineering
*Edge Detection using FPGA
*A-contrario line segment detection with code and on-line demonstration
* Edge detection using MATLAB
* Subpixel edge detection using Matlab
* Image Tools Effects - Edgedetect
* Edge Detection for Image Processing</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1513153" start="0" end="14" title="Edge detection" label="Edge detection"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="37" end="49" title="mathematical" label="mathematical"/>
<link wikidata="Q161973" start="100" end="105" title="curve" label="curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250322" start="112" end="125" title="digital image" label="digital image"/>
<link wikidata="Q104831" start="139" end="155" title="luminous intensity" label="image brightness"/>
<link wikidata="Q541961" start="195" end="210" title="Discontinuity (mathematics)" label="discontinuities"/>
<link wikidata="Q7608015" start="301" end="315" title="step detection" label="step detection"/>
<link wikidata="Q25389927" start="400" end="416" title="change detection" label="change detection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070689" start="464" end="480" title="image processing" label="image processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425977" start="482" end="496" title="machine vision" label="machine vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q844240" start="501" end="516" title="computer vision" label="computer vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q93586" start="547" end="564" title="feature detection (computer vision)" label="feature detection"/>
<link wikidata="Q22245680" start="569" end="587" title="feature extraction" label="feature extraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q37105" start="2911" end="2915" title="line (mathematics)" label="line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7332717" start="2942" end="2956" title="ridge detection" label="ridge detector"/>
<link wikidata="Q355198" start="2983" end="2988" title="pixel" label="pixel"/>
<link wikidata="Q215932" start="3424" end="3438" title="depth-of-field" label="depth-of-field"/>
<link wikidata="Q510427" start="3450" end="3471" title="point spread function" label="point spread function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068535" start="3475" end="3489" title="penumbra" label="penumbral blur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191981" start="3555" end="3562" title="shading" label="shading"/>
<link wikidata="Q579262" start="3650" end="3664" title="error function" label="error function"/>
<link wikidata="Q462383" start="5055" end="5068" title="Zero crossing" label="zero-crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q29175" start="5171" end="5204" title="first-order derivative expression" label="first-order derivative expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q29175" start="5470" end="5504" title="second-order derivative expression" label="second-order derivative expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q203484" start="5587" end="5596" title="Laplacian" label="Laplacian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894545" start="5733" end="5751" title="Gaussian smoothing" label="Gaussian smoothing"/>
<link wikidata="Q581861" start="5788" end="5803" title="noise reduction" label="noise reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225059" start="6451" end="6461" title="John Canny" label="John Canny"/>
<link wikidata="Q7345241" start="7159" end="7167" title="Haralick" label="Haralick"/>
<link wikidata="Q118394015" start="7286" end="7299" title="Marr–Hildreth algorithm" label="Marr–Hildreth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7364027" start="7382" end="7392" title="Ron Kimmel" label="Ron Kimmel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7397" end="7414" title="Alfred Bruckstein" label="Alfred Bruckstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q597183" start="7486" end="7505" title="Canny edge detector" label="Canny edge detector"/>
<link wikidata="Q113507296" start="7722" end="7744" title="Vladimir Antonovich Kovalevsky" label="Vladimir A. Kovalevsky"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10074" end="10092" title="exponential filter" label="exponential filter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10120" end="10146" title="Edge detection#Differential" label="differential edge detector"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058184" start="10279" end="10305" title="scale space representation" label="scale space representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q25303702" start="10424" end="10440" title="Log Gabor filter" label="Log Gabor filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757673" start="10863" end="10877" title="Sobel operator" label="Sobel operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q21980965" start="10962" end="10978" title="image derivative" label="image derivative"/>
<link wikidata="Q451898" start="11199" end="11215" title="Prewitt operator" label="Prewitt operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753515" start="11217" end="11230" title="Roberts cross" label="Roberts cross"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11253" end="11271" title="Frei–Chen operator" label="Frei–Chen operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q738628" start="11363" end="11366" title="Signal-to-noise ratio" label="SNR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323086" start="11799" end="11804" title="image noise" label="noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256906" start="12715" end="12727" title="Adaptive thresholding" label="thresholding"/>
<link wikidata="Q190837" start="12733" end="12743" title="hysteresis" label="hysteresis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971661" start="14744" end="14762" title="object recognition" label="object recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q195076" start="14769" end="14784" title="Hough transform" label="Hough transform"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15116" end="15128" title="Pixel connectivity#2-dimensional" label="connectivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1594663" start="15148" end="15162" title="Moore neighborhood" label="8 connectivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q29175" start="15982" end="15996" title="Derivative" label="rate of change"/>
<link wikidata="Q118394015" start="16163" end="16176" title="Marr–Hildreth algorithm" label="Marr–Hildreth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058184" start="17179" end="17205" title="scale space representation" label="scale space representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058184" start="17306" end="17332" title="scale space representation" label="scale space representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058184" start="18006" end="18032" title="scale space representation" label="scale space representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054475" start="18092" end="18107" title="Gaussian kernel" label="Gaussian kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058184" start="18470" end="18496" title="scale space representation" label="scale space representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17105246" start="18839" end="18855" title="Phase congruency" label="Phase congruency"/>
<link wikidata="Q655405" start="19235" end="19245" title="Mach bands" label="Mach bands"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19297" end="19306" title="roof edge" label="roof edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q25054259" start="19439" end="19462" title="phase stretch transform" label="phase stretch transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q7805439" start="19652" end="19693" title="time stretch dispersive Fourier transform" label="time stretch dispersive Fourier transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q118394015" start="21092" end="21123" title="Marr–Hildreth algorithm" label="The Marr-Hildreth edge detector"/>
<link wikidata="Q5337637" start="23738" end="23763" title="Edge-preserving filtering" label="Edge-preserving filtering"/>
<link wikidata="Q93586" start="23765" end="23800" title="Feature detection (computer vision)" label="Feature detection (computer vision)"/>
<link wikidata="Q21980965" start="23840" end="23856" title="Image derivative" label="Image derivative"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447890" start="23858" end="23870" title="Gabor filter" label="Gabor filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q581861" start="23872" end="23893" title="Image noise reduction" label="Image noise reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1743578" start="23895" end="23910" title="Kirsch operator" label="Kirsch operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7332717" start="23957" end="23972" title="Ridge detection" label="Ridge detection"/>
<link wikidata="Q25303702" start="24031" end="24047" title="Log Gabor filter" label="Log Gabor filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q25054259" start="24049" end="24072" title="Phase stretch transform" label="Phase stretch transform"/>
<link wikidata="" start="24469" end="24539" title=":doi:10.5201/ipol.2012.gjmr-lsd" label="A-contrario line segment detection with code and on-line demonstration"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="331685" wikidata="Q3853432" url="?curid=331685" title="New Jersey Meadowlands">
<text>New Jersey Meadowlands, also known as the Hackensack Meadowlands after the primary river flowing through it, is a general name for a large ecosystem of wetlands in northeastern New Jersey in the United States, a few miles to the west of New York City. During the 20th century, much of the Meadowlands area was urbanized, and it became known for being the site of large landfills and decades of environmental abuse. A variety of projects began in the late 20th century to restore and conserve the remaining ecological resources in the Meadowlands.

==Geography==
The Meadowlands stretch mainly along the terminus of the Hackensack and Passaic Rivers as they flow into Newark Bay; tributaries of the Hackensack include Mill Creek, Berrys Creek, and Overpeck Creek. The present Meadowlands consist of roughly 8,400 acres (34 km2) of open, undeveloped space in addition to developed areas that had been part of the natural wetlands which were heavily developed by H. Bert Mack and M. Bolero in the 1960s. The area includes portions of Kearny, Jersey City, North Arlington, Secaucus, Lyndhurst, Rutherford, East Rutherford, Carlstadt, North Bergen, Moonachie, Ridgefield, South Hackensack, Teaneck, and Little Ferry.

==History==
The area was forested with Atlantic white cedars before the early Dutch settlers (17th century) cleared the forests and used dikes to drain the land. The Dutch farmers used the drained tidal lands to create &quot;meadows&quot; of salt hay; hence, the area was referred to by locals as the Meadows. In more recent times, the Meadowlands became known for being the site of large landfills and decades of environmental abuse.

== Human effect ==
Before European settlement, the area consisted of several diverse ecosystems based on freshwater, brackish water, and saltwater environments. Large areas were covered by forests. And the area was once inhabited with Mountain lions, Eastern elk, Eastern wolves, American marten, Fisher (animal), &amp; American black bears before being made extinct in the area due to hunting. Considered by residents of the area through the centuries as wastelands, the Meadowlands were systematically subject to various kinds of human intervention. The four major categories are:
* &quot;Extraction of natural resources (including fish and game, as well as cedar logs).&quot; Farmers also harvested salt hay for feed. Over time, the forest resources were totally depleted, dike systems broke down, farming ceased, and contamination by pollution increased.
* &quot;Alteration of water flow.&quot; Construction of drainage canals and the Oradell Reservoir, and the deepening of the Hackensack River for navigation have allowed salt water to enter the original fresh water and brackish water areas, altering the ecology and destroying the estuarine environment.
* &quot;Reclamation, land making, and development.&quot; In addition to landfill from garbage, landmass generated from dredging was also used to create new land. Some material came from building the World Trade Center in nearby New York City, during the late 1960s.
* &quot;Pollution by sewage, refuse, and hazardous waste.&quot; Various types of waste have been dumped legally and illegally in the Meadowlands. During World War II, military refuse was dumped in the Meadowlands, including rubble from London created by the Blitz and used as ballast in returning ships. After the war, the Meadowlands continued to be used for civilian waste disposal, as the marshes were considered simply as wastelands that were not good for anything else. In early to mid-20th c. Berrys Creek was extensively polluted with mercury, PCBs and other chemical wastes, and three adjacent industrial properties were subsequently designated as Superfund sites by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). The opening of the New Jersey Turnpike in January 1952 only amplified the continuing environmental degradation of the Meadowlands. Both spurs of the Turnpike travel through the region from the Passaic River to just past North Bergen.

The Meadowlands Sports Complex, the site of multiple stadia and a racetrack, was built in the Meadowlands beginning in the 1960s. The race track was the first venue in the complex to open, on September 1, 1976.

==New Jersey Meadowlands Commission==

The location of the New Jersey Meadowlands near the center of the New York metropolitan area and its outgrowth into New Jersey makes conservation of the vast wetland a difficult proposition. In spite of this, the New Jersey Legislature, promoted by Richard W. DeKorte, created the Hackensack Meadowlands Development Commission in 1969 to attempt to address both economic and environmental issues concerning the wetland region. The commission was authorized to review and approve land development projects, manage landfill operations, and oversee environmental restoration and preservation projects. The commission oversaw the closure of most of the landfills in the Meadowlands district.

The commission was subsequently renamed the New Jersey Meadowlands Commission, and merged with the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority (NJSEA) in 2015.

==Conservation efforts==
The Hackensack Riverkeeper, a conservation organization established in 1997, conducts public education, advocacy, river cleanups and conservation projects.

Water quality in the Hackensack River improved somewhat by the late 2000s following the decline in manufacturing in the area, as well as from enforcement of Clean Water Act regulations and from the efforts of local conservancy groups. Urban runoff pollution, municipal sewage discharges from sanitary sewer overflows and combined sewer overflows, and runoff from hazardous waste sites continue to impair the river&#x27;s water quality.

In 2015 EPA awarded grants to conduct research on Meadowlands wetlands.

The NJSEA owns or holds management rights to preserve wetlands in the Meadowlands district. As of 2016 over 3,900 acres of wetlands have been preserved by NJSEA and other property owners.

The New Jersey Legislature established the Meadowlands Conservation Trust in 1999 to protect and manage land in the Meadowlands watershed. As of 2024 over 800 acres of land are protected through the trust using conservation easements and management by government agencies.

==See also==
*Marine life of New York-New Jersey Harbor Estuary
*Meadowlands Museum

==References==
==Further reading==
* 

==External links==
*Meadowlands Museum
*Hackensack Riverkeeper
*New Jersey Meadowlands Commission Master Plan
*Meadowlands Environment Center
*Wild New Jersey – &quot;The Fishes Swim Through it? Once Again&quot;
*New Jersey Meadowlands at National Geographic
*Photos of Mill Creek Marsh, Meadowlands Preserve
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3853432" start="0" end="22" title="New Jersey Meadowlands" label="New Jersey Meadowlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3853432" start="42" end="64" title="New Jersey Meadowlands" label="Hackensack Meadowlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125487" start="75" end="107" title="Hackensack River" label="primary river flowing through it"/>
<link wikidata="Q37813" start="139" end="148" title="ecosystem" label="ecosystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q170321" start="152" end="159" title="wetland" label="wetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="177" end="187" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="195" end="208" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="237" end="250" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q161078" start="310" end="319" title="Urbanization" label="urbanized"/>
<link wikidata="Q152810" start="369" end="377" title="landfill" label="landfill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125487" start="619" end="629" title="Hackensack River" label="Hackensack"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055835" start="634" end="647" title="Passaic River" label="Passaic River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617172" start="667" end="677" title="Newark Bay" label="Newark Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4894878" start="729" end="741" title="Berrys Creek" label="Berrys Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q7113859" start="747" end="761" title="Overpeck Creek" label="Overpeck Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q18808840" start="960" end="972" title="H. Bert Mack" label="H. Bert Mack"/>
<link wikidata="Q776648" start="1031" end="1037" title="Kearny, New Jersey" label="Kearny"/>
<link wikidata="Q26339" start="1039" end="1050" title="Jersey City, New Jersey" label="Jersey City"/>
<link wikidata="Q182289" start="1052" end="1067" title="North Arlington, New Jersey" label="North Arlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013249" start="1069" end="1077" title="Secaucus, New Jersey" label="Secaucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q524732" start="1079" end="1088" title="Lyndhurst, New Jersey" label="Lyndhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q589182" start="1090" end="1100" title="Rutherford, New Jersey" label="Rutherford"/>
<link wikidata="Q746830" start="1102" end="1117" title="East Rutherford, New Jersey" label="East Rutherford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043422" start="1119" end="1128" title="Carlstadt, New Jersey" label="Carlstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000528" start="1130" end="1142" title="North Bergen, New Jersey" label="North Bergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089562" start="1144" end="1153" title="Moonachie, New Jersey" label="Moonachie"/>
<link wikidata="Q187626" start="1155" end="1165" title="Ridgefield, New Jersey" label="Ridgefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013236" start="1167" end="1183" title="South Hackensack, New Jersey" label="South Hackensack"/>
<link wikidata="Q991387" start="1185" end="1192" title="Teaneck, New Jersey" label="Teaneck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084461" start="1198" end="1210" title="Little Ferry, New Jersey" label="Little Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744650" start="1252" end="1272" title="Chamaecyparis thyoides" label="Atlantic white cedar"/>
<link wikidata="Q382593" start="1285" end="1305" title="New Netherland" label="early Dutch settlers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492753" start="1455" end="1463" title="Spartina patens" label="salt hay"/>
<link wikidata="Q102192" start="1754" end="1764" title="freshwater" label="freshwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q105533" start="1766" end="1780" title="brackish water" label="brackish water"/>
<link wikidata="Q184395" start="1786" end="1795" title="Seawater" label="saltwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q35255" start="1884" end="1898" title="Mountain lions" label="Mountain lions"/>
<link wikidata="Q743864" start="1900" end="1911" title="Eastern elk" label="Eastern elk"/>
<link wikidata="Q677746" start="1913" end="1927" title="Eastern wolf" label="Eastern wolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q322145" start="1929" end="1944" title="American marten" label="American marten"/>
<link wikidata="Q584064" start="1946" end="1961" title="Fisher (animal)" label="Fisher (animal)"/>
<link wikidata="Q122783" start="1969" end="1989" title="American black bears" label="American black bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492753" start="2351" end="2359" title="salt hay" label="salt hay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7099324" start="2588" end="2605" title="Oradell Reservoir" label="Oradell Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125487" start="2632" end="2648" title="Hackensack River" label="Hackensack River"/>
<link wikidata="Q11235" start="3010" end="3028" title="World Trade Center (1973–2001)" label="World Trade Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="3039" end="3052" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3230" end="3242" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="3313" end="3319" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900329" start="3331" end="3340" title="the Blitz" label="the Blitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5461048" start="3353" end="3360" title="Sailing ballast" label="ballast"/>
<link wikidata="Q4894878" start="3576" end="3588" title="Berrys Creek" label="Berrys Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q925" start="3619" end="3626" title="Mercury (element)" label="mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q211171" start="3628" end="3632" title="Polychlorinated biphenyl" label="PCBs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504641" start="3733" end="3742" title="Superfund" label="Superfund"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="3756" end="3792" title="U.S. Environmental Protection Agency" label="U.S. Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q811504" start="3819" end="3838" title="New Jersey Turnpike" label="New Jersey Turnpike"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334780" start="3885" end="3910" title="environmental degradation" label="environmental degradation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055835" start="3993" end="4006" title="Passaic River" label="Passaic River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000528" start="4020" end="4032" title="North Bergen Township, New Jersey" label="North Bergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q225108" start="4039" end="4065" title="Meadowlands Sports Complex" label="Meadowlands Sports Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q683705" start="4352" end="4378" title="New York metropolitan area" label="New York metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990118" start="4419" end="4431" title="Wetland conservation" label="conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867079" start="4499" end="4521" title="New Jersey Legislature" label="New Jersey Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q7329696" start="4535" end="4553" title="Richard W. DeKorte" label="Richard W. DeKorte"/>
<link wikidata="Q6484056" start="4765" end="4781" title="land development" label="land development"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428433" start="4832" end="4857" title="environmental restoration" label="environmental restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855609" start="4862" end="4874" title="Preservation ethic" label="preservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17021350" start="5074" end="5116" title="New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority" label="New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q2978742" start="5474" end="5489" title="Clean Water Act" label="Clean Water Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q4358090" start="5552" end="5564" title="Urban runoff" label="Urban runoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2150529" start="5609" end="5632" title="sanitary sewer overflow" label="sanitary sewer overflow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069369" start="5680" end="5695" title="hazardous waste" label="hazardous waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q625376" start="5738" end="5751" title="water quality" label="water quality"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867079" start="6020" end="6042" title="New Jersey Legislature" label="New Jersey Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q272893" start="6240" end="6248" title="easement" label="easement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6764295" start="6304" end="6353" title="Marine life of New York-New Jersey Harbor Estuary" label="Marine life of New York-New Jersey Harbor Estuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705739" start="6355" end="6373" title="Meadowlands Museum" label="Meadowlands Museum"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="331688" wikidata="Q312368" url="?curid=331688" title="Ernest Chausson">
<text>Amédée-Ernest Chausson (; 20 January 1855 – 10 June 1899) was a French Romantic composer.

==Life==
Born in Paris into an affluent bourgeois family, Chausson was the sole surviving child of a building contractor who made his fortune assisting Baron Haussmann in the redevelopment of Paris in the 1850s. To please his father, Chausson studied law and was appointed a barrister for the Court of Appeals, but had little or no interest in the profession. He frequented the Paris salons, where he met celebrities such as Henri Fantin-Latour, Odilon Redon, and Vincent d&#x27;Indy. Before deciding on a musical career, he dabbled in writing and drawing.
In 1879, at the age of 24, he began attending the composition classes of Jules Massenet at the Paris Conservatoire; Massenet came to regard him as &quot;an exceptional person and a true artist&quot;. He had already composed some piano pieces and songs. Nevertheless, the earliest manuscripts that have been preserved are those corrected by Massenet. At the Conservatoire, Chausson also studied with César Franck, with whom he formed a close friendship that lasted until Franck&#x27;s death in 1890. Chausson interrupted his studies in 1881 after a failed attempt to win the Prix de Rome. 

During 1882 and 1883, Chausson, who enjoyed travel, visited Bayreuth to hear the operas of Richard Wagner. On the first of these journeys, he went with d&#x27;Indy for the premiere of Wagner&#x27;s &quot;Parsifal&quot;, and on the second trip he went with his new spouse, Jeanne Escudier (1862–1936), with whom he was to have five children.

From 1886 until his death in 1899, Chausson was secretary of the Société Nationale de Musique. In his own home (22 Boulevard de Courcelles, near Parc Monceau), he received artists, including the composers Henri Duparc, Gabriel Fauré, Claude Debussy, and Isaac Albéniz; poet Stéphane Mallarmé; Russian novelist Ivan Turgenev; and Impressionist painter Claude Monet. Chausson also assembled a collection of paintings.

==Death==

When 44 years old, Chausson died while staying at one of his country retreats, the Château de Moussets, in Limay, Yvelines. Riding his bicycle downhill, Chausson hit a brick wall and died instantly. The exact circumstances remain unclear; although probably an accident, there has been the suggestion of suicide, as Chausson was prone to depression. This suicide theory was propounded by Debussy&#x27;s biographer Edward Lockspeiser, but has been rejected more recently by Chausson&#x27;s own biographer Ralph Scott Grover. When he was 20, Chausson jotted into his diary “I have the premonition that my life will be short. I’m far from complaining about it, but I should not want to die before having done something.&quot;

Chausson was buried in Père Lachaise Cemetery in Paris. His funeral was attended by figures of the arts, including Duparc, Gabriel Fauré, Isaac Albéniz, Redon, Edgar Degas, Auguste Rodin, Henri de Régnier, Pierre Louÿs and Claude Debussy. While Chausson&#x27;s brotherly relationship with Debussy had ended abruptly five years earlier, following his disapproval of Debussy&#x27;s promiscuity, Debussy never ceased to admire Chausson&#x27;s music.

==Eponymy==
A small park, Square Ernest-Chausson, in the 17th arrondissement of Paris is named in his honour.

==Music==

The creative work of Chausson is commonly divided into three periods. In the first, his output was stylistically dominated by the influence of Massenet. The second period, dating from 1886, is marked by a more dramatic character, deriving partly from Chausson&#x27;s contacts with the artistic milieux in which he moved. From his father&#x27;s death in 1894 dates the beginning of his third period, during which he was especially influenced by his reading of the symbolist poets and Russian literature, particularly Turgenev, Dostoyevsky, and Tolstoy.

Chausson&#x27;s work is individual, but it does reflect some technical influences of both Wagner and his other musical hero, Franck. Stylistic traces not only of Massenet but also of Brahms can be detected sometimes. In general, Chausson&#x27;s compositional idiom bridges the gap between the ripe Romanticism of Massenet and Franck and the more introverted Impressionism of Debussy.

Several delicate songs came from Chausson&#x27;s pen. He completed one opera, &quot;Le roi Arthus&quot; (&quot;King Arthur&quot;). His orchestral output was small, but significant. It includes the symphonic poem &quot;Viviane&quot;; the Symphony in B-flat, his sole symphony; &quot;Poème&quot; for violin and orchestra, an important piece in the violin repertoire; and the dramatic song-cycle &quot;Poème de l&#x27;amour et de la mer&quot;.

Chausson is believed to be the first composer to use the celesta. He employed that instrument in December 1888 in his incidental music, written for a small orchestra, for &quot;La Tempête&quot;, a French translation by Maurice Bouchor of Shakespeare&#x27;s &quot;The Tempest&quot;.

Not at all prolific, Chausson left behind only 39 opus-numbered pieces.

&quot;There are moments when I feel myself driven by a kind of feverish instinct, as if I had the presentiment of being unable to attain my goal, or of attaining it too late.&quot; 
==References==
==Bibliography==
* Charles Oulmont (), &quot;Musique de l&#x27;amour. I. Ernest Chausson et &quot;la bande à Franck&quot;&quot; (Paris: Desclée de Brouwer &amp; Cie., 1935).
* Jean Gallois, &quot;Ernest Chausson&quot; (Paris: Fayard, 1994).

==External links==
*
*Free digital scores by Ernest Chausson in the OpenScore Lieder Corpus
*&quot;Hymne védique&quot; Chorus accompanied by orchestra, op. 9 Vocal Score (Paris: Hamelle, 1886) From Sibley Music Library Digital Scores Collection
*&quot;Mélodies pour chant et piano&quot;, op. 2 (Paris: J. Hamelle, 1890) From Sibley Music Library Digital Scores Collection
*&quot;Les Vêpres du Commun des saint&quot;, op. 31 (Paris: Editions de la Schola Cantorum, 1907) From Sibley Music Library Digital Scores Collection</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q312368" start="0" end="22" title="Ernest Chausson" label="Amédée-Ernest Chausson"/>
<link wikidata="Q207591" start="71" end="79" title="Romantic music" label="Romantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q36834" start="80" end="88" title="composer" label="composer"/>
<link wikidata="Q52090" start="131" end="140" title="Bourgeoisie" label="bourgeois"/>
<link wikidata="Q191798" start="243" end="258" title="Baron Haussmann" label="Baron Haussmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q576342" start="469" end="481" title="Salon (gathering)" label="Paris salons"/>
<link wikidata="Q310715" start="516" end="535" title="Henri Fantin-Latour" label="Henri Fantin-Latour"/>
<link wikidata="Q154349" start="537" end="549" title="Odilon Redon" label="Odilon Redon"/>
<link wikidata="Q313584" start="555" end="574" title="Vincent d&amp;#x27;Indy" label="Vincent d&amp;#x27;Indy"/>
<link wikidata="Q194436" start="721" end="735" title="Jules Massenet" label="Jules Massenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q463055" start="743" end="762" title="Conservatoire de Paris" label="Paris Conservatoire"/>
<link wikidata="Q50187" start="1047" end="1059" title="César Franck" label="César Franck"/>
<link wikidata="Q576434" start="1222" end="1234" title="Prix de Rome" label="Prix de Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q329133" start="1298" end="1306" title="Bayreuth Festspielhaus" label="Bayreuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511" start="1329" end="1343" title="Richard Wagner" label="Richard Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q220340" start="1442" end="1450" title="Parsifal" label="Parsifal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749118" start="1645" end="1673" title="Société Nationale de Musique" label="Société Nationale de Musique"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414059" start="1725" end="1737" title="Parc Monceau" label="Parc Monceau"/>
<link wikidata="Q364983" start="1785" end="1797" title="Henri Duparc (composer)" label="Henri Duparc"/>
<link wikidata="Q104919" start="1799" end="1812" title="Gabriel Fauré" label="Gabriel Fauré"/>
<link wikidata="Q4700" start="1814" end="1828" title="Claude Debussy" label="Claude Debussy"/>
<link wikidata="Q185812" start="1834" end="1847" title="Isaac Albéniz" label="Isaac Albéniz"/>
<link wikidata="Q767" start="1854" end="1871" title="Stéphane Mallarmé" label="Stéphane Mallarmé"/>
<link wikidata="Q42831" start="1890" end="1903" title="Ivan Turgenev" label="Ivan Turgenev"/>
<link wikidata="Q296" start="1931" end="1943" title="Claude Monet" label="Claude Monet"/>
<link wikidata="Q526378" start="2115" end="2130" title="Limay, Yvelines" label="Limay, Yvelines"/>
<link wikidata="Q5344196" start="2421" end="2439" title="Edward Lockspeiser" label="Edward Lockspeiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q311" start="2754" end="2776" title="Père Lachaise Cemetery" label="Père Lachaise Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q104919" start="2854" end="2867" title="Gabriel Fauré" label="Gabriel Fauré"/>
<link wikidata="Q185812" start="2869" end="2882" title="Isaac Albéniz" label="Isaac Albéniz"/>
<link wikidata="Q46373" start="2891" end="2902" title="Edgar Degas" label="Edgar Degas"/>
<link wikidata="Q30755" start="2904" end="2917" title="Auguste Rodin" label="Auguste Rodin"/>
<link wikidata="Q561510" start="2919" end="2935" title="Henri de Régnier" label="Henri de Régnier"/>
<link wikidata="Q334958" start="2937" end="2949" title="Pierre Louÿs" label="Pierre Louÿs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4700" start="2954" end="2968" title="Claude Debussy" label="Claude Debussy"/>
<link wikidata="Q197297" start="3236" end="3264" title="17th arrondissement of Paris" label="17th arrondissement of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q42831" start="3817" end="3825" title="Ivan Turgenev" label="Turgenev"/>
<link wikidata="Q991" start="3827" end="3838" title="Fyodor Dostoyevsky" label="Dostoyevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243" start="3844" end="3851" title="Leo Tolstoy" label="Tolstoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294" start="4037" end="4043" title="Johannes Brahms" label="Brahms"/>
<link wikidata="Q772829" start="4323" end="4336" title="Le roi Arthus" label="Le roi Arthus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561568" start="4457" end="4464" title="Viviane (Chausson)" label="Viviane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3507621" start="4476" end="4494" title="Symphony in B-flat (Chausson)" label="Symphony in B-flat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401050" start="4515" end="4557" title="Poème (Chausson)" label="&amp;quot;Poème&amp;quot; for violin and orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401051" start="4638" end="4672" title="Poème de l&amp;#x27;amour et de la mer" label="Poème de l&amp;#x27;amour et de la mer"/>
<link wikidata="Q320341" start="4738" end="4745" title="celesta" label="celesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147752" start="4799" end="4815" title="incidental music" label="incidental music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742471" start="4900" end="4915" title="Maurice Bouchor" label="Maurice Bouchor"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="4919" end="4930" title="William Shakespeare" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q86440" start="4944" end="4955" title="The Tempest" label="The Tempest"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="331689" wikidata="Q126225" url="?curid=331689" title="Michael Shermer">
<text>Michael Brant Shermer (born September 8, 1954) is an American science writer, historian of science, executive director of The Skeptics Society, and founding publisher of &quot;Skeptic&quot; magazine, a publication focused on investigating pseudoscientific and supernatural claims. The author of over a dozen books, Shermer is known for engaging in debates on pseudoscience and religion in which he emphasizes scientific skepticism.

Shermer was the co-producer and co-host of &quot;Exploring the Unknown&quot;, a 13-hour Fox Family television series broadcast in 1999. From April 2001 to January 2019, he contributed a monthly &quot;Skeptic&quot; column to &quot;Scientific American&quot; magazine.

Shermer was raised in a non-religious household, before converting to Christian fundamentalism as a teenager. He stopped believing in God during graduate school, influenced by a traumatic accident that left his then-girlfriend paralyzed. He identifies as an agnostic and an atheist, but prefers &quot;skeptic&quot;. He also advocates for humanism. Shermer became an Internet-ordained clergyman in the Universal Life Church and has performed weddings.

==Early life and education==
Michael Brant Shermer was born on September 8, 1954, in Los Angeles, California. He is partly of Greek and German ancestry. Shermer was raised in Southern California, primarily in the La Cañada Flintridge area. His parents divorced when he was four and later remarried. He has a step-sister, two step-brothers, and two half-sisters.

Shermer attended Sunday school but said he was otherwise raised in a non religious household. He began his senior year of high school in 1971, when the evangelical movement in the United States was growing in popularity. At the behest of a friend, Shermer embraced Christianity. He attended the Presbyterian Church in Glendale, California and observed a sermon delivered by a &quot;dynamic and histrionic preacher&quot; who encouraged him to come forward to be saved. For seven years, Shermer evangelized door-to-door. He also attended an informal Christian fellowship at &quot;The Barn&quot; in La Crescenta, California, where he described enjoying the social aspects of religion, especially the theological debates.

In 1972, he graduated from Crescenta Valley High School and enrolled at Pepperdine University, intending to pursue Christian theology. Shermer changed majors to psychology once he learned that a doctorate in theology required proficiency in Hebrew, Greek, Latin, and Aramaic. He completed his BA in psychology at Pepperdine in 1976.

Shermer went on to study experimental psychology at California State University, Fullerton. Discussions with his professors, along with studies in the natural and social sciences, led him to question his religious beliefs. Fueled by what he perceived to be the intolerance generated by the absolute morality taught in his religious studies; the hypocrisy in what many believers preached and what they practiced; and a growing awareness of other religious beliefs that were determined by the temporal, geographic, and cultural circumstances in which their adherents were born, he abandoned his religious views halfway through graduate school.

Shermer attributed the paralysis of his college girlfriend as a key point when he lost faith. After she was in an automobile accident that broke her back and rendered her paralyzed from the waist down, Shermer relayed, &quot;If anyone deserved to be healed it was her, and nothing happened, so I just thought there was probably no God at all.&quot;

He earned an MA degree in psychology from California State University, Fullerton in 1978.

==Career==
=== Cycling ===
After earning his MA in experimental psychology in 1978, Shermer worked as a writer for a bicycle magazine in Irvine, California. He took up bicycle racing after his first assignment, a Cycles Peugeot press conference, He completed a century ride (100 miles) and started to ride hundreds of miles a week.

Shermer began competitive cycling in 1979 and rode professionally for ten years, primarily in long distance ultramarathon road racing. He is a founding member of the Ultra Cycling Hall of Fame.

Shermer worked with cycling technologists in developing better products for the sport. During his association with Bell Helmets, a bicycle-race sponsor, he advised them on design issues regarding expanded-polystyrene for use in cycling helmets, which would absorb greater impact than the old leather &quot;hairnet&quot; helmets used by bicyclists for decades. Shermer advised them that if their helmets looked too much like motorcycle helmets, in which polystyrene was already being used, and not like the old hairnet helmets, no serious cyclists or amateur would use them. This suggestion led to their model, the &quot;V1 Pro&quot;, which looked like a black leather hairnet, but functioned on the inside like a motorcycle helmet. In 1982, he worked with Wayman Spence, whose small supply company, Spenco Medical, adapted the gel technology Spence developed for bedridden patients with pressure sores into cycling gloves and saddles to alleviate the carpal tunnel syndrome and saddle sores suffered by cyclists.

While a long distance racer, he helped to found the 3,000-mile nonstop transcontinental bicycle Race Across America (known as &quot;RAAM&quot;, along with Lon Haldeman and John Marino), in which he competed five times (1982, 1983, 1984, 1985, and 1989), was an assistant race director for six years, and the executive race director for seven years. An acute medical condition is named for him: &quot;Shermer&#x27;s Neck&quot; is pain in and extreme weakness of the neck muscles found among long-distance bicyclists. Shermer suffered the condition about 2,000 miles into the 1983 Race Across America. Shermer&#x27;s embrace of scientific skepticism crystallized during his time as a cyclist, explaining, &quot;I became a skeptic on Saturday, August 6, 1983, on the long climbing road to Loveland Pass, Colorado&quot;, after months of training under the guidance of a &quot;nutritionist&quot; with an unaccredited PhD. After years of practicing acupuncture, chiropractic, massage therapy, negative ions, rolfing, pyramid power, and fundamentalist Christianity to improve his life and training, Shermer stopped rationalizing the failure of these practices.

Shermer participated in the Furnace Creek 508 in October 2011, a qualifying race for RAAM, finishing second in the four man team category.

Shermer has written on the subject of pervasive doping in competitive cycling and a game theoretic view of the dynamics driving the problem in several sports. He covered r-EPO doping and described it as widespread and well known within the sport, which was later shown to be instrumental in the doping scandal surrounding Lance Armstrong in 2010.

===Teaching===
While cycling, Shermer taught Psychology 101 during the evenings at Glendale Community College, a two-year college. Wanting to teach at a four-year university, he decided to earn his PhD. He lost interest in psychology and switched to studying the history of science, earning his PhD at Claremont Graduate University in 1991. His dissertation was titled &quot;Heretic-Scientist: Alfred Russel Wallace and the Evolution of Man: A Study on the Nature of Historical Change&quot;.

Shermer then became an adjunct professor of the history of science at Occidental College, California. In 2007, Shermer became a senior research fellow at Claremont Graduate University. In 2011, he worked as an adjunct professor at Chapman University, and was later made a Presidential Fellow. At Chapman, he taught a yearly critical thinking course called Skepticism 101.

===Skeptics Society===
In 1991, Shermer and Pat Linse co-founded the Skeptics Society in Los Angeles with the assistance of Kim Ziel Shermer. The Skeptics Society is a non-profit organization that promotes scientific skepticism and seeks to debunk pseudoscience and irrational beliefs. It started off as a garage hobby but eventually grew into a full-time occupation. The Skeptics Society publishes the magazine &quot;Skeptic&quot;, organizes the Caltech Lecture Series, and as of 2017, it had over 50,000 members.

Shermer is listed as one of the scientific advisors for the American Council on Science and Health (ACSH).

===Published works===
Shermer’s early writing covered cycling, followed by math and science education for children which included several collaborations with Arthur Benjamin.

From April 2001 to January 2019, he wrote the monthly &quot;Skeptic&quot; column for &quot;Scientific American&quot;. He has also contributed to &quot;Time&quot; magazine.

He is the author of a series of books that attempt to explain the ubiquity of irrational or poorly substantiated beliefs, including UFOs, Bigfoot, and paranormal claims. Writing in &quot;Why People Believe Weird Things: Pseudoscience, Superstition, and Other Confusions of Our Time&quot; (1997), Shermer refers to &quot;patternicity&quot;, his term for pareidolia and apophenia or the willing suspension of disbelief. He writes in the Introduction:So we are left with the legacy of two types of thinking errors: &quot;Type 1 Error: believing a falsehood&quot; and &quot;Type 2 Error: rejecting a truth&quot;. ... Believers in UFOs, alien abductions, ESP, and psychic phenomena have committed a Type 1 Error in thinking: they are believing a falsehood. ... It&#x27;s not that these folks are ignorant or uninformed; they are intelligent but misinformed. Their thinking has gone wrong.In &quot;How We Believe: The Search for God in an Age of Science&quot; (2000), Shermer explored the psychology behind the belief in God.

In February 2002, he characterized the position that &quot;God had no part in the process [of the evolution of mankind]&quot; as the &quot;standard scientific theory&quot;. This statement was criticized in January 2006 by the scientist Eugenie Scott, who commented that science makes no claim about God one way or the other.

Shermer&#x27;s book &quot;In Darwin&#x27;s Shadow: The Life and Science of Alfred Russel Wallace: A Biographical Study on the Psychology of History&quot; (2002) was based on his dissertation.

In his book &quot;The Borderlands of Science&quot;, (2001) Shermer rated several noted scientists for gullibility toward &quot;pseudo&quot; or &quot;borderland&quot; ideas, using a rating version, developed by psychologist Frank Sulloway, of the Big Five model of personality. Shermer rated Wallace extremely high (99th percentile) on agreeableness/accommodation and argued that this was the key trait in distinguishing Wallace from scientists who give less credence to fringe ideas.

In May 2002, Shermer and Alex Grobman published their book &quot;Denying History: Who Says the Holocaust Never Happened and Why Do They Say It?&quot;, which examined and countered the Holocaust denial movement. This book recounts meeting various denialists and concludes that free speech is the best way to deal with pseudohistory.

&quot;Science Friction: Where the Known Meets the Unknown&quot; was released in 2005.

His 2006 book &quot;Why Darwin Matters: The Case Against Intelligent Design&quot; marshals point-by-point arguments supporting evolution, sharply criticizing intelligent design. This book also argues that science cannot invalidate religion, and that Christians and conservatives can and should accept evolution.

In &quot;The Mind of The Market: Compassionate Apes, Competitive Humans, and Other Tales from Evolutionary Economics&quot; (2007), Shermer reported on the findings of multiple behavioral and biochemical studies that address evolutionary explanations for modern behavior. It garnered several critical reviews from academics, with skeptic Robert T. Carroll saying: &quot;He has been blinded by his libertarianism and seduced by the allure of evolutionary psychology to explain everything, including ethics and economics.&quot;

In May 2011, Shermer published &quot;The Believing Brain: From Ghosts and Gods to Politics and Conspiracies: How We Construct Beliefs and Reinforce Them as Truths&quot;. In a review for &quot;Commonweal&quot;, writer Joseph Bottum described Shermer as more of a popularizer of science and stated, &quot;science emerges from &quot;The Believing Brain&quot; as a full-blown ideology, lifted out of its proper realm and applied to all the puzzles of the world.&quot;

In January 2015, Shermer published &quot;The Moral Arc: How Science and Reason Lead Humanity Toward Truth, Justice, and Freedom&quot;.

Writing for &quot;Society&quot; in 2017, Eugene Goodheart noted that Shermer identified skepticism with scientism and observed that in his book &quot;Skeptic: Viewing the World with a Skeptical Eye&quot; (2016) Shermer was a &quot;vivid and lucid&quot; writer who imported his &quot;political convictions into his advocacy of evolutionary theory, compromising his objectivity as a defender of science.&quot;

Harriet Hall said of Shermer&#x27;s 2018 publication, &quot;Heavens on Earth&quot;, that &quot;the topics of &quot;Heavens on Earth&quot; are usually relegated to the spheres of philosophy and religion, but Shermer approaches them through science, looking for evidence – or lack thereof.&quot;

In 2020, Shermer launched &quot;Giving the Devil His Due,&quot; a series of 30 reflections on essays that he had published the previous 15 years.

===Media appearances and lectures===

Shermer appeared as a guest on &quot;Donahue&quot; in 1994 to respond to Bradley Smith&#x27;s and David Cole&#x27;s Holocaust denial claims, and in 1995 on &quot;The Oprah Winfrey Show&quot; to challenge Rosemary Altea&#x27;s psychic claims.

In 1994 and 1995, Shermer made several appearances on NBC&#x27;s daytime paranormal-themed show &quot;The Other Side&quot;. He proposed a skepticism-oriented reality show to the producers but it did not move forward. Several years later Fox Family Channel, picked up the series. In 1999, Shermer co-produced and co-hosted the Fox Family TV series &quot;Exploring the Unknown&quot;. Budgeted at approximately $200,000 per episode, the series was viewed by Shermer as a direct extension of the work done at the Skeptics Society and &quot;Skeptic&quot; magazine, with a neutral title chosen to broaden viewership.

Shermer made a guest appearance in a 2004 episode of Penn &amp; Teller&#x27;s &quot;Bullshit!&quot;, in which he argued that events in the Bible constitute &quot;mythic storytelling&quot;, rather than events described literally. His stance was supported by the show&#x27;s hosts, who have expressed their own atheism. The episode in question, &quot;The Bible: Fact or Fiction?&quot;, sought to debunk the notion that the Bible is an empirically reliable historical record. Opposing Shermer was Paul L. Maier, professor of ancient history at Western Michigan University.

Shermer presented at the three Beyond Belief events from 2006 to 2008. He has presented at several TED conferences with &quot;Why people believe strange things&quot; in 2006, &quot;The pattern behind self-deception&quot; in 2010, and &quot;Reasonable Doubt&quot; in 2015.

Shermer has debated Deepak Chopra several times, including on the ABC News program &quot;Nightline&quot; in March 2010.

In 2012, Shermer was one of three guest speakers at the first Reason Rally in Washington, D.C., an event attended by thousands of atheists, where he gave a talk titled &quot;The Moral Arc of Reason.&quot; That same year, Shermer participated in an Intelligence Squared debate titled &quot;Science Refutes God&quot; paired with Lawrence Krauss, and opposing Dinesh D&#x27;Souza and Ian Hutchinson.

He is also an occasional guest on &quot;Skepticality&quot;, the official podcast of &quot;Skeptic&quot;.

Shermer appeared in the 2014 documentary &quot;Merchants of Doubt.&quot;

== Allegations of sexual assault and harassment ==
In 2013, blogger PZ Myers published an anonymous account of a woman who said that Shermer had raped her at a conference. Subsequently, he was accused of sexual harassment by two other women. Shermer has denied these allegations. In 2019, Illinois Wesleyan University canceled Shermer’s visit for the President’s Convocation at that institution after it learned of the sexual assault allegations.

==Personal life==
Shermer married Kim Ziel. They had one daughter together and later divorced. On June 25, 2014 he married Jennifer Graf, a native of Cologne, Germany.

==Political positions==

Shermer is a self-described libertarian. In a 2015 interview, Shermer stated that he preferred to talk about individual issues after previous experience with people refusing to listen to him after learning he held libertarian views.

In 2000, Shermer voted for libertarian Harry Browne, on the assumption that the winner of the Al Gore – George W. Bush contest would be irrelevant. He later regretted this decision, believing that Bush&#x27;s foreign policy made the world more dangerous. He voted for John Kerry in 2004. Shermer named Thomas Jefferson as his favorite president, for his championing of liberty and his application of scientific thinking to the political, economic, and social spheres.

In June 2006, Shermer, who formerly expressed skepticism regarding the mainstream scientific views on global warming, wrote in &quot;Scientific American&quot; magazine that, in the light of the accumulation of evidence, the position of denying global warming is no longer tenable.

===Gun control===
Shermer supports some measures to reduce gun-related violence. He once opposed most gun control measures, primarily because of his beliefs in the principles of increasing individual freedom and decreasing government intervention, and also because he has owned guns for most of his life. As an adult, he owned a .357 Magnum pistol for a quarter of a century for protection, although he eventually took it out of the house, and then got rid of it entirely. Though he no longer owns guns, he continues to support the right to own guns to protect one&#x27;s family. However, by 2013, the data on gun homicides, suicides, and accidental shootings convinced him that some modest gun control measures might be necessary.

==Awards and honors==
* Fellow, 2001, Linnean Society of London
* California State University, Fullerton Distinguished Alumni Award, 2002
* NCAS Philip J. Klass Award, October 2006
* Honorary Doctorate of Humane Letters, Whittier College, 2008
* Independent Investigations Group, 10th Anniversary Gala award, 2010

==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Shermer, Michael (2022)&quot;. Conspiracy – Why the Rational Believe the Irrational&quot;. Johns Hopkins University Press. .
==References==
==External links==

* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q126225" start="0" end="21" title="Michael Shermer" label="Michael Brant Shermer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301770" start="122" end="142" title="The Skeptics Society" label="The Skeptics Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7534655" start="176" end="183" title="Skeptic (U.S. magazine)" label="Skeptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q483677" start="239" end="255" title="pseudoscience" label="pseudoscientific"/>
<link wikidata="Q80837" start="260" end="272" title="supernatural" label="supernatural"/>
<link wikidata="Q483677" start="359" end="372" title="pseudoscience" label="pseudoscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q929771" start="409" end="430" title="scientific skepticism" label="scientific skepticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q287149" start="521" end="531" title="Freeform (TV channel)" label="Fox Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q39379" start="663" end="682" title="Scientific American" label="Scientific American"/>
<link wikidata="Q578881" start="770" end="794" title="Christian fundamentalism" label="Christian fundamentalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q288928" start="958" end="966" title="agnostic" label="agnostic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="974" end="981" title="atheist" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395219" start="1001" end="1008" title="skeptic" label="skeptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q46158" start="1038" end="1046" title="humanism" label="humanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4385041" start="1101" end="1122" title="Universal Life Church" label="Universal Life Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q844837" start="1327" end="1346" title="Southern California" label="Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011181" start="1365" end="1385" title="La Cañada Flintridge, California" label="La Cañada Flintridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="1780" end="1792" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="1810" end="1822" title="Presbyterian" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q485716" start="1833" end="1853" title="Glendale, California" label="Glendale, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798748" start="2111" end="2135" title="La Crescenta, California" label="La Crescenta, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q5184443" start="2261" end="2289" title="Crescenta Valley High School" label="Crescenta Valley High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q117876" start="2306" end="2327" title="Pepperdine University" label="Pepperdine University"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="2527" end="2529" title="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree" label="BA"/>
<link wikidata="Q475042" start="2593" end="2616" title="experimental psychology" label="experimental psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026925" start="2620" end="2658" title="California State University, Fullerton" label="California State University, Fullerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7991" start="2719" end="2726" title="natural science" label="natural"/>
<link wikidata="Q34749" start="2731" end="2745" title="social science" label="social science"/>
<link wikidata="Q815352" start="3603" end="3630" title="California State University" label="California State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49219" start="3789" end="3807" title="Irvine, California" label="Irvine, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q383592" start="3865" end="3879" title="Cycles Peugeot" label="Cycles Peugeot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5063219" start="3913" end="3925" title="century ride" label="century ride"/>
<link wikidata="Q3609" start="4107" end="4118" title="Road bicycle racing" label="road racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883256" start="4295" end="4307" title="Bell Sports" label="Bell Helmets"/>
<link wikidata="Q146243" start="4376" end="4396" title="expanded-polystyrene" label="expanded-polystyrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127483" start="4408" end="4423" title="bicycle helmet" label="cycling helmets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566593" start="4486" end="4493" title="hairnet" label="hairnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q938683" start="4604" end="4622" title="motorcycle helmets" label="motorcycle helmets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392548" start="5087" end="5101" title="cycling gloves" label="cycling gloves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076532" start="5106" end="5113" title="Bicycle saddle" label="saddles"/>
<link wikidata="Q332293" start="5131" end="5153" title="carpal tunnel syndrome" label="carpal tunnel syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2125192" start="5290" end="5309" title="Race Across America" label="Race Across America"/>
<link wikidata="Q126225" start="5594" end="5613" title="Shermer&amp;#x27;s Neck" label="Shermer&amp;#x27;s Neck"/>
<link wikidata="Q756697" start="5659" end="5671" title="neck muscles" label="neck muscles"/>
<link wikidata="Q929771" start="5820" end="5841" title="scientific skepticism" label="scientific skepticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1872459" start="5980" end="6003" title="Loveland Pass, Colorado" label="Loveland Pass, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q419911" start="6093" end="6105" title="school accreditation" label="unaccredited"/>
<link wikidata="Q121713" start="6137" end="6148" title="acupuncture" label="acupuncture"/>
<link wikidata="Q658096" start="6150" end="6162" title="chiropractic" label="chiropractic"/>
<link wikidata="Q179415" start="6164" end="6179" title="massage therapy" label="massage therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="6181" end="6193" title="negative ion" label="negative ion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781074" start="6196" end="6203" title="rolfing" label="rolfing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968423" start="6205" end="6218" title="pyramid power" label="pyramid power"/>
<link wikidata="Q578881" start="6224" end="6251" title="fundamentalist Christianity" label="fundamentalist Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q166376" start="6537" end="6543" title="doping in sport" label="doping"/>
<link wikidata="Q44455" start="6573" end="6587" title="game theory" label="game theoretic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6659" end="6671" title="Erythropoietin#Blood doping" label="r-EPO doping"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483314" start="6784" end="6826" title="Lance Armstrong doping case" label="doping scandal surrounding Lance Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5568357" start="6920" end="6946" title="Glendale Community College (California)" label="Glendale Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q201486" start="7100" end="7118" title="history of science" label="history of science"/>
<link wikidata="Q50015" start="7139" end="7168" title="Claremont Graduate University" label="Claremont Graduate University"/>
<link wikidata="Q160627" start="7231" end="7252" title="Alfred Russel Wallace" label="Alfred Russel Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346110" start="7400" end="7418" title="Occidental College" label="Occidental College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1805085" start="7561" end="7579" title="Chapman University" label="Chapman University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301770" start="7772" end="7788" title="Skeptics Society" label="Skeptics Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7534655" start="8115" end="8134" title="Skeptic (U.S. magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Skeptic&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301770" start="8150" end="8172" title="Caltech Lecture Series" label="Caltech Lecture Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743553" start="8279" end="8317" title="American Council on Science and Health" label="American Council on Science and Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865351" start="8485" end="8500" title="Arthur T. Benjamin" label="Arthur Benjamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q39379" start="8594" end="8613" title="Scientific American" label="Scientific American"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="8654" end="8658" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q421" start="8808" end="8811" title="UFO" label="UFO"/>
<link wikidata="Q44810" start="8814" end="8821" title="Bigfoot" label="Bigfoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997855" start="8863" end="8894" title="Why People Believe Weird Things" label="Why People Believe Weird Things"/>
<link wikidata="Q506422" start="9029" end="9039" title="pareidolia" label="pareidolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q619675" start="9044" end="9053" title="apophenia" label="apophenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q892757" start="9308" end="9324" title="alien abductions" label="alien abductions"/>
<link wikidata="Q790024" start="9326" end="9329" title="Extrasensory perception" label="ESP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917466" start="9335" end="9352" title="psychic phenomena" label="psychic phenomena"/>
<link wikidata="Q466831" start="9933" end="9946" title="Eugenie Scott" label="Eugenie Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q788582" start="10439" end="10453" title="Frank Sulloway" label="Frank Sulloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q378132" start="10462" end="10491" title="Big Five personality traits" label="Big Five model of personality"/>
<link wikidata="Q380358" start="10551" end="10578" title="Agreeableness" label="agreeableness/accommodation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4717100" start="10726" end="10738" title="Alex Grobman" label="Alex Grobman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259839" start="10766" end="10844" title="Denying History" label="Denying History: Who Says the Holocaust Never Happened and Why Do They Say It?"/>
<link wikidata="Q151296" start="10885" end="10901" title="Holocaust denial" label="Holocaust denial"/>
<link wikidata="Q11146759" start="11018" end="11031" title="pseudohistory" label="pseudohistory"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11040" end="11091" title="Science Friction: Where the Known Meets the Unknown" label="Science Friction: Where the Known Meets the Unknown"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11141" end="11196" title="Why Darwin Matters: The Case Against Intelligent Design" label="Why Darwin Matters: The Case Against Intelligent Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="11248" end="11257" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q172618" start="11279" end="11297" title="intelligent design" label="intelligent design"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="11371" end="11381" title="Christians" label="Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169" start="11386" end="11399" title="Conservatism" label="conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q73356" start="11771" end="11788" title="Robert T. Carroll" label="Robert T. Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q511735" start="12152" end="12162" title="Commonweal (magazine)" label="Commonweal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16193019" start="12177" end="12190" title="Joseph Bottum (author)" label="Joseph Bottum"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12466" end="12552" title="The Moral Arc: How Science and Reason Lead Humanity Toward Truth, Justice, and Freedom" label="The Moral Arc: How Science and Reason Lead Humanity Toward Truth, Justice, and Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7552007" start="12579" end="12586" title="Society (journal)" label="Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q93236414" start="12602" end="12618" title="Eugene Goodheart" label="Eugene Goodheart"/>
<link wikidata="Q193626" start="12665" end="12674" title="scientism" label="scientism"/>
<link wikidata="Q193923" start="12970" end="12982" title="Harriet A. Hall" label="Harriet Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336253" start="13487" end="13494" title="Phil Donahue" label="Donahue"/>
<link wikidata="Q151296" start="13523" end="13536" title="Bradley Smith (Holocaust denier)" label="Bradley Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174040" start="13548" end="13558" title="David Cole (journalist)" label="David Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q151296" start="13566" end="13582" title="Holocaust denial" label="Holocaust denial"/>
<link wikidata="Q694106" start="13612" end="13634" title="The Oprah Winfrey Show" label="The Oprah Winfrey Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132139" start="13654" end="13668" title="Rosemary Altea" label="Rosemary Altea"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="13747" end="13750" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7697087" start="13930" end="13948" title="Fox Family Channel" label="Fox Family Channel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14019" end="14029" title="Television networks preceding ABC Family#Fox Family" label="Fox Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q130317" start="14358" end="14375" title="Penn &amp;amp; Teller" label="Penn &amp;amp; Teller"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14389" end="14398" title="Penn &amp;amp; Teller: Bullshit!" label="Bullshit!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="14444" end="14449" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q83368" start="14738" end="14749" title="empiricism" label="empirically"/>
<link wikidata="Q5972513" start="14799" end="14812" title="Paul L. Maier" label="Paul L. Maier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546191" start="14846" end="14873" title="Western Michigan University" label="Western Michigan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6567684" start="14907" end="14920" title="Beyond Belief (symposium)" label="Beyond Belief"/>
<link wikidata="Q189021" start="14975" end="14990" title="TED (conference)" label="TED conferences"/>
<link wikidata="Q318506" start="15169" end="15182" title="Deepak Chopra" label="Deepak Chopra"/>
<link wikidata="Q287171" start="15215" end="15223" title="ABC News (United States)" label="ABC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768706" start="15238" end="15247" title="Nightline" label="Nightline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189792" start="15332" end="15344" title="Reason Rally" label="Reason Rally"/>
<link wikidata="Q7353317" start="15518" end="15538" title="Intelligence Squared" label="Intelligence Squared"/>
<link wikidata="Q470468" start="15597" end="15612" title="Lawrence Krauss" label="Lawrence Krauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226328" start="15627" end="15646" title="Dinesh D&amp;#x27;Souza" label="Dinesh D&amp;#x27;Souza"/>
<link wikidata="Q24067022" start="15651" end="15666" title="Ian Hutchinson (scientist)" label="Ian Hutchinson."/>
<link wikidata="Q7534659" start="15708" end="15720" title="Skepticality" label="Skepticality"/>
<link wikidata="Q20899" start="15741" end="15748" title="podcast" label="podcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q19605630" start="15821" end="15839" title="Merchants of Doubt (film)" label="Merchants of Doubt"/>
<link wikidata="Q241802" start="15916" end="15924" title="PZ Myers" label="PZ Myers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2159219" start="16137" end="16165" title="Illinois Wesleyan University" label="Illinois Wesleyan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q365" start="16446" end="16453" title="Cologne" label="Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q178598" start="16518" end="16529" title="Libertarianism" label="libertarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736354" start="16763" end="16775" title="Harry Browne" label="Harry Browne"/>
<link wikidata="Q19673" start="16818" end="16825" title="Al Gore" label="Al Gore"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="16828" end="16842" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468443" start="16921" end="16947" title="Foreign policy of the George W. Bush administration" label="Bush&amp;#x27;s foreign policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q22316" start="16992" end="17002" title="John Kerry" label="John Kerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="17026" end="17042" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="17295" end="17309" title="global warming" label="global warming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328508" start="17577" end="17588" title="gun control" label="gun control"/>
<link wikidata="Q158754" start="17804" end="17815" title=".357 Magnum" label=".357 Magnum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907525" start="17816" end="17822" title="pistol" label="pistol"/>
<link wikidata="Q867447" start="18246" end="18271" title="Linnean Society of London" label="Linnean Society of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026925" start="18274" end="18312" title="California State University, Fullerton" label="California State University, Fullerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996868" start="18429" end="18445" title="Whittier College" label="Whittier College"/>
<link wikidata="Q648015" start="18454" end="18486" title="Independent Investigations Group" label="Independent Investigations Group"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="331693" wikidata="Q1067825" url="?curid=331693" title="Charter schools in the United States">
<text>Charter schools in the United States are primary or secondary education institutions which receive government funding but operate with a degree of autonomy or independence from local public school districts. Charter schools have a contract with local public school districts or other governmental authorizing bodies that allow them to operate. These contracts, or charters, are how charter schools bear their name. Charter schools are open to all students, depending on capacity, and do not charge tuition. 7.4 percent of all public school students attended a charter school in the 2021–2022 school year.

The rules governing charter schools, and how they are authorized, differ in each of the states that allow them. 

Charter schools may also fundraise independently, in addition to the funding they receive from the government. Charters can be run as either non-profit or for-profit institutions. However, there are some for-profit management organizations that hold charters, though these are only allowed in Arizona. Only non-profit charters can receive donations from private sources, just the same as traditional public schools. 

As of 2021-2022 there were an estimated 7,800 public charter schools in 46 states and the District of Columbia, with approximately 3.7 million students In the 2021-2022 school year, 291 new charter schools opened. They educate the majority of children in New Orleans Public Schools. Some charter schools provide a specialized curriculum (for example in arts, mathematics, or vocational training).

Charter schools may be founded by individuals or teacher-parent groups. Two-thirds of charter schools are freestanding and independent; the remainder are managed by a charter management organization or education management organization. Such entries, which manage one or more charter schools, can be either for-profit or non-profit. The first state law in the United States authorizing charter schools was enacted in Minnesota in 1991, and the first charter school that opened as a result of this new law was the City Academy High School in St. Paul.

== History ==
The charter school idea in the United States had several originating sources. In 1971, UC Berkeley professors Stephen Sugarman and Jack Coons published &quot;Family Choice in Education&quot; which outlined the concept of a charter school model. This idea, called &quot;Independent Public Schools&quot; was expanded on in their 1978 volume, &quot;Education by Choice&quot;. The term &quot;charter schools&quot; was defined In 1974 by University of Massachusetts Amherst professor Ray Budde. Albert Shanker, president of the American Federation of Teachers, embraced the concept in 1988, when he called for the reform of the public schools by establishing &quot;charter schools&quot; or &quot;schools of choice.&quot; Gloria Ladson-Billings called him &quot;the first person to publicly propose charter schools.&quot; At the time, a few schools already existed that were not called charter schools but embodied some of their principles, such as H-B Woodlawn.

As originally conceived, the ideal model of a charter school was as a legally and financially autonomous public school (without tuition, religious affiliation, or selective student admissions) that would operate much like a private business—free from many state laws and district regulations, and accountable more for student outcomes rather than for processes or inputs (such as Carnegie Units and teacher certification requirements).

Minnesota was the first state to pass a charter school law in 1991. California was second, in 1992. , 46 states and the District of Columbia have charter school laws, according to the Center for Education Reform.

As of 2012, an authorizer other than a local school board has granted over 60 percent of charters across the country. Between 2009 and 2012, the percent of charter schools implementing performance-based compensation increased from 19 percent to 37 percent, while the proportion that is unionized decreased from 12 percent to 7 percent. The most popular educational focus is college preparation (30 percent), while 8 percent focus on Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics. Another 16 percent emphasize Core Knowledge. Blended Learning (6 percent) and Virtual/Online learning (2 percent) are in use. When compared to traditional public schools, charters serve a more disadvantaged student population, including more low-income and minority students. Sixty-one percent of charter schools serve a student population where over 60 percent qualify for the federal Free or Reduced Lunch Program. Charter schools receive an average 36 percent less revenue per student than traditional public schools, and receive no facilities funds. The number of charters providing a longer school day grew from 23 percent in 2009 to 48 percent in 2012.

In June 2023, Oklahoma approved the first ever Religious Charter school in the United States. In April 2024, the Oklahoma Supreme Court took up the case to explore the constitutionality of such a school.

== General structure and characteristics ==
The rules and structure of charter schools depend on state authorizing legislation and differ from state to state. A charter school is authorized to function once it has received a charter, a statutorily defined performance contract detailing the school&#x27;s mission, program, goals, students served, methods of assessment, and ways to measure success. The length of time for which charters are granted varies, but most are granted for 3–5 years.

=== Operational autonomy ===
Often, charters create unique school cultures to tailor to students, particularly minority students in urban school districts, whose school performance is affected by social phenomena including stereotype threat, acting white, non-dominant cultural capital, and a &quot;code of the street&quot;. Most teachers, by a 68 percent to 21 percent margin, say schools would be better for students if principals and teachers had more control and flexibility about work rules and school duties.

=== Accountability for student achievement ===

Charter schools are accountable for student achievement to their sponsor—a local school board, state education agency, university, or other entity—for producing positive academic results and adhere to the charter contract. While this accountability is one of the key arguments in favor of charters, evidence gathered by the United States Department of Education suggests that charter schools may not, in practice, be held to higher standards of accountability than traditional public schools. Typically, these schools are allowed to remain open, perhaps with new leadership or restructuring, or perhaps with no change at all. Charter school proponents assert that charter schools are not given the opportunities to restructure often and are simply closed down when students perform poorly on these assessments. , 12.5% of the over 5000 charter schools founded in the United States had closed for reasons including academic, financial, and managerial problems, and occasionally consolidation or district interference. A 2013 Study by the Center for Research on Education Outcomes (CREDO) at Stanford University institute linked overall improvement of the charter school sector to charter school closures, suggesting that charter schools as a whole are not getting better, but the closure of bad schools is improving the system as a whole.

Many charter schools are created with the original intent of providing a unique and innovative educational experience to its students. However, charter schools are still held accountable for test scores, state mandates, and other traditional requirements that often have the effect of turning the charter school into a similar model and design as the public schools.

Although the U.S. Department of Education&#x27;s findings agree with those of the National Education Association (NEA), their study points out the limitations of such studies and the inability to hold constant other important factors, and notes that &quot;study design does not allow us to determine whether or not traditional public schools are more effective than charter schools.&quot;

=== Chartering authorities ===

Chartering authorizers, entities that may legally issue charters, differ from state to state, as do the bodies that are legally entitled to apply for and operate under such charters. In some states, like Arkansas, the State Board of Education authorizes charters. In other states, like Maryland, only the local school district may issue charters. Some school districts may authorize charter schools as part of a larger program for systemic improvement, such as the Portfolio strategy. States including Arizona and the District of Columbia have created independent charter-authorizing bodies to which applicants may apply for a charter. The laws that permit the most charter development, as seen in Minnesota and Michigan, allow for a combination of such authorizers. As of 2012, 39% of charters were authorized by local districts, 28% by state boards of education, 12% by state commissions, with the remainder by universities, cities and others.

=== Caps ===
Andrew Rotherham, co-founder of Education Sector and opponent of charter school caps, wrote in 2007, &quot;One might be willing to accept this pent-up demand if charter school caps, or the debate over them, were addressing the greater concern of charter school quality. But this is not the case. Statutory caps as they exist now are too blunt a policy instrument to sufficiently address quality. They fail to differentiate between good schools and lousy schools and between successful charter school authorizers and those with a poor track record of running charter schools. And, all the while, they limit public schooling options and choices for parents.&quot;

=== Demographics ===

The U.S. Department of Education&#x27;s 1997 First Year Report, part of a four-year national study on charters, was based on interviews of 225 charter schools in 10 states. The report found charters tended to be small (fewer than 200 students) and represented primarily new schools, though some schools had converted to charter status. Charter schools often tended to exist in urban locations, rather than rural. This study also found enormous variation among states. Charter schools tended to be somewhat more racially diverse, and to enroll slightly fewer students with special needs or limited English proficiency than the average schools in their state.

=== Funding ===

Charter school funding is dictated by each state. In many states, charter schools are funded by transferring per-pupil state aid from the school district where the charter school student resides. Charters on average receive less money per-pupil than the corresponding public schools in their areas, though the average figure is controversial because some charter schools do not enroll a proportionate number of students that require special education or student support services. Additionally, some charters are not required to provide transportation and nutrition services.
The Federal Elementary and Secondary Education Act, Part B, Sections 502–511 authorizes funding grants for charter schools.

In August 2005, the Thomas B. Fordam Institute, a pro-charter group, published a national report of charter school finance. It found that across 16 states and the District of Columbia—which collectively enrolled 84 percent of that year&#x27;s one million charter school students—charter schools receive about 22 percent less public funding per-pupil than the district schools that surround them, a difference of about $1,800. For a typical charter school of 250 students, that amounts to about $450,000 per year. The study asserts that the funding gap is wider in most of twenty-seven urban school districts studied, where it amounts to $2,200 per student, and that in cities like San Diego and Atlanta, charters receive 40% less than traditional public schools. The funding gap was largest in South Carolina, California, Ohio, Georgia, Wisconsin and Missouri. The report suggests that the primary driver of the district-charter funding gap is charter schools&#x27; lack of access to local and capital funding.

A 2010 study by the Center for Education Reform, a pro-charter advocacy group, found that charters received 64 percent of their district counterparts, averaging $7,131 per pupil compared to the average per pupil expenditure of $11,184 in the traditional public schools in 2009/10 compared to $10,771 per pupil at conventional district public schools. Charters raise an average of some $500 per student in additional revenue from donors.

However, funding differences across districts remain considerable in most states that use local property taxes for revenue. Charters that are funded based on a statewide average may have an advantage if they are located in a low-income district, or be at a disadvantage if located in a high-income district.
===Spending===
The overwhelming majority of charter schools advertise to attract students unlike traditional schools, where generally, students go to the school closest to their homes. In Utah some of the schools which spent the most on advertising, were poorly performing on academics, for example Mountain Heights Academy which spent $819,000 on marketing received an &quot;F&quot; from the state in 2016.

In Pennsylvania, 12 of its 14 cyber charter schools spent more than $21 million in taxpayer dollars on advertising over three years.

===Virtual charter schools===

In November 2015, the first major study into online charter schools in the United States, the National Study of Online Charter Schools, was published. It found &quot;significantly weaker academic performance&quot; in mathematics and reading in such schools when they were compared to conventional ones. The study was the result of research carried out in 17 US states which had online charter schools, and was conducted by researchers from the University of Washington, Stanford University and Mathematica Policy Research. It concluded that keeping online pupils focused on their work was the biggest problem faced by online charter schools, and that in mathematics the difference in attainment between online pupils and their conventionally educated peers equated to the cyber pupils missing a whole academic year in school.

== State-specific structure and regulations ==


State laws follow varied sets of key organizing principles based on the Citizens League&#x27;s recommendations for Minnesota, American Federation of Teachers guidelines, or federal charter-school legislation (U.S. Department of Education). Principles govern sponsorship, number of schools, regulatory waivers, degree of fiscal/legal autonomy, and performance expectations.

=== Center for Education Reform ranking ===
The Center for Education Reform, an organization that advocates in favor of charter schools, has characterized laws as either &quot;strong&quot; or &quot;weak.&quot; &quot;Strong-law&quot; states mandate considerable autonomy from local labor-management agreements and bureaucracy, allow a significant number of charter schools to be authorized by multiple charter-granting agencies, and allocate a level of funding consistent with the statewide per pupil average. According to the Center for Education Reform, as of 2022, Arizona and Florida get an &quot;A&quot; grade from a pro-charter school perspective for their laws governing charter schools, while the District of Columbia, Michigan, Indiana, Colorado, Minnesota, Texas and Utah received a &quot;B&quot; rating. This same pro-charter score card ranked Alaska, Virginia, Kansas, and Iowa in last place.

== National evaluations ==

Multiple researchers and organizations have examined educational outcomes for students who attend charter schools. In general, urban charter schools may appear to be a good alternative to traditional urban schools for urban minority students in poor neighborhoods, if one looks strictly at test scores, but students in suburban charter schools do no better than those in traditional suburban schools serving a mostly middle-class white population.

=== United States Department of Education study ===
In its Evaluation of the Public Charter Schools Program: Final Report released in 2003, the U.S. Department of Education found that, in the five case study states, charter schools were out-performed by traditional public schools in meeting state performance standards, but noted: &quot;It is impossible to know from this study whether that is because of the performance of the schools, the prior achievement of the students, or some other factor.&quot;

=== American Federation of Teachers study ===
A 2004 report by the American Federation of Teachers, a teachers&#x27; union, stated that students attending charter schools tied to school boards do not fare any better or worse statistically in reading and math scores than students attending public schools. This report was based on a study conducted as part of the National Assessment of Educational Progress in 2003. The study included a sample of 6000 4th grade pupils and was the first national comparison of test scores among children in charter schools and regular public schools. Rod Paige, the U.S. Secretary of Education from 2001 to 2005, issued a statement saying (among other things) that, &quot;according to the authors of the data the Times cites, differences between charter and regular public schools in achievement test scores vanish when examined by race or ethnicity.&quot; Additionally, a number of prominent research experts called into question the usefulness of the findings and the interpretation of the data in an advertisement funded by a pro-charter group. Harvard economist Caroline Hoxby also criticized the report and the sample data, saying &quot;An analysis of charter schools that is statistically meaningful requires larger numbers of students.&quot;

=== National Bureau of Economic Research study ===

In 2004, the National Bureau of Economic Research found data that suggested charter schools increased competition in a given jurisdiction, thus improving the quality of traditional public schools (noncharters) in the area. Using end-of-year test scores for grades three through eight from North Carolina&#x27;s state testing program, researchers found that charter school competition raised the composite test scores in district schools, even though the students leaving district schools for the charters tended to have above average test scores. The introduction of charter schools in the state caused an approximate one percent increase in the score, which constitutes about one quarter of the average yearly growth. The gain was roughly two to five times greater than the gain from decreasing the student-faculty ratio by 1. This research could partially explain how other studies have found a small significant difference in comparing educational outcomes between charter and traditional public schools. It may be that in some cases, charter schools actually improve other public schools by raising educational standards in the area.
=== Caroline Hoxby studies ===

A 2000 paper by Caroline Hoxby found that certain charter school students did better than public school students, although this advantage was found only &quot;among white non-Hispanics, males, and students who have a parent with at least a high school diploma&quot;. 

Hoxby released a follow-up paper in 2004 with Jonah Rockoff, assistant professor of economics and finance at the Columbia Graduate School of Business, claiming to have again found that charter school students did better than public school students. This second study compared charter school students &quot;to the schools that their students would most likely otherwise attend: the nearest regular public school with a similar racial composition.&quot; It reported that the students in charter schools performed better in both math and reading. It also reported that the longer the charter school had been in operation, the more favorably its students compared.

The paper was the subject of controversy in 2005 when Princeton assistant professor Jesse Rothstein was unable to replicate her results. Hoxby&#x27;s methodology in this study has also been criticized by Lawrence Mishel, who argued that Hoxby&#x27;s &quot;assessment of school outcomes is based on the share of students who are proficient at reading or math but not the average test score of the students. That&#x27;s like knowing the poverty rate but not the average income of a community—useful but incomplete.&quot; How representative the study is has also been criticized, as the study is only of students in Chicago.

=== Learning gains studies ===

A common approach in education evaluation research is to compare the learning gains of individual students in charter schools to their gains when they were in traditional public schools. Thus, in effect, each student acts as his/her own control to assess the impact of charter schools. A few selected examples of this work find that charter schools on average outperform the traditional public schools that supplied students, at least after the charter school had been in operation for a few years. A possible limitation of this type of study is that it does not automatically distinguish between possible benefits of how the school operates (e.g. school structure) and possible peer effects, that is, effects of students on each other. At the same time, there appears to be a wide variation in the effectiveness of individual charter schools.

=== Meta-analyses ===

A report by the National Alliance for Public Charter Schools, released in July 2005 and updated in October 2006, looked at twenty-six studies that make some attempt to look at change over time in charter school student or school performance. Twelve of these find that overall gains in charter schools were larger than other public schools; four find charter schools&#x27; gains higher in certain significant categories of schools, such as elementary schools, high schools, or schools serving at risk students; six find comparable gains in charter and traditional public schools; and, four find that charter schools&#x27; overall gains lagged behind. The study also looks at whether individual charter schools improve their performance with age (e.g. after overcoming start-up challenges). Of these, five of seven studies find that as charter schools mature, they improve. The other two find no significant differences between older and younger charter schools.

A 2006 synthesis of findings conducted by Vanderbilt University indicates that solid conclusions cannot be drawn from the existing studies, due to their methodological shortcomings and conflicting results, and proposes standards for future meta-analyses.

=== National Center for Education Statistics study ===

A study released on August 22, 2006, by the National Center for Education Statistics (NCES) found that students in charter schools performed several points worse than students in traditional public schools in both reading and math on the National Assessment of Educational Progress test. Some proponents consider this the best study as they believe by incorporating basic demographic, regional, or school characteristics simultaneously it &quot;...  has shown conclusively, through rigorous, replicated, and representative research, whether charter schools boost student achievement ...&quot;, while they say that in the AFT study &quot;...  estimates of differences between charter schools and traditional public schools are overstated.&quot; The Center for Education Reform argued that its demographic controls were highly unreliable, as the percentage of students receiving free lunches does not correlate well to poverty levels, and some charter schools do not offer free lunches at all, skewing their apparent demographics towards higher income levels than actually occur.

=== Center for Research on Education Outcomes ===
Center for Research on Education Outcomes (CREDO) completed two national reports for 2009 and 2013. The reports were the first detailed national assessments of charter schools. The reports analyzed the impact of charter schools in 26 states and found a steady improvement in charter school quality since 2009.

The authors stated, &quot;On average, students attending charter schools have eight additional days of learning in reading and the same days of learning in math per year compared to their peers in traditional public schools.&quot; Charter schools also have varying impacts on different demographic groups. Black students in charters get an extra seven days of learning in reading. For low-income charter school students the advantage is 14 days of extra learning in reading and 22 days in math. English Language Learner students in charter schools see a 43-day learning advantage over traditional public school students in reading and an extra 36 days advantage in math.

Charter schools showed a significantly greater variation in quality between states and within states. For example, Arizona charter school students had a 29-day disadvantage in math compared to public school students but charter school students in D.C. had a 105-day advantage over their peers in public schools. While the obvious solution to the widely varying quality of charter schools would be to close those that perform below the level of public schools, this is hard to accomplish in practice as even a poor school has its supporters.

==== Criticism and debate ====

Stanford economist Caroline Hoxby criticized the CREDO study, resulting in a written debate with the authors. She originally argued the study &quot;contains a serious statistical mistake that causes a negative bias in its estimate of how charter schools affect achievement,&quot; but after CREDO countered the remarks, saying Hoxby&#x27;s &quot;memo is riddled with serious errors&quot; Hoxby revised her original criticism. The debate ended with a written &quot;Finale&quot; by CREDO that aimed to rebut both Hoxby&#x27;s original and revised criticism.

In 2017, the National Education Policy Center also criticized the methods that CREDO used in its studies. They criticized the CREDO studies for &quot;over-interpreting small effect sizes; failing to justify the statistical assumptions underlying the group comparisons made; not taking into account or acknowledging the large body of charter school research beyond CREDO&#x27;s own work; ignoring the limitations inherent in the research approach they have taken, or at least failing to clearly communicate limitations to readers.&quot;

== Local evaluations of charter schools ==

=== Boston, 2009 ===

A study in the Boston Public Schools (BPS) District published in 2009 compared Boston&#x27;s charter schools to their district school peers as well as Boston&#x27;s pilot schools, which are public schools that have been granted the flexibility to determine their own budgets, staffing, curricula, and scheduling but remain part of the local school district and subject to collectively bargained pay scales and seniority protections. The report performed analyses using both statistical controls and using pilot and charter applicant lotteries.

The results using statistical controls to control for demographic and baseline state test scores found a positive effect among charter schools similar to a year spent in one of Boston&#x27;s selective exam schools, with math scores, for instance, showing positive effects of 0.18 and 0.22 standard deviations for charter middle and high schools respectively compared to an effect of 0.20 and 0.16 standard deviations for exam schools. For pilot schools, the report found that in the middle school grades pilot school students modestly underperform relative to similar students attending traditional BPS schools (-0.05 standard deviations in ELA and -0.07 in math) while showing slightly positive results in the high school grades for pilot schools (0.15 standard deviations for writing and 0.06 for math).

The results using a sub-sample of schools with random lottery results found very large positive effects in both math and ELA scores for charter schools, including 0.16 and 0.19 standard deviations in middle and high school ELA scores respectively and 0.36 and 0.17 standard deviations in middle and high school math scores respectively. Boston&#x27;s pilot schools, however, showed a concerning negative effect in middle school math and ELA and a slightly positive effect in high school.

=== Los Angeles, 2008–2012 ===
CREDO evaluated the impact of charter schools in Los Angeles from 2008 to 2012. The study found that over 48% of Los Angeles charters outperform local public schools in reading and 44% percent of Los Angeles charters outperform local public schools in math. The study concludes they believe not every charter will outperform traditional public schools, but that conditions are well suited for growth.

An evaluation of Los Angeles charter schools from 2002 to 2008, contends that a rapidly diversifying group of schools in the period did not improve charter school student&#x27;s performance relative to their public school peers.

=== New Orleans, 2010–2015 ===

A 2010 case study by the Harvard Business School examined the charter school reform efforts in New Orleans. Following Hurricane Katrina, the district became composed of 70 Recovery School District (RSD) schools managed by the state (including 37 RSD charter schools) and 16 schools managed by the local Orleans Parish School Board (OPSB) (including 12 OPSB charter schools). Charter schools now account for more than 60% of the public schools in New Orleans. RSD Schools were a result of Act 9 of the Louisiana State Legislature passed in 2003 to manage under-performing schools throughout the state.

When evaluating New Orleans&#x27; schools against the 200-point index called the State Performance Index (SPI),19 of the 20 highest-performing non-selective schools were charter schools. Charter schools affiliated with charter management organizations such as KIPP tended to perform better than stand-alone schools. The overall percentage of schools performing below the failing mark of 60 fell from 64% in 2005 to 36% in 2009.

A 2015 study contends that although charter schools may seem to be improving the system overall, these metrics do not take into account race, as many of the underperforming charters primarily educate African-American students. It offers significant concern that current metrics for evaluation are ignoring significant portions of the population and that the media is not taking this into account when considering the impact of charter schools on New Orleans.

=== Massachusetts study, 2014 ===
According to a 2014 study of charter schools in Massachusetts, charter schools performed better in both math and reading than their traditional public school counterparts

=== Texas study, 2020 ===
According to a 2020 study of charter schools in Texas, charter schools had no impact on test scores and adversely affected early-life labor market outcomes.

=== Massachusetts and North Carolina, 2022===
A 2022 study found that charter school openings in Massachusetts and North Carolinahad no impact on student achievement, but caused a reduction in public school enrollment, in particular white enrollment.
===Epic Charter Schools, Oklahoma 2022===
In 2022, the two co-founders of Epic Charter Schools were charged with felony racketeering and embezzlement.

== Policy and practice ==

As more states start charter schools, there is increasing speculation about upcoming legislation. In an innovation-diffusion study surveying education policy experts in fifty states, Michael Mintrom and Sandra Vergari (1997) found that charter legislation is more likely to be considered in states with poor test scores, Republican legislative control, and proximity to other states with high quality charter schools. Legislative enthusiasm, gubernatorial support, interactions with national authorities, and use of permissive charter-law models increase the chances for adopting what they consider stronger laws. He feels union support and restrictive models lead to adoption of what he considers weaker laws. Other barriers to charter expansion include restrictions on the number of charters permissible in a state, lack of state and local funding for facilities and transportation, and a political and philanthropic focus on expanding charters in urban areas rather than in suburban or rural areas.

The threat of vouchers, wavering support for public education, and bipartisan support for charters has led some unions to start charters themselves. Several AFT chapters, such as those in Houston and Dallas, have themselves started charters. In New York City, the United Federation of Teachers operates a charter school serving grades 9–12 in Brooklyn, NY. The National Education Association has allocated $1.5 million to help members start charter schools. Proponents claim that charters offer teachers a measure of empowerment, employee ownership, and governance that might be enhanced by union assistance (Nathan). Former President George W. Bush&#x27;s No Child Left Behind Act also promotes charter schools.

Over two dozen private management companies are attempting to increase their 10 percent share of a &quot;more hospitable and entrepreneurial market&quot; (Stecklow 1997). In the late 1990s Boston-based Advantage Schools Inc., a corporation specializing in for-profit schooling, contracted to run charter schools in New Jersey, Arizona, and North Carolina. In July 2001, Advantage Schools, Inc. was acquired by Mosaica Education. The Education Development Corporation was planning in the summer of 1997 to manage nine nonsectarian charter schools in Michigan, using cost-cutting measures employed in Christian schools.

=== Public opinion ===

Historically, Americans have been evenly split on the idea of charter schools, with a roughly even mix of support versus opposition between 2000 and 2005. There is also widespread sentiment that states should hold charter schools accountable, with 80% thinking so in 2005. However, openness to charter schools has been increasing especially among minority communities who have shifted opinions higher than the national average. A 2011 Phi Delta Kappa International-Gallup Poll reported that public support for charter schools stood at a &quot;decade-high&quot; of 70%.

Charter schools provide an alternative for educators, families, and communities who are dissatisfied with educational quality and school district bureaucracies at noncharter schools. In early 2008, the Friedman Foundation for Educational Choice, a pro-charter organization, conducted two polls in primarily conservative states Idaho and Nevada where they asked parents about their preferences concerning education. In Idaho, only 12% of respondents said that their regular public school was their top choice for the children&#x27;s school. Most preferred private schools over other options. In 2008, polls conducted in the conservative states Georgia and Wyoming found similar results.

The charter approach uses market principles from the private sector, including accountability and consumer choice, to offer new public sector options that remain nonsectarian and non-exclusive. Many people, such as former president Bill Clinton, see charter schools, with their emphasis on autonomy and accountability, as a workable political compromise and an alternative to vouchers. Others, such as former president George W. Bush, see charter schools as a way to improve schools without antagonizing the teachers&#x27; union. Bush made charter schools a major part of his No Child Left Behind Act. Despite these endorsements, a recent report by the AFT has shown charter schools not faring as well as public schools on state administered standardized testing, though the report has been heavily criticized by conservatives like William G. Howell of the Brookings Institution. Other charter school opponents have examined the competing claims and suggest that most students in charter schools perform the same or worse than their traditional public school counterparts on standardized tests.

Both charter school proponents and critics admit that individual schools of public choice have the potential to develop into successful or unsuccessful models. In a May 2009 policy report issued by Education Sector, &quot;Food for Thought: Building a High-Quality School Choice Market&quot;, author Erin Dillon argues that market forces alone will not provide the necessary supply and demand for excellent public schools, especially in low-income, urban neighborhoods that often witness low student achievement. According to Dillon, &quot;In order to pressure all public schools to improve and to raise student achievement overall, school choice reforms need to not just increase the supply of any schools. They need to increase the supply of good schools, and parents who know how to find them.&quot; Drawing lessons from successful food and banking enterprises located in poor, inner-city neighborhoods, the report recommends that policymakers enhance the charter school market by providing more information to consumers, forging community partnerships, allowing for more flexible school financing, and mapping the quality of the education market.

===Parent considerations ===
The growth in the amount and popularity of charter schools has prompted more parents to consider sending their children to charter schools over public schools. According to Shannon Altenhofen, this changes the question from &quot;&#x27;public versus charter school?&#x27; to &#x27;which charter school?&#x27;&quot;.

==== Implications of school choice ====
The concept of school choice views parents as &quot;consumers&quot; with the responsibility of choosing the best possible school for their child. There &quot;is little evidence that parents of different races and social classes value fundamentally different qualities in schools,&quot; but there is evidence that &quot;socioeconomic status, social capital, and education level&quot; can limit the parental choice of schools.

Most parents, regardless of class status, rely on their social network for choosing schools. Higher-income parents &quot;have a greater array of social resources and connections to trust when choosing a school, and making the choice seem almost effortless.&quot; Upper-income parents might have more access to information which guides their choice of charter schools. One survey study of 553 upper-income mostly White parents in Colorado&#x27;s charter schools noted the importance of social networking in their decision to choose charter schools. Of those surveyed &quot;95% of parents reported that they relied on talks with other family members, friends, neighbors, coworkers, or parents.&quot; This study highlighted that upper-income white parents tend to rely greatly on the information given by those in their social networks, but the parents also did their research on &quot;school quality, curriculum, instruction, and other factors to see whether the school is a good fit for their child.

Low income and minority parents, on the other hand, struggle &quot;when it comes to the amount and type of information they can access.&quot; &quot;The many challenges that low-income families face both shape and limit their views of the costs and benefits of various school choice options.&quot; A qualitative study conducted in New York City interviewed parents from two similar performing charter schools, one which was &quot;racially and ethnically diverse&quot; and another which was more &quot;racially and ethnically homogeneous,&quot; to get an &quot;insight&quot; on parent rationale for choosing that particular charter school. Parents from the homogeneously, Black and Latino, low-income charter school tended to choose their charter school primarily as a desperate escape from the &quot;negative experiences&quot; they had faced at traditional public schools. Many of the parents in this charter school heard about the charter school by simply seeing it in their community or by hearing about it from people in their social network. So in this study, the parents used their social network but did not conduct extensive research so what they knew was more limited. Parents from the more economically and racially diverse school chose the charter school because of the school&#x27;s unique qualities which they felt would benefit their child. Parents from this school also heard about it in their social networks, but that particular charter school did more outreach through advertisements. In the diverse charter school, White and Asian parents were more likely to transfer out if they were dissatisfied with the charter school as compared to the other ethnic groups.

==== Optimizing selection ====
One experimental research study asked 14,989 parents from Denver to rank their top schools; the researchers then focused on the top first school and surveyed the parents by asking them which &quot;resource,&quot; out of all the provided resources, had aided them the most in their decision of ranking their first choice school. The researchers then analyzed the quality of the top school chosen based on the Denver Public Schools School Performance Framework (SPF) with the noted resource. Parents who chose higher-rated schools were more likely to have listed two particular sources of school information. One was the &quot;school choice enrollment guide&quot; and the other resource was &quot;parent websites.&quot; The school choice enrollment guide provided parents with a list of &quot;each school&#x27;s SPF rating.&quot; These valuable resources were able to help low-income minority parents choose schools with higher ratings.

=== Debate over funding ===

Nearly all charter schools face implementation obstacles, but newly created schools are most vulnerable. Some charter advocates claim that new charters tend to be plagued by resource limitations, particularly inadequate startup funds. Yet, a few charter schools also attract large amounts of interest and money from private sources such as the Gates Foundation, the Walton Family Foundation, the Broad Foundation, and the NewSchools Venture Fund. Private businesses and foundations, such as Ameritech and the Annenberg Fund, have provided financial support to some charters in assisting with start up costs for new schools.

Although charter advocates recommend the schools control all per-pupil funds, charter advocates claim that their schools rarely receive as much funding as other public schools. Charter schools in California were guaranteed a set amount of district funding that in some districts amounted to $800 per student per year more than traditional public schools received until a new law was passed that took effect in fall 2006. Charter advocates claim that their schools generally lack access to funding for facilities and special program funds distributed on a district basis. Congress and the president allocated $80 million to support charter-school activities in fiscal year 1998, up from $51 million in 1997. Despite the possibility of additional private and non-district funding, a government study showed that charter school may still lag behind traditional public school achievement.

Although charter schools receive less public funding than traditional public schools, a portion of charter schools&#x27; operating costs can come from sources outside public funding (such as private funding in the form of donations). A study funded by the American Federation of Teachers found that in DC charter schools, private funding accounted for $780 per pupil on average and, combined with a higher level of public funding in some charters (mostly due to non-district funding), resulted in considerably higher funding when compared to comparable public schools. Without federal funding, private funding, and &quot;other income&quot;, D.C. charter schools received slightly more on average ($8,725 versus $8,676 per pupil), but that funding was more concentrated in the better funded charter schools (as seen by the median DC charter school funding of $7,940 per pupil). With federal, private, and &quot;other income&quot;, charter school funding shot up to an average of $11,644 versus the district $10,384 per pupil. The median here showed an even more unequal distribution of the funds with a median of $10,333. Other research, using different funding data for DC schools and including funding for school facilities, finds conflicting results.

According to a recent study published in December 2011 by the Center for Education Reform, the national percentage of charter closures were as follows: 42% of charter schools close as a direct result of financial issues, whereas only 19% of charter schools closed due to academic problems. Congress and the president allocated $80 million to support charter-school activities in fiscal year 1998, up from $51 million in 1997. Despite the possibility of additional private and non-district funding, a government study showed that charter school may still lag behind traditional public school achievement.

=== Co-location ===

Co-location or collocation of charter schools in public noncharter school buildings has been practiced in both New York City and Chicago and is controversial. Since students planning to attend charter schools are generally students who would have attended noncharter schools, co-location permits reassigning seating for the same students from one kind of school to the other in the same building, so that, while space might have to be rebuilt, entire schools do not have to be built from the ground up. The cost savings let more charter schools open. Co-location also permits the two kinds of schools to be visible to each other, thereby promoting school reform, especially within families whose children attend both schools in the same building. It may also mean that a government administration responsible for overseeing noncharter public schools loses political turf as it gives up space to independently run charter schools.

== Criticism ==

=== Difficulties with accountability ===

The basic concept of charter schools is that they exercise increased autonomy in return for greater accountability. They are meant to be held accountable for both academic results and fiscal practices to several groups, including the sponsor that grants them, the parents who choose them, and the public that funds them. Charter schools can theoretically be closed for failing to meet the terms set forth in their charter, but in practice, this can be difficult, divisive, and controversial. One example was the 2003 revocation of the charter for Urban Pioneer in the San Francisco Unified School District, which first came under scrutiny when two students died on a school wilderness outing. An auditor&#x27;s report found that the school was in financial disarray and posted the lowest test scores of any school in the district except those serving entirely non-English-speakers. It was also accused of academic fraud, graduating students with far fewer than the required credits. There is also the case of California Charter Academy, where a publicly funded but privately run chain of 60 charter schools became insolvent in August 2004, despite a budget of $100 million, which left thousands of children without a school to attend.

In March 2009, the Center for Education Reform released its latest data on charter school closures. At that time they found that 657 of the more than 5250 charter schools that have ever opened had closed, for reasons ranging from district consolidation to failure to attract students. The study found that &quot;41 percent of the nation&#x27;s charter closures resulted from financial deficiencies caused by either low student enrollment or inequitable funding,&quot; while 14% had closed due to poor academic performance. The report also found that the absence of achievement data &quot;correlates directly with the weakness of a state&#x27;s charter school law. For example, states like Iowa, Mississippi, Virginia and Wyoming have laws ranked either &quot;D&quot; or &quot;F&quot;. Progress among these schools has not been tracked objectively or clearly.&quot; A 2005 paper found that in Connecticut, which it characterized as having been highly selective in approving charter applications, a relatively large proportion of poorly performing charter schools have closed. Under Connecticut&#x27;s relatively weak charter law, only 21 charter schools have opened in all, and of those, five have closed. Of those, 3 closed for financial reasons. Charter school students in Connecticut are funded on average $4,278 less than regular public school students. However the authors of the 2005 study more centrally find that &quot;lobbies and special interest groups that advocate for charter schools, such as the Center for Education Reform, have been effective in conveying a message that strong charter school laws are those that (i) grant the most autonomy to charter schools and (ii) result in large numbers of charter schools. Contrary to these assumptions, we have seen from our research and state evaluations that permissive laws and states with large numbers of charter schools are often less likely to have positive outcomes&quot;.

In a September 2007 public policy report, Andrew Rotherham and Sara Mead of Education Sector offered a series of recommendations to improve charter school quality through increased accountability. Some of their recommendations urged policymakers to: (i) provide more public oversight of charter school authorizers, including the removal of poor-quality authorizers, (ii) improve the quality of student performance data with more longitudinal student-linked data and multiple measures of school performance, and (iii) clarify state laws related to charter school closure, especially the treatment of displaced students.
All but 17% of charter school students show no improvement when compared to a heuristically modeled virtual twin traditional public school. Educational gains from switching to charter schools from public schools have on average been shown to be &quot;small or insignificant&quot; (Zimmer, et al.) and tend to decline over a span of time (Byrnes). Charter schools provided no substantial improvement in students&#x27; educational outcomes that could not be accounted for in a public school setting (Gleason, Clark and Clark Tuttle). Attrition rates for teachers in charter schools have shown annual rates as high as 40%. Students also tend to move from charter schools prior to graduation more often than do students in public schools (Finch, Lapsley and Baker-Boudissa). Charter schools are often regarded as an outgrowth of the Powell Manifesto advocating corporate domination of the American democratic process and are considered to represent vested interests&#x27; attempts to mold public opinion via public school education and to claim a share of this $500–600 billion-dollar industry.

=== Scalability ===

Whether the charter school model can be scaled up to the size of a public noncharter school system has been questioned, when teaching demands more from teachers and many noncharter teachers are apparently unable to teach in the way charters seek, as has been suggested by Arne Duncan, U.S. Secretary of Education, Diane Ravitch, education historian and former assistant U.S. education secretary, Mark Roosevelt, former schools chief for Pittsburgh, Penn., U.S., and Dave Levin, of the KIPP charters However, some, such as Eva Moskowitz of Success Academy Charter Schools, believe that the model can be scaled up.

=== Exploitation by for-profit entities ===
Critics have accused for-profit entities, (education management organizations, EMOs) and private foundations such as the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, the Eli and Edythe Broad Foundation, and the Walton Family Foundation of funding Charter school initiatives to undermine public education and turn education into a &quot;business model&quot; which can make a profit. According to activist Jonathan Kozol, education is seen as one of the biggest market opportunities in America or &quot;the &quot;.

=== Shift from progressive to conservative movement ===

Charters were originally a progressive movement (called the &quot;small schools&quot; movement) started by University of Massachusetts professor Ray Budde and American Federation of Teachers leader Al Shanker to explore best practices for education without bureaucracy. However, some critics argue that the charter movement has shifted into an effort to privatize education and attack teachers&#x27; unions. For example, education historian Diane Ravitch has estimated, as a &quot;safe guess,&quot; that 95% of charters in the United States are non-union and has said that charters follow an unsustainable practice of requiring teachers to work unusually long hours.

=== Better student test scores / Teacher issues ===
A 2004 study done by the Department of Education found that charter schools &quot;are less likely than traditional public schools to employ teachers meeting state certification standards.&quot; A national evaluation by Stanford University found that &quot;students attending charter schools have eight additional days of learning in reading and the same days of learning in math per year compared to their peers in traditional public schools&quot;.

=== Admissions lottery ===

Because demand often exceeds the supply of available seats in charter schools, lotteries are held to determine which students will be admitted. When admission depends on a random lottery, some hopeful applicants may be disappointed. A film about the admission lottery at the Success Academy Charter Schools (then known as Harlem Success Academy) has been shown as &quot;The Lottery&quot;. The 2010 documentary &quot;Waiting for &quot;Superman&quot;&quot; also examines this issue. A lottery, however, ensures those in wealthier districts do not have a better chance of being accepted.

=== Collective bargaining ===

Concern has also been raised about the exemption of charter school teachers from states&#x27; collective bargaining laws, especially because &quot;charter school teachers are even more likely than traditional public school teachers to be beset by the burn-out caused by working long hours, in poor facilities.&quot; , &quot;an increasing number of teachers at charter schools&quot; were attempting to restore collective bargaining rights. Steven Brill, in his book, &quot;Class Warfare: Inside the Fight to Fix America&#x27;s Schools&quot; (2011), changed his position on charter schools and unions. He said that after two years of researching school reform, he understood the complexities. He reversed his view of union leader Randi Weingarten and suggested she run the school system for a city.

=== Racial segregation ===

One study states that charter schools increase racial segregation. A UCLA report points out that most charter schools are located in African-American neighborhoods. However, a recent statistical analysis of racial segregation and performance outcomes in U.S. charter schools notes that studies on race and charter schools often incorrectly confound the inter-dependent variables of race and family income (poverty). Moreover, the authors conclude: &quot;charter schools with a strong academic focus and &quot;no-excuses&quot; philosophy that serve poor black students in urban areas stand as contradictions to the general association between school-level poverty and academic achievement. These very high-poverty, high-minority schools produce achievement gains that are substantially greater than the traditional public schools in the same catchment areas.&quot; This study concludes that &quot;charter schools are also, on average, more racially segregated than traditional public schools,&quot; and state &quot;reducing school segregation and improving the quality of schools serving minority students are both important goals, but they are not the same&quot;.

===Selective admission===

Although charter schools are not allowed to engage in selective admissions tests and are required to use random selection, some charter schools are allowed to interview students or parents, evaluate student records or require an admissions test. This is similar to other selective admission public schools such as Magnet Schools, career and professional academies, or IB programs.

=== Diverting resources from public schools ===
Many public schools receive funding that is at least partly based on the number of enrolled students. As charter schools attract more students from neighboring public schools, those public schools will start to lose funding. &quot;In just one academic year Albany City, N.Y.&#x27;s school district lost $24.9–$26.1 million to charter schools.&quot;  Despite having less students, public schools still have many fixed costs such as heating and cooling leaving public schools with less funds for other services. 

== See also ==

* Education in the United States
* Federal Charter School Program
* Charter School Growth Fund
* &quot;Waiting for Superman&quot;
* &quot;The Lottery&quot;

== References ==
==Bibliography==
* 

==Further reading==
* 9 Billionaires Are About to Remake New York&#x27;s Public Schools – Here&#x27;s Their Story (March 2015). &quot;A &quot;Nation&quot; investigation reveals how a group of hedge funders are about to get exactly what they paid for.&quot;
* Charter schools making big profits for private companies (Aug. 2014), &quot;WTSP Television&quot;
* Study of charter school effectiveness (Oct. 2013), &quot;The Boston Foundation&quot;
* Buckley, Jack and Schneider, Mark. &quot;Charter Schools: Hope or Hype?&quot; (Princeton, PUP, 2007).
* 
* 
* Perez, Shivaun, &quot;Assessing Service Learning Using Pragmatic Principles of Education: A Texas Charter School Case Study&quot; (2000). Applied Research Projects, Texas State University. Paper 76.
* Silverman, Robert Mark. 2012. &quot;The Nonprofitization of Public Education: Implications of Requiring Charter Schools to be Nonprofits in New York.&quot; Nonprofit Policy Forum 3(1).
* Silverman, Robert Mark. 2013. &quot;Making Waves or Treading Water?: An Analysis of Charter Schools in New York State.&quot; Urban Education, 48(2): 257–88.
* 
* The original Wikipedia article listed here is based on the text at this public domain site.

== External links ==
* The Birth and Life of Charter Schools
* A Sum Greater Than the Parts: What States Can Teach Each Other About Charter Schooling
* Food for Thought: Building a High-Quality School Choice Market
* Perspectives on Charter Schools: A Review for Parents. ERIC Digest.
* Charter Schools: An Approach for Rural Education? ERIC Digest.
* Public Charter Schools and Students with Disabilities. ERIC Digest.
* The Importance of Choice (when a charter school means less choice)
* Mississippi Teacher Corps Focus Paper on charter Schools
* US Charter Schools – Charter School Weekly News Connection – archive
* US Charter Schools – Charter Schools Resource Update – archive
* Nation&#x27;s Charter Schools Lagging Behind, U.S. Test Scores Reveal. New York Times
* Massachusetts Charter Public School Association – &quot;Myths and realities About Massachusetts Charter Public Schools.&quot;
* Work Hard. Be Nice. How Two Inspired Teachers Created the Most Promising Schools in America. (2009) by Jay Mathews.
* Democracy Now! Roundtable: Do Charter Schools Worsen Inequality of Two-Tiered Education System, or Help Address It?
* Charter School Fiscal Reality: Dependent on Donations
* Charter School Programs Authorized by the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA Title V-B): A Primer Congressional Research Service
* &quot;The Teachers&#x27; Unions&#x27; Last Stand&quot;, &quot;The New York Times&quot;, May 23, 2010, p. MM32, accessed June 10, 2010.
* Charter Schools news. &quot;Education Week&quot;.
* Charter Schools backgrounder. &quot;Education Week&quot;.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1067825" start="0" end="36" title="Charter schools in the United States" label="Charter schools in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243124" start="41" end="48" title="Primary education in the United States" label="primary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054793" start="52" end="71" title="Secondary education in the United States" label="secondary education"/>
<link wikidata="Q12241709" start="626" end="641" title="charter schools" label="charter schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010769" start="1393" end="1419" title="Orleans Parish School Board" label="New Orleans Public Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q20017412" start="1452" end="1463" title="Specialized school" label="specialized"/>
<link wikidata="Q207137" start="1464" end="1474" title="curriculum" label="curriculum"/>
<link wikidata="Q49000879" start="1703" end="1734" title="charter management organization" label="charter management organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q49000954" start="1738" end="1771" title="education management organization" label="education management organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="1953" end="1962" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q14692571" start="2049" end="2073" title="City Academy High School" label="City Academy High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="2189" end="2200" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="UC Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q35570562" start="2212" end="2228" title="Stephen Sugarman" label="Stephen Sugarman"/>
<link wikidata="Q15142" start="2535" end="2570" title="University of Massachusetts Amherst" label="University of Massachusetts Amherst"/>
<link wikidata="Q4711205" start="2592" end="2606" title="Albert Shanker" label="Albert Shanker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743760" start="2625" end="2656" title="American Federation of Teachers" label="American Federation of Teachers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5571408" start="2818" end="2840" title="Gloria Ladson-Billings" label="Gloria Ladson-Billings"/>
<link wikidata="Q5627828" start="3045" end="3057" title="H-B Woodlawn" label="H-B Woodlawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080794" start="3165" end="3178" title="Public school (government funded)" label="public school"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043978" start="3440" end="3454" title="Carnegie Unit and Student Hour" label="Carnegie Units"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="3497" end="3506" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="3565" end="3575" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="3617" end="3637" title="District of Columbia" label="District of Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="4869" end="4877" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7082395" start="4968" end="4990" title="Oklahoma Supreme Court" label="Oklahoma Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q727002" start="5285" end="5292" title="charter" label="charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q93288" start="5328" end="5336" title="contract" label="contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q813952" start="5777" end="5794" title="stereotype threat" label="stereotype threat"/>
<link wikidata="Q21821391" start="5796" end="5808" title="acting white" label="acting white"/>
<link wikidata="Q918002" start="5823" end="5839" title="cultural capital" label="cultural capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q399541" start="6199" end="6211" title="school board" label="school board"/>
<link wikidata="Q162633" start="6288" end="6296" title="academic" label="academic"/>
<link wikidata="Q861556" start="6442" end="6479" title="United States Department of Education" label="United States Department of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="7208" end="7227" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111510" start="7907" end="7937" title="National Education Association" label="National Education Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612" start="8451" end="8459" title="Arkansas" label="Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="8533" end="8541" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q25344745" start="8712" end="8730" title="Portfolio strategy" label="Portfolio strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="8749" end="8756" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="8959" end="8967" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7787243" start="11288" end="11314" title="Thomas B. Fordham Institute" label="Thomas B. Fordam Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q37038" start="13263" end="13274" title="advertising" label="advertising"/>
<link wikidata="Q18154741" start="13325" end="13349" title="Mountain Heights Academy" label="Mountain Heights Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q219563" start="14044" end="14068" title="University of Washington" label="University of Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="14070" end="14089" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6786822" start="14094" end="14121" title="Mathematica Policy Research" label="Mathematica Policy Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q5122706" start="14548" end="14570" title="Citizens League" label="Citizens League&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743760" start="14602" end="14633" title="American Federation of Teachers" label="American Federation of Teachers"/>
<link wikidata="Q861556" start="14684" end="14714" title="United States Department of Education" label="(U.S. Department of Education)"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="15554" end="15574" title="District of Columbia" label="District of Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="15576" end="15584" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415" start="15586" end="15593" title="Indiana" label="Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="15595" end="15603" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="15605" end="15614" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="15616" end="15621" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q829" start="15626" end="15630" title="Utah" label="Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="15704" end="15710" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="15712" end="15720" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558" start="15722" end="15728" title="Kansas" label="Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546" start="15734" end="15738" title="Iowa" label="Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q861556" start="16376" end="16404" title="U.S. Department of Education" label="U.S. Department of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743760" start="16805" end="16836" title="American Federation of Teachers" label="American Federation of Teachers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5476244" start="17191" end="17200" title="4th grade" label="4th grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q283396" start="17323" end="17332" title="Rod Paige" label="Rod Paige"/>
<link wikidata="Q11079619" start="17343" end="17365" title="Secretary of Education" label="Secretary of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q5045105" start="17838" end="17852" title="Caroline Hoxby" label="Caroline Hoxby"/>
<link wikidata="Q475424" start="18087" end="18123" title="National Bureau of Economic Research" label="National Bureau of Economic Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="18363" end="18384" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5045105" start="19260" end="19274" title="Caroline Hoxby" label="Caroline Hoxby"/>
<link wikidata="Q51843924" start="19559" end="19572" title="Jonah Rockoff" label="Jonah Rockoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q907481" start="19626" end="19662" title="Columbia Business School" label="Columbia Graduate School of Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="20229" end="20238" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q18155143" start="20259" end="20274" title="Jesse Rothstein" label="Jesse Rothstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q6504390" start="20379" end="20394" title="Lawrence Mishel" label="Lawrence Mishel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="20788" end="20795" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q48989785" start="21714" end="21758" title="National Alliance for Public Charter Schools" label="National Alliance for Public Charter Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q29052" start="22702" end="22723" title="Vanderbilt University" label="Vanderbilt University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966994" start="23016" end="23063" title="National Center for Education Statistics" label="National Center for Education Statistics (NCES)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406979" start="23210" end="23253" title="National Assessment of Educational Progress" label="National Assessment of Educational Progress"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24101" end="24142" title="Center for Research on Education Outcomes" label="Center for Research on Education Outcomes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5045105" start="25677" end="25691" title="Caroline Hoxby" label="Caroline Hoxby"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972387" start="26227" end="26259" title="National Education Policy Center" label="National Education Policy Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2215021" start="26832" end="26853" title="Boston Public Schools" label="Boston Public Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q49126" start="29378" end="29401" title="Harvard Business School" label="Harvard Business School"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="29448" end="29459" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q16422" start="29471" end="29488" title="Hurricane Katrina" label="Hurricane Katrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7303003" start="29525" end="29549" title="Recovery School District" label="Recovery School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010769" start="29656" end="29683" title="Orleans Parish School Board" label="Orleans Parish School Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423304" start="30215" end="30219" title="Knowledge Is Power Program" label="KIPP"/>
<link wikidata="Q123266276" start="31559" end="31579" title="Epic Charter Schools" label="Epic Charter Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q304994" start="31768" end="31788" title="Diffusion of innovations" label="innovation-diffusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743760" start="32824" end="32827" title="American Federation of Teachers" label="AFT"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887762" start="32931" end="32960" title="United Federation of Teachers" label="United Federation of Teachers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111510" start="33028" end="33058" title="National Education Association" label="National Education Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="33302" end="33323" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329394" start="33324" end="33348" title="No Child Left Behind Act" label="No Child Left Behind Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5466629" start="33637" end="33657" title="for-profit schooling" label="for-profit schooling"/>
<link wikidata="Q13408402" start="33791" end="33808" title="Mosaica Education" label="Mosaica Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="33930" end="33938" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q867738" start="33980" end="33997" title="Christian schools" label="Christian schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181522" start="34459" end="34474" title="Phi Delta Kappa" label="Phi Delta Kappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q65358" start="34489" end="34500" title="Gallup (company)" label="Gallup Poll"/>
<link wikidata="Q17006226" start="34796" end="34838" title="EdChoice" label="Friedman Foundation for Educational Choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q833495" start="35379" end="35394" title="consumer choice" label="consumer choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049579" start="35443" end="35455" title="nonsectarian" label="nonsectarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="35513" end="35525" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="35700" end="35714" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111510" start="35789" end="35809" title="National Education Association" label="teachers&amp;#x27; union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329394" start="35857" end="35881" title="No Child Left Behind Act" label="No Child Left Behind Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743760" start="35934" end="35937" title="American Federation of Teachers" label="AFT"/>
<link wikidata="Q16226290" start="36113" end="36130" title="William G. Howell" label="William G. Howell"/>
<link wikidata="Q929154" start="36138" end="36159" title="Brookings Institution" label="Brookings Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248822" start="37929" end="37942" title="school choice" label="school choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023385" start="41459" end="41480" title="Denver Public Schools" label="Denver Public Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q655286" start="42360" end="42376" title="Bill &amp;amp; Melinda Gates Foundation" label="Gates Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269313" start="42382" end="42406" title="Walton family" label="Walton Family Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139602" start="42412" end="42428" title="Eli Broad" label="Broad Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745803" start="42507" end="42516" title="Ameritech" label="Ameritech"/>
<link wikidata="Q4769004" start="42525" end="42539" title="Annenberg Foundation" label="Annenberg Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743760" start="43783" end="43814" title="American Federation of Teachers" label="American Federation of Teachers"/>
<link wikidata="Q226995" start="44349" end="44355" title="median" label="median"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="45518" end="45531" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="45536" end="45543" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q2215009" start="46965" end="47002" title="San Francisco Unified School District" label="San Francisco Unified School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020310" start="47406" end="47432" title="California Charter Academy" label="California Charter Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q252739" start="51019" end="51035" title="Lewis F. Powell Jr." label="Powell Manifesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q349922" start="51575" end="51586" title="Arne Duncan" label="Arne Duncan"/>
<link wikidata="Q967762" start="51588" end="51615" title="United States Secretary of Education" label="U.S. Secretary of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q5271548" start="51617" end="51630" title="Diane Ravitch" label="Diane Ravitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6769499" start="51699" end="51713" title="Mark Roosevelt" label="Mark Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423304" start="51788" end="51801" title="Knowledge Is Power Program" label="KIPP charters"/>
<link wikidata="Q5415130" start="51825" end="51838" title="Eva Moskowitz" label="Eva Moskowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q14707388" start="51842" end="51873" title="Success Academy Charter Schools" label="Success Academy Charter Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q49000954" start="52004" end="52037" title="education management organization" label="education management organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q655286" start="52082" end="52115" title="Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation" label="Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139602" start="52121" end="52152" title="Eli and Edythe Broad Foundation" label="Eli and Edythe Broad Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269313" start="52162" end="52175" title="Walton Family" label="Walton Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703223" start="52355" end="52369" title="Jonathan Kozol" label="Jonathan Kozol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4379869" start="52549" end="52569" title="Progressivism in the United States" label="progressive movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7543572" start="52582" end="52616" title="Small schools movement" label="&amp;quot;small schools&amp;quot; movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743760" start="52681" end="52712" title="American Federation of Teachers" label="American Federation of Teachers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4711205" start="52720" end="52730" title="Al Shanker" label="Al Shanker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5271548" start="52963" end="52976" title="Diane Ravitch" label="Diane Ravitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q861556" start="53267" end="53290" title="United States Department of Education" label="Department of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="53461" end="53480" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q14707388" start="53995" end="54026" title="Success Academy Charter Schools" label="Success Academy Charter Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748803" start="54090" end="54101" title="The Lottery (2010 film)" label="The Lottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061346" start="54136" end="54168" title="Waiting for &amp;quot;Superman&amp;quot;" label="Waiting for &amp;quot;Superman&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q452421" start="54431" end="54452" title="collective bargaining" label="collective bargaining"/>
<link wikidata="Q7614513" start="54776" end="54788" title="Steven Brill (law writer)" label="Steven Brill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291716" start="55065" end="55081" title="Randi Weingarten" label="Randi Weingarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703577" start="56669" end="56683" title="Magnet Schools" label="Magnet Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861491" start="56723" end="56734" title="IB Diploma Programme" label="IB programs"/>
<link wikidata="Q861654" start="57315" end="57345" title="Education in the United States" label="Education in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440055" start="57348" end="57378" title="Federal Charter School Program" label="Federal Charter School Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q20714814" start="57381" end="57407" title="Charter School Growth Fund" label="Charter School Growth Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061346" start="57416" end="57436" title="Waiting for &amp;quot;Superman&amp;quot;" label="Waiting for Superman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748803" start="57451" end="57462" title="The Lottery (2010 film)" label="The Lottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897630" start="57650" end="57656" title="The Nation" label="Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7956417" start="57843" end="57858" title="WTSP" label="WTSP Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719452" start="57924" end="57945" title="The Boston Foundation" label="The Boston Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879334" start="59198" end="59223" title="Mississippi Teacher Corps" label="Mississippi Teacher Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q972414" start="60009" end="60039" title="Congressional Research Service" label="Congressional Research Service"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="331699" wikidata="Q3111221" url="?curid=331699" title="Commonwealth Secretary-General">
<text>The Commonwealth secretary-general, formally the secretary-general of the Commonwealth of Nations, is the head of the Commonwealth Secretariat, the central body which has served the Commonwealth of Nations since its establishment in 1965, and responsible for representing the Commonwealth publicly. The Commonwealth secretary-general should not be confused with the head of the Commonwealth.

==Role==
The position was created, along with the Secretariat itself, after the fourteenth Commonwealth Prime Ministers Conference in London in 1965, issued a memorandum describing the role of the Secretary-General:
The headquarters of the secretary-general, as with the Secretariat generally, is Marlborough House, a former royal residence in London, which was placed at the disposal of the Secretariat by Queen Elizabeth II, who was the head of the Commonwealth. However, as the building cannot house all of the Secretariat&#x27;s staff in London, additional space is rented elsewhere in London. From this operational base, a large part of the Secretary-General&#x27;s work involves travelling around the Commonwealth keeping in personal contact with those at the heart of the governments of member states.

The secretary-general receives a salary of nearly £160,000 (2015) and a four‑storey mansion, Garden House, in Mayfair as an official residence.

==Staff and responsibility==
The secretary-general leads the Commonwealth Secretariat, and all Secretariat staff are responsible and answerable to them. They are supported by three deputy secretaries-general, which are elected by the Commonwealth heads of government via the members&#x27; high commissioners in London. Currently, the three deputy secretaries-general are Deodat Maharaj, Gary Dunn and Josephine Ojiambo. Until 2014, only two deputy secretaries-general were appointed along with an assistant secretary-general for corporate affairs. The secretary-general may appoint junior staff at their own discretion, provided the Secretariat can afford it, whilst more senior staff may be appointed only from a shortlist of nominations from the heads of government. In practice, the Secretary-General has more power than this; member governments consult the secretary-general on nominations, and the secretary-general has also at times submitted nominations of his own.

Formally, the secretary-general is given the same rank as a high commissioner or ambassador. However, in practice, their rank is considerably higher. At CHOGMs, they are the equal of the heads of government, except with preference deferred to the longest-serving head of government. At other ministerial meetings, they are considered &quot;primus inter pares&quot;. For the first three years of the job&#x27;s existence the Foreign Office refused to invite the secretary-general to the Queen&#x27;s annual diplomatic reception at Buckingham Palace, much to Arnold Smith&#x27;s irritation, until in 1968 this refusal was over-ridden by the Queen herself.

The Secretary-General was originally required to submit annual reports to the Heads of Government, but this has since been changed to reporting at biennial Commonwealth Heads of Government Meetings (CHOGM). The Secretary-General is held responsible by the Commonwealth&#x27;s Board of Governors in London.

Between 2016 and 2019, the staff of the Commonwealth secretariat declined in number, from 295 to 223.

==Election==
Since the 1993 CHOGM, it has been decided that the secretary-general is elected to a maximum of two four-year terms. The election is held by the assembled heads of government and other ministerial representatives at every other CHOGM. Nominations are received from the member states&#x27; governments, who sponsor the nomination through the election process and are responsible for withdrawing their candidate as they see fit.

The election is held in a Restricted Session of the CHOGM, in which only heads of government or ministerial representatives thereof may be present. The chair of the CHOGM (the head of government of the host nation) is responsible for ascertaining which candidate has the greatest support, through the conduct of negotiations and secret straw polls.

Secretaries-general seeking a second term in office are often elected unopposed. Although this practice was occasionally deemed to be a convention, it was broken by a Zimbabwe-backed bid for Sri Lankan Lakshman Kadirgamar to displace New Zealand&#x27;s Don McKinnon in 2003. At the vote, however, Kadirgamar was easily defeated by McKinnon, with only 11 members voting for him against 40 for McKinnon. In March 2019, the 53 high commissioners, meeting in London, confirmed the unwritten rule allowing secretaries-general to be challenged for a second term.

At the 2011 CHOGM, India&#x27;s Kamalesh Sharma was re-elected to his second term unopposed. Sharma had won the position at the 2007 CHOGM, when he defeated Malta&#x27;s Michael Frendo to replace McKinnon, who had served the maximum two terms.

At the 2015 CHOGM, Patricia Scotland, a former British cabinet minister, was nominated for Commonwealth secretary-general by her native country of Dominica and defeated Antiguan diplomat Sir Ronald Sanders and former deputy secretary-general for political affairs Mmasekgoa Masire-Mwamba of Botswana to become the 6th Commonwealth secretary-general and the first woman to hold the post. She took office on 1 April 2016. Lady Scotland&#x27;s re-election to a second term was challenged at the 2022 Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting but she won a second term, reportedly defeating Jamaican foreign minister Kamina Johnson Smith by a margin of 27 votes to 24. As the CHOGM had been delayed by two years due to the COVID-19 pandemic, Scotland agreed to only serve for two additional years.

At the 2024 CHOGM, Ghanaian foreign minister Shirley Ayorkor Botchwey was elected to succeed Baroness Scotland. She will begin her tenure as Secretary-General on 1 April 2025.

==List of secretaries-general==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3111221" start="4" end="34" title="Commonwealth Secretary-General" label="Commonwealth secretary-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111221" start="49" end="97" title="Commonwealth Secretary-General" label="secretary-general of the Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3954348" start="118" end="142" title="Commonwealth Secretariat" label="Commonwealth Secretariat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="182" end="205" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q460057" start="366" end="390" title="head of the Commonwealth" label="head of the Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q16155639" start="469" end="483" title="1965 Commonwealth Prime Ministers&amp;#x27; Conference" label="the fourteenth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153833" start="484" end="523" title="Commonwealth Prime Ministers Conference" label="Commonwealth Prime Ministers Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q565532" start="690" end="707" title="Marlborough House" label="Marlborough House"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="806" end="818" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q460057" start="832" end="856" title="head of the Commonwealth" label="head of the Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q124184" start="1313" end="1320" title="Mayfair" label="Mayfair"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153728" start="1529" end="1555" title="Commonwealth Deputy Secretary-General" label="deputy secretaries-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247874" start="1582" end="1614" title="Commonwealth heads of government" label="Commonwealth heads of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q123695" start="1637" end="1655" title="High Commissioner (Commonwealth)" label="high commissioners"/>
<link wikidata="Q309477" start="2662" end="2680" title="primus inter pares" label="primus inter pares"/>
<link wikidata="Q358834" start="2746" end="2760" title="Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office" label="Foreign Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q376421" start="2879" end="2891" title="Arnold Smith" label="Arnold Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3458201" start="3133" end="3173" title="Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting" label="Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q581993" start="3485" end="3492" title="term limit" label="maximum"/>
<link wikidata="Q337987" start="4157" end="4163" title="secret ballot" label="secret"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354171" start="4164" end="4174" title="straw poll" label="straw poll"/>
<link wikidata="Q367293" start="4314" end="4324" title="Convention (norm)" label="convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="4345" end="4353" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q206638" start="4380" end="4399" title="Lakshman Kadirgamar" label="Lakshman Kadirgamar"/>
<link wikidata="Q599938" start="4431" end="4443" title="Don McKinnon" label="Don McKinnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153783" start="4743" end="4753" title="Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting 2011" label="2011 CHOGM"/>
<link wikidata="Q144385" start="4768" end="4783" title="Kamalesh Sharma" label="Kamalesh Sharma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153782" start="4864" end="4874" title="Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting 2007" label="2007 CHOGM"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="4893" end="4898" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275788" start="4906" end="4920" title="Michael Frendo" label="Michael Frendo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16827631" start="4988" end="4998" title="Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting 2015" label="2015 CHOGM"/>
<link wikidata="Q194713" start="5000" end="5017" title="Patricia Scotland" label="Patricia Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q784" start="5128" end="5136" title="Dominica" label="Dominica"/>
<link wikidata="Q781" start="5150" end="5158" title="Antigua and Barbuda" label="Antiguan"/>
<link wikidata="Q21062107" start="5172" end="5186" title="Ronald Sanders (diplomat)" label="Ronald Sanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153728" start="5198" end="5244" title="Commonwealth Deputy Secretary-General" label="deputy secretary-general for political affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q28027794" start="5245" end="5268" title="Mmasekgoa Masire-Mwamba" label="Mmasekgoa Masire-Mwamba"/>
<link wikidata="Q963" start="5272" end="5280" title="Botswana" label="Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q23640674" start="5473" end="5518" title="2022 Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting" label="2022 Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q28225536" start="5593" end="5613" title="Kamina Johnson Smith" label="Kamina Johnson Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="5699" end="5716" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q123427265" start="5782" end="5792" title="2024 Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting" label="2024 CHOGM"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="5794" end="5802" title="Ghana" label="Ghanaian"/>
<link wikidata="Q26923626" start="5820" end="5844" title="Shirley Ayorkor Botchwey" label="Shirley Ayorkor Botchwey"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="331700" wikidata="Q3825881" url="?curid=331700" title="Bladder stone">
<text>A bladder stone is a stone found in the urinary bladder.

==Signs and symptoms==

Bladder stones are small mineral deposits that can form in the bladder. In most cases bladder stones develop when the urine becomes very concentrated or when one is dehydrated. This allows for minerals, such as calcium or magnesium salts, to crystallize and form stones. Bladder stones vary in number, size and consistency. In some cases bladder stones do not cause any symptoms and are discovered as an incidental finding on a plain radiograph. However, when symptoms do occur, these may include severe lower abdominal and back pain, difficult urination, frequent urination at night, fever, painful urination and blood in the urine. The majority of individuals who are symptomatic will complain of pain which comes in waves. The pain may also be associated with nausea, vomiting and chills.

Bladder stones vary in their size, shape and texture- some are small, hard and smooth whereas others are huge, spiked and very soft. One can have one or multiple stones. Bladder stones are somewhat more common in men who have prostate enlargement. The large prostate presses on the urethra and makes it difficult to pass urine. Over time, stagnant urine collects in the bladder and minerals like calcium start to precipitate. Other individuals who develop bladder stones include those who have had spinal cord injury, paralysis, or some type of nerve damage. When nerves to the back are damaged, the bladder cannot empty, resulting in stagnant urine.

==Causes==
Bladder stones may occur whenever the kidneys, bladder, or ureters become inflamed, which may occur when the urine becomes too concentrated or when the body becomes dehydrated. Minerals such as calcium and magnesium crystallize into the stones, which then can cause such symptoms as lower back or abdominal pain or difficulty with urination. The use of urinary catheters may cause a bladder stone. Individuals who are paralyzed or are unable to adequately pass urine may require the use of small plastic tubes (catheters) placed into the bladder. The use of these tubes may lead to an infection, which irritates the bladder, resulting in stone formation. Finally, a kidney stone may travel down the ureter into the bladder and become a bladder stone. There is some evidence indicating that chronic irritation of the bladder by retained stones may increase the chance of bladder cancer. Urinary schistosomiasis, a disease caused by the digenean trematode &quot;Schistosoma haematobium&quot;, has been implicated in the development of vesical calculi. However, evidence accumulated thus far has not supported this hypothesis.

==Diagnosis==

The diagnosis of bladder stone includes urinalysis, ultrasonography, x rays or cystoscopy (inserting a small thin camera into the urethra and viewing the bladder). The intravenous pyelogram can also be used to assess the presence of kidney stones. This test involves injecting a radiocontrast agent which is passed into the urinary system. X-ray images are then obtained every few minutes to determine if there is any obstruction to the contrast as it is excreted into the bladder. Today, intravenous pyelogram has been replaced at many health centers by CT scans. CT scans are more sensitive and can identify very small stones not seen by other tests.

===Classification===

Urinary stones may be composed of the following substances:
* Calcium oxalate monohydrate (whewellite)
* Calcium oxalate dihydrate (weddellite)
* Calcium phosphate
* Magnesium phosphate
* Ammonium phosphate
* Ammonium magnesium phosphate (struvite)
* Calcium hydroxyphosphate (apatite)
* Uric acid and its salts (urates)
* Cystine
* Xanthine
* Indigotin (rare)
* Urostealith (rare)
* Sulfonamide (rare)

===Jackstone calculus===
Jackstone calculi are rare bladder stones that have an appearance resembling toy jacks. They are almost always composed of calcium oxalate dihydrate and consist of a dense central core and radiating . They are typically light brown with dark patches and are usually formed in the urinary bladder and rarely in the upper urinary tract. Their appearance on plain radiographs and computed tomography in human patients is usually easily recognizable. Jackstones often must be removed via cystolithotomy.

==Prevention==
The best way to prevent bladder stones is to drink plenty of liquids. Juices containing citrate are thought to reduce the risk of stone formation. A study published in the &quot;Clinical Journal of the American Society of Nephrology&quot; indicate orange juice is more effective at preventing stone formation than other citrus juices. Men who have difficulty with urination due to prostate enlargement should seek treatment, however, urinating in a sitting position appears to improve bladder emptying which might decrease the risk of bladder stones forming.

Prevention in newborn children, especially in the first three months of life when most stones begin, is critical. Studies show that feeding newborn infants milk (mother&#x27;s, cow or goat) with no substitutes or supplements until at least the third month has proven successful in preventing most stones.

==Management==
Increasing fluid intake can facilitate the passage of small bladder stones. However, larger stones may require other methods of treatment. Fragmentation of bladder stones can be achieved by use of a cystoscope which is inserted into the bladder. The urologist visualizes the stone and uses ultrasonic energy or laser lithotripsy to cause fragmentation of the stones into small pieces, which are then flushed out of the bladder. This procedure requires anesthesia and may require admission to a hospital. Complications of this treatment include infection and damage to the bladder. Some stones are too large even for cystoscopic treatment and may require open cystotomy, in which an incision is made in the bladder and the stones are removed manually. For children with urinary stones, the evidence supporting treatment options is very weak and high quality trials are necessary to help guide clinical management.

===Cystolithotomy===
Cystolithotomy is a surgical procedure for the removal of bladder stones in the case that one has been deemed too large to pass naturally, such as developed jackstone calculi. This may require open surgery to remove the stone, however robotic cystolithotomy allows for a minimally invasive approach to remove the stone through much smaller incisions than the traditional approach. Most bladder stones can be dealt with by an endoscopic procedure, to avoid the need for a surgical incision.

An open cystolithotomy is performed under general anesthesia as an inpatient procedure. The first step is a cystoscopy to examine the bladder, then an incision is made in the lower abdomen. Once the stone is removed, the bladder is repaired with an absorbable stitch, and a catheter is inserted into the bladder via the urethra. Occasionally it is necessary to gently drip fluid in and out of the bladder for a period, as there is often some bleeding following the procedure. The majority of patients do not have major side effects following cystolithotomy, but it may be followed by a minor burning sensation and light bleeding. More serious side effects include bladder infection, a prolonged need of catheter use, and infection in the surgical incision. Rare side effects may include delayed bleeding requiring removal of clots or further surgery, injury to the urethra causing scar formation, fever and more serious infection requiring a longer hospital stay, and delayed healing of the bladder, which may require a further procedure.

==History==
&quot;Lithoclastic cystotomy&quot; is attributed to Ammonius Lithotomos (stone-cutter) of Alexandria, Egypt. The term &quot;lithotomy&quot; is derived from the same words (λιθοτομία (lithotomia) - stone-cutting). Aulus Cornelius Celsus wrote that Lithotomos developed instruments to break up and extract bladder stones. Celsus gave the first description of lithotomy as performed before and during his time, and the operation has ever since borne his name—the Celsian method.

==Etymology==
Lithiasis (stone formation) in the bladder is called cystolithiasis (), from &quot;&quot; (bladder/cyst) + &quot;&quot; (stone) + &quot;&quot; (disorder).
==See also==
*Ureter stone
*Kidney stone disease

==Other animals==

==References==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3825881" start="2" end="15" title="Bladder stone" label="bladder stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q617079" start="21" end="26" title="calculus (medicine)" label="stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q9382" start="40" end="55" title="urinary bladder" label="urinary bladder"/>
<link wikidata="Q12370" start="314" end="319" title="Salt (chemistry)" label="salts"/>
<link wikidata="Q228172" start="486" end="504" title="incidental finding" label="incidental finding"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610264" start="516" end="526" title="Projectional radiography" label="radiograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q373597" start="696" end="714" title="hematuria" label="blood in the urine"/>
<link wikidata="Q506659" start="1101" end="1121" title="prostate enlargement" label="prostate enlargement"/>
<link wikidata="Q9625" start="1133" end="1141" title="prostate" label="prostate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415275" start="1373" end="1391" title="spinal cord injury" label="spinal cord injury"/>
<link wikidata="Q101991" start="1612" end="1620" title="inflammation" label="inflamed"/>
<link wikidata="Q40924" start="1647" end="1652" title="urine" label="urine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025432" start="1891" end="1908" title="Urinary catheterization" label="urinary catheters"/>
<link wikidata="Q652297" start="2049" end="2057" title="catheter" label="catheter"/>
<link wikidata="Q166231" start="2123" end="2132" title="infection" label="infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q504775" start="2408" end="2422" title="bladder cancer" label="bladder cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q221159" start="2432" end="2447" title="schistosomiasis" label="schistosomiasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q132650" start="2473" end="2480" title="digenea" label="digenea"/>
<link wikidata="Q207547" start="2482" end="2491" title="Trematoda" label="trematode"/>
<link wikidata="Q134582" start="2498" end="2521" title="Schistosoma haematobium" label="Schistosoma haematobium"/>
<link wikidata="Q842424" start="2718" end="2728" title="urinalysis" label="urinalysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q234904" start="2730" end="2745" title="Medical ultrasonography" label="ultrasonography"/>
<link wikidata="Q245341" start="2747" end="2753" title="medical radiography" label="x rays"/>
<link wikidata="Q246090" start="2757" end="2767" title="cystoscopy" label="cystoscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567532" start="2846" end="2867" title="intravenous pyelogram" label="intravenous pyelogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414967" start="2957" end="2970" title="radiocontrast" label="radiocontrast"/>
<link wikidata="Q32566" start="3233" end="3241" title="X-ray computed tomography" label="CT scans"/>
<link wikidata="Q416303" start="3416" end="3443" title="Whewellite" label="Calcium oxalate monohydrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q408544" start="3459" end="3484" title="Weddellite" label="Calcium oxalate dihydrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q426664" start="3500" end="3517" title="Calcium phosphate" label="Calcium phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q723683" start="3520" end="3539" title="Magnesium phosphate" label="Magnesium phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q423820" start="3542" end="3560" title="Ammonium phosphate" label="Ammonium phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q419364" start="3563" end="3591" title="Struvite" label="Ammonium magnesium phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q178397" start="3605" end="3629" title="Apatite" label="Calcium hydroxyphosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q105522" start="3642" end="3651" title="Uric acid" label="Uric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q408626" start="3677" end="3684" title="Cystine" label="Cystine"/>
<link wikidata="Q50980" start="3687" end="3695" title="Xanthine" label="Xanthine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7901059" start="3717" end="3728" title="Urostealith" label="Urostealith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3208529" start="3738" end="3749" title="sulfonamide (chemistry)" label="Sulfonamide"/>
<link wikidata="Q20452" start="3864" end="3869" title="Knucklebones" label="jacks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4267" end="4281" title="Bladder stone#Cystolithotomy" label="cystolithotomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q159683" start="4387" end="4394" title="citric acid" label="citrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q506659" start="4680" end="4700" title="prostate enlargement" label="prostate enlargement"/>
<link wikidata="Q246090" start="5379" end="5389" title="Cystoscopy" label="cystoscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q105650" start="5430" end="5439" title="urology" label="urologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q162564" start="5470" end="5487" title="ultrasound" label="ultrasonic energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6493082" start="5491" end="5508" title="laser lithotripsy" label="laser lithotripsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131130" start="5632" end="5642" title="anesthesia" label="anesthesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q166543" start="6648" end="6666" title="general anesthesia" label="general anesthesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q181600" start="6673" end="6682" title="inpatient" label="inpatient"/>
<link wikidata="Q246090" start="6714" end="6724" title="cystoscopy" label="cystoscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q652297" start="6880" end="6888" title="catheter" label="catheter"/>
<link wikidata="Q9386" start="6926" end="6933" title="urethra" label="urethra"/>
<link wikidata="Q206060" start="7487" end="7491" title="scar" label="scar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4747311" start="7710" end="7729" title="Ammonius Lithotomos" label="Ammonius Lithotomos"/>
<link wikidata="Q21714486" start="7782" end="7791" title="lithotomy" label="lithotomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q312420" start="7871" end="7893" title="Aulus Cornelius Celsus" label="Aulus Cornelius Celsus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8318" end="8330" title="Ureter#Ureteral_stones" label="Ureter stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q178623" start="8332" end="8352" title="Kidney stone disease" label="Kidney stone disease"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="331712" wikidata="Q359878" url="?curid=331712" title="Erasmus of Formia">
<text>Erasmus of Formia, also known as Saint Elmo (died ), was a Christian saint and martyr. He is venerated as the patron saint of sailors and abdominal pain. Erasmus or Elmo is also one of the Fourteen Holy Helpers, saintly figures of Christian religion who are venerated especially as intercessors.

==Documentation of his life==
The &quot;Acts of Saint Elmo&quot; were partly compiled from legends that confuse him with a Syrian bishop Erasmus of Antioch. Jacobus de Voragine in the &quot;Golden Legend&quot; credited him as a bishop at Formia over all the Italian Campania, as a hermit on Mount Lebanon, and a martyr in the Diocletianic Persecution. There appears to be no historical basis for his &quot;passion&quot;.

==Account of life and martyrdom==
Erasmus was Bishop of Formia, Italy. During the persecution against Christians under the emperors Diocletian (284–305) and Maximian Hercules (286–305), he left his diocese and went to Mount Libanus, where he hid for seven years. Around that time, an &quot;angel&quot; was purported to have appeared to him, and counseled him to return to his city.

On the way, he encountered some soldiers who questioned him. Erasmus admitted that he was a Christian and they brought him to trial at Antioch before the emperor Diocletian. After suffering terrible tortures, he was bound with chains and thrown into prison, but an angel appeared and helped him escape.

He passed through Lycia, where he raised up the son of an illustrious citizen. This resulted in a number of baptisms, which drew the attention of the Western Roman Emperor Maximian who, according to Voragine, was &quot;much worse than was Diocletian.&quot; Maximian ordered his arrest and Erasmus continued to confess his faith. 
Angered, Maximian had Erasmus enclosed in a barrel full of protruding spikes and rolled down a hill. His survival is claimed to be the result of the intervention of an angel.
A number of unreliable legends fill Erasmus’ story. Though he was thrown into prison with the intention of letting him die of starvation, Erasmus managed to escape. He was recaptured and tortured in the Roman province of Illyricum, after preaching and converting numerous pagans to Christianity. According to the traditional account, he was disemboweled; his abdomen slit open and his intestines wound around a windlass. This version may have developed from interpreting an icon that showed him with a windlass, signifying his patronage of sailors.

==Veneration and patronage==
Erasmus may have become the patron saint of sailors because he is said to have continued preaching even after a thunderbolt struck the ground beside him. This prompted sailors, who were in danger from sudden storms and lightning, to claim his prayers. The electrical discharges at the mastheads of ships were read as a sign of his protection and came to be called &quot;Saint Elmo&#x27;s Fire&quot;.

Pope Gregory the Great recorded in the 6th century that the relics of Erasmus were preserved in the cathedral of Formia. When the old &quot;Formiae&quot; was razed by the Saracens in 842, the cult of Erasmus was moved to Gaeta. He is currently the patron of Gaeta, Santeramo in Colle and Formia.

There is an altar to Erasmus in the north transept of St. Peter&#x27;s Basilica. A copy of Nicolas Poussin&#x27;s &quot;Martyrdom of St Erasmus&quot; serves as the altarpiece.

The skull of St. Erasmus, venerated as a relic, is purported to be in St. Peter&#x27;s Church in Munich, Germany and some parts of his body are around in Europe

Besides his patronage of mariners, Erasmus is invoked against colic in children, abdominal pain, intestinal ailments and diseases, cramps and the pain of women in labour, as well as cattle pests.

==Gallery==

==See also==
* St. Elmo Hall, a name for some chapter houses of Delta Phi fraternity
* St. Elmo&#x27;s fire, a meteorological phenomenon named after the saint
* List of early Christian saints
* Blessed Peter González, patron of Spanish and Portuguese mariners is also invoked as &quot;San Telmo&quot; or &quot;San Elmo&quot;.

==References==
==External links==

* &quot;The Golden Legend (Saint Erasmus)&quot; – e-text adapted from Wynken de Worde&#x27;s edition of 1527.
* Saint of the Day, June 2: &quot;Erasmus of Formia&quot; at &quot;SaintPatrickDC.org&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q359878" start="0" end="17" title="Erasmus of Formia" label="Erasmus of Formia"/>
<link wikidata="Q359878" start="33" end="43" title="Erasmus of Formia" label="Saint Elmo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="59" end="68" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q43115" start="69" end="74" title="saint" label="saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q107013" start="79" end="85" title="Christian martyrs" label="martyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q28914" start="110" end="122" title="patron saint" label="patron saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q45199" start="126" end="133" title="sailors" label="sailors"/>
<link wikidata="Q183425" start="138" end="152" title="abdominal pain" label="abdominal pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q219014" start="189" end="210" title="Fourteen Holy Helpers" label="Fourteen Holy Helpers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266263" start="282" end="294" title="Intercession" label="intercessors"/>
<link wikidata="Q313460" start="454" end="473" title="Jacobus de Voragine" label="Jacobus de Voragine"/>
<link wikidata="Q129493" start="487" end="500" title="Golden Legend" label="Golden Legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q128086" start="535" end="541" title="Formia" label="Formia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438" start="563" end="571" title="Campania" label="Campania"/>
<link wikidata="Q333711" start="588" end="601" title="Mount Lebanon" label="Mount Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265674" start="623" end="647" title="Diocletianic Persecution" label="Diocletianic Persecution"/>
<link wikidata="Q43107" start="851" end="861" title="Diocletian" label="Diocletian"/>
<link wikidata="Q46768" start="876" end="893" title="Maximian" label="Maximian Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q665487" start="917" end="924" title="diocese" label="diocese"/>
<link wikidata="Q235113" start="1009" end="1014" title="angel" label="angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q18927" start="1424" end="1429" title="Lycia" label="Lycia"/>
<link wikidata="Q842606" start="1556" end="1577" title="Western Roman Emperor" label="Western Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q46768" start="1578" end="1586" title="Maximian" label="Maximian"/>
<link wikidata="Q32047" start="2132" end="2141" title="Illyria" label="Illyricum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373406" start="2322" end="2330" title="windlass" label="windlass"/>
<link wikidata="Q28914" start="2518" end="2530" title="patron saint" label="patron saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q120688" start="2860" end="2882" title="St. Elmo&amp;#x27;s Fire" label="Saint Elmo&amp;#x27;s Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q42827" start="2891" end="2913" title="Gregory the Great" label="Pope Gregory the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q128086" start="3031" end="3037" title="Formia" label="Formia"/>
<link wikidata="Q105763" start="3062" end="3069" title="Saracen" label="Saracen"/>
<link wikidata="Q128089" start="3112" end="3117" title="Gaeta" label="Gaeta"/>
<link wikidata="Q51851" start="3156" end="3174" title="Santeramo in Colle" label="Santeramo in Colle"/>
<link wikidata="Q128086" start="3179" end="3185" title="Formia" label="Formia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12512" start="3242" end="3267" title="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica" label="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q41554" start="3279" end="3294" title="Nicolas Poussin" label="Nicolas Poussin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15711026" start="3352" end="3362" title="altarpiece" label="altarpiece"/>
<link wikidata="Q707645" start="3435" end="3458" title="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Church, Munich" label="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q45199" start="3552" end="3560" title="sailors" label="mariners"/>
<link wikidata="Q13121526" start="3589" end="3594" title="colic" label="colic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3021914" start="3752" end="3765" title="St. Elmo Hall" label="St. Elmo Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q120688" start="3824" end="3844" title="St. Elmo&amp;#x27;s fire" label="St. Elmo&amp;#x27;s fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6617582" start="3898" end="3928" title="List of early Christian saints" label="List of early Christian saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715632" start="3939" end="3953" title="Peter González" label="Peter González"/>
<link wikidata="Q725733" start="4169" end="4184" title="Wynken de Worde" label="Wynken de Worde"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="331715" wikidata="Q41420" url="?curid=331715" title="Borussia Dortmund">
<text>Ballspielverein Borussia 09 e. V. Dortmund, often known simply as Borussia Dortmund () or by its initialism BVB (), or just Dortmund by International fans, is a German professional sports club based in Dortmund, North Rhine-Westphalia. It is best known for its men&#x27;s professional football team, which plays in the Bundesliga, the top tier of the German football league system. 

Founded in 1909 by eighteen football players from Dortmund, they are nicknamed &quot;Die Schwarzgelben&quot; (The Black and Yellow), for the colours used in the club&#x27;s crest. They hold a long-standing rivalry with Ruhr neighbours Schalke 04, against whom they contest the Revierderby. They also contest Der Klassiker with Bayern Munich. Dortmund is the second largest sports club by membership in Germany, with about 218,000 members, making Borussia Dortmund the fifth largest sports club by membership in the world. The club also has a women&#x27;s handball team. Since 1974, Dortmund have played their home games at the Westfalenstadion; the stadium is the largest in Germany, and Dortmund has the highest average attendance of any association football club in the world. The &quot;Yellow Wall&quot;, a standing terrace in the South Stand, is the largest of its kind in Europe, with Dortmund consistently boasting the highest average attendance in world football.

Dortmund is the second most decorated German football team, domestically, they have eight league championships, five DFB-Pokals, and six DFL-Supercups. Internationally, they won the UEFA Champions League in 1997, the European Cup Winners&#x27; Cup in 1966, and the Intercontinental Cup in 1997. In addition, they were runners-up in the Champions League in 2013 and 2024 and UEFA Europa League (formerly the UEFA Cup) in 1993 and 2002.

Under the directorship of Michael Zorc in the 2010s, Dortmund cultivated a reputation for spotting and developing young talent, and have remained focused on developing a youth system. As of 2024, Dortmund had the second most revenue across football clubs in Germany, and the 12th most revenue across all football teams in the world, per Deloitte&#x27;s Football Money League.

==History==
===Foundation and early years===

The club was founded on 19 December 1909 by a group of young men unhappy with the Catholic church-sponsored &quot;Trinity Youth&quot;, where they played football under the guidance of the local parish priest. The priest, Father Dewald was blocked at the door when he tried to break up the organising meeting being held in a room of the local pub, &quot;Zum Wildschütz&quot;. The founders were Franz and Paul Braun, Henry Cleve, Hans Debest, Paul Dziendzielle, Franz, Julius and Wilhelm Jacobi, Hans Kahn, Gustav Müller, Franz Risse, Fritz Schulte, Hans Siebold, August Tönnesmann, Heinrich and Robert Unger, Fritz Weber and Franz Wendt. The name &quot;Borussia&quot; is Latin for Prussia but was taken from Borussia beer from the nearby Borussia brewery in Dortmund. The team began playing in blue and white striped shirts with a red sash, and black shorts. In 1913, they donned the black and yellow stripes for the first time.

Over the next decades the club had only modest success playing in local leagues. They came close to bankruptcy in 1929 when an attempt to boost the club&#x27;s fortunes by signing some paid professional footballers failed miserably and left the team deep in debt. They survived only through the generosity of a local supporter who covered the team&#x27;s shortfall out of his own pocket.

The 1930s saw the rise of the Third Reich, which restructured sports and football organisations throughout the nation to suit the regime&#x27;s goals. &quot;Borussia&quot;&#x27;s president was replaced when he refused to join the Nazi Party, and a couple of members who surreptitiously used the club&#x27;s offices to produce anti-Nazi pamphlets were executed in the last days of the war. The club did have greater success in the newly established Gauliga Westfalen, but would have to wait until after the Second World War to make a breakthrough. It was during this time that Borussia developed its intense rivalry with Schalke 04 of suburban Gelsenkirchen, the most successful side of the era (see &quot;Revierderby&quot;). Like every other organisation in Germany, Borussia was dissolved by the Allied occupation authorities after the war in an attempt to distance the country&#x27;s institutions from its recent Nazi past. There was a short-lived attempt to merge the club with two others – &quot;Werksportgemeinschaft Hoesch&quot; and &quot;Freier Sportverein 98&quot; – as &quot;Sportgemeinschaft Borussia von 1898&quot;, but it was as &quot;Ballspiel-Verein Borussia&quot; (&quot;BVB&quot;) that they made their first appearance in the national league final in 1949.

===First national titles===

Between 1946 and 1963, Borussia featured in the Oberliga West, a first division league which dominated German football through the late 1950s. In 1949, Borussia reached the final in Stuttgart against VfR Mannheim, which they lost 2–3 after extra time. The club claimed its first national title in 1956 with a 4–2 win against Karlsruher SC. One year later, Borussia defeated Hamburger SV 4–1 to win their second national title. After this coup, the three Alfredos (Alfred Preißler, Alfred Kelbassa and Alfred Niepieklo) were legends in Dortmund. In 1963, Borussia won the last edition of the German Football Championship (before the introduction of the new Bundesliga) to secure their third national title.

===Bundesliga debut===
In 1962, the DFB met in Dortmund and voted to establish a professional football league in Germany, to begin play in August 1963 as the Bundesliga. Borussia Dortmund earned its place among the first sixteen clubs to play in the league by winning the last pre-Bundesliga national championship. Runners-up 1. FC Köln also earned an automatic berth. Dortmund&#x27;s Friedhelm Konietzka scored the first-ever Bundesliga goal a minute into the match, which they would eventually lose 2–3 to Werder Bremen.

In 1965, Dortmund won its first DFB-Pokal. In 1966, Dortmund won the European Cup Winners&#x27; Cup 2–1 against Liverpool in extra time, with the goals coming from Sigfried Held and Reinhard Libuda. In the same year, however, the team lost their top position on the Bundesliga by losing four of their last five league games and finishing second, three points behind champions 1860 München, most of whose success came on the strength of the play of Konietzka, recently transferred from Dortmund.

The 1970s were characterised by financial problems, relegation from the Bundesliga in 1972, and the opening of the Westfalenstadion, named after its home region Westphalia in 1974. The club returned to the Bundesliga in 1976.

Dortmund continued to have financial problems through the 1980s. &quot;BVB&quot; avoided being relegated in 1986 by winning a third decisive playoff game against Fortuna Köln after finishing the regular season in 16th place. Dortmund did not have any significant success again until a 4–1 DFB-Pokal win in 1989 against Werder Bremen. It was Horst Köppel&#x27;s first trophy as a manager. Dortmund then won the 1989 DFL-Supercup 4–3 against rivals Bayern Munich.

===Golden age – the 1990s===
After a tenth-place finish in the Bundesliga in 1991, manager Horst Köppel was sacked and manager Ottmar Hitzfeld was hired.

In 1992, Hitzfeld led Borussia Dortmund to a second-place finish in the Bundesliga, and would have won the title had VfB Stuttgart not won their last game to become champions instead.

Along with a fourth-place finish in the Bundesliga, Dortmund made it to the 1993 UEFA Cup final, which they lost 6–1 on aggregate to Juventus. In spite of this result, Borussia walked away with DM25 million under the prize money pool system in place at the time for German sides participating in the Cup. Thanks to the prize money, Dortmund was able to sign players who later brought them numerous honours in the 1990s.

Under the captaincy of 1996 European Footballer of the Year Matthias Sammer, Borussia Dortmund won back-to-back Bundesliga titles in 1995 and 1996. Dortmund also won the DFL-Supercup against Mönchengladbach in 1995 and 1. FC Kaiserslautern in 1996.

In 1996–97 the team reached its first European Cup final. In a memorable match at the Olympiastadion in Munich, Dortmund faced the holders Juventus. Karl-Heinz Riedle put Dortmund ahead, shooting under goalkeeper Angelo Peruzzi from a cross by Paul Lambert. Riedle then made it two with a bullet header from a corner kick. In the second half, Alessandro Del Piero pulled one back for Juventus with a back heel. Then 20-year-old substitute and Dortmund-born Lars Ricken latched onto a through pass by Andreas Möller. Only 16 seconds after coming on to the pitch, Ricken chipped Peruzzi in the Juventus goal from over 20 yards out with his first touch of the ball. With Zinedine Zidane unable to make an impression for Juventus against the close marking of Lambert, Dortmund lifted the trophy with a 3–1 victory. Hitzfeld&#x27;s successful managerial reign then ended, with Nevio Scala being appointed as his successor.

Dortmund then beat Brazilian club Cruzeiro 2–0 in the 1997 Intercontinental Cup final to become world club champions. Borussia Dortmund were the second German club to win the Intercontinental Cup, after Bayern Munich in 1976.

As defending champions, Dortmund reached the Champions League semi-final in 1998. The team was missing key players from the start of the season when they played Real Madrid in the 1998 semi-final. Sammer&#x27;s career was shortened by injury and only played three first team games after the 1997 Champions League win. Lambert had left in November to return to play in Scotland. Möller missed the first leg as did Kohler who missed both games in the tie. Real won the first leg 2–0 at home. Dortmund played better in the second leg, but did not take their chances. The club exited 2–0 on aggregate.

===21st century and Borussia &quot;goes public&quot;===

In October 2000, Borussia Dortmund became the first publicly traded club on the German stock market.

In 2002, Borussia Dortmund won their third Bundesliga title. Dortmund had a remarkable run at the end of the season to overtake Bayer Leverkusen, securing the title on the final day. Manager Matthias Sammer became the first person in Borussia Dortmund history to win the Bundesliga as both a player and manager. In the same season, Borussia lost the final of the 2001–02 UEFA Cup to the Dutch club Feyenoord.

Dortmund&#x27;s fortunes then steadily declined for several years. Poor financial management led to a heavy debt load and the sale of their Westfalenstadion grounds. The situation was compounded by failure to advance in the 2003–04 UEFA Champions League, when the team was eliminated on penalties in the qualifying rounds by Club Brugge. In 2003, Bayern Munich loaned €2 million to Dortmund for several months to pay their payroll. Borussia was again driven to the brink of bankruptcy in 2005, the original €11 value of its shares having plummeted by over 80% on the Frankfurt Stock Exchange.

At this time Hans-Joachim Watzke was appointed CEO and streamlined the club. The response to the crisis included a 20% pay cut for all players. In 2006, in order to reduce debt, the Westfalenstadion was renamed &quot;Signal Iduna Park&quot; after a local insurance company. The naming rights agreement ran until 2021.

Dortmund suffered a miserable start to the 2005–06 season, but rallied to finish seventh. The club was unable gain a place in the UEFA Cup via the Fair Play draw. The club&#x27;s management indicated that the club again showed a profit; this was largely related to the sale of David Odonkor to Real Betis and Tomáš Rosický to Arsenal.

In the 2006–07 season, Dortmund unexpectedly faced serious relegation trouble for the first time in years. Dortmund went through three coaches, and appointed Thomas Doll on 13 March 2007, after dropping to just one point above the relegation zone. Christoph Metzelder also left Borussia Dortmund on a free transfer.

In the 2007–08 season, Dortmund finished 13th in the Bundesliga table, but reached the DFB-Pokal final against Bayern Munich, where they lost 2–1 in extra time. The final appearance qualified Dortmund for the UEFA Cup, because Bayern had already qualified for the Champions League. Thomas Doll resigned on 19 May 2008 and was replaced by Jürgen Klopp.

===Klopp era and return to prominence===

In the 2009–10 season, Klopp&#x27;s Dortmund improved on the season before, finishing fifth in the Bundesliga to qualify for the UEFA Europa League. The team missed an opportunity to qualify for the Champions League when they did not beat eighth-place VfL Wolfsburg and 14th-place SC Freiburg in the final two matches of the campaign.

Entering the 2010–11 season, Dortmund fielded a young and vibrant roster. On 4 December 2010, Borussia became &quot;Herbstmeister&quot; (&quot;Autumn Champion&quot;), an unofficial accolade going to the league leader at the winter break. They did this three matches before the break, sharing the record for having achieved this earliest with Eintracht Frankfurt (1993–94) and 1. FC Kaiserslautern (1997–98). On 30 April 2011, the club beat 1. FC Nürnberg 2–0 at home, while second-place Bayer Leverkusen lost, leaving Dortmund eight points clear with two games to play. This championship equalled the seven national titles held by rivals Schalke 04, and guaranteed a spot in the 2011–12 Champions League group stages.

One year later, Dortmund successfully defended of its Bundesliga title with a win over Borussia Mönchengladbach, again on the 32nd match day. By the 34th and final match day, Dortmund had set a new record with the most points—81—gained by a club in one Bundesliga season. This was surpassed the following season by Bayern Munich&#x27;s 91 points. The club&#x27;s fifth Bundesliga title and eighth German championship overall placed it third in total national titles, allowing the club to wear two stars above its crest in recognition of the team&#x27;s five Bundesliga titles. The club capped its successful 2011–12 season by winning the double for the first time, beating Bayern 5–2 in the final of the DFB-Pokal. Borussia Dortmund are one of four German clubs to win the Bundesliga and DFB-Pokal double, along with Bayern Munich, 1. FC Köln and Werder Bremen. The club was voted Team of the Year 2011 at the annual &quot;Sportler des Jahres&quot; (German Sports Personality of the Year) awards.
Borussia Dortmund ended the 2012–13 season in second place in the Bundesliga. Dortmund played in their second UEFA Champions League final against Bayern Munich in the first ever all-German club final at Wembley Stadium on 25 May 2013, which they lost 2–1.

In the 2013–14 season, Borussia Dortmund won the 2013 DFL-Supercup 4–2 against rivals Bayern Munich. The 2013–14 season started with a five-game winning streak for Dortmund, their best start to a season. Despite a promising start, however, their season saw injuries to several key players, seeing them stoop as low as fourth place in the table, and with a depleted squad could go only as far as the quarter-finals of the Champions League, losing 3–2 on aggregate to Real Madrid. Nevertheless, Dortmund ended their season on a high note by finishing second in the Bundesliga and reaching the 2014 DFB-Pokal final, losing 0–2 to Bayern in extra time. They then began their 2014–15 season by defeating Bayern in the 2014 DFL-Supercup 2–0. However, this victory did not affect the squad&#x27;s solidity in performance at the start of the ensuing season, with Dortmund recording various results such as a 0–1 loss to Hamburger SV and two 2–2 draws against VfB Stuttgart and Bundesliga newcomers Paderborn 07. During the winter, Dortmund fell to the bottom of the table on multiple occasions, but escaped the relegation zone after four consecutive wins in February. On 15 April 2015, Jürgen Klopp announced that after seven years, he would be leaving Dortmund. Four days later, Dortmund announced that Thomas Tuchel would replace Klopp at the end of the season. Klopp&#x27;s final season, however, ended on high note, rising and finishing seventh after facing relegation, gaining a DFB-Pokal final with VfL Wolfsburg and qualifying for the 2015–16 Europa League.

===Post-Klopp era===
In the 2015–16 season, Dortmund started off winning 4–0 against Borussia Mönchengladbach on the opening day, followed by five-straight wins which took them to the top of the Bundesliga. After the eighth matchday, they were surpassed by Bayern Munich following an unlucky draw with 1899 Hoffenheim. Dortmund kept their performances up, winning 24 out of 34 league games and becoming the best Bundesliga runner-up team of all time. In the Europa League, they advanced to the quarter-finals, getting knocked out by a Jürgen Klopp-led Liverpool in a dramatic comeback at Anfield, where defender Dejan Lovren scored a late goal to make it 4–3 to Liverpool and 5–4 on aggregate. In the 2015–16 DFB-Pokal, for the third-straight year, Dortmund made it to the competition final, but lost to Bayern Munich on penalties.

On 11 April 2017, three explosions occurred near the team&#x27;s bus on its way to a Champions League match against AS Monaco at the Signal Iduna Park. Defender Marc Bartra was injured, and taken to hospital. Dortmund lost the game 2–3 to AS Monaco. Dortmund manager Tuchel blamed the loss on the ignorant decision by UEFA. UEFA said that the team made no objection to playing, and that the decision was made in compliance with the club and local law enforcement. In the second leg, Dortmund lost 1–3, leaving the aggregate score at 3–6, causing them to be eliminated from that year&#x27;s UEFA Champions League. On 26 April, Dortmund defeated Bayern Munich 3–2 in Munich to advance to the 2017 DFB-Pokal final, Dortmund&#x27;s fourth consecutive final and fifth in six seasons. On 27 May, Dortmund won the 2016–17 DFB-Pokal 2–1 over Eintracht Frankfurt with the winner coming from a penalty converted by Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang.

Ahead of the 2017–18 season, Thomas Tuchel stepped down as manager. The Dortmund board made a decision to hire Peter Bosz as the new manager and head coach. Although Bosz got off to a record-breaking start in the team&#x27;s first 7 games, what followed was 20 games without a win, after which he was relieved of his staff role. Peter Stöger was announced as the interim coach. During the January window of the same season, Aubameyang and Bartra both left the club. Stöger bought Manuel Akanji of FC Basel for a fee of €21.5 million and Michy Batshuayi on a six-month loan from Chelsea. Stöger coached Dortmund for the rest of the season, granting them a fourth-place finish in the Bundesliga before stepping down at the end of the season.

In the summer of 2018, Dortmund appointed former OGC Nice coach, Lucien Favre as their manager/head coach. After a very busy transfer window for the team, seeing eight new players arrive at the club for the first team squad, Dortmund performed strongly, chasing Bayern Munich for the title race down to the last matchday, narrowly missing out on the league title by two points and earning Lucien Favre a contract extension. A four-part Amazon Prime Video documentary series was created, about the same season, named &quot;Inside Borussia Dortmund&quot;.

The next season, Dortmund announced a few big-name signings with the intent of winning the Bundesliga title. Although they won the DFL Supercup, this was their only silverware of the season. After a scrappy first half of the season, they changed their tactics and made a few more transfers in the January Window. They were eliminated in both the DFB-Pokal and the UEFA Champions League as well. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic in Germany, the season stopped abruptly. Once the season restarted, Dortmund looked better, but their performances were not enough to stop a dominant Bayern Munich side from winning the Bundesliga title. They finished the 2019–20 season in second place after beating RB Leipzig in matchweek 33 due to a brace from Erling Haaland.

Dortmund got off to a rather shaky start in the 2020–21 season. They lost the DFL-Supercup and had an inconsistent set of results in the Champions League and the Bundesliga. After a 5–1 defeat to Stuttgart in Matchday 11, Lucien Favre was relieved of his managerial duties. Assistant manager Edin Terzić was placed as the caretaker for the rest of the season. Under Terzić, Dortmund finished third on the final matchday of the Bundesliga and was eliminated in the quarter-finals of the Champions League in a match against Manchester City. The team then won the DFB-Pokal, defeating RB Leipzig 4–1 in the final.

Marco Rose was appointed manager for the 2021–22 season, with Terzić being appointed as the club&#x27;s new technical director. Rose lead the club to a second-place finish in the league, but was sacked ahead of the 2022–23 season with Terzić being reappointed as manager. Before the final match day of that season, Dortmund were top of the league table, though they later lost the Bundesliga title on goal difference to Bayern Munich after a 2–2 home draw against Mainz.

After selling star player Jude Bellingham to Real Madrid for €103 million, Dortmund had a disappointing Bundesliga campaign in the 2023–24 season, finishing fifth, but experienced more success in the UEFA Champions League, knocking out PSV Eindhoven, Atlético Madrid and PSG in the knockout stages to reach the final for the first time in eleven years, where they lost 2–0 to Real Madrid.

Shortly before the end of the season, BVB management announced that the military weapons manufacturer Rheinmetall would be the future sponsor. The partnership includes the use of high-reach advertising space, marketing rights as well as event and hospitality offers in the stadium and on the club premises and a payment of one million euro per year until 2027 by Rheinmetall. The sponsorship has been heavily criticised by BVB fans.

==Crest==
==Grounds==


===Stadiums===
The Westfalenstadion is the home stadium of Borussia Dortmund, Germany&#x27;s largest stadium and the seventh-largest in Europe. The stadium was named &quot;Signal Iduna Park&quot; after insurance company Signal Iduna purchased the rights to name the stadium until 2021. This name, however, could not be used when hosting FIFA and UEFA events, since these governing bodies have policies forbidding corporate sponsorship from companies that are not official tournament partners. During the 2006 World Cup, the stadium was referred to as &quot;FIFA World Cup Stadium, Dortmund&quot;, while in UEFA club matches, it is known as &quot;BVB Stadion Dortmund&quot;. The stadium currently hosts up to 81,359 spectators (standing and seated) for league matches and 65,829 seated spectators for international matches. For these, the characteristic southern grandstand is re-equipped with seats to conform to FIFA regulations.

In 1974, the Westfalenstadion replaced the Stadion Rote Erde, which is located next door and serves now as the stadium of Borussia Dortmund II. After the increasing popularity of Borussia Dortmund in the 1960s, it became obvious that the traditional ground was too small for the increasing number of Borussia Dortmund supporters. The city of Dortmund, however, was not able to finance a new stadium and federal institutions were unwilling to help. But in 1971, Dortmund was selected to replace the city of Cologne, which was forced to withdraw its plans to host games in the 1974 World Cup. The funds originally set aside for the projected stadium in Cologne were thus re-allocated to Dortmund, and a new stadium became reality.

The Westfalenstadion has undergone several renovations throughout the years to increase the size of the stadium, including an expansion of the stadium for the 2006 World Cup. In 2008, the &quot;Borusseum&quot;, a museum about Borussia Dortmund, opened in the stadium. In 2011, Borussia Dortmund agreed to a partnership with Q-Cells. The company installed 8,768 solar cells on the roof of the Westfalenstadion to generate up to 860,000 kWh per year.

Borussia Dortmund has the highest average attendance of any football club worldwide. In 2014, it was estimated that each of the club&#x27;s home games was attended by around 1,000 British spectators, drawn to the team by its low ticket prices compared to the Premier League.

===Training ground===
Borussia Dortmund&#x27;s training ground and academy base &quot;Hohenbuschei&quot; is located in Brackel, a district of Dortmund. Inside the complex, there are physical fitness and rehabilitation robotics areas, physiotherapy and massage rooms, and remedial and hydrotherapy pools. The facility also includes sauna rooms, steam rooms and weight rooms, classrooms, conference halls, offices for the BVB front office, a restaurant, and a TV studio to interview the BVB professional footballers and coaching staff for &quot;BVB total!&quot;, the channel owned by the club. On the grounds, there are five grass pitches, two of which have under-soil heating, one artificial grass field, three small grass pitches and a multi-functional sports arena. The site covers a total area of . In addition, the club owns a &quot;Footbonaut&quot;, a training robot, which is effectively a training cage.

The training complex and youth performance centre, located in Hohenbuschei, will be expanded in stages until 2021. In addition, the &quot;Sports Business Office&quot; will be entirely rebuilt from scratch. The planned construction, which will cost up to 20 million euros, will make BVB the best-equipped football club in the country with regards to infrastructure.

In the &quot;Strobelallee Training Centre&quot;, the BVB Evonik Football Academy has an outstanding training venue exclusively at its disposal. Among others, the Bundesliga-team used to prepare for their matches on the club&#x27;s former training ground.

==Organisation and finance==

Borussia Dortmund e.V. is represented by its management board and a board of directors consisting of president Dr. Reinhard Rauball, his proxy and vice-president Gerd Pieper, and treasurer Dr. Reinhold Lunow.

Professional football at Dortmund is run by the organisation Borussia Dortmund GmbH &amp; Co. KGaA. This corporation model has two types of participators: at least one partner with unlimited liability and at least one partner with limited liability. The investment of the latter is divided into stocks. The organisation Borussia Dortmund GmbH is the partner with unlimited liability and is responsible for the management and representation of Borussia Dortmund GmbH &amp; Co. KGaA. Borussia Dortmund GmbH is fully owned by the sports club, Borussia Dortmund e.V. This organizational structure was designed to ensure that the sports club has full control over the professional squad.

The stock of Borussia Dortmund GmbH &amp; Co. KGaA was floated on the stock market in October 2000 and is listed in the General Standard of Deutsche Börse AG. Borussia Dortmund GmbH &amp; Co. KGaA became the first and, so far, the only publicly traded sports club on the German stock market. 4.61% of Borussia Dortmund GmbH &amp; Co. KGaA is owned by the sports club, Borussia Dortmund e.V.; 8.24% by Bernd Geske; and 67.24% widely spread shareholdings. Hans-Joachim Watzke is the CEO and Thomas Treß is the CFO of the GmbH &amp; Co. KGaA. Michael Zorc as sporting director is responsible for the first team, the coaching staff, the youth and junior section, and scouting. The supervisory board consists, among others, of politicians Werner Müller and Peer Steinbrück.

According to the 2015 Deloitte&#x27;s annual Football Money League, BVB generated revenues of €262 million during the 2013–14 season. This figure excludes player transfer fees, VAT and other sales-related taxes.

===Current management and board===


==Kits and sponsorship==

Dortmund&#x27;s main advertising partner and current shirt sponsor is Evonik. Since the 2012–13 season, the main equipment supplier has been Puma. The contract is currently valid. The club announced a deal with Opel to be the first-ever sleeve sponsor from the 2017–18 season.

In addition, there are three different levels of partners: &quot;BVBChampionPartner&quot; includes, among others, Opel, bwin, Brinkhoff&#x27;s, Wilo, Hankook and EA Sports; &quot;BVBPartner&quot; includes, among others, MAN, Eurowings, Coca-Cola, Ruhr Nachrichten, REWE and Aral; and &quot;BVBProduktPartner&quot; includes, among others, ofo, Westfalenhallen and TEDi.

Since 2012, Brixental in the Kitzbühel Alps in Austria is a BVB sponsor as well; furthermore, the region is host of one of the annual summer training camps.

===Sponsors===




== Controversy ==
Shortly before the end of the 2023–24 season, BVB management announced that the military weapons manufacturer Rheinmetall would be joining as a sponsor. The BVB fan council criticized the decision and was not previously informed by BVB GmbH. Borussia Dortmund&#x27;s fan department published a statement denying media reports that there was a democratic agreement or even a vote by the fans in connection with the Rheinmetall deal.

Thomas Kessen, spokesman for the Unser Kurve fan alliance, clearly criticized the deal. &quot;Here you have to say, it&#x27;s basically the same mechanism as in Qatar. It&#x27;s sportswashing,&quot; said Kessen. &quot;Rheinmetall is happy to be able to paint a little black and yellow on blood-soaked names. And Aki Watzke is happy about several million in income. It can&#x27;t be beaten in terms of shabbiness.&quot;

Federal minister Robert Habeck (A90/Greens) justified a football club&#x27;s deal with Rheinmetall and said that we live in a dangerous world and that the &quot;understandable reluctance&quot; in public dealings with the arms industry is no longer tenable and correct.

==Charity==
Borussia Dortmund has raised money for charity for various causes. On 17 May 2011, Borussia Dortmund held a charity game for the 2011 Japan earthquake and tsunami against &quot;Team Japan&quot;. Ticket sales from the game and €1 million from Dortmund&#x27;s main sponsor Evonik went to charity for Japan earthquake and tsunami victims. In November 2012, Borussia Dortmund KGaA founded a charitable trust called &quot;leuchte auf&quot;, to give important social projects financial help. The trust&#x27;s logo is a star consisting of the streets which meet at Dortmund&#x27;s Borsigplatz, where the club was founded. On 6 July 2013, Borussia Dortmund held a charity game to raise money for 2013 German flood victims in the German states of Saxony and Saxony-Anhalt.

In March 2020, Borussia Dortmund, Bayern Munich, RB Leipzig, and Bayer Leverkusen, the four German UEFA Champions League teams for the 2019–20 season, collectively gave €20 million to Bundesliga and 2. Bundesliga teams that were struggling financially during the COVID-19 pandemic.

Since 1996, during Advent, Borussia Dortmund players visit the children&#x27;s hospital in Dortmund where the players meet with the patients and give them gifts.

==Players==
===Current squad===


&lt;ref name=&quot;captains24/25&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;








===Out on loan===



===Reserves and Youth Sector===
===Club captains===
Since 1963, 19 players have held the position of club captain for Borussia Dortmund. The first club captain after the introduction of the Bundesliga was Alfred Schmidt, who was captain from 1963 to 1965. The longest-serving captain Michael Zorc, who was club captain from 1988 to 1998, has the distinction of having won the most trophies as captain; he won two Bundesliga titles, one DFB-Pokal, three DFL-Supercups and one UEFA Champions League. 
The current club captain is Emre Can, who took over after Marco Reus stepped down from his role as the club&#x27;s captain for the 2023–24 season.

==Non-playing staff==

===Head coaches===

In July 1935, Fritz Thelen became the club&#x27;s first full-time head coach, but was not available in the first months of the season, forcing Dortmund player and Germany international Ernst Kuzorra to take over instead. In 1966, Willi Multhaup led his side to the European Cup Winners&#x27; Cup, the first German team to win a European trophy. Horst Köppel was the coach to bring major silverware to the club for the first time in over 20 years, winning the DFB-Pokal in 1989.

Ottmar Hitzfeld is the club&#x27;s most successful coach, having won both the Bundesliga and Supercup twice. In 1997, Dortmund had waited for continental success for over 30 years; Hitzfeld crowned his period with an unexpected triumph and won the Champions League. Dortmund won the Intercontinental Cup in 1997 and head coach Nevio Scala became the first and, so far, only non-native speaker to win a major title. In 2001–02, Matthias Sammer, a former BVB player, brought the league title back to Dortmund. In 2008–09, the club approached Mainz 05 head coach Jürgen Klopp. He won the club&#x27;s seventh championship title in 2010–11. In his fourth season, Dortmund won the Bundesliga and the DFB-Pokal to complete the first league and cup double in the club&#x27;s history. Successor Thomas Tuchel won the 2016–17 DFB-Pokal.

On 22 May 2018, Lucien Favre was confirmed as the new head coach of the club for the 2018–19 season. He won the 2019 DFL-Supercup on 3 August 2019.

On 12 December 2020, Dortmund suffered a 5–1 defeat against VfB Stuttgart. Favre was fired the next day.

==Records==
Borussia Dortmund&#x27;s name is attached to a number of Bundesliga and European records:

* The Borussia Dortmund player with the most appearances is Michael Zorc, with 572 in all competitions.
* The Borussia Dortmund player with the most goals is Alfred Preissler, with 177 in all competitions.
* The most goals ever in a UEFA Champions League match (12) occurred when Dortmund beat Legia Warsaw 8–4 in the 2016–17 season.
* Youssoufa Moukoko became the youngest player in Bundesliga history (aged 16 years and 1 day) when he appeared for Borussia Dortmund against Hertha BSC on 21 November 2020.
* Moukoko also became the youngest player in UEFA Champions League history (aged 16 years and 18 days) when he was subbed on for Dortmund against Zenit Saint Petersburg on 8 December 2020.
* Moukoko became both the youngest goalscorer in Bundesliga history and the youngest player to score for Dortmund (aged 16 years and 28 days) after netting against Union Berlin on 18 December 2020.
* Dortmund was on the receiving end of the worst loss ever in a Bundesliga match when they suffered a 12–0 defeat away to Borussia Mönchengladbach on 29 April 1978.
* BVB and Bayern Munich were carded a record of 15 times (3 for Dortmund, 12 for Bayern) in a match played on 7 April 2001.
* The most penalties given in a Bundesliga match was five, in a game played between Borussia Mönchengladbach and Dortmund on 9 November 1965.
* The first goal ever scored in Bundesliga play was by Dortmund&#x27;s Friedhelm Konietzka against Werder Bremen; however, Werder Bremen won 3–2.
* Former Borussia Dortmund striker Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang is one of only three players, the others being Klaus Allofs and Robert Lewandowski, to have scored at least once in ten straight Bundesliga matchdays. He was also the first player ever to score at least once in the first eight matchdays of a Bundesliga season, and formerly held the record for most Bundesliga goals in a single season by a foreign player (31 in 2016–17).

==Honours==
===Regional===
* Oberliga West/West German Championship:
** Winners: 1947–48, 1948–49, 1949–50, 1952–53, 1955–56, 1956–57 &quot;(record)&quot;
** &quot;Runners-up:&quot; 1960–61, 1962–63
* Westphalia Cup:
** Winners: 1947

===Individual trophies===

Ballon d&#x27;Or
* 1996: Matthias Sammer

Golden Boy
* 2011: Mario Götze
* 2020: Erling Haaland
* 2023: Jude Bellingham

==UEFA club coefficient ranking==


==Affiliated clubs==
The following clubs are currently affiliated with Borussia Dortmund:
* Hyderabad
* Buriram United
* Marconi Stallions
* Iwate Grulla Morioka
* Hoa Binh
* BVB International Academy Waterloo
* Aris Thessalonikis
* Persib Bandung

==See also==
* Borussia Dortmund II
* Borussia Dortmund Youth Sector
* List of Borussia Dortmund seasons
* List of world champion football clubs

==References==
==External links==
* Borussia Dortmund on Bundesliga official website
* Borussia Dortmund on UEFA official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q41420" start="0" end="42" title="Borussia Dortmund" label="Ballspielverein Borussia 09 e. V. Dortmund"/>
<link wikidata="Q41420" start="66" end="83" title="Borussia Dortmund" label="Borussia Dortmund"/>
<link wikidata="Q41420" start="108" end="111" title="Borussia Dortmund" label="BVB"/>
<link wikidata="Q41420" start="124" end="132" title="Borussia Dortmund" label="Dortmund"/>
<link wikidata="Q847017" start="181" end="192" title="sports club" label="sports club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295" start="202" end="210" title="Dortmund" label="Dortmund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198" start="212" end="234" title="North Rhine-Westphalia" label="North Rhine-Westphalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q476028" start="285" end="293" title="football club (association football)" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q82595" start="319" end="329" title="Bundesliga" label="Bundesliga"/>
<link wikidata="Q835610" start="351" end="380" title="German football league system" label="German football league system"/>
<link wikidata="Q151993" start="603" end="607" title="Ruhr" label="Ruhr"/>
<link wikidata="Q32494" start="619" end="629" title="FC Schalke 04" label="Schalke 04"/>
<link wikidata="Q659619" start="661" end="672" title="Revierderby" label="Revierderby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911367" start="692" end="705" title="Der Klassiker" label="Der Klassiker"/>
<link wikidata="Q15789" start="711" end="724" title="FC Bayern Munich" label="Bayern Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q15791" start="852" end="891" title="List of sports clubs by membership" label="fifth largest sports club by membership"/>
<link wikidata="Q894278" start="926" end="947" title="Borussia Dortmund Handball" label="women&amp;#x27;s handball"/>
<link wikidata="Q150928" start="1011" end="1027" title="Westfalenstadion" label="Westfalenstadion"/>
<link wikidata="Q476028" start="1123" end="1148" title="Football club (association football)" label="association football club"/>
<link wikidata="Q647080" start="1446" end="1466" title="List of German football champions" label="league championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q150880" start="1473" end="1482" title="DFB-Pokal" label="DFB-Pokal"/>
<link wikidata="Q156973" start="1493" end="1505" title="DFL-Supercup" label="DFL-Supercup"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="1538" end="1559" title="UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q196515" start="1563" end="1567" title="1996–97 UEFA Champions League" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q40241" start="1573" end="1603" title="UEFA Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup" label="European Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q384586" start="1607" end="1611" title="1965–66 European Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup" label="1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q182473" start="1621" end="1641" title="Intercontinental Cup (1960–2004)" label="Intercontinental Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499184" start="1645" end="1649" title="1997 Intercontinental Cup" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q485956" start="1712" end="1716" title="2012–13 UEFA Champions League" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q111309338" start="1721" end="1725" title="2023–24 UEFA Champions League" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q18760" start="1730" end="1748" title="UEFA Europa League" label="UEFA Europa League"/>
<link wikidata="Q268859" start="1776" end="1780" title="1992–93 UEFA Cup" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q838894" start="1785" end="1789" title="2001–02 UEFA Cup" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q598387" start="1818" end="1830" title="Michael Zorc" label="Michael Zorc"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119268" start="1962" end="1974" title="youth system" label="youth system"/>
<link wikidata="Q491748" start="2129" end="2137" title="Deloitte" label="Deloitte"/>
<link wikidata="Q388971" start="2145" end="2166" title="Deloitte Football Money League" label="Football Money League"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="2885" end="2890" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="2895" end="2902" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="3563" end="3574" title="Third Reich" label="Third Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="3763" end="3773" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q323639" start="3981" end="3998" title="Gauliga Westfalen" label="Gauliga Westfalen"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4039" end="4055" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q32494" start="4153" end="4163" title="FC Schalke 04" label="Schalke 04"/>
<link wikidata="Q2765" start="4176" end="4189" title="Gelsenkirchen" label="Gelsenkirchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q659619" start="4238" end="4249" title="Revierderby" label="Revierderby"/>
<link wikidata="Q317683" start="4884" end="4897" title="Oberliga West (1947–63)" label="Oberliga West"/>
<link wikidata="Q531098" start="4982" end="4986" title="1949 German football championship" label="1949"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5009" end="5014" title="1949 German football championship#Final" label="final"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022" start="5018" end="5027" title="Stuttgart" label="Stuttgart"/>
<link wikidata="Q666179" start="5036" end="5048" title="VfR Mannheim" label="VfR Mannheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q314988" start="5133" end="5137" title="1956 German football championship" label="1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q105853" start="5161" end="5174" title="Karlsruher SC" label="Karlsruher SC"/>
<link wikidata="Q51974" start="5210" end="5222" title="Hamburger SV" label="Hamburger SV"/>
<link wikidata="Q531127" start="5240" end="5261" title="1957 German football championship" label="second national title"/>
<link wikidata="Q896072" start="5300" end="5315" title="Alfred Preißler" label="Alfred Preißler"/>
<link wikidata="Q535704" start="5317" end="5332" title="Alfred Kelbassa" label="Alfred Kelbassa"/>
<link wikidata="Q872802" start="5337" end="5353" title="Alfred Niepieklo" label="Alfred Niepieklo"/>
<link wikidata="Q512527" start="5384" end="5388" title="1963 German football championship" label="1963"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5427" end="5455" title="List of German football champions#German football championships Postwar to the Bundesliga (1946–63)" label="German Football Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q82595" start="5492" end="5502" title="Bundesliga" label="Bundesliga"/>
<link wikidata="Q154191" start="5579" end="5582" title="German Football Association" label="DFB"/>
<link wikidata="Q82595" start="5701" end="5711" title="Bundesliga" label="Bundesliga"/>
<link wikidata="Q104770" start="5869" end="5879" title="1. FC Köln" label="1. FC Köln"/>
<link wikidata="Q486573" start="5928" end="5947" title="Friedhelm Konietzka" label="Friedhelm Konietzka"/>
<link wikidata="Q51976" start="6051" end="6064" title="SV Werder Bremen" label="Werder Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q874516" start="6070" end="6074" title="1964–65 DFB-Pokal" label="1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q150880" start="6099" end="6108" title="DFB-Pokal" label="DFB-Pokal"/>
<link wikidata="Q384586" start="6136" end="6166" title="1965–66 European Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup" label="European Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="6179" end="6188" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q509178" start="6231" end="6244" title="Sigfried Held" label="Sigfried Held"/>
<link wikidata="Q340143" start="6249" end="6264" title="Reinhard Libuda" label="Reinhard Libuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q704077" start="6269" end="6282" title="1965–66 Bundesliga" label="the same year"/>
<link wikidata="Q704077" start="6333" end="6343" title="1965–66 Bundesliga" label="Bundesliga"/>
<link wikidata="Q131603" start="6443" end="6455" title="TSV 1860 München" label="1860 München"/>
<link wikidata="Q150928" start="6678" end="6694" title="Westfalenstadion" label="Westfalenstadion"/>
<link wikidata="Q8614" start="6724" end="6734" title="Westphalia" label="Westphalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q310608" start="6952" end="6964" title="SC Fortuna Köln" label="Fortuna Köln"/>
<link wikidata="Q874286" start="7096" end="7100" title="1988–89 DFB-Pokal" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q62089" start="7131" end="7143" title="Horst Köppel" label="Horst Köppel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2017012" start="7200" end="7217" title="1989 DFB-Supercup" label="1989 DFL-Supercup"/>
<link wikidata="Q15789" start="7237" end="7250" title="FC Bayern Munich" label="Bayern Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q570480" start="7330" end="7334" title="1990–91 Bundesliga" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q62089" start="7344" end="7356" title="Horst Köppel" label="Horst Köppel"/>
<link wikidata="Q44478" start="7380" end="7395" title="Ottmar Hitzfeld" label="Ottmar Hitzfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q687247" start="7411" end="7415" title="1991–92 Bundesliga" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q4512" start="7525" end="7538" title="VfB Stuttgart" label="VfB Stuttgart"/>
<link wikidata="Q268859" start="7674" end="7682" title="1992–93 UEFA Cup" label="UEFA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q840485" start="7683" end="7688" title="1993 UEFA Cup final" label="final"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422" start="7726" end="7734" title="Juventus FC" label="Juventus"/>
<link wikidata="Q16068" start="7787" end="7789" title="Deutsche Mark" label="DM"/>
<link wikidata="Q715772" start="8024" end="8033" title="Captain (association football)" label="captaincy"/>
<link wikidata="Q166177" start="8042" end="8073" title="Ballon d&amp;#x27;Or" label="European Footballer of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q57183" start="8074" end="8089" title="Matthias Sammer" label="Matthias Sammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q695357" start="8147" end="8151" title="1994–95 Bundesliga" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q700494" start="8156" end="8160" title="1995–96 Bundesliga" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q156973" start="8184" end="8196" title="DFL-Supercup" label="DFL-Supercup"/>
<link wikidata="Q101959" start="8205" end="8220" title="Borussia Mönchengladbach" label="Mönchengladbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016950" start="8224" end="8228" title="1995 DFB-Supercup" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q8466" start="8233" end="8253" title="1. FC Kaiserslautern" label="1. FC Kaiserslautern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016964" start="8257" end="8261" title="1996 DFB-Supercup" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q196515" start="8267" end="8274" title="1996–97 UEFA Champions League" label="1996–97"/>
<link wikidata="Q2265387" start="8302" end="8320" title="List of European Cup and UEFA Champions League finals" label="European Cup final"/>
<link wikidata="Q947569" start="8337" end="8342" title="1997 UEFA Champions League final" label="match"/>
<link wikidata="Q131610" start="8350" end="8364" title="Olympic Stadium (Munich)" label="Olympiastadion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="8368" end="8374" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q159951" start="8413" end="8430" title="Karl-Heinz Riedle" label="Karl-Heinz Riedle"/>
<link wikidata="Q294565" start="8477" end="8491" title="Angelo Peruzzi" label="Angelo Peruzzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q246724" start="8508" end="8520" title="Paul Lambert" label="Paul Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q624" start="8607" end="8627" title="Alessandro Del Piero" label="Alessandro Del Piero"/>
<link wikidata="Q506919" start="8721" end="8732" title="Lars Ricken" label="Lars Ricken"/>
<link wikidata="Q155919" start="8764" end="8778" title="Andreas Möller" label="Andreas Möller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1835" start="8932" end="8947" title="Zinedine Zidane" label="Zinedine Zidane"/>
<link wikidata="Q505701" start="9136" end="9147" title="Nevio Scala" label="Nevio Scala"/>
<link wikidata="Q188277" start="9217" end="9225" title="Cruzeiro Esporte Clube" label="Cruzeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499184" start="9237" end="9262" title="1997 Intercontinental Cup" label="1997 Intercontinental Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446757" start="9403" end="9407" title="1976 Intercontinental Cup" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q8682" start="9571" end="9582" title="Real Madrid CF" label="Real Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q304338" start="10171" end="10175" title="2001–02 Bundesliga" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q104761" start="10296" end="10312" title="Bayer 04 Leverkusen" label="Bayer Leverkusen"/>
<link wikidata="Q57183" start="10359" end="10374" title="Matthias Sammer" label="Matthias Sammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q909959" start="10518" end="10523" title="2002 UEFA Cup final" label="final"/>
<link wikidata="Q838894" start="10531" end="10547" title="2001–02 UEFA Cup" label="2001–02 UEFA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q134241" start="10566" end="10575" title="Feyenoord" label="Feyenoord"/>
<link wikidata="Q244467" start="10802" end="10831" title="2003–04 UEFA Champions League" label="2003–04 UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q190916" start="10903" end="10914" title="Club Brugge KV" label="Club Brugge"/>
<link wikidata="Q152074" start="11052" end="11062" title="bankruptcy" label="bankruptcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q151139" start="11145" end="11169" title="Frankfurt Stock Exchange" label="Frankfurt Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306609" start="11185" end="11204" title="Hans-Joachim Watzke" label="Hans-Joachim Watzke"/>
<link wikidata="Q150928" start="11354" end="11370" title="Westfalenstadion" label="Westfalenstadion"/>
<link wikidata="Q121323" start="11534" end="11541" title="2005–06 Bundesliga" label="2005–06"/>
<link wikidata="Q738019" start="11621" end="11629" title="2006–07 UEFA Cup" label="UEFA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q160795" start="11768" end="11781" title="David Odonkor" label="David Odonkor"/>
<link wikidata="Q8723" start="11785" end="11795" title="Real Betis" label="Real Betis"/>
<link wikidata="Q29162" start="11800" end="11813" title="Tomáš Rosický" label="Tomáš Rosický"/>
<link wikidata="Q9617" start="11817" end="11824" title="Arsenal F.C." label="Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q27896" start="11834" end="11841" title="2006–07 Bundesliga" label="2006–07"/>
<link wikidata="Q778665" start="11886" end="11896" title="Promotion and relegation" label="relegation"/>
<link wikidata="Q366258" start="11985" end="11996" title="Thomas Doll" label="Thomas Doll"/>
<link wikidata="Q152984" start="12075" end="12094" title="Christoph Metzelder" label="Christoph Metzelder"/>
<link wikidata="Q161072" start="12151" end="12158" title="2007–08 Bundesliga" label="2007–08"/>
<link wikidata="Q520047" start="12231" end="12240" title="2007–08 DFB-Pokal" label="DFB-Pokal"/>
<link wikidata="Q326492" start="12353" end="12361" title="2008–09 UEFA Cup" label="UEFA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q188787" start="12408" end="12424" title="2008–09 UEFA Champions League" label="Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q83106" start="12482" end="12494" title="Jürgen Klopp" label="Jürgen Klopp"/>
<link wikidata="Q121318" start="12546" end="12553" title="2009–10 Bundesliga" label="2009–10"/>
<link wikidata="Q206657" start="12668" end="12686" title="2010–11 UEFA Europa League" label="UEFA Europa League"/>
<link wikidata="Q101859" start="12791" end="12804" title="VfL Wolfsburg" label="VfL Wolfsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q106394" start="12820" end="12831" title="SC Freiburg" label="SC Freiburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q110095" start="12888" end="12895" title="2010–11 Bundesliga" label="2010–11"/>
<link wikidata="Q26278" start="12991" end="13004" title="Herbstmeister" label="Herbstmeister"/>
<link wikidata="Q38245" start="13217" end="13236" title="Eintracht Frankfurt" label="Eintracht Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q15786" start="13315" end="13329" title="1. FC Nürnberg" label="1. FC Nürnberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q485002" start="13554" end="13578" title="2011–12 UEFA Champions League" label="2011–12 Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q101959" start="13681" end="13705" title="Borussia Mönchengladbach" label="Borussia Mönchengladbach"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14038" end="14059" title="List of German football champions#Total German football championships won" label="total national titles"/>
<link wikidata="Q82595" start="14087" end="14096" title="Verdiente Meistervereine" label="two stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q876065" start="14232" end="14238" title="double (association football)" label="double"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484543" start="14285" end="14290" title="2012 DFB-Pokal Final" label="final"/>
<link wikidata="Q703020" start="14298" end="14307" title="2011–12 DFB-Pokal" label="DFB-Pokal"/>
<link wikidata="Q876065" start="14392" end="14398" title="Double (association football)" label="double"/>
<link wikidata="Q104770" start="14426" end="14436" title="1. FC Köln" label="1. FC Köln"/>
<link wikidata="Q51976" start="14441" end="14454" title="SV Werder Bremen" label="Werder Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3633471" start="14619" end="14633" title="2012–13 Borussia Dortmund season" label="2012–13 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q310725" start="14657" end="14667" title="2012–13 Bundesliga" label="Bundesliga"/>
<link wikidata="Q572031" start="14701" end="14728" title="2013 UEFA Champions League final" label="UEFA Champions League final"/>
<link wikidata="Q128468" start="14794" end="14809" title="Wembley Stadium" label="Wembley Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q15123056" start="14855" end="14869" title="2013–14 Borussia Dortmund season" label="2013–14 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q13643411" start="14897" end="14914" title="2013 DFL-Supercup" label="2013 DFL-Supercup"/>
<link wikidata="Q30608" start="15269" end="15285" title="2013–14 UEFA Champions League" label="Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q16354764" start="15439" end="15459" title="2014 DFB-Pokal final" label="2014 DFB-Pokal final"/>
<link wikidata="Q15810955" start="15519" end="15533" title="2014–15 Bundesliga" label="2014–15 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q16636725" start="15561" end="15578" title="2014 DFL-Supercup" label="2014 DFL-Supercup"/>
<link wikidata="Q51974" start="15760" end="15772" title="Hamburger SV" label="Hamburger SV"/>
<link wikidata="Q4512" start="15799" end="15812" title="VfB Stuttgart" label="VfB Stuttgart"/>
<link wikidata="Q160532" start="15838" end="15850" title="SC Paderborn 07" label="Paderborn 07"/>
<link wikidata="Q702233" start="16144" end="16157" title="Thomas Tuchel" label="Thomas Tuchel"/>
<link wikidata="Q15699191" start="16382" end="16403" title="2015–16 UEFA Europa League" label="2015–16 Europa League"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16434" end="16448" title="2015–16 Borussia Dortmund season#Results summary" label="2015–16 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q101959" start="16491" end="16515" title="Borussia Mönchengladbach" label="Borussia Mönchengladbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q22707" start="16708" end="16723" title="TSG 1899 Hoffenheim" label="1899 Hoffenheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q18760" start="16864" end="16877" title="UEFA Europa League" label="Europa League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="16958" end="16967" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q45671" start="16994" end="17001" title="Anfield" label="Anfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q349125" start="17018" end="17030" title="Dejan Lovren" label="Dejan Lovren"/>
<link wikidata="Q17048567" start="17107" end="17124" title="2015–16 DFB-Pokal" label="2015–16 DFB-Pokal"/>
<link wikidata="Q21210605" start="17191" end="17196" title="2016 DFB-Pokal final" label="final"/>
<link wikidata="Q29354759" start="17257" end="17307" title="Borussia Dortmund team bus bombing" label="three explosions occurred near the team&amp;#x27;s bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18740961" start="17324" end="17340" title="2016–17 UEFA Champions League" label="Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q180305" start="17355" end="17364" title="AS Monaco FC" label="AS Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q150928" start="17372" end="17389" title="Westfalenstadion" label="Signal Iduna Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q310625" start="17400" end="17411" title="Marc Bartra" label="Marc Bartra"/>
<link wikidata="Q35572" start="17557" end="17561" title="UEFA" label="UEFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q15789" start="17883" end="17896" title="Bayern Munich" label="Bayern Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q29575055" start="17929" end="17949" title="2017 DFB-Pokal final" label="2017 DFB-Pokal final"/>
<link wikidata="Q21791448" start="18046" end="18063" title="2016–17 DFB-Pokal" label="2016–17 DFB-Pokal"/>
<link wikidata="Q38245" start="18073" end="18092" title="Eintracht Frankfurt" label="Eintracht Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q44977" start="18144" end="18169" title="Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang" label="Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029982" start="18283" end="18293" title="Peter Bosz" label="Peter Bosz"/>
<link wikidata="Q697397" start="18501" end="18513" title="Peter Stöger" label="Peter Stöger"/>
<link wikidata="Q19938984" start="18652" end="18665" title="Manuel Akanji" label="Manuel Akanji"/>
<link wikidata="Q189671" start="18669" end="18677" title="FC Basel" label="FC Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301910" start="18709" end="18724" title="Michy Batshuayi" label="Michy Batshuayi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616" start="18750" end="18757" title="Chelsea F.C." label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q185163" start="18962" end="18970" title="OGC Nice" label="OGC Nice"/>
<link wikidata="Q539920" start="18978" end="18990" title="Lucien Favre" label="Lucien Favre"/>
<link wikidata="Q15789" start="19175" end="19188" title="Bayern Munich" label="Bayern Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740856" start="19349" end="19367" title="Amazon Prime Video" label="Amazon Prime Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q83889294" start="19874" end="19902" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Germany" label="COVID-19 pandemic in Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q702455" start="20159" end="20169" title="RB Leipzig" label="RB Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q28967995" start="20206" end="20220" title="Erling Haaland" label="Erling Haaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q61709977" start="20515" end="20526" title="Edin Terzić (footballer)" label="Edin Terzić"/>
<link wikidata="Q104842984" start="20795" end="20832" title="2021 DFB-Pokal final" label="defeating RB Leipzig 4–1 in the final"/>
<link wikidata="Q66241169" start="21333" end="21348" title="Jude Bellingham" label="Jude Bellingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q8682" start="21352" end="21363" title="Real Madrid" label="Real Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11938" start="21543" end="21556" title="PSV Eindhoven" label="PSV Eindhoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q8701" start="21558" end="21573" title="Atlético Madrid" label="Atlético Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q483020" start="21578" end="21581" title="PSG" label="PSG"/>
<link wikidata="Q96371011" start="21618" end="21623" title="2024 UEFA Champions League final" label="final"/>
<link wikidata="Q8682" start="21683" end="21694" title="Real Madrid" label="Real Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q161544" start="21799" end="21810" title="Rheinmetall" label="Rheinmetall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285066" start="22375" end="22387" title="Signal Iduna" label="Signal Iduna"/>
<link wikidata="Q253414" start="22492" end="22496" title="FIFA" label="FIFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q35572" start="22501" end="22505" title="UEFA" label="UEFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q37285" start="22659" end="22673" title="2006 FIFA World Cup" label="2006 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q628059" start="23130" end="23147" title="Stadion Rote Erde" label="Stadion Rote Erde"/>
<link wikidata="Q865720" start="23209" end="23229" title="Borussia Dortmund II" label="Borussia Dortmund II"/>
<link wikidata="Q365" start="23593" end="23600" title="Cologne" label="Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q166121" start="23662" end="23676" title="1974 FIFA World Cup" label="1974 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q265176" start="24141" end="24148" title="Q-Cells" label="Q-Cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q58803" start="24178" end="24188" title="solar cell" label="solar cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q182098" start="24252" end="24255" title="Kilowatt hour" label="kWh"/>
<link wikidata="Q476028" start="24327" end="24340" title="Football club (association football)" label="football club"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="24526" end="24540" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945309" start="24590" end="24605" title="Training ground (association football)" label="training ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119268" start="24610" end="24617" title="Football academy" label="academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q309252" start="24725" end="24741" title="physical fitness" label="physical fitness"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309766" start="24746" end="24769" title="rehabilitation robotics" label="rehabilitation robotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q186005" start="24777" end="24790" title="physiotherapy" label="physiotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501" start="24827" end="24844" title="hydrotherapy pool" label="hydrotherapy pool"/>
<link wikidata="Q57036" start="24874" end="24879" title="sauna" label="sauna"/>
<link wikidata="Q718955" start="24887" end="24897" title="steam room" label="steam room"/>
<link wikidata="Q12834857" start="24903" end="24914" title="weight room" label="weight room"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207465" start="24929" end="24944" title="conference hall" label="conference hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256565" start="24967" end="24979" title="Front office (sports)" label="front office"/>
<link wikidata="Q178651" start="25014" end="25023" title="interview" label="interview"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111991" start="25032" end="25055" title="professional footballer" label="professional footballer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137636" start="25061" end="25075" title="coaching staff" label="coaching staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310214" start="25172" end="25179" title="Pitch (sports field)" label="pitches"/>
<link wikidata="Q2131878" start="25199" end="25217" title="under-soil heating" label="under-soil heating"/>
<link wikidata="Q311935" start="25223" end="25245" title="Artificial turf" label="artificial grass field"/>
<link wikidata="Q43238" start="25259" end="25264" title="Sports turf" label="grass"/>
<link wikidata="Q641226" start="25296" end="25308" title="sports arena" label="sports arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q11012" start="25408" end="25413" title="robot" label="robot"/>
<link wikidata="Q476028" start="25758" end="25771" title="Football club (association football)" label="football club"/>
<link wikidata="Q9299236" start="26124" end="26128" title="Eingetragener Verein" label="e.V."/>
<link wikidata="Q188628" start="26174" end="26192" title="board of directors" label="board of directors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255921" start="26207" end="26216" title="president (corporate title)" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q881201" start="26221" end="26237" title="Reinhard Rauball" label="Reinhard Rauball"/>
<link wikidata="Q42178" start="26253" end="26267" title="vice-president" label="vice-president"/>
<link wikidata="Q388338" start="26285" end="26294" title="treasurer" label="treasurer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26395" end="26414" title="Kommanditgesellschaft auf Aktien#Germany" label="GmbH &amp;amp; Co. KGaA"/>
<link wikidata="Q17152511" start="26497" end="26516" title="unlimited liability" label="unlimited liability"/>
<link wikidata="Q568338" start="26547" end="26564" title="limited liability" label="limited liability"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196314" start="26611" end="26616" title="stock" label="stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q460178" start="26654" end="26658" title="Gesellschaft mit beschränkter Haftung" label="GmbH"/>
<link wikidata="Q17152511" start="26679" end="26698" title="unlimited liability" label="unlimited liability"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196314" start="27004" end="27009" title="stock" label="stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q475000" start="27070" end="27082" title="stock market" label="stock market"/>
<link wikidata="Q157852" start="27140" end="27154" title="Deutsche Börse" label="Deutsche Börse"/>
<link wikidata="Q847017" start="27252" end="27263" title="sports club" label="sports club"/>
<link wikidata="Q381136" start="27439" end="27452" title="Shareholder" label="shareholdings"/>
<link wikidata="Q484876" start="27481" end="27484" title="chief executive officer" label="CEO"/>
<link wikidata="Q623268" start="27508" end="27511" title="chief financial officer" label="CFO"/>
<link wikidata="Q598387" start="27540" end="27552" title="Michael Zorc" label="Michael Zorc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130252" start="27556" end="27573" title="Director of football" label="sporting director"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137636" start="27613" end="27627" title="coaching staff" label="coaching staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339677" start="27663" end="27671" title="Scout (sport)" label="scouting"/>
<link wikidata="Q759969" start="27677" end="27694" title="supervisory board" label="supervisory board"/>
<link wikidata="Q69646" start="27734" end="27747" title="Werner Müller (politician)" label="Werner Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q49328" start="27752" end="27767" title="Peer Steinbrück" label="Peer Steinbrück"/>
<link wikidata="Q491748" start="27792" end="27800" title="Deloitte" label="Deloitte"/>
<link wikidata="Q388971" start="27815" end="27836" title="Deloitte Football Money League" label="Football Money League"/>
<link wikidata="Q850210" start="27852" end="27859" title="revenue" label="revenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q473513" start="28116" end="28122" title="Evonik Industries" label="Evonik"/>
<link wikidata="Q157064" start="28187" end="28191" title="Puma (brand)" label="Puma"/>
<link wikidata="Q40966" start="28257" end="28261" title="Opel" label="Opel"/>
<link wikidata="Q40966" start="28438" end="28442" title="Opel" label="Opel"/>
<link wikidata="Q21006898" start="28444" end="28448" title="bwin" label="bwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q688668" start="28450" end="28466" title="Dr. Oetker" label="Brinkhoff&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q875633" start="28468" end="28472" title="WILO group" label="Wilo"/>
<link wikidata="Q493094" start="28474" end="28481" title="Hankook Tire" label="Hankook"/>
<link wikidata="Q869106" start="28486" end="28495" title="EA Sports" label="EA Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q35953" start="28544" end="28547" title="MAN SE" label="MAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q168836" start="28549" end="28558" title="Eurowings" label="Eurowings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813" start="28560" end="28569" title="Coca-Cola" label="Coca-Cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q2175052" start="28571" end="28587" title="Ruhr Nachrichten" label="Ruhr Nachrichten"/>
<link wikidata="Q573266" start="28589" end="28593" title="REWE Group" label="REWE"/>
<link wikidata="Q565734" start="28598" end="28602" title="Aral AG" label="Aral"/>
<link wikidata="Q29011371" start="28662" end="28665" title="ofo (company)" label="ofo"/>
<link wikidata="Q516072" start="28667" end="28682" title="Westfalenhallen" label="Westfalenhallen"/>
<link wikidata="Q832996" start="28687" end="28691" title="Tengelmann Group" label="TEDi"/>
<link wikidata="Q383032" start="28706" end="28715" title="Brixental" label="Brixental"/>
<link wikidata="Q592910" start="28723" end="28737" title="Kitzbühel Alps" label="Kitzbühel Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q83290448" start="29500" end="29513" title="sportswashing" label="sportswashing"/>
<link wikidata="Q109943" start="29759" end="29772" title="Robert Habeck" label="Robert Habeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q36204" start="30153" end="30186" title="2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami" label="2011 Japan earthquake and tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q473513" start="30295" end="30301" title="Evonik Industries" label="Evonik"/>
<link wikidata="Q13415210" start="30712" end="30729" title="2013 European floods" label="2013 German flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202" start="30762" end="30768" title="Saxony" label="Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206" start="30773" end="30786" title="Saxony-Anhalt" label="Saxony-Anhalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q83889294" start="31052" end="31069" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Germany" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q83012" start="31091" end="31097" title="Advent" label="Advent"/>
<link wikidata="Q514279" start="31558" end="31572" title="Alfred Schmidt (footballer)" label="Alfred Schmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q598387" start="31637" end="31649" title="Michael Zorc" label="Michael Zorc"/>
<link wikidata="Q82595" start="31766" end="31776" title="Bundesliga" label="Bundesliga"/>
<link wikidata="Q150880" start="31789" end="31798" title="DFB-Pokal" label="DFB-Pokal"/>
<link wikidata="Q156973" start="31806" end="31818" title="DFL-Supercup" label="DFL-Supercup"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="31828" end="31849" title="UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q27694" start="31880" end="31888" title="Emre Can" label="Emre Can"/>
<link wikidata="Q152377" start="31910" end="31920" title="Marco Reus" label="Marco Reus"/>
<link wikidata="Q118905736" start="31983" end="31997" title="2023–24 Borussia Dortmund season" label="2023–24 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q43310" start="32206" end="32213" title="Germany national football team" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q489759" start="32228" end="32241" title="Ernst Kuzorra" label="Ernst Kuzorra"/>
<link wikidata="Q96866" start="32273" end="32287" title="Willi Multhaup" label="Willi Multhaup"/>
<link wikidata="Q384586" start="32308" end="32338" title="1965–66 European Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup" label="European Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q62089" start="32388" end="32400" title="Horst Köppel" label="Horst Köppel"/>
<link wikidata="Q874286" start="32502" end="32511" title="1988–89 DFB-Pokal" label="DFB-Pokal"/>
<link wikidata="Q44478" start="32522" end="32537" title="Ottmar Hitzfeld" label="Ottmar Hitzfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q156973" start="32615" end="32623" title="DFL-Supercup" label="Supercup"/>
<link wikidata="Q196515" start="32634" end="32638" title="1996–97 UEFA Champions League" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="32770" end="32786" title="UEFA Champions League" label="Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q182473" start="32805" end="32825" title="Intercontinental Cup (1960–2004)" label="Intercontinental Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499184" start="32829" end="32833" title="1997 Intercontinental Cup" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q505701" start="32849" end="32860" title="Nevio Scala" label="Nevio Scala"/>
<link wikidata="Q304338" start="32940" end="32947" title="2001–02 Bundesliga" label="2001–02"/>
<link wikidata="Q57183" start="32949" end="32964" title="Matthias Sammer" label="Matthias Sammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q121339" start="33033" end="33040" title="2008–09 Bundesliga" label="2008–09"/>
<link wikidata="Q105254" start="33062" end="33070" title="1. FSV Mainz 05" label="Mainz 05"/>
<link wikidata="Q83106" start="33082" end="33094" title="Jürgen Klopp" label="Jürgen Klopp"/>
<link wikidata="Q110095" start="33149" end="33156" title="2010–11 Bundesliga" label="2010–11"/>
<link wikidata="Q3633469" start="33165" end="33178" title="2011–12 Borussia Dortmund season" label="fourth season"/>
<link wikidata="Q108723" start="33197" end="33207" title="2011–12 Bundesliga" label="Bundesliga"/>
<link wikidata="Q703020" start="33216" end="33225" title="2011–12 DFB-Pokal" label="DFB-Pokal"/>
<link wikidata="Q876065" start="33263" end="33269" title="Double (association football)" label="double"/>
<link wikidata="Q702233" start="33308" end="33321" title="Thomas Tuchel" label="Thomas Tuchel"/>
<link wikidata="Q21791448" start="33330" end="33347" title="2016–17 DFB-Pokal" label="2016–17 DFB-Pokal"/>
<link wikidata="Q539920" start="33366" end="33378" title="Lucien Favre" label="Lucien Favre"/>
<link wikidata="Q64027247" start="33462" end="33479" title="2019 DFL-Supercup" label="2019 DFL-Supercup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4512" start="33559" end="33572" title="VfB Stuttgart" label="VfB Stuttgart"/>
<link wikidata="Q598387" start="33768" end="33780" title="Michael Zorc" label="Michael Zorc"/>
<link wikidata="Q896072" start="33866" end="33882" title="Alfred Preissler" label="Alfred Preissler"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="33941" end="33962" title="UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q193749" start="34002" end="34014" title="Legia Warsaw" label="Legia Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34015" end="34018" title="2016–17 UEFA Champions League group stage#Borussia Dortmund v Legia Warsaw" label="8–4"/>
<link wikidata="Q18740961" start="34026" end="34040" title="2016–17 UEFA Champions League" label="2016–17 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q41896054" start="34044" end="34061" title="Youssoufa Moukoko" label="Youssoufa Moukoko"/>
<link wikidata="Q102720" start="34184" end="34194" title="Hertha BSC" label="Hertha BSC"/>
<link wikidata="Q29108" start="34362" end="34384" title="FC Zenit Saint Petersburg" label="Zenit Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q141971" start="34569" end="34581" title="1. FC Union Berlin" label="Union Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478425" start="34705" end="34716" title="Borussia Mönchengladbach 12–0 Borussia Dortmund" label="12–0 defeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q101959" start="34725" end="34749" title="Borussia Mönchengladbach" label="Borussia Mönchengladbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q15789" start="34778" end="34791" title="FC Bayern Munich" label="Bayern Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q101959" start="34976" end="35000" title="Borussia Mönchengladbach" label="Borussia Mönchengladbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q486573" start="35105" end="35124" title="Friedhelm Konietzka" label="Friedhelm Konietzka"/>
<link wikidata="Q51976" start="35133" end="35146" title="SV Werder Bremen" label="Werder Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q44977" start="35215" end="35240" title="Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang" label="Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q166336" start="35288" end="35300" title="Klaus Allofs" label="Klaus Allofs"/>
<link wikidata="Q151269" start="35305" end="35323" title="Robert Lewandowski" label="Robert Lewandowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q22970620" start="35603" end="35610" title="2016–17 Bundesliga" label="2016–17"/>
<link wikidata="Q317683" start="35643" end="35681" title="Oberliga West" label="Oberliga West/West German Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476498" start="35695" end="35702" title="1947–48 Oberliga" label="1947–48"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476501" start="35704" end="35711" title="1948–49 Oberliga" label="1948–49"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476502" start="35713" end="35720" title="1949–50 Oberliga" label="1949–50"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371193" start="35722" end="35729" title="1952–53 Oberliga" label="1952–53"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476508" start="35731" end="35738" title="1955–56 Oberliga" label="1955–56"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476512" start="35740" end="35747" title="1956–57 Oberliga" label="1956–57"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476519" start="35796" end="35803" title="1960–61 Oberliga" label="1960–61"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274538" start="35805" end="35812" title="1962–63 Oberliga" label="1962–63"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565154" start="35815" end="35829" title="Westphalia Cup" label="Westphalia Cup"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35843" end="35847" title="Westphalia Cup#Pre-1981" label="1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q166177" start="35876" end="35892" title="Ballon d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Ballon d&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q3892681" start="35895" end="35899" title="1996 Ballon d&amp;#x27;Or" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q57183" start="35901" end="35916" title="Matthias Sammer" label="Matthias Sammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588911" start="35918" end="35928" title="Golden Boy (award)" label="Golden Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q104454" start="35937" end="35948" title="Mario Götze" label="Mario Götze"/>
<link wikidata="Q28967995" start="35957" end="35971" title="Erling Haaland" label="Erling Haaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q66241169" start="35980" end="35995" title="Jude Bellingham" label="Jude Bellingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q66816187" start="36125" end="36134" title="Hyderabad FC" label="Hyderabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q252065" start="36137" end="36151" title="Buriram United" label="Buriram United"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894039" start="36154" end="36171" title="Marconi Stallions FC" label="Marconi Stallions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5612030" start="36174" end="36194" title="Iwate Grulla Morioka" label="Iwate Grulla Morioka"/>
<link wikidata="Q109436400" start="36197" end="36205" title="Hoa Binh FC" label="Hoa Binh"/>
<link wikidata="Q105559627" start="36208" end="36242" title="BVB International Academy Waterloo" label="BVB International Academy Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q219926" start="36245" end="36263" title="Aris Thessaloniki F.C." label="Aris Thessalonikis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630834" start="36266" end="36280" title="Persib Bandung" label="Persib Bandung"/>
<link wikidata="Q865720" start="36297" end="36317" title="Borussia Dortmund II" label="Borussia Dortmund II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4946828" start="36320" end="36350" title="Borussia Dortmund Youth Sector" label="Borussia Dortmund Youth Sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213273" start="36353" end="36386" title="List of Borussia Dortmund seasons" label="List of Borussia Dortmund seasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q42405316" start="36389" end="36426" title="List of world champion football clubs" label="List of world champion football clubs"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="331720" wikidata="Q8010051" url="?curid=331720" title="William Gould (naturalist)">
<text>The Rev. William Gould A. M. (1715 – 16 March 1799) was an English cleric and naturalist. He was described by Horace Donisthorpe as &quot;the father of British myrmecology&quot;, the branch of entomology dealing with ants.

==Life and career==
Gould was born at Sharpham Park, Glastonbury, Somerset, son of Davidge Gould, and educated at Exeter College, Oxford, where he matriculated in 1732, aged 17; he gained his B. A. in 1736.

He was afterwards Rector of Stapleford Abbotts in Essex. In May 1774 he was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society

==&quot;An Account of English Ants&quot;==

He is most famous for his book, &quot;An Account of English Ants&quot;, published in London by Andrew Millar in 1747. It was the first scientific paper written on ants, with 109 pages, and brought together all previous observation into a single volume. When it was published it was quite controversial, since Gould, albeit reluctantly, conceded that his observations directly contradicted the Bible, specifically Proverbs 6:6-8, where it was written:
:&quot;Go to the ant, thou sluggard; consider her ways and be wise; which having no chief, overseer, or ruler, provideth her bread in the summer, and gathereth her food in the harvest.&quot;

Gould, however, correctly stated that there was no evidence at all to suggest that any of the British ant species he knew hoarded grain. It is often said he faced criticism from the established church for this, but the story may be apocryphal.

His book remains an important early record in ant observation and the science of myrmecology, even though he only recognised a handful of species, which he categorized as &quot;hill ants&quot;, &quot;jet ants&quot;, &quot;red ants&quot;, &quot;common yellow ants&quot;, and &quot;small black ants&quot;.

His work is divided into four chapters:
*Their different Species and Mechanism
*Their manner of Government, and a Description of their several Queens
*The Production of their Eggs, and Process of the Young
*The incessant Labours of the Workers or common Ants

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8010051" start="0" end="28" title="William Gould (naturalist)" label="The Rev. William Gould A. M."/>
<link wikidata="Q177826" start="67" end="73" title="clergy" label="cleric"/>
<link wikidata="Q484591" start="78" end="88" title="natural history" label="naturalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245828" start="110" end="128" title="Horace Donisthorpe" label="Horace Donisthorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="152" end="159" title="United Kingdom" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q499578" start="160" end="171" title="myrmecology" label="myrmecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q39286" start="193" end="203" title="entomology" label="entomology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7386" start="217" end="220" title="ant" label="ant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3160539" start="262" end="270" title="Sharpham" label="Sharpham"/>
<link wikidata="Q210891" start="277" end="288" title="Glastonbury" label="Glastonbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q23157" start="290" end="298" title="Somerset" label="Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q81173" start="338" end="352" title="Exeter College, Oxford" label="Exeter College"/>
<link wikidata="Q34217" start="354" end="360" title="Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="416" end="421" title="Bachelor of Arts" label="B. A."/>
<link wikidata="Q1920623" start="460" end="478" title="Stapleford Abbotts" label="Stapleford Abbotts"/>
<link wikidata="Q23240" start="482" end="487" title="Essex" label="Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q15631401" start="518" end="545" title="Fellow of the Royal Society" label="Fellow of the Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="676" end="682" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758020" start="686" end="699" title="Andrew Millar" label="Andrew Millar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7386" start="754" end="757" title="ant" label="ant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="984" end="989" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q4579" start="1004" end="1012" title="Book of Proverbs" label="Proverbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6606031" start="1328" end="1339" title="List of ants of Great Britain" label="British ant"/>
<link wikidata="Q12117" start="1364" end="1369" title="Cereal" label="grain"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="1416" end="1434" title="Church of England" label="established church"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="331725" wikidata="Q702259" url="?curid=331725" title="Elberfeld">
<text>Elberfeld is a municipal subdivision of the German city of Wuppertal; it was an independent town until 1929.

==History==
The first official mentioning of the geographic area on the banks of today&#x27;s Wupper River as &quot;elverfelde&quot; was in a document of 1161. Etymologically, &quot;elver&quot; is derived from the old Low German word for &quot;river.&quot; (See etymology of the name of the German Elbe River; cf. North Germanic &quot;älv&quot;.) Therefore, the original meaning of &quot;elverfelde&quot; can be understood as &quot;field on the river.&quot; Elverfelde received its town charter in 1610.

In 1726, Elias Eller and a pastor, Daniel Schleyermacher, founded a Philadelphian Society. They later moved to Ronsdorf in the Duchy of Berg, becoming the Zionites, a fringe sect.

In 1826 Friedrich Harkort, a famous German industrialist and politician, had a type of suspension railway built as a trial and ran it on the grounds of what is today the tax office at Elberfeld. In fact the railway, the Schwebebahn Wuppertal, was eventually built between Oberbarmen and Vohwinkel and runs through Elberfeld.

In 1888 the district of Sonnborn was incorporated into Elberfeld. In 1929 the towns of Barmen, Elberfeld, Vohwinkel, Cronenberg and Ronsdorf became a municipal entity officially called &quot;Barmen-Elberfeld;&quot; in the same year, the unified city administration through a vote of its council members decided to rename the newly incorporated city &quot;Wuppertal.&quot; This took place in 1930. Today Elberfeld is the largest municipal subdivision of Wuppertal.

==Notable people==

*Greta Bösel (1908–1947), concentration camp guard executed for war crimes
*Arno Breker, sculptor
*Heinz Thilo, SS war criminal
*Werner Eggerath, East German politician
*Karl Germer, Outer Head of Ordo Templi Orientis (1947–1962)
*Will Glahé, accordionist, composer, and bandleader
*Carl Grossberg, artist
*Theodor Hausmann (1880–1972), composer
*August von der Heydt (1801–1874), economist
*Eduard von der Heydt (1882–1964), banker
*Walter Kaufmann (physicist), physicist
*Hans Knappertsbusch, conductor
*Erich Koch, Nazi Party Gauleiter of East Prussia, Reichskommissar of Ukraine, convicted war criminal
*Hermann Friedrich Kohlbrugge, minister
*Friedrich Wilhelm Krummacher, minister
*Johann Peter Lange, Protestant theologian
*Else Lasker-Schüler (1869–1945), poet
*Wilhelm Neumann-Torborg, sculptor
*Friedrich Philippi, historian
*Julius Plücker, mathematician and physicist
*Eugene Plumacher (1838–1910), emigrant to the United States, diplomat
*Sigurd Raschèr, saxophonist
*Paul Ortwin Rave, art historian and director of the Berlin National Gallery
*Fritz Roeber (1851–1924), painter
*Sir Hans Wolfgang Singer, economist 
*Johannes Steele (1908–1988), journalist
*Horst Stein (1901–1989), conductor
*Horst Tappert (1923–2008), actor
*Edward Thonen (1827-1854), emigrant to Australia, leader of Eureka Rebellion
*Günter Wand (1912–2002), conductor
*Carl Wirths (1897–1955), politician
*Sulamith Wülfing, artist

==See also==
* Elberfeld system

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q702259" start="0" end="9" title="Elberfeld" label="Elberfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="44" end="50" title="Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107" start="59" end="68" title="Wuppertal" label="Wuppertal"/>
<link wikidata="Q639374" start="204" end="210" title="Wupper" label="Wupper"/>
<link wikidata="Q25433" start="328" end="338" title="Low German" label="Low German"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="408" end="412" title="Elbe#Etymology" label="Elbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q106085" start="424" end="438" title="North Germanic languages" label="North Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7182885" start="683" end="704" title="Philadelphian Society" label="Philadelphian Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q681425" start="726" end="734" title="Ronsdorf" label="Ronsdorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q151095" start="742" end="755" title="Duchy of Berg" label="Duchy of Berg"/>
<link wikidata="Q205376" start="770" end="778" title="Zionites (Germany)" label="Zionites"/>
<link wikidata="Q85947" start="804" end="821" title="Friedrich Harkort" label="Friedrich Harkort"/>
<link wikidata="Q256964" start="1016" end="1037" title="Schwebebahn Wuppertal" label="Schwebebahn Wuppertal"/>
<link wikidata="Q153974" start="1209" end="1215" title="Barmen" label="Barmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q769183" start="1239" end="1249" title="Cronenberg, Wuppertal" label="Cronenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q70740" start="1608" end="1619" title="Greta Bösel" label="Greta Bösel"/>
<link wikidata="Q61055" start="1683" end="1694" title="Arno Breker" label="Arno Breker"/>
<link wikidata="Q91290" start="1706" end="1717" title="Heinz Thilo" label="Heinz Thilo"/>
<link wikidata="Q95861" start="1736" end="1751" title="Werner Eggerath" label="Werner Eggerath"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="1753" end="1764" title="German Democratic Republic" label="East German"/>
<link wikidata="Q78405" start="1777" end="1788" title="Karl Germer" label="Karl Germer"/>
<link wikidata="Q33237" start="1804" end="1824" title="Ordo Templi Orientis" label="Ordo Templi Orientis"/>
<link wikidata="Q316348" start="1838" end="1848" title="Will Glahé" label="Will Glahé"/>
<link wikidata="Q566849" start="1890" end="1904" title="Carl Grossberg" label="Carl Grossberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q94504904" start="1914" end="1930" title="Theodor Hausmann" label="Theodor Hausmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q765327" start="1954" end="1974" title="August von der Heydt" label="August von der Heydt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290744" start="1999" end="2019" title="Eduard von der Heydt" label="Eduard von der Heydt"/>
<link wikidata="Q64978" start="2041" end="2068" title="Walter Kaufmann (physicist)" label="Walter Kaufmann (physicist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q57425" start="2081" end="2100" title="Hans Knappertsbusch" label="Hans Knappertsbusch"/>
<link wikidata="Q60353" start="2113" end="2123" title="Erich Koch" label="Erich Koch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="2125" end="2135" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q479924" start="2215" end="2243" title="Hermann Friedrich Kohlbrugge" label="Hermann Friedrich Kohlbrugge"/>
<link wikidata="Q72485" start="2255" end="2283" title="Friedrich Wilhelm Krummacher" label="Friedrich Wilhelm Krummacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q314863" start="2295" end="2313" title="Johann Peter Lange" label="Johann Peter Lange"/>
<link wikidata="Q58033" start="2338" end="2357" title="Else Lasker-Schüler" label="Else Lasker-Schüler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496963" start="2377" end="2400" title="Wilhelm Neumann-Torborg" label="Wilhelm Neumann-Torborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461524" start="2412" end="2430" title="Friedrich Philippi (historian)" label="Friedrich Philippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q57561" start="2443" end="2457" title="Julius Plücker" label="Julius Plücker"/>
<link wikidata="Q81059955" start="2488" end="2504" title="Eugene Plumacher" label="Eugene Plumacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q214058" start="2559" end="2573" title="Sigurd Raschèr" label="Sigurd Raschèr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1715301" start="2588" end="2604" title="Paul Ortwin Rave" label="Paul Ortwin Rave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468027" start="2665" end="2677" title="Fritz Roeber" label="Fritz Roeber"/>
<link wikidata="Q71404" start="2704" end="2724" title="Hans Wolfgang Singer" label="Hans Wolfgang Singer"/>
<link wikidata="Q100262" start="2738" end="2753" title="Johannes Steele" label="Johannes Steele"/>
<link wikidata="Q62785" start="2779" end="2790" title="Horst Stein" label="Horst Stein"/>
<link wikidata="Q61608" start="2815" end="2828" title="Horst Tappert" label="Horst Tappert"/>
<link wikidata="Q115014115" start="2849" end="2862" title="Edward Thonen" label="Edward Thonen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164870" start="2909" end="2925" title="Eureka Rebellion" label="Eureka Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q62692" start="2927" end="2938" title="Günter Wand" label="Günter Wand"/>
<link wikidata="Q124825" start="2963" end="2974" title="Carl Wirths" label="Carl Wirths"/>
<link wikidata="Q120421" start="3000" end="3016" title="Sulamith Wülfing" label="Sulamith Wülfing"/>
<link wikidata="Q872018" start="3041" end="3057" title="Elberfeld system" label="Elberfeld system"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="331726" wikidata="Q1059546" url="?curid=331726" title="Lycée Louis-le-Grand">
<text>The Lycée Louis-le-Grand (), also referred to simply as Louis-le-Grand or by its acronym LLG, is a public Lycée (French secondary school, also known as sixth form college) located on rue Saint-Jacques in central Paris. 

It was founded in the early 1560s by the Jesuits as the Collège de Clermont, was renamed in 1682 after King Louis XIV (&quot;Louis the Great&quot;), and has remained at the apex of France&#x27;s secondary education system despite its disruption in 1762 following the suppression of the Society of Jesus. It offers both a high school curriculum, and a Classes Préparatoires post-secondary-level curriculum in the sciences, business and humanities.

==Location==
Louis-le-Grand is located in the heart of the , the centuries-old student district of Paris. It is surrounded by other storied educational institutions: the Sorbonne to its west, across rue Saint-Jacques; the Collège de France to its north, across ; the Panthéon campus of Paris 2 Panthéon-Assas University to its south, across rue Cujas; the former Collège Sainte-Barbe to its east, across ; and the Sainte-Geneviève Library to its southeast.

==History==

===Jesuit college (1560-1762)===


Jesuit students, mostly from Spain and Italy, were present in Paris immediately after the Society of Jesus&#x27;s foundation, first in 1540 at the and from 1541 at the . From 1550 on, Guillaume Duprat, the bishop of Clermont, who in the previous decade had met early Jesuit leaders and Diego Laynez and corresponded with Ignatius of Loyola, invited Jesuit students to stay in his mansion, the on rue de la Harpe. The thus became the Jesuit order&#x27;s first permanent home in Paris. It no longer exists following its annexation in the 17th century by the nearby , and stood on a location that is now part of the Lycée Saint-Louis.

Upon his death on , Duprat bequested an endowment for a new Jesuit college in Paris, as well as funds for two other colleges in the vicinity of Clermont, at Billom at Mauriac. The Parisian project was eagerly supported by Laynez, by then the Jesuits&#x27; Superior General, who wanted it to become &quot;the most celebrated college of the Society&quot;. It was delayed, however, by dilatory initiatives by the Parlement of Paris, University of Paris, and local clergy, all of which opposed the Jesuits&#x27; establishment. In July 1563, the Jesuits were finally able to purchase the former Parisian estate of the bishop of Langres on rue Saint-Jacques, where its current now stands, and started teaching there in late 1563 (Old Style). The new institution was named , in recognition of Duprat&#x27;s support but also because one of the conditions that the Jesuits accepted to overcome local opposition was not to formally name the college after the Society of Jesus as they did elsewhere.

The college soon met considerable success, as it was both free and of high quality, disrupting the antiquated business models and longstanding conventions of the University of Paris. In particular, its theology course, led from the 1564 inception by Juan Maldonado, was so popular that the college&#x27;s buildings were too small to contain the audience. Other prominent early faculty included Pierre Perpinien, Juan de Mariana, and Francisco Suárez.

The University of Paris had been hostile to the Jesuits from the start, in line with its general rejection of novel initiatives and long before that hostility took doctrinal undertones in the 17th and 18th centuries as the Jesuits became a key adversary for Jansenists. In 1554, the university&#x27;s College of Sorbonne had already issued a negative opinion regarding the opening of a college in Paris. That opposition was temporarily overcome at the monarchy&#x27;s initiative during the Colloquy of Poissy on , but the university kept debating the matter after the college started teaching in 1564. On , it refused to recognize it and thereby nullified the prior favorable decision of Poissy. The multiple cases brought by the university before the court of the Parlement of Paris, and counter-cases from the Jesuits, resulted in a stalemate that lasted over the next three decades: the was not readmitted into the university system, but the Jesuits were able to continue and expand their activities, even though Maldonado was removed from Paris in 1575 following accusations of heresy by Sorbonne theologians. While the courses were free of charge, boarding costs for the resident students, who typically came from elite families, were covered by gifts and scholarships, and the corresponding accounts were kept separate until the Jesuits&#x27; departure in 1762. In the 1580s, the college&#x27;s students numbered in the thousands, of which several hundreds were resident ( and ). The faculty included several dozen Jesuit priests.

Unlike most colleges of the university, the Jesuit college remained open during the Siege of Paris in 1590, albeit with reduced activity, and inevitably colluded with the Catholic League, as did the university too. On , an alumnus of the college, Jean Châtel, attempted to assassinate King Henry IV. As a reaction, the king took the side of the Jesuits&#x27; longstanding accusers such as Parlement lawyer Antoine Arnauld, and expelled the Jesuits from France, including those in Paris. In 1595, the bibliothèque du roi was relocated into the college&#x27;s premises and stayed there until 1603. That year, Henry allowed the Jesuits to return to France on the conditions that they be French nationals. They were allowed to retake the college building in 1606, and to fully restart their teaching in 1610. On , however, upon a new case brought by the university and in the changed political context resulting from Henry IV&#x27;s assassination in May 1610 by François Ravaillac, the Parlement of Paris forbade the Jesuits from teaching in Paris. That ruling, however, was reversed by a decision of Louis XIII on , allowing the Jesuits to resume teaching for good.

Despite its near-continuous interruption between 1595 and 1618, the College de Clermont almost immediately recovered and reached an equivalent level of activity to its heyday of the 1570s and 1580s. Its adversaries made sure that it would still not obtain admission into the university, but otherwise their attempts to undermine it met with decreasing success, given the continuing support the Jesuits were able to secure from the monarchy and high nobility. The college was regularly bolstered by royal visits, including by Louis XIII in 1625 and Louis XIV in 1674. On the latter occasion, the king donated a painting by Jean Jouvenet, &quot;Alexander and the family of Darius&quot;, which remains to this day in the office of Louis-le-Grand&#x27;s principal.

Several notable scholars were resident in the college, including mathematician Pierre Bourdin (1595-1653), historian Philippe Labbe (1607-1667), or Latinist Charles de la Rue (1643-1725). Other faculty included author René Rapin (1621-1687), scientist Ignace-Gaston Pardies (1636-1673), historian Claude Buffier (1661-1737), theologian René-Joseph de Tournemine (1661-1739), sinologist Jean-Baptiste Du Halde (1674-1743), rhetorician Charles Porée (1675-1741), and humanist Pierre Brumoy (1688-1742). Composer Marc-Antoine Charpentier, who may have studied at the college, was its music master () between 1688 and 1698. The college library had about 40,000 volumes as of 1718, and included unique manuscripts such as the Chronicle of Fredegar (occasionally known for that reason as ) or &quot;Anonymus Valesianus&quot;. As in other Jesuit colleges, theatrical representations became increasingly prominent during the 17th century. Also as in other colleges, in 1660 the Jesuits opened an observatory, and in 1679 they created the elaborate sundials, augmented in the 18th century, that survive to this day on the northern side of the thanks to preservation campaigns in 1842 and 1988.

The college undertook a rebuilding campaign in 1628, on a design attributed to Paris municipal architect Augustin Guillain. It expanded by acquiring more buildings, to its northeast from the recently closed in 1641, and to its south from the in 1656 and 1660. In 1682, the college was able to expand further by acquiring the buildings of the to its east, after a century of attempts, as that college&#x27;s activities were relocated elsewhere in Paris.

Also in 1682, Louis XIV formally authorized the college to change its name to (). That act confirmed its royal patronage, despite the near-simultaneous Declaration of the Clergy of France and the kingdom&#x27;s ongoing conflicts with the Papacy, to which the Jesuits were directly tied by their vows. Already in 1674, during his visit, Louis was said to have remarked (&quot;this is my college&quot;). A black marble slab with the inscription COLLEGIVM LVDOVICI MAGNI (College of Louis the Great) was promptly placed on the façade, in substitution to the earlier text COLLEGIVM CLAROMONTANVM SOCIETATIS IESV, which triggered controversy. (The anecdote was narrated by Gérard de Nerval in his short story , published in 1852 in the collection titled .) The new inscription survived later turmoil, and was relocated on the eastern side of the during the late-19th-century rebuilding.

In 1700, Louis-le-Grand took over the École des Jeunes de langues, founded in 1669 by Jean-Baptiste Colbert, in line with the Jesuits&#x27; leadership in studying foreign languages and foreign cultures, reinforced since 1685 with the permanent mission in China initiated by six Jesuits from Louis-le-Grand. Antoine Galland, the first Western European translator of &quot;One Thousand and One Nights&quot;, had studied in this section and taught Arabic there from 1709. In 1742 the college had five Chinese students: Paul Liu, Maur Cao, Thomas Liu, Philippe-Stanislas Kang, and Ignace-Xavier Lan, who had come from China via Macau together with Jesuit Father Foureau.

===After 1762===


With the suppression of the Society of Jesus in France, the Jesuits were ordered to cease their teaching and leave the college on . The establishment was immediately nationalized and renamed . Teachers from the nearby replaced the Jesuit fathers as faculty. This change triggered a broader reform of the University of Paris. The scholarship students () of twenty-six smaller colleges of the University of Paris, known as the , were invited to follow classes at Louis-le-Grand. By 1764, these students also boarded at Louis-le-Grand. By then, the effectively ceased autonomous activity, after which their property were gradually sold. Louis-le-Grand thus became the center of the university, even though ten other survived until 1792. The nearby buildings of the , one of the , were purchased by the monarchy in 1770 and repurposed as headquarters () of the University of Paris. Meanwhile, by 1764 the former faculty of the Collège de Beauvais took over teaching at Louis-le-Grand from those of the . Between then and the French Revolution, there were about 190 every year at Louis-le-Grand, and a smaller number of whose families paid for their boarding.

As a broader consequence of the Jesuits&#x27; termination, the French state in 1766 initiated the Aggregation examination to raise the standards of teaching in secondary education. Louis-le-Grand aspired to a leading position in supplying future . Its ambitions failed to materialize, however, as only nine of its succeeded in the exams between 1766 and 1792, out of a total of 206 successful candidates during that period.

During and after the French Revolution, the college was renamed several times in response to France&#x27;s changing politics: in January 1793, in 1797, in July 1798, in 1803, in 1805, in 1814, in 1815, in 1831, in 1848, in 1849, in 1853, again in 1870, and finally again in 1873. It has kept that name ever since.

Throughout the troubled 1790s, it was the only Parisian educational institution that remained continuously open, as it had been during the 1590s siege of Paris. Part of its premises, however, were used as barracks for soldiers, then as political prison and workshops. In 1796, three more opened in Paris, respectively in the former Abbey of Saint Genevieve (, later Lycée Henri-IV), the Professed House of the Jesuits (, later Lycée Charlemagne), and the Collège des Quatre-Nations (). The latter building, however, was repurposed in 1801 for artistic training, and its secondary school was relocated to the adjacent to Louis-le-Grand then known as the Prytanée (), then merged into it in 1804. In 1803, Napoleon created the Lycée Condorcet in the former , and in 1820, another new took the premises of the former , now the Lycée Saint-Louis. Louis-le-Grand was thus one of only five public in Paris for most of the 19th century, until Jules Ferry&#x27;s reforms greatly expanded secondary education in the 1880s.

Bordering Louis-le-Grand to the north, some of the buildings of the former were partly used by the École normale from 1810 to 1814 and again from 1826 to 1847, after which it moved to its present campus designed by architect Alphonse de Gisors on . Others parts of the Plessis complex were temporarily awarded to the Paris University&#x27;s Faculty of Letters and a section of the Faculty of Law, but were demolished in 1833 as they had become derelict. During the early Second Republic, an opened in July 1848 on the École Normale&#x27;s former location, promoted by politician Hippolyte Carnot, but it met overwhelming opposition and ceased operating after about six months. Louis-le-Grand eventually acquired the remaining Plessis buildings in May 1849 and tore them down in 1864. Meanwhile, in 1822, Louis-le-Grand had expanded southwards by taking over the former from the university. Louis-le-Grand&#x27;s main buildings themselves were in an increasingly dilapidated state, implying danger for the students. From the 1840s onwards multiple attempts were made to start their reconstructions, but faltered for several decades. In the mid-1860s, Georges-Eugène Haussmann promoted a project to move Louis-le-Grand to the premises of the on , but that initiative was short-lived and the complex on rue de Sèvres was instead repurposed a decade later as .

Eventually, Louis-le-Grand was almost entirely reconstructed between 1885 and 1898 on a design by architect , on a complex schedule so that teaching activities could continue during the works, and at a record high cost. Le Coeur&#x27;s design only preserved the northern and southern sides of the inner court (now ) from the earlier college facilities. He created two vast courtyards to the north () and south () of that central space, with multiple levels of classrooms connected by airy arcaded corridors. That rebuilding project took place the context of broader urban remodeling of the neighborhood around rue Saint-Jacques, also including the rebuilding of the Sorbonne (1884-1901, architect Henri Paul Nénot) and the extension of what is now the Panthéon campus of Paris 2 Panthéon-Assas University (1891-1897, architect Ernest Lheureux).

During World War I, the neighborhood was hit by Paris Gun shells, known to Parisians as . One shell tore through the ceiling of the main entrance hall on , and another left a large hole in the pavement of rue Saint-Jacques in front of the &#x27;s entrance on . During World War II, Jacques Lusseyran founded the resistance group Volontaires de la Liberté, in which a number of his fellow Louis-le-Grand students participated.

The last significant new building project was a new auditorium (), located in the southeastern corner of the premises and completed in the late 1950s.

Louis-le-Grand had its share of May 68 turmoil and subsequent violence between far-left and far-right student factions. On , it hosted the general assembly of the high-school students&#x27; action committees () which called for a general strike. On Jean Tiberi, a gaullist member of parliament who would later become the mayor of Paris, was assaulted during a visit of the . A hand grenade exploded inside its premises in early May 1969.

A collection of the school&#x27;s old scientific instruments was curated from 1972 and is now managed autonomously as the .

==Operations==

Louis-le-Grand has about 1,800 students, nearly a tenth of which are non-French from more than 40 countries. About half of these are enrolled in high school, and the other half in the . Its boarding capacity is of 340 inside the building.

Together with its longstanding rival the Lycée Henri-IV, Louis-le-Grand has long been the only French that is exempted from the scheme of location-based enrollment known as the , even after the introduction in 2008 of the nationwide application known as . This exemption has been criticized as a breach of territorial equality and a device for the self-perpetuation of French elites. It was decided to reform it in 2022.

==Notable alumni==
Louis-le-Grand has long been considered to play an important role in the education of French elites. In 1762, just before the college&#x27;s nationalization, scholar Jean-Baptiste-Jacques Élie de Beaumont wrote: &quot;The Jesuit College of Paris has for a long time been a state nursery, the most fertile in great men.&quot; Many of its former students have become influential statesmen, diplomats, prelates, writers, artists, intellectuals and scientists.

It counts seven Nobel Prize laureates as alumni, second only to the Bronx High School of Science in New York City, one Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences and six Fields Medal winners. The Louis-le-Grand alumni laureates are, by chronological order of prize-winning: Frédéric Passy (Peace, 1901); Henri Becquerel (Physics, 1903); Charles Louis Alphonse Laveran (Medicine, 1907); Paul d&#x27;Estournelles de Constant (Peace, 1909); Romain Rolland (Literature, 1915); Jean-Paul Sartre (Literature, 1964); Maurice Allais (Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences, 1988); and Serge Haroche (Physics, 2012).

Other notable alumni include: 
* statesmen the Cardinal de Fleury, the Duc de Choiseul, the Cardinal de Bernis, the Chancelier de Maupeou, Charles Carroll of Carrollton, Maximilien Robespierre, Camille Desmoulins, Victor Schœlcher, Jean Jaurès, Édouard Herriot, Edgard Pisani, Léopold Sédar Senghor, Jacques de Larosière, Paul Biya; seven French presidents (Raymond Poincaré, Paul Deschanel, Alexandre Millerand, Alain Poher acting, Georges Pompidou, Valéry Giscard d&#x27;Estaing and Jacques Chirac); and eight Prime Ministers (Paul Painlevé, Pierre Mendès France, Michel Debré, Maurice Couve de Murville, Pierre Messmer, Laurent Fabius, Michel Rocard, Alain Juppé)
* scientists Évariste Galois, Charles Hermite, Henri Poincaré, Jacques Hadamard, Benoit Mandelbrot, Laurent Schwartz, Laurent Lafforgue, Cédric Villani, Hugo Duminil-Copin
* writers Molière, Bussy-Rabutin, the Marquis de Sade, Victor Hugo, Théophile Gautier, Charles Baudelaire, Paul Claudel, Joseph Kessel, Roland Barthes, Aimé Césaire
* philosophers and social scientists Voltaire, Denis Diderot, Emile Durkheim, Gaston Maspero, Marc Bloch, Julien Benda, Georges Dumézil, Jacques Derrida, Jacques Le Goff, Régis Debray, Thomas Piketty
* artists Eugène Delacroix, Théodore Géricault, Frédéric Auguste Bartholdi, Gustave Caillebotte (at the in Vanves), Edgar Degas, Pierre Bonnard, Georges Méliès, Jean-Paul Belmondo
* business leaders André Citroën, André Michelin, Michel Pébereau, Jean-Charles Naouri, Frédéric Arnault 
* military leaders Maxime Weygand, Henri Honoré d&#x27;Estienne d&#x27;Orves
* religious figures Francis de Sales, Pierre de Bérulle, the Cardinal de Retz, Dalil Boubakeur

==Offshoots==

===Gentilly estate (1638-1770)===
The made a series of purchases in Gentilly to establish a rural retreat there, in 1632, 1638, 1640 and 1659, thus forming a major property that was eventually sold after the order&#x27;s suppression in the early 1770s. One of its buildings survives and has been repurposed in the 1990s as the Maison de la photographie Robert Doisneau.

=== in Vanves (1853-1864)===

In 1798, Louis-le-Grand (then known as Prytanée) acquired the former grounds of the . In the 1840s it initiated the project of establishing there an annex, known as the . In 1853 this became the sole location of its or middle school. The facilities were expanded in 1858–1860 on a design by Joseph-Louis Duc. It became an independent establishment by imperial decree in August 1864, known since 1888 as the Lycée Michelet.

=== on the Jardin du Luxembourg (1885-1891)===
In 1882, a law awarded a former tree nursery ground of the Jardin du Luxembourg to Louis-le-Grand for the creation of new classrooms, in anticipation of the main building&#x27;s reconstruction. The new , also designed by , opened in 1885 and became independent in August 1891 as the Lycée Montaigne.

===Abu Dhabi Section (2008-2017)===

In September 2008, Louis-le-Grand and the Abu Dhabi Education Council launched the Advanced Math and Science Pilot Class, with one class of 20 girls and another of 20 boys. Classes were taught in English in Abu Dhabi, by professors sent from France. The students who made up the Advanced Math and Science Pilot Class graduated at the end of the 12th grade and were awarded a certificate of academic recognition by Louis-le-Grand. The final cohort of the program graduated in 2017, marking the end of the program.

==Gallery==
==See also==

* List of Lycée Louis-le-Grand people
* List of Jesuit sites
* College of Navarre
* Lycée Henri-IV
* Secondary education in France
* List of schools in France

==References==
==External links==

(These pages are in French)
* Lycée Louis-le-Grand (official website)
* Homepage of the parents&#x27; association FCPE
* Homepage of the parents&#x27; association PEEP</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1059546" start="4" end="24" title="Lycée Louis-le-Grand" label="Lycée Louis-le-Grand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059546" start="56" end="70" title="Lycée Louis-le-Grand" label="Louis-le-Grand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059546" start="89" end="92" title="Lycée Louis-le-Grand" label="LLG"/>
<link wikidata="Q26869819" start="106" end="111" title="Lycée" label="Lycée"/>
<link wikidata="Q7533204" start="152" end="170" title="sixth form college" label="sixth form college"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356926" start="183" end="200" title="Rue Saint-Jacques (Paris)" label="rue Saint-Jacques"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="212" end="217" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="262" end="269" title="Jesuits" label="Jesuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059546" start="277" end="296" title="Lycée Louis-le-Grand" label="Collège de Clermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="329" end="338" title="Louis XIV" label="Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q477324" start="488" end="523" title="suppression of the Society of Jesus" label="suppression of the Society of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096010" start="572" end="593" title="Classe préparatoire aux grandes écoles" label="Classes Préparatoires"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976200" start="656" end="666" title="khâgne" label="humanities"/>
<link wikidata="Q209842" start="839" end="847" title="University of Paris" label="Sorbonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q202660" start="891" end="908" title="Collège de France" label="Collège de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q662976" start="955" end="988" title="Paris 2 Panthéon-Assas University" label="Paris 2 Panthéon-Assas University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3447577" start="1010" end="1019" title="rue Cujas" label="rue Cujas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110002" start="1032" end="1052" title="Collège Sainte-Barbe" label="Collège Sainte-Barbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q517249" start="1083" end="1107" title="Sainte-Geneviève Library" label="Sainte-Geneviève Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="1265" end="1281" title="Society of Jesus" label="Society of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119821" start="1359" end="1375" title="Guillaume Duprat" label="Guillaume Duprat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640132" start="1381" end="1399" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Clermont" label="bishop of Clermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q301664" start="1461" end="1473" title="Diego Laynez" label="Diego Laynez"/>
<link wikidata="Q44281" start="1496" end="1514" title="Ignatius of Loyola" label="Ignatius of Loyola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496833" start="1571" end="1586" title="rue de la Harpe" label="rue de la Harpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q471980" start="1788" end="1805" title="Lycée Saint-Louis" label="Lycée Saint-Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q246257" start="1965" end="1971" title="Billom" label="Billom"/>
<link wikidata="Q454125" start="1975" end="1982" title="Mauriac, Cantal" label="Mauriac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515704" start="2064" end="2080" title="Superior General of the Society of Jesus" label="Superior General"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242473" start="2218" end="2236" title="Parlement of Paris" label="Parlement of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q209842" start="2238" end="2257" title="University of Paris" label="University of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q871038" start="2421" end="2438" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Langres" label="bishop of Langres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356926" start="2442" end="2459" title="Rue Saint-Jacques (Paris)" label="rue Saint-Jacques"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922815" start="2532" end="2541" title="Old Style and New Style dates" label="Old Style"/>
<link wikidata="Q209842" start="2960" end="2979" title="University of Paris" label="University of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q352804" start="3048" end="3062" title="Juan Maldonado (Jesuit)" label="Juan Maldonado"/>
<link wikidata="Q939889" start="3210" end="3225" title="Juan de Mariana" label="Juan de Mariana"/>
<link wikidata="Q316339" start="3231" end="3247" title="Francisco Suárez" label="Francisco Suárez"/>
<link wikidata="Q209842" start="3254" end="3273" title="University of Paris" label="University of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287" start="3508" end="3518" title="Jansenism" label="Jansenists"/>
<link wikidata="Q787286" start="3551" end="3570" title="College of Sorbonne" label="College of Sorbonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426625" start="3740" end="3758" title="Colloquy of Poissy" label="Colloquy of Poissy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242473" start="4015" end="4033" title="Parlement of Paris" label="Parlement of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q269770" start="4403" end="4411" title="Boarding school" label="boarding"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485984" start="4872" end="4886" title="Siege of Paris (1590)" label="Siege of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q696189" start="4959" end="4974" title="Catholic League (French)" label="Catholic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q323494" start="5035" end="5046" title="Jean Châtel" label="Jean Châtel"/>
<link wikidata="Q936976" start="5073" end="5086" title="Henry IV of France" label="King Henry IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965159" start="5194" end="5209" title="Antoine Arnauld (lawyer)" label="Antoine Arnauld"/>
<link wikidata="Q193563" start="5288" end="5307" title="bibliothèque du roi" label="bibliothèque du roi"/>
<link wikidata="Q349190" start="5746" end="5764" title="François Ravaillac" label="François Ravaillac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242473" start="5770" end="5788" title="Parlement of Paris" label="Parlement of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q737533" start="5885" end="5895" title="Louis XIII" label="Louis XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="6500" end="6509" title="Louis XIV" label="Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q712455" start="6574" end="6587" title="Jean Jouvenet" label="Jean Jouvenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961423" start="6831" end="6845" title="Philippe Labbe" label="Philippe Labbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238942" start="6871" end="6888" title="Charles de la Rue" label="Charles de la Rue"/>
<link wikidata="Q511359" start="6932" end="6942" title="René Rapin" label="René Rapin"/>
<link wikidata="Q925729" start="6966" end="6987" title="Ignace-Gaston Pardies" label="Ignace-Gaston Pardies"/>
<link wikidata="Q722978" start="7011" end="7025" title="Claude Buffier" label="Claude Buffier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144490" start="7050" end="7075" title="René-Joseph de Tournemine" label="René-Joseph de Tournemine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354427" start="7100" end="7122" title="Jean-Baptiste Du Halde" label="Jean-Baptiste Du Halde"/>
<link wikidata="Q2960049" start="7148" end="7161" title="Charles Porée" label="Charles Porée"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093251" start="7188" end="7201" title="Pierre Brumoy" label="Pierre Brumoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q55524" start="7224" end="7248" title="Marc-Antoine Charpentier" label="Marc-Antoine Charpentier"/>
<link wikidata="Q215793" start="7295" end="7307" title="Kapellmeister" label="music master"/>
<link wikidata="Q15623879" start="7435" end="7456" title="Chronicle of Fredegar" label="Chronicle of Fredegar"/>
<link wikidata="Q432263" start="7507" end="7526" title="Anonymus Valesianus" label="Anonymus Valesianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q62832" start="7702" end="7713" title="observatory" label="observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q80793" start="7754" end="7761" title="sundial" label="sundial"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="8368" end="8377" title="Louis XIV" label="Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249462" start="8506" end="8541" title="Declaration of the Clergy of France" label="Declaration of the Clergy of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="8592" end="8598" title="Papacy" label="Papacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q191305" start="9022" end="9038" title="Gérard de Nerval" label="Gérard de Nerval"/>
<link wikidata="Q3577936" start="9275" end="9302" title="École des Jeunes de langues" label="École des Jeunes de langues"/>
<link wikidata="Q188971" start="9323" end="9344" title="Jean-Baptiste Colbert" label="Jean-Baptiste Colbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335343" start="9481" end="9497" title="Jesuit China missions" label="mission in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q319399" start="9544" end="9559" title="Antoine Galland" label="Antoine Galland"/>
<link wikidata="Q8258" start="9608" end="9635" title="One Thousand and One Nights" label="One Thousand and One Nights"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="9682" end="9688" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773" start="9861" end="9866" title="Macau" label="Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q477324" start="9933" end="9968" title="suppression of the Society of Jesus" label="suppression of the Society of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q209842" start="10228" end="10247" title="University of Paris" label="University of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110005" start="10847" end="10866" title="Collège de Beauvais" label="Collège de Beauvais"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="10945" end="10962" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q397610" start="11178" end="11189" title="Agrégation" label="Aggregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="11526" end="11543" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1766069" start="12152" end="12176" title="Abbey of Saint Genevieve" label="Abbey of Saint Genevieve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878600" start="12186" end="12200" title="Lycée Henri-IV" label="Lycée Henri-IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247969" start="12207" end="12237" title="Saint-Paul-Saint-Louis" label="Professed House of the Jesuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q748307" start="12247" end="12264" title="Lycée Charlemagne" label="Lycée Charlemagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q979600" start="12275" end="12301" title="Collège des Quatre-Nations" label="Collège des Quatre-Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q926749" start="12545" end="12560" title="Lycée Condorcet" label="Lycée Condorcet"/>
<link wikidata="Q471980" start="12644" end="12661" title="Lycée Saint-Louis" label="Lycée Saint-Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q959708" start="12756" end="12767" title="Jules Ferry" label="Jules Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q83259" start="12934" end="12947" title="École normale supérieure (Paris)" label="École normale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840019" start="13060" end="13078" title="Alphonse de Gisors" label="Alphonse de Gisors"/>
<link wikidata="Q58326" start="13306" end="13321" title="French Second Republic" label="Second Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q950235" start="13414" end="13430" title="Hippolyte Carnot" label="Hippolyte Carnot"/>
<link wikidata="Q191798" start="13985" end="14009" title="Georges-Eugène Haussmann" label="Georges-Eugène Haussmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q214654" start="14859" end="14867" title="Sorbonne (building)" label="Sorbonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130450" start="14890" end="14906" title="Henri Paul Nénot" label="Henri Paul Nénot"/>
<link wikidata="Q662976" start="14964" end="14997" title="Paris 2 Panthéon-Assas University" label="Paris 2 Panthéon-Assas University"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="15046" end="15057" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q753063" start="15087" end="15096" title="Paris Gun" label="Paris Gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="15307" end="15319" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q567372" start="15321" end="15338" title="Jacques Lusseyran" label="Jacques Lusseyran"/>
<link wikidata="Q17022901" start="15368" end="15393" title="Volontaires de la Liberté" label="Volontaires de la Liberté"/>
<link wikidata="Q6743" start="15650" end="15656" title="May 68" label="May 68"/>
<link wikidata="Q1685859" start="15867" end="15878" title="Jean Tiberi" label="Jean Tiberi"/>
<link wikidata="Q770215" start="15882" end="15890" title="Gaullism" label="gaullist"/>
<link wikidata="Q173517" start="15995" end="16007" title="Grenade" label="hand grenade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878600" start="16479" end="16493" title="Lycée Henri-IV" label="Lycée Henri-IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3163782" start="17045" end="17083" title="Jean-Baptiste-Jacques Élie de Beaumont" label="Jean-Baptiste-Jacques Élie de Beaumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="17353" end="17364" title="Nobel Prize" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q751612" start="17405" end="17433" title="Bronx High School of Science" label="Bronx High School of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="17437" end="17450" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q47170" start="17456" end="17497" title="Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences" label="Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q28835" start="17506" end="17518" title="Fields Medal" label="Fields Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q180409" start="17610" end="17624" title="Frédéric Passy" label="Frédéric Passy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41269" start="17640" end="17655" title="Henri Becquerel" label="Henri Becquerel"/>
<link wikidata="Q189006" start="17673" end="17703" title="Charles Louis Alphonse Laveran" label="Charles Louis Alphonse Laveran"/>
<link wikidata="Q238731" start="17722" end="17758" title="Paul Henri Balluet d&amp;#x27;Estournelles de Constant" label="Paul d&amp;#x27;Estournelles de Constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q47162" start="17774" end="17788" title="Romain Rolland" label="Romain Rolland"/>
<link wikidata="Q9364" start="17809" end="17825" title="Jean-Paul Sartre" label="Jean-Paul Sartre"/>
<link wikidata="Q105962" start="17846" end="17860" title="Maurice Allais" label="Maurice Allais"/>
<link wikidata="Q109588" start="17910" end="17923" title="Serge Haroche" label="Serge Haroche"/>
<link wikidata="Q439144" start="17989" end="18007" title="André-Hercule de Fleury" label="Cardinal de Fleury"/>
<link wikidata="Q289149" start="18013" end="18028" title="Étienne François, duc de Choiseul" label="Duc de Choiseul"/>
<link wikidata="Q374572" start="18034" end="18052" title="François-Joachim de Pierre de Bernis" label="Cardinal de Bernis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266161" start="18058" end="18079" title="René Nicolas Charles Augustin de Maupeou" label="Chancelier de Maupeou"/>
<link wikidata="Q466009" start="18081" end="18110" title="Charles Carroll of Carrollton" label="Charles Carroll of Carrollton"/>
<link wikidata="Q44197" start="18112" end="18134" title="Maximilien Robespierre" label="Maximilien Robespierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q249313" start="18136" end="18154" title="Camille Desmoulins" label="Camille Desmoulins"/>
<link wikidata="Q120417" start="18156" end="18172" title="Victor Schœlcher" label="Victor Schœlcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q12688" start="18174" end="18185" title="Jean Jaurès" label="Jean Jaurès"/>
<link wikidata="Q274344" start="18187" end="18202" title="Édouard Herriot" label="Édouard Herriot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284283" start="18204" end="18217" title="Edgard Pisani" label="Edgard Pisani"/>
<link wikidata="Q154545" start="18219" end="18240" title="Léopold Sédar Senghor" label="Léopold Sédar Senghor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363641" start="18242" end="18262" title="Jacques de Larosière" label="Jacques de Larosière"/>
<link wikidata="Q57272" start="18264" end="18273" title="Paul Biya" label="Paul Biya"/>
<link wikidata="Q191954" start="18281" end="18298" title="president of France" label="French presidents"/>
<link wikidata="Q191974" start="18300" end="18316" title="Raymond Poincaré" label="Raymond Poincaré"/>
<link wikidata="Q309995" start="18318" end="18332" title="Paul Deschanel" label="Paul Deschanel"/>
<link wikidata="Q274540" start="18334" end="18353" title="Alexandre Millerand" label="Alexandre Millerand"/>
<link wikidata="Q12950" start="18355" end="18366" title="Alain Poher" label="Alain Poher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2185" start="18375" end="18391" title="Georges Pompidou" label="Georges Pompidou"/>
<link wikidata="Q2124" start="18393" end="18422" title="Valéry Giscard d&amp;#x27;Estaing" label="Valéry Giscard d&amp;#x27;Estaing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105" start="18427" end="18441" title="Jacques Chirac" label="Jacques Chirac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587677" start="18454" end="18469" title="Prime Minister of France" label="Prime Ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q315434" start="18471" end="18484" title="Paul Painlevé" label="Paul Painlevé"/>
<link wikidata="Q314265" start="18486" end="18506" title="Pierre Mendès France" label="Pierre Mendès France"/>
<link wikidata="Q296386" start="18508" end="18520" title="Michel Debré" label="Michel Debré"/>
<link wikidata="Q312034" start="18522" end="18547" title="Maurice Couve de Murville" label="Maurice Couve de Murville"/>
<link wikidata="Q271822" start="18549" end="18563" title="Pierre Messmer" label="Pierre Messmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q217070" start="18565" end="18579" title="Laurent Fabius" label="Laurent Fabius"/>
<link wikidata="Q12946" start="18581" end="18594" title="Michel Rocard" label="Michel Rocard"/>
<link wikidata="Q215569" start="18596" end="18607" title="Alain Juppé" label="Alain Juppé"/>
<link wikidata="Q7091" start="18622" end="18637" title="Évariste Galois" label="Évariste Galois"/>
<link wikidata="Q168401" start="18639" end="18654" title="Charles Hermite" label="Charles Hermite"/>
<link wikidata="Q81082" start="18656" end="18670" title="Henri Poincaré" label="Henri Poincaré"/>
<link wikidata="Q164425" start="18672" end="18688" title="Jacques Hadamard" label="Jacques Hadamard"/>
<link wikidata="Q101740" start="18690" end="18707" title="Benoit Mandelbrot" label="Benoit Mandelbrot"/>
<link wikidata="Q212081" start="18709" end="18725" title="Laurent Schwartz" label="Laurent Schwartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q315396" start="18727" end="18744" title="Laurent Lafforgue" label="Laurent Lafforgue"/>
<link wikidata="Q334065" start="18746" end="18760" title="Cédric Villani" label="Cédric Villani"/>
<link wikidata="Q15461028" start="18762" end="18780" title="Hugo Duminil-Copin" label="Hugo Duminil-Copin"/>
<link wikidata="Q687" start="18791" end="18798" title="Molière" label="Molière"/>
<link wikidata="Q733246" start="18800" end="18813" title="Roger de Rabutin, comte de Bussy" label="Bussy-Rabutin"/>
<link wikidata="Q123867" start="18819" end="18834" title="Marquis de Sade" label="Marquis de Sade"/>
<link wikidata="Q535" start="18836" end="18847" title="Victor Hugo" label="Victor Hugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q183713" start="18849" end="18866" title="Théophile Gautier" label="Théophile Gautier"/>
<link wikidata="Q501" start="18868" end="18886" title="Charles Baudelaire" label="Charles Baudelaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q295830" start="18888" end="18900" title="Paul Claudel" label="Paul Claudel"/>
<link wikidata="Q356537" start="18902" end="18915" title="Joseph Kessel" label="Joseph Kessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q179109" start="18917" end="18931" title="Roland Barthes" label="Roland Barthes"/>
<link wikidata="Q223955" start="18933" end="18945" title="Aimé Césaire" label="Aimé Césaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q9068" start="18983" end="18991" title="Voltaire" label="Voltaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q448" start="18993" end="19006" title="Denis Diderot" label="Denis Diderot"/>
<link wikidata="Q15948" start="19008" end="19022" title="Emile Durkheim" label="Emile Durkheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q311816" start="19024" end="19038" title="Gaston Maspero" label="Gaston Maspero"/>
<link wikidata="Q156585" start="19040" end="19050" title="Marc Bloch" label="Marc Bloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q155270" start="19052" end="19064" title="Julien Benda" label="Julien Benda"/>
<link wikidata="Q310590" start="19066" end="19081" title="Georges Dumézil" label="Georges Dumézil"/>
<link wikidata="Q130631" start="19083" end="19098" title="Jacques Derrida" label="Jacques Derrida"/>
<link wikidata="Q213992" start="19100" end="19115" title="Jacques Le Goff" label="Jacques Le Goff"/>
<link wikidata="Q378116" start="19117" end="19129" title="Régis Debray" label="Régis Debray"/>
<link wikidata="Q984448" start="19131" end="19145" title="Thomas Piketty" label="Thomas Piketty"/>
<link wikidata="Q33477" start="19156" end="19172" title="Eugène Delacroix" label="Eugène Delacroix"/>
<link wikidata="Q184212" start="19174" end="19192" title="Théodore Géricault" label="Théodore Géricault"/>
<link wikidata="Q223274" start="19194" end="19220" title="Frédéric Auguste Bartholdi" label="Frédéric Auguste Bartholdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q295144" start="19222" end="19241" title="Gustave Caillebotte" label="Gustave Caillebotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q46373" start="19262" end="19273" title="Edgar Degas" label="Edgar Degas"/>
<link wikidata="Q26408" start="19275" end="19289" title="Pierre Bonnard" label="Pierre Bonnard"/>
<link wikidata="Q152272" start="19291" end="19305" title="Georges Méliès" label="Georges Méliès"/>
<link wikidata="Q106255" start="19307" end="19325" title="Jean-Paul Belmondo" label="Jean-Paul Belmondo"/>
<link wikidata="Q219842" start="19345" end="19358" title="André Citroën" label="André Citroën"/>
<link wikidata="Q382573" start="19360" end="19374" title="André Michelin" label="André Michelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q875178" start="19376" end="19391" title="Michel Pébereau" label="Michel Pébereau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3164680" start="19393" end="19412" title="Jean-Charles Naouri" label="Jean-Charles Naouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q105037449" start="19414" end="19430" title="Frédéric Arnault" label="Frédéric Arnault"/>
<link wikidata="Q170357" start="19451" end="19465" title="Maxime Weygand" label="Maxime Weygand"/>
<link wikidata="Q471460" start="19467" end="19508" title="Henri Honoré d&amp;#x27;Estienne d&amp;#x27;Orves" label="Henri Honoré d&amp;#x27;Estienne d&amp;#x27;Orves"/>
<link wikidata="Q231256" start="19529" end="19545" title="Francis de Sales" label="Francis de Sales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243948" start="19547" end="19564" title="Pierre de Bérulle" label="Pierre de Bérulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q353879" start="19570" end="19586" title="Jean François Paul de Gondi" label="Cardinal de Retz"/>
<link wikidata="Q898596" start="19588" end="19603" title="Dalil Boubakeur" label="Dalil Boubakeur"/>
<link wikidata="Q640102" start="19688" end="19696" title="Gentilly, Val-de-Marne" label="Gentilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6737061" start="19947" end="19988" title="Maison de la photographie Robert Doisneau" label="Maison de la photographie Robert Doisneau"/>
<link wikidata="Q149566" start="20240" end="20253" title="middle school" label="middle school"/>
<link wikidata="Q3184327" start="20312" end="20328" title="Joseph-Louis Duc" label="Joseph-Louis Duc"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268847" start="20428" end="20442" title="Lycée Michelet (Vanves)" label="Lycée Michelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q309458" start="20551" end="20571" title="Jardin du Luxembourg" label="Jardin du Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268857" start="20775" end="20790" title="Lycée Montaigne (Paris)" label="Lycée Montaigne"/>
<link wikidata="Q40380206" start="20872" end="20899" title="Abu Dhabi Education Council" label="Abu Dhabi Education Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519" start="21037" end="21046" title="Abu Dhabi" label="Abu Dhabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q110442856" start="21372" end="21407" title="List of Lycée Louis-le-Grand people" label="List of Lycée Louis-le-Grand people"/>
<link wikidata="Q6575275" start="21410" end="21430" title="List of Jesuit sites" label="List of Jesuit sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110010" start="21433" end="21451" title="College of Navarre" label="College of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878600" start="21454" end="21468" title="Lycée Henri-IV" label="Lycée Henri-IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q26869819" start="21471" end="21500" title="Secondary education in France" label="Secondary education in France"/>
<link wikidata="Q6637496" start="21503" end="21528" title="List of schools in France" label="List of schools in France"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="331729" wikidata="Q1353689" url="?curid=331729" title="San Simeon, California">
<text>San Simeon (Spanish: &quot;San Simeón&quot;, meaning &quot;St. Simon&quot;) is an unincorporated community on the Pacific coast of San Luis Obispo County, California, United States. Its position along State Route 1 is about halfway between Los Angeles and San Francisco, each of those cities being roughly away. A key feature of the area is Hearst Castle, a hilltop mansion built for William Randolph Hearst in the early 20th century that is now a tourist attraction. The area is also home to a large northern elephant seal rookery, known as the Piedras Blancas rookery, located north of San Simeon on Highway 1.

== History ==

Humans first settled the local area at least 11,000 years ago. Prehistorically, the local area was inhabited by the Chumash people, including a large village south of San Simeon at Morro Creek.

In 1542 the coastal exploration of Juan Cabrillo discovered the bay and named it the Bay of Sardines.

The first European land exploration of Alta California, the Spanish Portolà expedition, traveled northwest along the coast in September 1769. On September 11–12, the party passed the future location of San Simeon. At Ragged Point, which is about past San Simeon, the party turned inland across the Santa Lucia Range.

San Simeon was founded as an &quot;asistencia&quot; (&quot;sub-mission&quot;) to Mission San Miguel Arcángel, founded in 1797, and located to the east across the Santa Lucia Range. The Bay of San Simeon is mentioned in the records of San Miguel Mission for 1830. San Simeon was named for Rancho San Simeon, although the town-site is actually north of that rancho, on the former Rancho Piedra Blanca, a Mexican land grant given in 1840 to José de Jesús Pico. In 1865, Pico sold part of the rancho to George Hearst, the father of William Randolph Hearst.

The first Europeans to settle in the immediate area near the bay of San Simeon were Portuguese shore whalers under the command of Captain Joseph Clark (born Machado) from the Cape Verde Islands, around 1864. In 1869, Captain Clark built a wharf near the point for his whaling station. A small community grew near the 1869 wharf, but the waves near the wharf were too high, and the wharf was abandoned. In 1878, Hearst built a new wharf, and the small community moved near the new wharf. A general store (later Sebastian&#x27;s Store) was built near the Clark wharf, and then relocated near the 1878 wharf. Shore whaling continued on the point until the mid-1890s. It ceased for a short time, started up again in 1897, and continued until about 1908 when it ceased for good.

In 1953, the Hearst Corporation donated the William Randolph Hearst Memorial Beach, including the Hearst Pier, to San Luis Obispo County. It is currently part of Hearst San Simeon State Park. The present-day San Simeon pier was built in 1957.

== Geology ==
The name &quot;San Simeon&quot; also refers to some geologic structures of the area, particularly elements of the coastal Jurassic-age landforms and ophiolite rock formations.

== Geography ==
According to the United States Census Bureau, the census-designated place covers an area of 0.8 square miles (2.1 km2), all of it land. The original townsite of San Simeon is at San Simeon Bay, and was the important 19th-century shipping point with the successive wharves that were built. San Simeon Acres, about 4 mi south of the original townsite at the mouth of Pico Creek, and so about halfway between old San Simeon and Cambria, was established in the 1950s. Most of the development at San Simeon Acres was in the 1960s to the 1980s. Many motels and cafes serve visitors to Hearst Castle.

=== Climate ===
San Simeon and the Hearst Castle area has a mild warm-summer Mediterranean climate (Köppen Csb) that is moderated by its relative proximity to the Pacific coastline. NOW Data has readings from the San Simeon weather station since December 1999.

== Demographics ==

For statistical purposes, the United States Census Bureau has defined San Simeon as a census-designated place (CDP). The 2010 United States Census reported that San Simeon had a population of 462. The population density was . The racial makeup of San Simeon was 58.4% White, 0.9% African American, 1.1% Native American, 1.9% Asian, 0.4% Pacific Islander, 34.6% from other races, and 2.6% from two or more races. Hispanics or Latinos of any race were 55.8%.
Of the 197 households, 26.9% had children under the age of 18 living in them, 47.7% were married couples living together, 7.1% had a female householder with no husband present 6.6% had a male householder with no wife present, 6.1% were unmarried opposite-sex partnerships, and 2.5% were same-sex married couples or partnerships; 34.0% of the households were made up of individuals, and 15.2% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.34. About 61.4% of all households were families; the average family size was 3.00.

The population was distributed as 22.9% under the age of 18, 6.7% aged 18 to 24, 24.2% aged 25 to 44, 28.1% aged 45 to 64, and 18.0% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 40.7 years. For every 100 females, there were 105.3 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 102.3 males.

The 301 housing units averaged 377.8 per square mile (145.9/km2), of which 44.2% were owner-occupied, and 55.8% were occupied by renters. The homeowner vacancy rate was 2.2%; the rental vacancy rate was 11.3%; 31.0% of the population lived in owner-occupied housing units and 68.8% lived in rental housing units.
== Infrastructure ==
The San Simeon Community Services District provides water and sewerage. The wastewater treatment plant is operated by a private company under contract with the district. The facility also processes sewage for Hearst Castle.

== References ==
== External links ==
* Chamber of Commerce
* History of San Simeon and the Hearst Family
* History of San Simeon and Sebastian store
* San Simeon pier on Photohound</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1353689" start="0" end="10" title="San Simeon, California" label="San Simeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="12" end="19" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q269528" start="82" end="106" title="Unincorporated area" label="unincorporated community"/>
<link wikidata="Q49014" start="131" end="165" title="San Luis Obispo County, California" label="San Luis Obispo County, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q550419" start="201" end="214" title="California State Route 1" label="State Route 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="240" end="251" title="Los Angeles, California" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="256" end="269" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q378143" start="341" end="354" title="Hearst Castle" label="Hearst Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q294931" start="384" end="407" title="William Randolph Hearst" label="William Randolph Hearst"/>
<link wikidata="Q626023" start="501" end="523" title="northern elephant seal" label="northern elephant seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640507" start="524" end="531" title="rookery" label="rookery"/>
<link wikidata="Q24251468" start="745" end="759" title="Chumash people" label="Chumash people"/>
<link wikidata="Q6914166" start="810" end="821" title="Morro Creek" label="Morro Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q182491" start="859" end="872" title="Juan Cabrillo" label="Juan Cabrillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422806" start="966" end="981" title="Alta California" label="Alta California"/>
<link wikidata="Q3966440" start="995" end="1013" title="Portolà expedition" label="Portolà expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q18217115" start="1069" end="1087" title="Timeline of the Portolà expedition" label="On September 11–12"/>
<link wikidata="Q85795635" start="1144" end="1156" title="Ragged Point (California)" label="Ragged Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422677" start="1225" end="1242" title="Santa Lucia Range" label="Santa Lucia Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q12061891" start="1326" end="1353" title="Mission San Miguel Arcángel" label="Mission San Miguel Arcángel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291290" start="1533" end="1550" title="Rancho San Simeon" label="Rancho San Simeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291164" start="1623" end="1643" title="Rancho Piedra Blanca" label="Rancho Piedra Blanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q561826" start="1744" end="1757" title="George Hearst" label="George Hearst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011" start="1974" end="1992" title="Cape Verde Islands" label="Cape Verde Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q30624145" start="2309" end="2331" title="Sebastian Store" label="Sebastian&amp;#x27;s Store"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065024" start="2587" end="2605" title="Hearst Corporation" label="Hearst Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8017366" start="2618" end="2656" title="William Randolph Hearst Memorial State Beach" label="William Randolph Hearst Memorial Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q49014" start="2688" end="2710" title="San Luis Obispo County" label="San Luis Obispo County"/>
<link wikidata="Q5691720" start="2736" end="2764" title="Hearst San Simeon State Park" label="Hearst San Simeon State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q334823" start="2884" end="2902" title="Structural geology" label="geologic structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q45805" start="2954" end="2962" title="Jurassic" label="Jurassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q605396" start="2981" end="2990" title="ophiolite" label="ophiolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="3042" end="3069" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028196" start="3450" end="3457" title="Cambria, CA" label="Cambria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3685" end="3718" title="Mediterranean climate#warm-summer Mediterranean climate" label="warm-summer Mediterranean climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="3720" end="3726" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q13996" start="3727" end="3730" title="Warm-summer Mediterranean climate" label="Csb"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="3783" end="3790" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="3988" end="4011" title="census-designated place" label="census-designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="4023" end="4048" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 United States Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4132" end="4145" title="Race (United States Census)" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q7120037" start="4595" end="4630" title="POSSLQ" label="unmarried opposite-sex partnerships"/>
<link wikidata="Q3449014" start="4646" end="4686" title="same-sex partnerships" label="same-sex married couples or partnerships"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433028" start="4882" end="4890" title="family (U.S. Census)" label="families"/>
<link wikidata="Q378143" start="5780" end="5793" title="Hearst Castle" label="Hearst Castle"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="331731" wikidata="Q274988" url="?curid=331731" title="Plaster">
<text>Plaster is a building material used for the protective or decorative coating of walls and ceilings and for moulding and casting decorative elements. In English, &quot;plaster&quot; usually means a material used for the interiors of buildings, while &quot;render&quot; commonly refers to external applications. The term stucco refers to plasterwork that is worked in some way to produce relief decoration, rather than flat surfaces.

The most common types of plaster mainly contain either gypsum, lime, or cement, but all work in a similar way. The plaster is manufactured as a dry powder and is mixed with water to form a stiff but workable paste immediately before it is applied to the surface. The reaction with water liberates heat through crystallization and the hydrated plaster then hardens.

Plaster can be relatively easily worked with metal tools and sandpaper and can be moulded, either on site or in advance, and worked pieces can be put in place with adhesive. Plaster is suitable for finishing rather than load-bearing, and when thickly applied for decoration may require a hidden supporting framework.

Forms of plaster have several other uses. In medicine, plaster orthopedic casts are still often used for supporting set broken bones. In dentistry, plaster is used to make dental models by pouring the material into dental impressions. Various types of models and moulds are made with plaster. In art, lime plaster is the traditional matrix for fresco painting; the pigments are applied to a thin wet top layer of plaster and fuse with it so that the painting is actually in coloured plaster. In the ancient world, as well as the sort of ornamental designs in plaster relief that are still used, plaster was also widely used to create large figurative reliefs for walls, though few of these have survived.

== History ==

Plaster was first used as a building material and for decoration in the Middle East at least 7,000 years ago. In Egypt, gypsum was burned in open fires, crushed into powder, and mixed with water to create plaster, used as a mortar between the blocks of pyramids and to provide a smooth wall facing. In Jericho, a cult arose where human skulls were decorated with plaster and painted to appear lifelike. The Romans brought plaster-work techniques to Europe.

== Types ==

=== Clay plaster ===
Clay plaster is a mixture of clay, sand and water often with the addition of plant fibers for tensile strength over wood lath.

Clay plaster has been used around the world at least since antiquity. Settlers in the American colonies used clay plaster on the interiors of their houses: &quot;Interior plastering in the form of clay antedated even the building of houses of frame, and must have been visible in the inside of wattle filling in those earliest frame houses in which … wainscot had not been indulged. Clay continued in use long after the adoption of laths and brick filling for the frame.&quot; Where lime was not easily accessible it was rationed and usually substituted with clay as a binder. In Martin E. Weaver&#x27;s seminal work he says, &quot;Mud plaster consists of clay or earth which is mixed with water to give a &#x27;plastic&#x27; or workable consistency. If the clay mixture is too plastic it will shrink, crack and distort on drying. Sand, fine gravels and fibres were added to reduce the concentrations of fine clay particles which were the cause of the excessive shrinkage.&quot; Manure was often added for its fibre content. In some building techniques straw or grass was used as reinforcement.

In the Earliest European settlers&#x27; plasterwork, a mud plaster was used McKee wrote, of a circa 1675 Massachusetts contract that specified the plasterer, &quot;Is to lath and siele the four rooms of the house betwixt the joists overhead with a coat of lime and haire upon the clay; also to fill the gable ends of the house with ricks and plaister them with clay. 5. To lath and plaster partitions of the house with clay and lime, and to fill, lath, and plaister them with lime and haire besides; and to siele and lath them overhead with lime; also to fill, lath, and plaster the kitchen up to the wall plate on every side. 6. The said Daniel Andrews is to find lime, bricks, clay, stone, haire, together with laborers and workmen.&quot; Records of the New Haven colony in 1641 mention clay and hay as well as lime and hair also. In German houses of Pennsylvania the use of clay persisted.

Old Economy Village is one such German settlement. The early Nineteenth-Century utopian village in present-day Ambridge, Pennsylvania, used clay plaster substrate exclusively in the brick and wood frame high architecture of the Feast Hall, Great House and other large and commercial structures as well as in the brick, frame and log dwellings of the society members. The use of clay in plaster and in laying brickwork appears to have been a common practice at that time not just in the construction of Economy village when the settlement was founded in 1824. Specifications for the construction of, &quot;Lock keepers houses on the Chesapeake and Ohio Canal, written about 1828, require stone walls to be laid with clay mortar, excepting 3 inches on the outside of the walls … which (are) to be good lime mortar and well pointed.&quot; The choice of clay was because of its low cost, but also the availability. At Economy, root cellars dug under the houses yielded clay and sand (stone), or the nearby Ohio river yielded washed sand from the sand bars; and lime outcroppings and oyster shell for the lime kiln.

The surrounding forests of the new village of Economy provided straight grain, old-growth oak trees for lath. Hand split lath starts with a log of straight grained wood of the required length. The log is split into quarters and then smaller and smaller bolts with wedges and a sledge. When small enough, a froe and mallet were used to split away narrow strips of lath. Farm animals provided hair and manure for the float coat of plaster. Fields of wheat and grains provided straw and hay to reinforce the clay plaster. But there was no uniformity in clay plaster recipes.

Manure provides fiber for tensile strength as well as protein adhesive. Unlike casein used with lime plaster, hydrogen bonds of manure proteins are weakened by moisture. With braced timber-framed structures clay plaster was used on interior walls and ceilings as well as exterior walls as the wall cavity and exterior cladding isolated the clay plaster from moisture penetration. Application of clay plaster in brick structures risked water penetration from failed mortar joints on the exterior brick walls. In Economy Village, the rear and middle wythes of brick dwelling walls are laid in a clay and sand mortar with the front wythe bedded in a lime and sand mortar to provide a weather proof seal to protect from water penetration. This allowed a rendering of clay plaster and setting coat of thin lime and fine sand on exterior-walled rooms.

Split lath was nailed with square cut lath nails, one into each framing member. With hand split lath the plasterer had the luxury of making lath to fit the cavity being plastered. Lengths of lath two to six foot are not uncommon at Economy Village. Hand split lath is not uniform like sawn lath. The straightness or waviness of the grain affected the thickness or width of each lath, and thus the spacing of the lath. The clay plaster rough coat varied to cover the irregular lath. Window and door trim as well as the mudboard (baseboard) acted as screeds. With the variation of the lath thickness and use of coarse straw and manure, the clay coat of plaster was thick in comparison to later lime-only and gypsum plasters. In Economy Village, the lime top coats are thin veneers often an eighth inch or less attesting to the scarcity of limestone supplies there.

Clay plasters with their lack of tensile and compressive strength fell out of favor as industrial mining and technology advances in kiln production led to the exclusive use of lime and then gypsum in plaster applications. However, clay plasters still exist after hundreds of years clinging to split lath on rusty square nails. The wall variations and roughness reveal a hand-made and pleasing textured alternative to machine-made modern substrate finishes. But clay plaster finishes are rare and fleeting. According to Martin Weaver, &quot;Many of North America&#x27;s historic building interiors … are all too often … one of the first things to disappear in the frenzy of demolition of interiors which has unfortunately come to be a common companion to &#x27;heritage preservation&#x27; in the guise of building rehabilitation.&quot;

=== Gypsum plaster (plaster of Paris) ===
Gypsum plaster, also known as plaster of Paris, is a white powder consisting of calcium sulfate hemihydrate. The natural form of the compound is the mineral bassanite.

==== Etymology ====
The name &quot;plaster of Paris&quot; was given because it was originally made by heating gypsum from a large deposit at Montmartre, a hill in the north end of Paris.

==== Chemistry ====

Gypsum plaster, gypsum powder, or plaster of Paris, is produced by heating gypsum to about 120–180 °C (248–356 °F) in a kiln:
&lt;chem display=&quot;block&quot;&gt;CaSO4.2H2O \overset{heat} {CaSO4.1/2H2O} + 1\!1/2 H2O ^&lt;/chem&gt;
(released as steam).

Plaster of Paris has a remarkable property of setting into a hard mass on wetting with water.

&lt;chem display=&quot;block&quot;&gt;CaSO4.1/2H2O + 1 1/2H2O -&gt; CaSO4.2H2O&lt;/chem&gt;

Plaster of Paris is stored in moisture-proof containers, because the presence of moisture can cause slow setting of plaster of Paris by bringing about its hydration, which will make it useless after some time.

When the dry plaster powder is mixed with water, it rehydrates over time into gypsum. The setting of plaster slurry starts about 10 minutes after mixing and is complete in about 45 minutes. The setting of plaster of Paris is accompanied by a slight expansion of volume. It is used in making casts for statues, toys, and more. The initial matrix consists mostly of orthorhombic crystals: the kinetic product. Over the next 72 hours, the rhombic crystals give way to an interlocking mass of monoclinic crystal needles, and the plaster increases in hardness and strength. If plaster or gypsum is heated to between 130 °C (266 °F) and 180 °C (350 °F), hemihydrate is formed, which will also re-form as gypsum if mixed with water.

On heating to 180 °C (350 °F), the nearly water-free form, called γ-anhydrite (CaSO4·&quot;n&quot;H2O where &quot;n&quot; = 0 to 0.05) is produced. γ-anhydrite reacts slowly with water to return to the dihydrate state, a property exploited in some commercial desiccants. On heating above 250 °C (480 °F), the completely anhydrous form called β-anhydrite or dead burned plaster is formed.

==== Uses of gypsum plaster ====
* for making surfaces like the walls of a house smooth before painting them and for making ornamental designs on the ceilings of houses and other buildings. &quot;(see Plaster In decorative architecture)&quot;
* for making toys, decorative materials, cheap ornaments, cosmetics, and black-board chalk.
* a fire-proofing material. &quot;(see Plaster in Fire protection)&quot;
* an orthopedic cast is used in hospitals for setting fractured bones in the right position to ensure correct healing and avoid nonunion. It keeps the fractured bone straight. It is used in this way, because when plaster of Paris is mixed with a proper quantity of water and applied around the fractured limb, it sets into a hard mass, thereby keeping the bones in a fixed position. It is also used for making casts in dentistry. &quot;(see Plaster in Medicine)&quot;
* chemistry laboratory for sealing air-gaps in apparatus when air-tight arrangement is required.

=== Lime plaster ===

Lime plaster is a mixture of calcium hydroxide and sand (or other inert fillers). Carbon dioxide in the atmosphere causes the plaster to set by transforming the calcium hydroxide into calcium carbonate (limestone). Whitewash is based on the same chemistry.

To make lime plaster, limestone (calcium carbonate) is heated above approximately 850 °C (1600 °F) to produce quicklime (calcium oxide). Water is then added to produce slaked lime (calcium hydroxide), which is sold as a wet putty or a white powder. Additional water is added to form a paste prior to use. The paste may be stored in airtight containers. When exposed to the atmosphere, the calcium hydroxide very slowly turns back into calcium carbonate through reaction with atmospheric carbon dioxide, causing the plaster to increase in strength.

Lime plaster was a common building material for wall surfaces in a process known as lath and plaster, whereby a series of wooden strips on a studwork frame was covered with a semi-dry plaster that hardened into a surface. The plaster used in most lath and plaster construction was mainly lime plaster, with a cure time of about a month. To stabilize the lime plaster during curing, small amounts of plaster of Paris were incorporated into the mix. Because plaster of Paris sets quickly, &quot;retardants&quot; were used to slow setting time enough to allow workers to mix large working quantities of lime putty plaster. A modern form of this method uses expanded metal mesh over wood or metal structures, which allows a great freedom of design as it is adaptable to both simple and compound curves. Today this building method has been partly replaced with drywall, also composed mostly of gypsum plaster. In both these methods, a primary advantage of the material is that it is resistant to a fire within a room and so can assist in reducing or eliminating structural damage or destruction provided the fire is promptly extinguished.

Lime plaster is used for frescoes, where pigments, diluted in water, are applied to the still wet plaster.

USA and Iran are the main plaster producers in the world. 

=== Cement plaster ===
Cement plaster is a mixture of suitable plaster, sand, Portland cement and water which is normally applied to masonry interiors and exteriors to achieve a smooth surface. Interior surfaces sometimes receive a final layer of gypsum plaster. Walls constructed with stock bricks are normally plastered while face brick walls are not plastered. Various cement-based plasters are also used as proprietary spray fireproofing products. These usually use vermiculite as lightweight aggregate. Heavy versions of such plasters are also in use for exterior fireproofing, to protect LPG vessels, pipe bridges and vessel skirts.

Cement plaster was first introduced in America around 1909 and was often called by the generic name &quot;adamant plaster&quot; after a prominent manufacturer of the time. The advantages of cement plaster noted at that time were its strength, hardness, quick setting time and durability.

=== Heat-resistant plaster ===

Heat-resistant plaster is a building material used for coating walls and chimney breasts and for use as a fire barrier in ceilings. Its purpose is to replace conventional gypsum plasters in cases where the temperature can get too high for gypsum plaster to stay on the wall or ceiling.

An example of a heat-resistant plaster composition is a mixture of Portland cement, gypsum, lime, exfoliated insulating aggregate (perlite and vermiculite or mica), phosphate shale, and small amounts of adhesive binder (such as Gum karaya), and a detergent agent (such as sodium dodecylbenzene sulfonate).

== Applications ==
=== In decorative architecture ===
Plaster may also be used to create complex detailing for use in room interiors. These may be geometric (simulating wood or stone) or naturalistic (simulating leaves, vines, and flowers). These are also often used to simulate wood or stone detailing found in more substantial buildings.

In modern days this material is also used for false ceiling. In this, the powder form is converted in a sheet form and the sheet is then attached to the basic ceiling with the help of fasteners. It is done in various designs containing various combinations of lights and colors. The common use of this plaster can be seen in the construction of houses. Post-construction, direct painting is possible (which is commonly seen in French architecture), but elsewhere plaster is used. The walls are painted with the plaster which (in some countries) is nothing but calcium carbonate. After drying the calcium carbonate plaster turns white and then the wall is ready to be painted. Elsewhere in the world, such as the UK, ever finer layers of plaster are added on top of the plasterboard (or sometimes the brick wall directly) to give a smooth brown polished texture ready for painting.

=== Art ===

Mural paintings are commonly painted onto a plaster secondary support. Some, like Michelangelo&#x27;s Sistine Chapel ceiling, are executed in fresco, meaning they are painted on a thin layer of wet plaster, called intonaco; the pigments sink into this layer so that the plaster itself becomes the medium holding them, which accounts for the excellent durability of fresco. Additional work may be added &quot;a secco&quot; on top of the dry plaster, though this is generally less durable.

Plaster (often called stucco in this context) is a far easier material for making reliefs than stone or wood, and was widely used for large interior wall-reliefs in Egypt and the Near East from antiquity into Islamic times (latterly for architectural decoration, as at the Alhambra), Rome, and Europe from at least the Renaissance, as well as probably elsewhere. However, it needs very good conditions to survive long in unmaintained buildings – Roman decorative plasterwork is mainly known from Pompeii and other sites buried by ash from Mount Vesuvius.

Plaster may be cast directly into a damp clay mold. In creating this &quot;piece molds&quot; (molds designed for making multiple copies) or &quot;waste molds&quot; (for single use) would be made of plaster. This &quot;negative&quot; image, if properly designed, may be used to produce clay productions, which when fired in a kiln become terra cotta building decorations, or these may be used to create cast concrete sculptures. If a plaster positive was desired this would be constructed or cast to form a durable image artwork. As a model for stonecutters this would be sufficient. If intended for producing a bronze casting the plaster positive could be further worked to produce smooth surfaces. An advantage of this plaster image is that it is relatively cheap; should a patron approve of the durable image and be willing to bear further expense, subsequent molds could be made for the creation of a wax image to be used in lost wax casting, a far more expensive process. In lieu of producing a bronze image suitable for outdoor use the plaster image may be painted to resemble a metal image; such sculptures are suitable only for presentation in a weather-protected environment.

Plaster expands while hardening then contracts slightly just before hardening completely. This makes plaster excellent for use in molds, and it is often used as an artistic material for casting. Plaster is also commonly spread over an armature (form), made of wire mesh, cloth, or other materials; a process for adding raised details. For these processes, limestone or acrylic based plaster may be employed, known as stucco. 

Products composed mainly of plaster of Paris and a small amount of Portland cement are used for casting sculptures and other art objects as well as molds. Considerably harder and stronger than straight plaster of Paris, these products are for indoor use only as they degrade in moist conditions.
=== Medicine ===
Plaster is widely used as a support for broken bones; a bandage impregnated with plaster is moistened and then wrapped around the damaged limb, setting into a close-fitting yet easily removed tube, known as an orthopedic cast.

Plaster is also used in preparation for radiotherapy when fabricating individualized immobilization shells for patients. Plaster bandages are used to construct an impression of a patient&#x27;s head and neck, and liquid plaster is used to fill the impression and produce a plaster bust. The transparent material polymethyl methacrylate (Plexiglas, Perspex) is then vacuum formed over this bust to create a clear face mask which will hold the patient&#x27;s head steady while radiation is being delivered.

In dentistry, plaster is used for mounting casts or models of oral tissues. These diagnostic and working models are usually made from dental stone, a stronger, harder and denser derivative of plaster which is manufactured from gypsum under pressure. Plaster is also used to invest and flask wax dentures, the wax being subsequently removed by &quot;burning out,&quot; and replaced with flowable denture base material. The typically acrylic denture base then cures in the plaster investment mold. Plaster investments can withstand the high heat and pressure needed to ensure a rigid denture base. Moreover, in dentistry there are 5 types of gypsum products depending on their consistency and uses: 1) impression plaster (type 1), 2) model plaster (type 2), dental stones (types 3, 4 and 5)

In orthotics and prosthetics, plaster bandages traditionally were used to create impressions of the patient&#x27;s limb (or residuum). This negative impression was then, itself, filled with plaster of Paris, to create a positive model of the limb and used in fabricating the final medical device.

In addition, dentures (false teeth) are made by first taking a dental impression using a soft, pliable material that can be removed from around the teeth and gums without loss of fidelity and using the impression to creating a wax model of the teeth and gums. The model is used to create a plaster mold (which is heated so the wax melts and flows out) and the denture materials are injected into the mold. After a curing period, the mold is opened and the dentures are cleaned up and polished.

=== Fire protection ===


Plasters have been in use in passive fire protection, as fireproofing products, for many decades.

Gypsum plaster releases water vapor when exposed to flame, acting to slow the spread of the fire, for as much as an hour or two depending on thickness. Plaster also provides some insulation to retard heat flow into structural steel elements, that would otherwise lose their strength and collapse in a fire. Early versions of protective plasters often contain asbestos fibres, which since have been outlawed in many industrialized nations.

Recent plasters for fire protection either contain cement or gypsum as binding agents as well as mineral wool or glass fiber to add mechanical strength.
Vermiculite, polystyrene beads or chemical expansion agents are often added to decrease the density of the finished product and increase thermal insulation.

One differentiates between interior and exterior fireproofing. Interior products are typically less substantial, with lower densities and lower cost. Exterior products have to withstand harsher environmental conditions. A rough surface is typically forgiven inside of buildings as dropped ceilings often hide them. Fireproofing plasters are losing ground to more costly intumescent and endothermic products, simply on technical merit. Trade jurisdiction on unionized construction sites in North America remains with the plasterers, regardless of whether the plaster is decorative in nature or is used in passive fire protection. Cementitious and gypsum based plasters tend to be endothermic. Fireproofing plasters are closely related to firestop mortars. Most firestop mortars can be sprayed and tooled very well, due to the fine detail work that is required of firestopping.

=== 3D printing ===
Powder bed and inkjet head 3D printing is commonly based on the reaction of gypsum plaster with water, where the water is selectively applied by the inkjet head.

=== Gallery ===
== Safety issues ==
The chemical reaction that occurs when plaster is mixed with water is exothermic. When plaster sets, it can reach temperatures of more than 60 °C (140 °F) and, in large volumes, can burn the skin. In January 2007, a secondary school student in Lincolnshire, England sustained third-degree burns after encasing her hands in a bucket of plaster as part of a school art project.

Plaster that contains powdered silica or asbestos presents health hazards if inhaled repeatedly. Asbestos is a known irritant when inhaled and can cause cancer, especially in people who smoke, and inhalation can also cause asbestosis. Inhaled silica can cause silicosis and (in very rare cases) can encourage the development of cancer. Persons working regularly with plaster containing these additives should take precautions to avoid inhaling powdered plaster, cured or uncured. 

People can be exposed to plaster of Paris in the workplace by breathing it in, swallowing it, skin contact, and eye contact. The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) has set the legal limit (permissible exposure limit) for plaster of Paris exposure in the workplace as 15 mg/m3 total exposure and 5 mg/m3 respiratory exposure over an 8-hour workday. The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) has set a Recommended exposure limit (REL) of 10 mg/m3 total exposure and 5 mg/m3 respiratory exposure over an 8-hour workday.

== See also ==
== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q274988" start="0" end="7" title="Plaster" label="Plaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q206615" start="13" end="30" title="building material" label="building material"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770806" start="107" end="115" title="Molding (decorative)" label="moulding"/>
<link wikidata="Q33526" start="319" end="325" title="stucco" label="stucco"/>
<link wikidata="Q572879" start="336" end="347" title="plasterwork" label="plasterwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q245117" start="386" end="392" title="relief" label="relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q82658" start="488" end="494" title="gypsum" label="gypsum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6549153" start="496" end="500" title="lime plaster" label="lime"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776631" start="505" end="511" title="cement plaster" label="cement"/>
<link wikidata="Q284256" start="743" end="758" title="crystallization" label="crystallization"/>
<link wikidata="Q142274" start="860" end="869" title="sandpaper" label="sandpaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q131790" start="963" end="971" title="adhesive" label="adhesive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1526584" start="1180" end="1195" title="orthopedic cast" label="orthopedic cast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147570" start="1332" end="1349" title="dental impression" label="dental impression"/>
<link wikidata="Q134194" start="1461" end="1467" title="fresco" label="fresco"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="1910" end="1921" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q82658" start="1958" end="1964" title="gypsum" label="gypsum"/>
<link wikidata="Q189566" start="2062" end="2068" title="Mortar (masonry)" label="mortar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589292" start="2168" end="2208" title="Plastered human skulls" label="human skulls were decorated with plaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="2245" end="2251" title="Ancient Rome" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="2287" end="2293" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="2359" end="2363" title="clay" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092965" start="2451" end="2455" title="lath" label="lath"/>
<link wikidata="Q7974974" start="2752" end="2758" title="Wattle (construction)" label="wattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q49094494" start="2809" end="2817" title="wainscot" label="wainscot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6775371" start="3038" end="3054" title="Martin E. Weaver" label="Martin E. Weaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q7083903" start="4448" end="4467" title="Old Economy Village" label="Old Economy Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130536" start="4559" end="4567" title="Ambridge, Pennsylvania" label="Ambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092894" start="5080" end="5090" title="Chesapeake and Ohio Canal National Historical Park" label="Chesapeake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349300" start="5371" end="5382" title="root cellar" label="root cellar"/>
<link wikidata="Q28337" start="5490" end="5494" title="Shoal" label="sand"/>
<link wikidata="Q59772" start="5548" end="5557" title="lime kiln" label="lime kiln"/>
<link wikidata="Q208478" start="5643" end="5649" title="Old-growth forest" label="growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q185716" start="6133" end="6139" title="Manure" label="Manure"/>
<link wikidata="Q193970" start="6212" end="6218" title="casein" label="casein"/>
<link wikidata="Q82658" start="8722" end="8728" title="Gypsum" label="Gypsum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8802" end="8829" title="Calcium sulfate#Hydration and dehydration reactions" label="calcium sulfate hemihydrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q408259" start="8879" end="8888" title="bassanite" label="bassanite"/>
<link wikidata="Q186115" start="9032" end="9042" title="Montmartre" label="Montmartre"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="9071" end="9076" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q217651" start="9573" end="9581" title="moisture" label="moisture"/>
<link wikidata="Q11422" start="10064" end="10067" title="toy" label="toy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3144923" start="10402" end="10413" title="hemihydrate" label="hemihydrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q13221746" start="10740" end="10749" title="desiccant" label="desiccant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11071" end="11105" title="#In decorative architecture" label="Plaster In decorative architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q11422" start="11126" end="11129" title="toy" label="toy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131207" start="11171" end="11180" title="cosmetics" label="cosmetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q235585" start="11186" end="11197" title="Blackboard" label="black-board"/>
<link wikidata="Q183670" start="11198" end="11203" title="chalk" label="chalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059476" start="11209" end="11222" title="Fireproofing" label="fire-proofing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11244" end="11270" title="#Fire protection" label="Plaster in Fire protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q68833" start="11332" end="11347" title="Bone fracture" label="fractured bones"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049641" start="11406" end="11414" title="nonunion" label="nonunion"/>
<link wikidata="Q12128" start="11697" end="11706" title="dentistry" label="dentistry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11719" end="11738" title="#Medicine" label="Plaster in Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q483242" start="11748" end="11768" title="Laboratory" label="chemistry laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q182849" start="11895" end="11912" title="calcium hydroxide" label="calcium hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q23767" start="12050" end="12067" title="calcium carbonate" label="calcium carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="12069" end="12078" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q378312" start="12081" end="12090" title="Whitewash" label="Whitewash"/>
<link wikidata="Q185006" start="12234" end="12243" title="quicklime" label="quicklime"/>
<link wikidata="Q182849" start="12292" end="12303" title="slaked lime" label="slaked lime"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119408" start="12757" end="12773" title="lath and plaster" label="lath and plaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6516728" start="12814" end="12822" title="Wall stud" label="studwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q6549153" start="12961" end="12973" title="lime plaster" label="lime plaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q372852" start="13529" end="13536" title="drywall" label="drywall"/>
<link wikidata="Q134194" start="13833" end="13839" title="fresco" label="fresco"/>
<link wikidata="Q161179" start="13849" end="13856" title="pigment" label="pigment"/>
<link wikidata="Q844123" start="14054" end="14069" title="Portland cement" label="Portland cement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6671147" start="14262" end="14274" title="London stock brick" label="stock bricks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131313" start="14304" end="14314" title="Brickwork" label="face brick"/>
<link wikidata="Q194358" start="14446" end="14457" title="vermiculite" label="vermiculite"/>
<link wikidata="Q844123" start="15291" end="15306" title="Portland cement" label="Portland cement"/>
<link wikidata="Q655819" start="15355" end="15362" title="perlite" label="perlite"/>
<link wikidata="Q194358" start="15367" end="15378" title="vermiculite" label="vermiculite"/>
<link wikidata="Q114675" start="15382" end="15386" title="mica" label="mica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424327" start="15389" end="15404" title="Phosphorite" label="phosphate shale"/>
<link wikidata="Q421167" start="15452" end="15462" title="Gum karaya" label="Gum karaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q55095989" start="15496" end="15527" title="Alkylbenzene sulfonates" label="sodium dodecylbenzene sulfonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q687155" start="15918" end="15931" title="dropped ceiling" label="false ceiling"/>
<link wikidata="Q372852" start="16641" end="16653" title="drywall" label="plasterboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q844675" start="16869" end="16891" title="Sistine Chapel ceiling" label="Sistine Chapel ceiling"/>
<link wikidata="Q134194" start="16909" end="16915" title="fresco" label="fresco"/>
<link wikidata="Q4927228" start="16981" end="16989" title="intonaco" label="intonaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q33526" start="17278" end="17284" title="stucco" label="stucco"/>
<link wikidata="Q245117" start="17338" end="17344" title="relief" label="relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q48214" start="17435" end="17444" title="Near East" label="Near East"/>
<link wikidata="Q47476" start="17529" end="17537" title="Alhambra" label="Alhambra"/>
<link wikidata="Q43332" start="17752" end="17759" title="Pompeii" label="Pompeii"/>
<link wikidata="Q524" start="17795" end="17809" title="Mount Vesuvius" label="Mount Vesuvius"/>
<link wikidata="Q60424" start="18149" end="18160" title="terra cotta" label="terra cotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q22657" start="18219" end="18227" title="concrete" label="concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q765814" start="18740" end="18756" title="lost wax casting" label="lost wax casting"/>
<link wikidata="Q844123" start="19491" end="19506" title="Portland cement" label="Portland cement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1526584" start="19947" end="19962" title="orthopedic cast" label="orthopedic cast"/>
<link wikidata="Q180507" start="20005" end="20017" title="radiotherapy" label="radiotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q146123" start="20277" end="20300" title="poly(methyl methacrylate)" label="polymethyl methacrylate"/>
<link wikidata="Q143567" start="21572" end="21580" title="dentures" label="dentures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147570" start="21622" end="21639" title="dental impression" label="dental impression"/>
<link wikidata="Q643227" start="22109" end="22132" title="passive fire protection" label="passive fire protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059476" start="22137" end="22149" title="fireproofing" label="fireproofing"/>
<link wikidata="Q918306" start="22358" end="22368" title="thermal insulation" label="insulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q44432" start="22379" end="22383" title="heat" label="heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q725158" start="22394" end="22410" title="structural steel" label="structural steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q104085" start="22538" end="22546" title="asbestos" label="asbestos"/>
<link wikidata="Q194358" start="22772" end="22783" title="Vermiculite" label="Vermiculite"/>
<link wikidata="Q146243" start="22785" end="22796" title="polystyrene" label="polystyrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q452996" start="23300" end="23311" title="intumescent" label="intumescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q12571883" start="23316" end="23327" title="endothermic" label="endothermic"/>
<link wikidata="Q17013645" start="23667" end="23675" title="firestop" label="firestop"/>
<link wikidata="Q25381710" start="23827" end="23865" title="Powder bed and inkjet head 3D printing" label="Powder bed and inkjet head 3D printing"/>
<link wikidata="Q60661" start="24096" end="24106" title="exothermic" label="exothermic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23090" start="24270" end="24282" title="Lincolnshire" label="Lincolnshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="24284" end="24291" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q170518" start="24302" end="24319" title="third-degree burn" label="third-degree burn"/>
<link wikidata="Q116269" start="24434" end="24440" title="silica" label="silica"/>
<link wikidata="Q104085" start="24444" end="24452" title="asbestos" label="asbestos"/>
<link wikidata="Q77776" start="24520" end="24528" title="irritation" label="irritant"/>
<link wikidata="Q664174" start="24626" end="24636" title="asbestosis" label="asbestosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q653318" start="24663" end="24672" title="silicosis" label="silicosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="24731" end="24737" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q746186" start="25014" end="25059" title="Occupational Safety and Health Administration" label="Occupational Safety and Health Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q4376583" start="25092" end="25118" title="permissible exposure limit" label="permissible exposure limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q60346" start="25255" end="25308" title="National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health" label="National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302715" start="25327" end="25353" title="Recommended exposure limit" label="Recommended exposure limit"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="331741" wikidata="Q979432" url="?curid=331741" title="Raja Ram (musician)">
<text>Raja Ram (born Ronald Gary Rothfield, 18 December 1940) is an Australian-born musician and the owner of the United Kingdom record label Tip World. He was a founding member of the psychedelic rock band Quintessence in the late 1960s and early 1970s, playing at the first two Glastonbury Fayres in 1970 and 1971. He later found success in the psychedelic trance scene and continues to headline at large events worldwide.
==Early life==
Ram left Australia in the 1950s to begin the hippie trail. He returned to Australia later and studied flute at the Melbourne Conservatorium of Music. Ram travelled to New York in 1965 to study jazz, leading to his career as a psychedelic musician. Ram retired from Quintessence in the 1970s for personal reasons and became an envelope salesman.

Ram later returned to his music career, finding success in the emerging genre of electronic music. He was one of the first people to make what is today considered psychedelic trance.
==Career==
Raja Ram formed The Infinity Project in 1994 with Graham Wood and Ian St. Paul. The first TIP Records track was celebrated by throwing the first of the &quot;TIP parties.&quot; Some of the first tracks were produced of Martin Freeland of Man With No Name fame. Richard Bloor then joined them and together they made TIP one of the best-known Goa trance labels. 
Aside from The Infinity Project, Ram created Shpongle with Simon Posford and collaborated with a group of Goa musicians to make two ambient albums as The Mystery of the Yeti. He is a founder of 1200 Micrograms along with Riktam, Bansi and Chicago. He often plays the flute on both ambient and full on tracks and has played as guest flautist with Youth, Boy George and Sly &amp; Robbie. He also has collaborated in The Zap! and Cyberbabas with Benji Vaughan.

Ram is married to Nita Devi, with whom he has a daughter named Sastra. He also has a granddaughter named Bella.

==Projects==
* Quintessence
* The Infinity Project
* Shpongle
* The Mystery of the Yeti
* 1200 Micrograms
* The Zap!
* Cyberbabas
* Omputer
* DMT
* Tipnotic
* Visible Sound

==Discography==

*&quot;Raja Ram&#x27;s Stash Bag&quot; (2002)
*&quot;Raja Ram&#x27;s Stash Bag Volume 2&quot; (2003)
*&quot;Raja Ram&#x27;s Stash Bag Vol. 3 – Smokers Jokers and Midnight Tokers&quot; (2004)
*&quot;Raja Ram&#x27;s Stash Bag Vol. 3 – Smokers Jokers and Midnight Tokers (Unmixed Edition)&quot; (2004)
*&quot;Most Wanted Presents: Raja Ram the Godfather&quot; (2005)
*&quot;Evolution of Expanded Consciousness&quot; (2006)
*&quot;Raja Ram&#x27;s Stash Bag Volume 4&quot; (2006)
*&quot;The Anthology&quot; (2007)
*&quot;Raja Ram&#x27;s Pipe Dreams&quot; (2013)
*&quot;Raja Ram&#x27;s Pipe Dreams 2&quot; (2013)
*&quot;Raja Ram&#x27;s Stash Bag Volume 5&quot; (2014)
*&quot;Raja Ram&#x27;s Stash Bag Vol. 6&quot; (2018)

==References==
==External links==
*TIP Records</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q979432" start="0" end="8" title="Raja Ram (musician)" label="Raja Ram"/>
<link wikidata="Q979432" start="15" end="36" title="Raja Ram (musician)" label="Ronald Gary Rothfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q206159" start="179" end="195" title="psychedelic rock" label="psychedelic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284362" start="201" end="213" title="Quintessence (English band)" label="Quintessence"/>
<link wikidata="Q309066" start="274" end="292" title="Glastonbury Festival" label="Glastonbury Fayres"/>
<link wikidata="Q622871" start="341" end="359" title="psychedelic trance" label="psychedelic trance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619981" start="479" end="491" title="hippie trail" label="hippie trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q6811668" start="549" end="582" title="Melba Memorial Conservatorium of Music" label="Melbourne Conservatorium of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="627" end="631" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q622871" start="943" end="961" title="psychedelic trance" label="psychedelic trance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748644" start="1193" end="1208" title="Martin Freeland" label="Martin Freeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748644" start="1212" end="1228" title="Martin Freeland" label="Man With No Name"/>
<link wikidata="Q835131" start="1315" end="1325" title="Goa trance" label="Goa trance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134411" start="1380" end="1388" title="Shpongle" label="Shpongle"/>
<link wikidata="Q373057" start="1394" end="1407" title="Simon Posford" label="Simon Posford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752932" start="1485" end="1508" title="The Mystery of the Yeti" label="The Mystery of the Yeti"/>
<link wikidata="Q193207" start="1616" end="1623" title="ambient music" label="ambient"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1628" end="1635" title="Psychedelic trance#Full-on" label="full on"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367219" start="1681" end="1686" title="Youth (musician)" label="Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q312883" start="1688" end="1698" title="Boy George" label="Boy George"/>
<link wikidata="Q576723" start="1703" end="1719" title="Sly &amp;amp; Robbie" label="Sly &amp;amp; Robbie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284362" start="1922" end="1934" title="Quintessence (English band)" label="Quintessence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916431" start="1937" end="1957" title="The Infinity Project" label="The Infinity Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134411" start="1960" end="1968" title="Shpongle" label="Shpongle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752932" start="1971" end="1994" title="The Mystery of the Yeti" label="The Mystery of the Yeti"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="331745" wikidata="Q94382" url="?curid=331745" title="Karl Maria Kertbeny">
<text>Károly Mária Kertbeny (born Karl Maria Benkert; 28 February 1824 – 23 January 1882) was a Hungarian journalist, translator, memoirist and human rights campaigner. Kertbeny coined the words &quot;heterosexual&quot; and &quot;homosexual&quot; as the German nouns and .

He translated works by Hungarian poets and writers Sándor Petőfi, János Arany and Mór Jókai into German. Among his acquaintances were Heinrich Heine, George Sand, Alfred de Musset, Hans Christian Andersen, Karl Marx, and the Brothers Grimm.

==Early life==

Karl Maria Benkert was born in Vienna to Jewish-Hungarian parents on 28 February 1824. He moved with his family to Budapest when he was a child and was equally fluent in German and Hungarian. After a stint in the Hungarian army, Benkert made a living as a journalist and travel writer and wrote at least twenty-five books on various subjects.

==Career==
Benkert left Hungary and was determined to become an advocate on behalf of Hungarian culture. He, therefore, arranged for his legal name to take the Hungarian form under which he lived and published for most of his life. Final approval on 22 February 1848 made him Kertbeny Károly Mária or, in the standard way of rendering a Hungarian name in other European languages, Károly Mária Kertbeny.

He made a variety of contacts in his travels. He was Charles Baudelaire&#x27;s only personal Austro-Hungarian contact.

In his fiction, quite apart from his political advocacy, Kertbeny included homosexual characters in several works, including , and the short story &quot;&quot;.

===Writings on sexuality===
He settled in Berlin in 1868, when he was still unmarried at 44. Kertbeny claimed in his writings to be &quot;normally sexed&quot;. However, his diaries list a self-censored string of encounters with youths and men (&quot;young barber lad&quot;; &quot;very much in love with the lad&quot;; &quot;I have done it&quot;), and recurring fear following the arrest of Karl Heinrich Ulrichs with whom he corresponded (&quot;Awful days!... Horrible nightmares. I have burnt all the dangerous letters&quot;), which suggest he was secretly homosexual.

He explained his interest in sexual minorities as his &quot;instinctive drive to take issue with every injustice&quot;. He cited as a formative experience from his teenage years the suicide of a co-worker who was being blackmailed and threatened with exposure as a homosexual.

In 1869, he published two anonymous pamphlets. He argued that the Prussian sodomy law, Paragraph 143, which later became Paragraph 175 of the penal code of the German Empire, violated the &quot;rights of man&quot;. He advanced the classic liberal argument that consensual sexual acts in private should not be subject to criminal law. He contended that the Prussian law allowed blackmailers to extort money from homosexuals and often drove them to suicide.

Whether sexual preference was innate was called by Kertbeny &quot;a very interesting riddle of nature&quot; that was best excluded from arguments for the decriminalization of sexual practices. Instead, he considered the right of a government to intervene in private matters. He wrote:
On the other hand, he repeatedly described one&#x27;s sexual drive as &quot;innate and unchanging&quot;. That contradicted the dominant view up to that time of men committing &quot;sodomy&quot; out of mere wickedness. Gay men, he said, were not by nature effeminate, and he pointed out that many of the great heroes of history were gay. With Heinrich Hössli and Karl Heinrich Ulrichs, he was among the first writers to put those now-familiar arguments before the public.
In a letter written on 6 May 1868, Kertbeny published, in German the terms &quot;homosexual&quot; and &quot;heterosexual&quot; as part of his system for defining sexual types to replace the pejorative terms &quot;sodomite&quot; and &quot;pederast&quot;, which were used in the German- and French-speaking world of his time. In addition, he called those who masturbate &quot;monosexualists&quot;, practitioners of anal intercourse &quot;pygists&quot;, those who have sex with animals &quot;&quot;, and a man who prefers women sexually &quot;normalsexuals&quot; (), term of which he used to describe himself. The concept of bisexuality was named as ().

He also used German terms that did not influence his contemporaries but suggest how he was considering terms that did not rely on classical languages, including (&quot;those of the same sex&quot;) and (&quot;the same-sex act&quot;).

Kertbeny made no further contribution to the debates about homosexuality or its legal status or origins. In 1880, he offered a chapter on homosexuality for Gustav Jäger to include in his book &quot;Discovery of the Soul&quot;, but Jäger&#x27;s publisher decided that it was too controversial and omitted it. Jäger nevertheless used Kertbeny&#x27;s terminology elsewhere in the book.

==Death==

Kertbeny died in Budapest on 23 January 1882 at the age of 58. (1836–1894) eulogized him: &quot;He devoted his life to serving his country, even when he was living abroad. He publicised our glory there amongst foreign peoples. His first literary activities were received with mockery, but he did not give up and he brought light to Hungarian literature for foreign people&quot;.

The Hungarian writer and literary historian has described him in these terms: &quot;This moody, fluttering, imperfect writer is one of the best and undeservedly forgotten Hungarian memoir writers&quot;. He also said: &quot;He was born effeminately sensitive, soft, believing, fair, open minded and enthusiastic for beauty. He loved to love, and loved to be loved. He loved only the beautiful and he wanted the love of the best. Mária! - An old, vain, swindling, naughty, clownish, thick skinned, envious, literary adventurer became of him: Károly, poor, Károly!&quot;

Kertbeny&#x27;s gravesite, which was identified in 2001, is located in Budapest&#x27;s Kerepesi Cemetery, which is the final resting place of numerous prominent Hungarians of the 19th and the 20th centuries. The gay community set a new tombstone on it, and since 2002, a wreath is placed at his grave as part of Hungarian gay festivals.

==Notes==
==References==
;Additional sources 

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q94382" start="0" end="21" title="Karl Maria Kertbeny" label="Károly Mária Kertbeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q94382" start="28" end="46" title="Karl Maria Kertbeny" label="Karl Maria Benkert"/>
<link wikidata="Q133032" start="90" end="99" title="Hungarian people" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930187" start="100" end="110" title="journalist" label="journalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7553" start="112" end="122" title="translator" label="translator"/>
<link wikidata="Q112983" start="124" end="133" title="memoirist" label="memoirist"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="138" end="150" title="human rights" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035954" start="195" end="207" title="heterosexual" label="heterosexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636" start="224" end="234" title="homosexual" label="homosexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q81219" start="319" end="332" title="Sándor Petőfi" label="Sándor Petőfi"/>
<link wikidata="Q316556" start="334" end="345" title="János Arany" label="János Arany"/>
<link wikidata="Q379621" start="350" end="359" title="Mór Jókai" label="Mór Jókai"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="365" end="371" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q44403" start="402" end="416" title="Heinrich Heine" label="Heinrich Heine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3816" start="418" end="429" title="George Sand" label="George Sand"/>
<link wikidata="Q179680" start="431" end="447" title="Alfred de Musset" label="Alfred de Musset"/>
<link wikidata="Q5673" start="449" end="472" title="Hans Christian Andersen" label="Hans Christian Andersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9061" start="474" end="483" title="Karl Marx" label="Karl Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q2793" start="493" end="507" title="Brothers Grimm" label="Brothers Grimm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781" start="641" end="649" title="Budapest" label="Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q246505" start="956" end="973" title="Hungarian culture" label="Hungarian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q830844" start="1207" end="1221" title="Hungarian names" label="Hungarian name"/>
<link wikidata="Q48366" start="1231" end="1249" title="European languages" label="European languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q501" start="1328" end="1346" title="Charles Baudelaire" label="Charles Baudelaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="1368" end="1384" title="Austro-Hungarian" label="Austro-Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="1599" end="1605" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q60318" start="1947" end="1968" title="Karl Heinrich Ulrichs" label="Karl Heinrich Ulrichs"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="2472" end="2479" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656146" start="2481" end="2491" title="sodomy law" label="sodomy law"/>
<link wikidata="Q249348" start="2527" end="2540" title="Paragraph 175" label="Paragraph 175"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="2566" end="2579" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q794394" start="2637" end="2652" title="classic liberal" label="classic liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q206426" start="3329" end="3335" title="sodomy" label="sodomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q116152" start="3490" end="3505" title="Heinrich Hössli" label="Heinrich Hössli"/>
<link wikidata="Q60318" start="3510" end="3531" title="Karl Heinrich Ulrichs" label="Karl Heinrich Ulrichs"/>
<link wikidata="Q211354" start="3857" end="3865" title="pederast" label="pederast"/>
<link wikidata="Q8396" start="3976" end="3986" title="masturbation" label="masturbate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632385" start="3993" end="4007" title="Monosexual" label="monosexualists"/>
<link wikidata="Q8392" start="4080" end="4101" title="Bestiality" label="have sex with animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q43200" start="4241" end="4252" title="bisexuality" label="bisexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q63397" start="4661" end="4673" title="Gustav Jäger (naturalist)" label="Gustav Jäger"/>
<link wikidata="Q288130" start="5936" end="5953" title="Kerepesi Cemetery" label="Kerepesi Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201922" start="6120" end="6126" title="wreath" label="wreath"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="331749" wikidata="Q691653" url="?curid=331749" title="Parotid gland">
<text>The parotid gland is a major salivary gland in many animals. In humans, the two parotid glands are present on either side of the mouth and in front of both ears. They are the largest of the salivary glands. Each parotid is wrapped around the mandibular ramus, and secretes serous saliva through the parotid duct into the mouth, to facilitate mastication and swallowing and to begin the digestion of starches. There are also two other types of salivary glands; they are submandibular and sublingual glands. Sometimes accessory parotid glands are found close to the main parotid glands.

== Etymology ==
The word parotid literally means &quot;beside the ear&quot;. From Greek παρωτίς (stem παρωτιδ-) : (gland) behind the ear &lt; παρά - pará : in front, and οὖς - ous (stem ὠτ-, ōt-) : ear.

== Structure ==
The parotid glands are a pair of mainly serous salivary glands located below and in front of each ear canal, draining their secretions into the vestibule of the mouth through the parotid duct. Each gland lies behind the mandibular ramus and in front of the mastoid process of the temporal bone. The gland can be felt on either side, by feeling in front of each ear, along the cheek, and below the angle of the mandible.

The parotid duct, a long excretory duct, emerges from the front of each gland, superficial to the masseter muscle. The duct pierces the buccinator muscle, then opens into the mouth on the inner surface of the cheek, usually opposite the maxillary second molar. The parotid papilla is a small elevation of tissue that marks the opening of the parotid duct on the inner surface of the cheek.

The gland has four surfaces – superficial or lateral, superior, anteromedial, and posteromedial. The gland has three borders – anterior, medial, and posterior. The parotid gland has two ends – a superior end in the form of a small superior surface and an inferior end (apex).

A number of different structures pass through the gland. From lateral to medial, these are:
#Facial nerve
#Retromandibular vein
#External carotid artery
#Superficial temporal artery
#Branches of the great auricular nerve
#Maxillary artery

Sometimes accessory parotid glands are found as an anatomic variation. These are close to the main glands and consist of ectopic salivary gland tissue.

Capsule of parotid gland

A capsule of the parotid gland is formed from the investing layer of the deep cervical fascia. It is supplied by the great auricular nerve. The fascia splits to enclose the gland. This splitting occurs between the angle of the mandible and the mastoid process. The &quot;superficial lamina (parotidomassetric fascia)&quot; is thick and is attached to the zygomatic arch. The deep lamina is thin and is attached to the styloid process, tympanic plate, and the ramus of the mandible. The part of the deep lamina extending between the styloid process and the mandible is thickened to form a &quot;stylomastoid ligament.&quot; The stylomandibular ligament separates the parotid gland from the superficial lobe of the submandibular gland. 

===Relations===
*Superficial or lateral relations: The gland is situated deep to the skin, superficial fascia, superficial lamina of investing layer of deep cervical fascia, and great auricular nerve (anterior ramus of C2 and C3).
*Anteromedial relations: The gland is situated posterolaterally to the mandibular ramus, masseter, and medial pterygoid muscles. A part of the gland may extend between the ramus and medial pterygoid, as the pterygoid process. Branches of the facial nerve and parotid duct emerge through this surface.
*Posteromedial relations: The gland is situated anterolaterally to mastoid process of temporal bone with its attached sternocleidomastoid and digastric muscles, styloid process of temporal bone with its three attached muscles (stylohyoid, stylopharyngeus, and styloglossus) and carotid sheath with its contained neurovasculature (internal carotid artery, internal jugular vein, and 9th, 10th, 11th, and 12th cranial nerves).
*Medial relations: The parotid gland comes into contact with the superior pharyngeal constrictor muscle at the medial border, where the anteromedial and posteromedial surfaces meet. Hence, a need exists to examine the fauces in parotitis.
The facial nerve (CN VII) splits into its branches within the parotid gland, thus forming its parotid plexus. Nerves of this plexus then pass through the parotid gland without innervating the gland itself.

===Vasculature===
Arterial supply

The external carotid artery and its terminal branches within the gland, namely, the superficial temporal and the maxillary artery, also the posterior auricular artery supply the parotid gland.

Venous drainage

Venous return is to the retromandibular veins.

Lymphatic drainage

The gland is mainly drained into the preauricular or parotid lymph nodes which ultimately drain to the deep cervical chain.

===Nerve supply===
The parotid gland receives both sensory and autonomic innervation.

Sympathetic

The cell bodies of the preganglionic sympathetic fibres that supply the gland usually lie in the lateral horns of upper thoracic spinal segments (T1-T3). Postganglionic sympathetic fibers from superior cervical ganglion reach the gland by passing along the external carotid artery and middle meningeal artery. They act to cause vasoconstriction.

Parasympathetic

Preganglionic parasympathetic fibers for the parotid gland arise in the brainstem in the inferior salivatory nucleus, and leave the brain in the glossopharyngeal nerve (CN IX), then pass in the tympanic nerve to the tympanic plexus, then from the tympanic plexus in the lesser petrosal nerve to the otic ganglion where they synapse. Postganglionic (post-synaptic) fibers from the ganglion then &quot;hitch-hike&quot; along the auriculotemporal nerve to reach the parotid gland.

Sensory

General sensory innervation to the parotid gland and its capsule is provided by the auriculotemporal nerve.

=== Histology ===

The gland has a capsule of its own of dense connective tissue but is also provided with a false capsule by the investing layer of the deep cervical fascia. The fascia at the imaginary line between the angle of the mandible and the mastoid process splits into a superficial and a deep lamina to enclose the gland. The risorius is a small muscle embedded with this capsule substance.

The gland has short, striated ducts and long, intercalated ducts. The intercalated ducts are also numerous and lined with cuboidal epithelial cells and have lumina larger than those of the acini. The striated ducts are also numerous and consist of simple columnar epithelium, having striations that represent the infolded basal cell membranes and mitochondria.

Though the parotid gland is the largest, it provides only 25% of the total salivary volume. The serous cell predominates in the parotid, making the gland secrete a mainly serous secretory product.

The parotid gland also secretes salivary alpha-amylase (sAA), which is the first step in the decomposition of starches during mastication. It is the main exocrine gland to secrete this. It breaks down amylose (straight chain starch) and amylopectin (branched starch) by hydrolyzing alpha 1,4 bonds. Additionally, the alpha amylase has been suggested to prevent bacterial attachment to oral surfaces and to enable bacterial clearance from the mouth.

=== Development ===
The parotid salivary glands appear early in the sixth week of the prenatal development and are the first major salivary glands formed. The epithelial buds of these glands are located on the inner part of the cheek, near the labial commissures of the primitive mouth (from ectodermal lining near angles of the stomodeum in the 1st/2nd pharyngeal arches; the stomodeum itself is created from the rupturing of the oropharyngeal membrane at about 26 days.) These buds grow up posteriorly toward the otic placodes of the ears and branch to form solid cords with rounded terminal ends near the developing facial nerve. Later, at around 10 weeks of prenatal development, these cords are canalized and form ducts, with the largest becoming the parotid duct for the parotid gland. The rounded terminal ends of the cords form the acini of the glands. Secretion by the parotid glands via the parotid duct begins at about 18 weeks of gestation. Again, the supporting connective tissue of the gland develops from the surrounding mesenchyme.

==Clinical significance==
===Parotitis===
Inflammation of one or both parotid glands is known as parotitis. The most common cause of parotitis is mumps. Widespread vaccination against mumps has markedly reduced the incidence of mumps parotitis. The pain of mumps is due to the swelling of the gland within its fibrous capsule.

Apart from viral infection, other infections, such as bacterial, can cause parotitis (acute suppurative parotitis or chronic parotitis). These infections may cause blockage of the duct by salivary duct calculi or external compression. Parotid gland swellings can also be due to benign lymphoepithelial lesions caused by Mikulicz disease and Sjögren syndrome. Swelling of the parotid gland may also indicate the eating disorder bulimia nervosa, creating the look of a heavy jaw line. With the inflammation of mumps or obstruction of the ducts, increased levels of the salivary alpha amylase secreted by the parotid gland can be detected in the blood stream.

==== Mumps ====
Mumps is seen to be a common cause of parotid gland swelling85% of cases occur in children younger than 15 years. The disease is highly contagious and spreads by airborne droplets from salivary, nasal, and urinary secretions. Symptoms include oedema in the area, trismus as well as otalgia. The lesion tends to begin on one side of the face and eventually becomes bilateral. The transmission of the paramyxovirus is by contact with the infected persons saliva. Initial symptoms tend to be a headache and fever. Mumps is not fatal, however further complications can include swelling of the ovaries or the testes. Diagnosis of mumps is confirmed through viral serology, management of the condition includes hydration and good oral hygiene of the patient requiring excellent motivation. However, since the development of the mumps vaccine, given at the age of between 4–6 years, the incidence of this viral infection has greatly reduced. This vaccine has reduced the incidence by 99%.

===Fibrous reactions===
Tuberculosis and syphilis can cause granuloma formation in the parotid glands.

===Salivary stones===
Salivary stones mainly occur within the main confluence of the ducts and within the main parotid duct. The patient usually complains of intense pain when salivating and tends to avoid foods which produce this symptom. In addition, the parotid gland may become enlarged upon trying to eat. The pain can be reproduced in clinic by squirting lemon juice into the mouth. Surgery depends upon the site of the stone: if within the anterior aspect of the duct, a simple incision into the buccal mucosa with sphinterotomy may allow removal; however, if situated more posteriorly within the main duct, complete gland excision may be necessary.

===Injury===
The parotid salivary gland can also be pierced and the facial nerve temporarily traumatized when an inferior alveolar local anesthesia nerve block is incorrectly administered, causing transient facial paralysis.

===Cancer and tumours===
About 80% of tumors of the parotid gland are benign. The most common of these include pleomorphic adenoma (70% of tumors, of which 60% occur in females) and Warthin tumor (i.e. adenolymphoma, which is more common in males than in females). Their importance is in relation to their anatomical position and tendency to grow over time. The tumorous growth can also change the consistency of the gland and cause facial pain on the involved side.

Around 20% of parotid tumors are malignant, with the most common tumors being mucoepidermoid carcinoma and adenoid cystic carcinoma. Other malignant tumors of the parotid gland include acinic cell carcinoma, carcinoma expleomorphic adenoma, adenocarcinoma (arising from ductal epithelium of parotid gland), squamous cell carcinoma (arising from parenchyma of parotid gland), and undifferentiated carcinoma. Metastasis from other sites like phyllodes tumour of breast presenting as parotid swelling have also been described. Critically, the relationship of the tumor to the branches of the facial nerve (CN VII) must be defined because resection may damage the nerves, resulting in paralysis of the muscles of facial expression.

==== Benign ====
Neoplastic lesions of the parotid salivary gland can either be benign or malignant. Within the parotid gland, nearly 80% of tumours are benign. Benign lesions tend to be painless, asymptomatic and slow-growing. The most common salivary gland neoplasms in children are hemangiomas, lymphatic malformations, and pleomorphic adenomas. Diagnosis of benign lesions require a fine-needle-like aspiration biopsy. With various benign lesions, most commonly the pleomorphic adenoma, there is a risk of developing malignancy over time. As a result, these lesions are typically resected.

Pleomorphic adenoma is seen to be a common benign neoplasm of the salivary gland and has an overall incidence of 54–68%. The Warthin tumour has a lower incidence of 6–10%; this tumour is associated with smoking and is more common in older men. Benign lesions of the parotid gland have a significantly higher incidence than malignant lesions.

==== Malignant ====
Malignant salivary gland lesions are rare. However, when a tumour extends to the submandibular, sublingual and the minor salivary glands, they tend to be malignant. Distinguishing a malignant lesion from a benign one may be difficult as they both present as painless lesions. A biopsy is crucial in aiding diagnosis. There are common signs that can highlight the presence of a malignant lesion. These include facial nerve weakness, rapid increase of the size of the lump as well as ulceration of the mucosa of the skin.

Mucoepidermoid carcinoma is a common malignant tumour of the salivary glands and has a low incidence of 4–13%. Adenoid cystic carcinoma is also a common malignant salivary gland lesion and has an incidence of 4–8%. This carcinoma tends to invade nerves and can re-occur post-treatment.

=== Polycystic parotid disease ===
A developmental polycystic disease of the salivary gland is seen to be extremely rare and is seen to be independent of recurrent parotitis. The cause is thought to be a defect in the interactions between activin, follistatin and TGF-β, leading to a developmental disorder of glandular tissue.

=== Surgery ===
Surgical treatment of parotid gland tumors is sometimes difficult because of the anatomical relations of the facial nerve parotid lodge, as well as the increased potential for postoperative relapse. Thus, detection of early stages of a parotid tumor is extremely important in terms of postoperative prognosis. Operative technique is laborious, because of relapses and incomplete previous treatment made in other border specialties. Surgical techniques in parotid surgery have evolved in the last years with the use of neuromonitoring of the facial nerve and have become safer and less invasive.

After surgical removal of the parotid gland (parotidectomy), the auriculotemporal nerve is liable to damage and upon recovery it fuses with sweat glands. This can cause sweating on the cheek on the side of the face of the affected gland. This condition is known as Frey&#x27;s syndrome.

== Infections ==

=== Bacterial infections ===
==== Acute bacterial parotitis ====
Commonly caused by a retrograde bacterial infection as a result of illness, sepsis, trauma, surgery, reduced salivary flow due to medications, diabetes, malnutrition and dehydration. Classically symptoms of painful swelling in the parotid region when eating seen. Management is based upon antibacterials, rehydration combined with gentle massage to encourage salivary flow.

==== Chronic bacterial parotitis ====
A latent infection despite clinical resolution of the disease resulting in impaired function. Histologically glandular duct dilation, abscess formation and atrophy may be seen. Parotid secretions are viscous. Disease course shows pain and swelling, waxing and waning. Radiographic screening should be undertaken to rule out sialolith. Management with palliative care with parotidectomy as a last resort.

=== Viral infections ===

==== Mumps ====

Acute non-suppurative disease that often occurs in epidemics. Prevented by MMR vaccine. Caused by paramyxovirus that is transmitted by infected saliva and urine. A prodromal period of 24–28 hours is experienced, followed by rapid and painful swelling of the parotid gland. Treatment is supportive (bedrest, hydration) as spontaneous resolution occurs within 5–10 days.

==== HIV / AIDS ====

Diffuse gland enlargement is seen, and may affect patients throughout all stages of the infection. Lymphoepithelial cysts seen via imaging help aid diagnosis. Pathogenic process occurs due to circulating CD8 lymphocytes within the salivary gland. Medical management via use of antiretrovirals, excellent oral hygiene measures and sialogogues.

=== Autoimmune related ===

==== Systemic lupus erythematosus ====

Most commonly seen in fourth and fifth decades in women, and can affect any salivary gland. Presentation is a slowly enlarging gland, with diagnosis made by identification of the underlying systemic disorder and measurements of salivary chemical levels. Sodium and chloride ion levels will be elevated two or three times normal levels. Treatment is by addressing the underlying systemic condition.

==== Sarcoidosis ====

Sarcoidosis is a chronic systemic disease characterised by the production of non-caseating granulomas of unknown aetiology. It can affect any organ of the body, depressing cellular immunity and enhancing humoral immunity.

Salivary gland involvement primarily involves both parotid glands, causing enlargement and swelling. Salivary gland biopsy with histopathologic examination is needed to make the distinction between whether Sjoren&#x27;s syndrome or sarcoidosis is the cause of this.

==== Sjogren&#x27;s syndrome ====

Salivary gland enlargement occurs in up to 30% of patients with Sjogren&#x27;s syndrome, with the parotid gland being most often enlarged, and bilateral parotid gland enlargement seen in 25–60% of patients. However, the parotid glands have a longer-lasting secretory capacity in Sjogren&#x27;s syndrome patient and therefore are the last glands to manifest hyposalivation in the disease. Histopathology shows clustering of lymphocytic infiltrates and epimyoepithelial islands.

=== Mycobacterial infection ===

The most common head and neck manifestation of tuberculosis mycobacterial disease is infection of cervical lymph nodes. The infection is thought to originate in the tonsils or gingiva, ascending to the parotid gland. Two clinical forms; acute and chronic lesions. Acute lesions have diffuse glandular edema, easily confused with acute sialdentitis or abscess. The chronic lesions occur as slow growing masses mimicking tumors.

== Examination of the salivary gland ==

=== History and examination ===
A patient with parotid swelling may complain of swelling, pain, xerostomia, bad taste and sometimes sialorrhoea.

The most common presenting symptom of neoplasms (both benign and malignant) is an asymptomatic swelling. Pain is more common in patients with parotid cancer (10–29% feel pain) than those with benign neoplasms (only 2.5–4%), but pain itself it not diagnostic of malignancy.

Episodic swelling of major salivary glands accompanied by pain and related to salivary stimuli suggests duct obstruction.

Also need to assess the facial nerve. The facial nerve passes through the parotid so may be affected if there is a change in the parotid gland. Facial nerve paralysis in a previously untreated patient usually indicates that a tumour is malignant.

=== Physical examination ===
The superficial location of the salivary glands allows palpation and visual inspection. The inspection must be systematic, both intraorally and extraorally, so no area is missed.

For extraoral examination the patients head should be inclined forwards in order to maximally expose the parotid and submandibular glands. A normal parotid gland is barely palpable and a normal sublingual gland is not palpable.

Intra-oral examination should include observations for asymmetry, discolouration, pulsation and obstructions in the duct orifices. Swelling of the deep lobe of the parotid gland may be seen intra-orally, and may also displace the tonsil. The minor salivary glands should be examined. The labial, buccal and posterior palatal mucosa should be dried with an air blower or tissue and pressed to assess the flow of saliva.

=== Salivary testing ===
Salivary stimulation
* This can be done by palpating the parotid gland, thus stimulating it. Assess to see whether there is saliva flowing from the parotid papilla.
Sialography
* Sialograms can identify changes in salivary gland architecture and are useful in the evaluation of major gland swellings
* It involves the instillation of a radio-opaque fluid into the major gland ductal system. This outlines the major and minor ductal systems, and also gives an outline of the glandular tissue
* For example, sialadenitis creates an appearance known as “pruning of the tree” on a sialogram, where there are less branches visible from the duct system. Also, a space occupying lesion that occurs within or adjacent to a salivary gland can displace the normal anatomy of the gland. This may create an appearance known as “ball in hand” on a sialogram, where the ducts are curved around the mass of the lesion.
Sialochemistry
* The composition of saliva changes in disease states, and analysis of saliva for enzymes, electrolytes, hormones, drugs and immunisation status can be performed.
Radioisotope scintigraphy 
* Gives an objective measure of isotope uptake and excretion using a gamma scintillation camera. After about 20 minutes, a salivary stimulant will be given to promote salivary flow through the gland. They are used to assess patients with persistent symptoms of dry mouth and also to evaluate salivary gland swelling due to infection, inflammation or obstruction.

=== Further tests ===
* Imagining techniques
** Ultrasounds, CT Scans or MRIs can aid with disease localisation
* Sialoendoscopy
** A camera is inserted into the duct of a salivary gland to assess blockages
* Biopsy
** This can be done by fine needle aspiration biopsy, which provides an opportunity to obtain information about the histology of a salivary tumour prior to initiation of treatment.

==Additional images==
== See also ==
* Sjögren&#x27;s syndrome
* John Leonora
* Juxtaoral organ of Chievitz
* List of organs of the human body

== References ==
== External links ==
* Illustration at yoursurgery.com
* Salivary gland infections from Medline Plus
* Salivary gland cancer from American Cancer Society</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q691653" start="4" end="17" title="Parotid gland" label="parotid gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q134938" start="29" end="43" title="salivary gland" label="salivary gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370895" start="129" end="134" title="human mouth" label="mouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362" start="156" end="159" title="ear" label="ear"/>
<link wikidata="Q16370" start="242" end="258" title="mandibular ramus" label="mandibular ramus"/>
<link wikidata="Q155925" start="280" end="286" title="saliva" label="saliva"/>
<link wikidata="Q613885" start="299" end="311" title="parotid duct" label="parotid duct"/>
<link wikidata="Q827742" start="342" end="353" title="mastication" label="mastication"/>
<link wikidata="Q211669" start="358" end="368" title="swallowing" label="swallowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q41534" start="399" end="407" title="starches" label="starches"/>
<link wikidata="Q134938" start="443" end="451" title="salivary" label="salivary"/>
<link wikidata="Q579886" start="469" end="482" title="Submandibular gland" label="submandibular"/>
<link wikidata="Q692200" start="487" end="497" title="Sublingual gland" label="sublingual"/>
<link wikidata="Q691653" start="516" end="540" title="Parotid gland" label="accessory parotid glands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5966490" start="846" end="852" title="serous gland" label="serous"/>
<link wikidata="Q258328" start="904" end="913" title="ear canal" label="ear canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q613885" start="985" end="997" title="parotid duct" label="parotid duct"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543924" start="1063" end="1078" title="mastoid process" label="mastoid process"/>
<link wikidata="Q16313" start="1086" end="1099" title="temporal bone" label="temporal bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q795090" start="1118" end="1122" title="palpated" label="felt"/>
<link wikidata="Q268021" start="1203" end="1224" title="angle of the mandible" label="angle of the mandible"/>
<link wikidata="Q725408" start="1325" end="1340" title="masseter muscle" label="masseter muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q846480" start="1363" end="1380" title="buccinator muscle" label="buccinator muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632403" start="1464" end="1486" title="maxillary second molar" label="maxillary second molar"/>
<link wikidata="Q488415" start="1957" end="1974" title="Anatomical terms of location" label="lateral to medial"/>
<link wikidata="Q242160" start="1988" end="2000" title="Facial nerve" label="Facial nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q6125961" start="2002" end="2022" title="Retromandibular vein" label="Retromandibular vein"/>
<link wikidata="Q125276" start="2024" end="2047" title="External carotid artery" label="External carotid artery"/>
<link wikidata="Q494694" start="2049" end="2076" title="Superficial temporal artery" label="Superficial temporal artery"/>
<link wikidata="Q661721" start="2094" end="2115" title="great auricular nerve" label="great auricular nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q498171" start="2117" end="2133" title="Maxillary artery" label="Maxillary artery"/>
<link wikidata="Q16976968" start="2186" end="2204" title="List of anatomical variations" label="anatomic variation"/>
<link wikidata="Q10480798" start="2256" end="2263" title="Ectopia (medicine)" label="ectopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q242160" start="4250" end="4271" title="facial nerve" label="facial nerve (CN VII)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237446" start="4340" end="4354" title="parotid plexus" label="parotid plexus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493493" start="5185" end="5211" title="superior cervical ganglion" label="superior cervical ganglion"/>
<link wikidata="Q125276" start="5249" end="5272" title="external carotid artery" label="external carotid artery"/>
<link wikidata="Q500563" start="5277" end="5300" title="middle meningeal artery" label="middle meningeal artery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7404873" start="5445" end="5472" title="inferior salivatory nucleus" label="inferior salivatory nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q334143" start="5501" end="5531" title="glossopharyngeal nerve" label="glossopharyngeal nerve (CN IX)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127928" start="5550" end="5564" title="tympanic nerve" label="tympanic nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q7860413" start="5572" end="5587" title="tympanic plexus" label="tympanic plexus"/>
<link wikidata="Q638308" start="5626" end="5647" title="lesser petrosal nerve" label="lesser petrosal nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493508" start="5655" end="5668" title="otic ganglion" label="otic ganglion"/>
<link wikidata="Q587430" start="5783" end="5805" title="auriculotemporal nerve" label="auriculotemporal nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q5393906" start="5901" end="5908" title="Parotid fascia" label="capsule"/>
<link wikidata="Q587430" start="5928" end="5950" title="auriculotemporal nerve" label="auriculotemporal nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q841536" start="6289" end="6297" title="Risorius muscle" label="risorius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569526" start="7694" end="7703" title="stomodeum" label="stomodeum"/>
<link wikidata="Q32838" start="8401" end="8411" title="mesenchyme" label="mesenchyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975850" start="8511" end="8520" title="parotitis" label="parotitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q176741" start="8560" end="8565" title="mumps" label="mumps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627831" start="8930" end="8951" title="salivary duct calculi" label="salivary duct calculi"/>
<link wikidata="Q516562" start="9062" end="9078" title="Mikulicz disease" label="Mikulicz disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q335555" start="9083" end="9099" title="Sjögren syndrome" label="Sjögren syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q64513386" start="9169" end="9184" title="bulimia nervosa" label="bulimia nervosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q176741" start="9416" end="9421" title="Mumps" label="Mumps"/>
<link wikidata="Q936070" start="9679" end="9686" title="trismus" label="trismus"/>
<link wikidata="Q911129" start="9815" end="9828" title="Paramyxoviridae" label="paramyxovirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="10423" end="10435" title="Tuberculosis" label="Tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q41083" start="10440" end="10448" title="syphilis" label="syphilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129338" start="10459" end="10468" title="granuloma" label="granuloma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627831" start="10525" end="10540" title="Salivary stones" label="Salivary stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q81938" start="10669" end="10673" title="pain" label="pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064603" start="11498" end="11517" title="pleomorphic adenoma" label="pleomorphic adenoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300699" start="11569" end="11582" title="Warthin&amp;#x27;s tumor" label="Warthin tumor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300699" start="11589" end="11602" title="adenolymphoma" label="adenolymphoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736268" start="11933" end="11957" title="mucoepidermoid carcinoma" label="mucoepidermoid carcinoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q356005" start="11962" end="11986" title="adenoid cystic carcinoma" label="adenoid cystic carcinoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149070" start="12295" end="12311" title="phyllodes tumour" label="phyllodes tumour"/>
<link wikidata="Q242160" start="12444" end="12456" title="facial nerve" label="facial nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q180454" start="12458" end="12460" title="cranial nerve" label="CN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216998" start="12601" end="12611" title="Neoplasm" label="Neoplastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483951" start="12737" end="12743" title="benign" label="benign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707292" start="12781" end="12793" title="asymptomatic" label="asymptomatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q52771370" start="12869" end="12880" title="Infantile hemangioma" label="hemangiomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064603" start="12911" end="12930" title="pleomorphic adenoma" label="pleomorphic adenoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q180071" start="12988" end="13005" title="Fine-needle aspiration" label="aspiration biopsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483951" start="13105" end="13115" title="malignancy" label="malignancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483951" start="13542" end="13551" title="Malignancy" label="Malignant"/>
<link wikidata="Q579886" start="13623" end="13636" title="Submandibular gland" label="submandibular"/>
<link wikidata="Q692200" start="13638" end="13648" title="Sublingual gland" label="sublingual"/>
<link wikidata="Q179991" start="13820" end="13826" title="biopsy" label="biopsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736268" start="14063" end="14087" title="Mucoepidermoid carcinoma" label="Mucoepidermoid carcinoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q356005" start="14174" end="14198" title="Adenoid cystic carcinoma" label="Adenoid cystic carcinoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975850" start="14514" end="14523" title="parotitis" label="parotitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677603" start="14589" end="14596" title="Activin receptor" label="activin"/>
<link wikidata="Q408122" start="14598" end="14609" title="follistatin" label="follistatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q24785672" start="14614" end="14619" title="TGF β" label="TGF-β"/>
<link wikidata="Q2561732" start="15336" end="15349" title="parotidectomy" label="parotidectomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q587430" start="15356" end="15372" title="auriculotemporal" label="auriculotemporal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431371" start="15556" end="15576" title="Frey&amp;#x27;s syndrome" label="Frey&amp;#x27;s syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q183134" start="15738" end="15744" title="sepsis" label="sepsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="15805" end="15813" title="Diabetes mellitus" label="diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627831" start="16399" end="16408" title="Sialolithiasis" label="sialolith"/>
<link wikidata="Q29483" start="16426" end="16441" title="palliative care" label="palliative care"/>
<link wikidata="Q908104" start="16598" end="16609" title="MMR vaccine" label="MMR vaccine"/>
<link wikidata="Q911129" start="16621" end="16634" title="Paramyxoviridae" label="paramyxovirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q376266" start="17119" end="17122" title="CD8+ cell" label="CD8"/>
<link wikidata="Q583050" start="17192" end="17207" title="Management of HIV/AIDS" label="antiretrovirals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162276" start="19350" end="19360" title="xerostomia" label="xerostomia"/>
<link wikidata="Q761862" start="19386" end="19397" title="sialorrhoea" label="sialorrhoea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216998" start="19438" end="19446" title="neoplasm" label="neoplasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127628" start="21093" end="21104" title="Sialography" label="Sialography"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002586" start="21434" end="21446" title="sialadenitis" label="sialadenitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q15260579" start="22515" end="22529" title="Sialoendoscopy" label="Sialoendoscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q180071" start="22640" end="22669" title="Fine-needle aspiration" label="fine needle aspiration biopsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q335555" start="22838" end="22861" title="Sjögren&amp;#x27;s syndrome" label="Sjögren&amp;#x27;s syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q6244609" start="22864" end="22876" title="John Leonora" label="John Leonora"/>
<link wikidata="Q1714724" start="22879" end="22906" title="Juxtaoral organ of Chievitz" label="Juxtaoral organ of Chievitz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22909" end="22941" title="List of organs of the human body#Organ related tables" label="List of organs of the human body"/>
<link wikidata="Q557919" start="23048" end="23060" title="Medline Plus" label="Medline Plus"/>
<link wikidata="Q463665" start="23090" end="23113" title="American Cancer Society" label="American Cancer Society"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="331750" wikidata="Q1571074" url="?curid=331750" title="Pubic symphysis">
<text>The pubic symphysis (: symphyses) is a secondary cartilaginous joint between the left and right superior rami of the pubis of the hip bones. It is in front of and below the urinary bladder. In males, the suspensory ligament of the penis attaches to the pubic symphysis. In females, the pubic symphysis is attached to the suspensory ligament of the clitoris. In most adults, it can be moved roughly 2 mm and with 1 degree rotation. This increases for women at the time of childbirth.

The name comes from the Greek word &quot;symphysis&quot;, meaning &#x27;growing together&#x27;.

==Structure==

The pubic symphysis is a nonsynovial amphiarthrodial joint. The width of the pubic symphysis at the front is 3–5 mm greater than its width at the back. This joint is connected by fibrocartilage and may contain a fluid-filled cavity; the center is avascular, possibly due to the nature of the compressive forces passing through this joint, which may lead to harmful vascular disease. The ends of both pubic bones are covered by a thin layer of hyaline cartilage attached to the fibrocartilage. The fibrocartilaginous disk is reinforced by a series of ligaments. These ligaments cling to the fibrocartilaginous disk to the point that fibers intermix with it.

Two such ligaments are the superior pubic ligament and the inferior pubic ligament, which provide the most stability; the anterior and posterior ligaments are weaker. The strong and thicker superior ligament is reinforced by the tendons of the rectus abdominis muscle, the abdominal external oblique muscle, the gracilis muscle, and by muscles of the hip. The superior pubic ligament connects together the two pubic bones superiorly, extending laterally as far as the pubic tubercles. The inferior ligament in the pubic arch is also known as the arcuate pubic ligament or subpubic ligament; it is a thick, triangular arch of ligamentous fibers, connecting together the two pubic bones below, and forming the upper boundary of the pubic arch. Above, it is blended with the interpubic fibrocartilaginous lamina; laterally, it is attached to the inferior rami of the pubic bones; below, it is free, and is separated from the fascia of the urogenital diaphragm by an opening through which the deep dorsal vein of the penis passes into the pelvis.

===Fibrocartilage===
Fibrocartilage is composed of small, chained bundles of thick, clearly defined, type I collagen fibers. This fibrous connective tissue bundles have cartilage cells between them; these cells to a certain extent resemble tendon cells. The collagenous fibers are usually placed in an orderly arrangement parallel to tension on the tissue. It has a low content of glycosaminoglycans (2% of dry weight). Glycosaminoglycans are long, unbranched polysaccharides (relatively complex carbohydrates) consisting of repeating disaccharide units. Fibrocartilage does not have a surrounding perichondrium. Perichondrium surrounds the cartilage of developing bone; it has a layer of dense, irregular connective tissue and functions in the growth and repair of cartilage.

===Hyaline cartilage===
Hyaline cartilage is the white, shiny gristle at the end of long bones. This cartilage has poor healing potential, and efforts to induce it to repair itself frequently end up with a similar, but poorer fibrocartilage.

===Development===
In the newborn, the symphysis pubis is 9–10 mm in width, with thick cartilaginous end-plates. By mid-adolescence the adult size is achieved. During adulthood the end-plates decrease in width to a thinner layer. Degeneration of the symphysis pubis accompanies aging and postpartum. Women have a greater thickness of this pubic disc which allows more mobility of the pelvic bones, hence providing a greater diameter of pelvic cavity during childbirth.

==Function==
Analysis of the pelvis shows the skinny regions function as arches, transferring the weight of the upright trunk from the sacrum to the hips. The symphysis pubis connects these two weight-bearing arches, and the ligaments that surround this pelvic region maintain the mechanical integrity.

The main motions of the symphysis pubis are superior/inferior glide and separation/compression. The functions of the joint are to absorb shock during walking and allow delivery of a baby.

==Clinical significance==

===Injury===
The pubic symphysis widens slightly when the legs are stretched far apart. In sports where these movements are often performed, the risk of a pubic symphysis blockage is high, in which case, after completion of the movement, the bones at the symphysis do not realign correctly and can get jammed in a dislocated position. The resulting pain can be severe, especially when further strain is put upon the affected joint. In most cases, the joint can only be successfully reduced into its normal position by a trained medical professional.

===Disease===
Metabolic diseases, such as renal osteodystrophy, produce widening, while ochronosis results in calcific deposits in the symphysis. Inflammatory diseases, such as ankylosing spondylitis, result in bony fusion of the symphysis. Osteitis pubis, the most common inflammatory disease in this area, is treated with anti-inflammatory medication and rest. Degenerative joint disease of the symphysis, which can cause groin pain, results from instability or from abnormal pelvic mechanics.
&quot;Symphysiolysis&quot; is separation or slipping of the symphysis. It has been estimated to occur in 0.2% of pregnancies.

===Pregnancy===
During pregnancy in the human, hormones such as relaxin remodel this ligamentous capsule allowing the pelvic bones to be more flexible for delivery. The gap of the symphysis pubis, normally is 4–5 mm but during pregnancy there will be an increase of at least 2–3 mm, therefore, it is considered that a total width of up to 9 mm between the two bones is normal for a pregnant woman. The symphysis pubis separates to some degree during childbirth. In some women this separation can become a diastasis of the symphysis pubis. The diastasis could be the result of a rapid birth, or a forceps delivery, or may be a prenatal condition. A diastasis of the symphysis pubis is a cause of pelvic girdle pain (PGP). Overall, about 45% of all pregnant women and 25% of all women postpartum suffer from PGP.

===Symphysiotomy===
Symphysiotomy is a surgical procedure in which the cartilage of the pubic symphysis is divided to widen the pelvis allowing childbirth when there is a mechanical problem. It allows the safe delivery of the fetus where caesarean section is not an option. Symphysiotomy is suggested for woman in isolated areas experiencing obstructed labor where other medical intervention is unavailable.

This practice was carried out in Europe before the introduction of the Caesarean section. Historically, during obstructed labor, the skull of the fetus was also, at least occasionally, crushed in order to further facilitate the delivery.

==Society and culture==

===Use in forensic anthropology===
Pubic symphyses have importance in the field of forensic anthropology, as they can be used to estimate the age of adult skeletons. Throughout life, the surfaces are worn at a fairly predictable rate. By examining the wear of the pubic symphysis, it is possible to estimate the age of the person at death.

==Additional images==
==See also==

==References==
==External links==
* Pelvic Instability Network Support (PINS)
* – &quot;Major Joints of the Lower Extremity – hip and sacrum (anterior view)&quot;
* – &quot;The Male Pelvis: Hemisection of the Male Pelvis&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1571074" start="4" end="19" title="Pubic symphysis" label="pubic symphysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571074" start="23" end="32" title="Pubic symphysis" label="symphyses"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865752" start="49" end="68" title="cartilaginous joint" label="cartilaginous joint"/>
<link wikidata="Q220815" start="96" end="109" title="superior pubic ramus" label="superior rami"/>
<link wikidata="Q220815" start="130" end="139" title="pubis (bone)" label="hip bones"/>
<link wikidata="Q9382" start="173" end="188" title="urinary bladder" label="urinary bladder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3829592" start="204" end="236" title="suspensory ligament of the penis" label="suspensory ligament of the penis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7649249" start="321" end="356" title="suspensory ligament of the clitoris" label="suspensory ligament of the clitoris"/>
<link wikidata="Q575064" start="621" end="632" title="Synovium" label="nonsynovial"/>
<link wikidata="Q474663" start="633" end="648" title="Amphiarthrosis" label="amphiarthrodial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2192944" start="775" end="789" title="fibrocartilage" label="fibrocartilage"/>
<link wikidata="Q988343" start="843" end="852" title="Blood vessel" label="avascular"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014564" start="1039" end="1056" title="hyaline cartilage" label="hyaline cartilage"/>
<link wikidata="Q275150" start="1498" end="1521" title="rectus abdominis muscle" label="rectus abdominis muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q746123" start="1527" end="1560" title="abdominal external oblique muscle" label="abdominal external oblique muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428669" start="1566" end="1581" title="gracilis muscle" label="gracilis muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6940337" start="1590" end="1608" title="muscles of the hip" label="muscles of the hip"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257269" start="1984" end="1994" title="pubic arch" label="pubic arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q220815" start="2118" end="2129" title="pubic bones" label="pubic bones"/>
<link wikidata="Q3706503" start="2190" end="2210" title="urogenital diaphragm" label="urogenital diaphragm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2759368" start="2243" end="2272" title="deep dorsal vein of the penis" label="deep dorsal vein of the penis"/>
<link wikidata="Q713102" start="2289" end="2295" title="pelvis" label="pelvis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2192944" start="2319" end="2333" title="Fibrocartilage" label="Fibrocartilage"/>
<link wikidata="Q26868" start="2406" end="2414" title="collagen" label="collagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q25615" start="2436" end="2453" title="connective tissue" label="connective tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7699651" start="2538" end="2549" title="tendon cell" label="tendon cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q407553" start="2679" end="2697" title="glycosaminoglycans" label="glycosaminoglycans"/>
<link wikidata="Q134219" start="2758" end="2773" title="polysaccharides" label="polysaccharides"/>
<link wikidata="Q173600" start="2833" end="2845" title="disaccharide" label="disaccharide"/>
<link wikidata="Q663949" start="2896" end="2909" title="perichondrium" label="perichondrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014564" start="3100" end="3117" title="Hyaline cartilage" label="Hyaline cartilage"/>
<link wikidata="Q749115" start="3606" end="3616" title="Postnatal" label="postpartum"/>
<link wikidata="Q34581" start="3775" end="3785" title="childbirth" label="childbirth"/>
<link wikidata="Q324509" start="4622" end="4632" title="joint dislocation" label="dislocated"/>
<link wikidata="Q822598" start="4901" end="4921" title="renal osteodystrophy" label="renal osteodystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507609" start="4947" end="4957" title="ochronosis" label="ochronosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q52849" start="5036" end="5058" title="ankylosing spondylitis" label="ankylosing spondylitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569702" start="5100" end="5114" title="Osteitis pubis" label="Osteitis pubis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571074" start="5361" end="5375" title="Symphysiolysis" label="Symphysiolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11995" start="5505" end="5514" title="pregnancy" label="pregnancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q24773888" start="5546" end="5553" title="relaxin" label="relaxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q34581" start="5932" end="5942" title="childbirth" label="childbirth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5272095" start="5987" end="6019" title="Diastasis symphysis pubis" label="diastasis of the symphysis pubis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026419" start="6025" end="6034" title="Diastasis (pathology)" label="diastasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378235" start="6078" end="6085" title="forceps" label="forceps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297155" start="6108" end="6116" title="prenatal" label="prenatal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508658" start="6177" end="6195" title="pelvic girdle pain" label="pelvic girdle pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q10686880" start="6314" end="6327" title="Symphysiotomy" label="Symphysiotomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q228036" start="6532" end="6549" title="caesarean section" label="caesarean section"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811189" start="6636" end="6652" title="obstructed labor" label="obstructed labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q28065" start="7050" end="7071" title="forensic anthropology" label="forensic anthropology"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="331752" wikidata="Q1862972" url="?curid=331752" title="Pterygium (eye)">
<text>A pterygium of the eye (: &quot;pterygia&quot; or &quot;pterygiums&quot;, also called surfer&#x27;s eye) is a pinkish, roughly triangular tissue growth of the conjunctiva onto the cornea of the eye. It typically starts on the cornea near the nose. It may slowly grow but rarely grows so large that it covers the pupil and impairs vision. Often both eyes are involved.
The cause is unclear. It appears to be partly related to long term exposure to UV light and dust. Genetic factors also appear to be involved. It is a benign growth. Other conditions that can look similar include a pinguecula, tumor, or Terrien&#x27;s marginal corneal degeneration.
Prevention may include wearing sunglasses and a hat if in an area with strong sunlight. Among those with the condition, an eye lubricant can help with symptoms. Surgical removal is typically only recommended if the ability to see is affected. Following surgery a pterygium may recur in around half of cases.
The frequency of the condition varies from 1% to 33% in various regions of the world. It occurs more commonly among males than females and in people who live closer to the equator. The condition becomes more common with age. The condition has been described since at least 1000 BC.
==Signs and symptoms==
Symptoms of pterygium include persistent redness, inflammation, foreign body sensation, tearing, dry and itchy eyes. In advanced cases the pterygium can affect vision as it invades the cornea with the potential of obscuring the optical center of the cornea and inducing astigmatism and corneal scarring. Many patients do complain of the cosmetic appearance of the eye either with some of the symptoms above or as their major complaint. The use of standard contact lenses can become uncomfortable or even impossible although custom shaping may improve the fit to some extent.
==Cause==
The exact cause is unknown, but it is associated with excessive exposure to wind, sunlight, or sand. Therefore, it is more likely to occur in populations that inhabit the areas near the equator, as well as windy locations. In addition, pterygia are twice as likely to occur in men than women.

==Pathology==

Pterygium in the conjunctiva is characterized by elastotic degeneration of collagen (actinic elastosis) and fibrovascular proliferation. It has an advancing portion called the head of the pterygium, which is connected to the main body of the pterygium by the neck. Sometimes a line of iron deposition can be seen adjacent to the head of the pterygium called &quot;Stocker&#x27;s line&quot;. The location of the line can give an indication of the pattern of growth.

The predominance of pterygia on the nasal side is possibly a result of peripheral light focusing, where the sun&#x27;s rays passing laterally through the cornea, where they undergo refraction and become focused on the limbic area. Sunlight passes unobstructed from the lateral side of the eye, focusing on the medial limbus after passing through the cornea. On the contralateral (medial) side, however, the shadow of the nose medially reduces the intensity of sunlight focused on the lateral/temporal limbus.

Some research also suggests a genetic predisposition due to an expression of vimentin, which indicates cellular migration by the keratoblasts embryological development, which are the cells that give rise to the layers of the cornea. Supporting this fact is the congenital pterygium, in which pterygium is seen in infants. These cells also exhibit an increased P53 expression likely due to a deficit in the tumor suppressor gene. These indications give the impression of a migrating limbus because the cellular origin of the pterygium is actually initiated by the limbal epithelium.

The pterygium is composed of several segments:
* Fuchs&#x27; Patches (minute gray blemishes that disperse near the pterygium head)
* Stocker&#x27;s Line (a brownish line composed of iron deposits)
* Hood (fibrous nonvascular portion of the pterygium)
* Head (apex of the pterygium, typically raised and highly vascular)
* Body (fleshy elevated portion congested with tortuous vessels)
* Superior Edge (upper edge of the triangular or wing-shaped portion of the pterygium)
* Inferior Edge (lower edge of the triangular or wing-shaped portion of the pterygium).

==Diagnosis==
Pterygium (conjunctiva) can be diagnosed without need for a specific exam, however corneal topography is a practical test (technique) as the condition worsens.

===Differential Diagnosis===
Pterygium should be differentiated from pinguecula, which is histologically and etiologically similar to pterygium. Unlike pterygium, pinguecula is seen only on the conjunctiva, it will not progress to limbus or cornea.

Another condition which is similar to pterygium is inflammatory adhesion of conjunctiva to cornea known as pseudopterygium. Unlike pterygium, it may occur anywhere around cornea and the adhesion is usually limited to its apex.

==Prevention==
As it is associated with excessive sun or wind exposure, wearing protective sunglasses with side shields and/or wide brimmed hats and using artificial tears throughout the day may help prevent their formation or stop further growth. Surfers and other water-sport athletes should wear eye protection that blocks 100% of the UV rays from the water, as is often used by snow-sport athletes. Many of those who are at greatest risk of pterygium from work or play sun exposure do not understand the importance of protection.

==Treatment==
A pterygium typically does not require surgery unless it grows to such an extent that it causes visual problems. Some of the symptoms such as irritation can be addressed with artificial tears. Surgery may also be considered for unmanageable symptoms.

===Surgery===

A Cochrane review found conjunctival autograft surgery was less likely to have reoccurrence of the pterygium at 6 months compared to amniotic membrane transplant. More research is needed to determine which type of surgery resulted in better vision or quality of life. The additional use of mitomycin C is of unclear effect. Radiotherapy has also been used in an attempt to reduce the risk of recurrence.

==== Auto-grafting ====
Conjunctival auto-grafting is a surgical technique that is an effective and safe procedure for pterygium removal. When the pterygium is removed, the tissue that covers the sclera known as the Tenons layer is also removed. Auto-grafting covers the bare sclera with conjunctival tissue that is surgically removed from an area of healthy conjunctiva. That &quot;self-tissue&quot; is then transplanted to the bare sclera and is attached using sutures or tissue adhesive.

==== Amniotic membrane transplantation ====
Amniotic membrane transplantation is an effective and safe procedure for pterygium removal. Amniotic membrane transplantation offers practical alternative to conjunctival auto graft transplantation for extensive pterygium removal. Amniotic membrane transplantation is tissue that is acquired from the innermost layer of the human placenta and has been used to replace and heal damaged mucosal surfaces including successful reconstruction of the ocular surface. It has been used as a surgical material since the 1940s, and has been shown to have a strong anti-adhesive effect.

Using an amniotic graft facilitates epithelialization, and has anti-inflammatory as well as surface rejuvenation properties. Amniotic membrane transplantation can also be attached to the sclera using sutures, or glue adhesive. Amniotic membrane by itself does not provide an acceptable recurrence rate.

==References==
==External links==
* Pterygium eMedicine WebMD online article on pterygium (overview, differential diagnoses &amp; workup, treatment &amp; medication, and follow-up)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1862972" start="2" end="11" title="Pterygium (eye)" label="pterygium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862972" start="86" end="103" title="Pterygium (eye)" label="surfer&amp;#x27;s eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q273554" start="159" end="170" title="conjunctiva" label="conjunctiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q168291" start="180" end="186" title="cornea" label="cornea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7364" start="194" end="197" title="eye" label="eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q173318" start="312" end="317" title="pupil" label="pupil"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="447" end="455" title="UV light" label="UV light"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417240" start="518" end="531" title="benign growth" label="benign growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862031" start="582" end="592" title="pinguecula" label="pinguecula"/>
<link wikidata="Q25098815" start="604" end="648" title="Terrien&amp;#x27;s marginal corneal degeneration" label="Terrien&amp;#x27;s marginal corneal degeneration"/>
<link wikidata="Q552308" start="773" end="786" title="eye lubricant" label="eye lubricant"/>
<link wikidata="Q26868" start="2232" end="2240" title="collagen" label="collagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4676883" start="2242" end="2259" title="actinic elastosis" label="actinic elastosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168703" start="2694" end="2719" title="peripheral light focusing" label="peripheral light focusing"/>
<link wikidata="Q168291" start="2777" end="2783" title="cornea" label="cornea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377680" start="2841" end="2847" title="Corneal limbus" label="limbic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2892" end="2899" title="Human anatomical terms#Anatomical directions" label="lateral"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2933" end="2939" title="Human anatomical terms#Anatomical directions" label="medial"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2988" end="3001" title="Anatomical terms of location#Other directional terms" label="contralateral"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3107" end="3114" title="Human anatomical terms#Anatomical directions" label="lateral"/>
<link wikidata="Q243999" start="3115" end="3123" title="Temple (anatomy)" label="temporal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377680" start="3124" end="3130" title="Corneal limbus" label="limbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q411624" start="3210" end="3218" title="vimentin" label="vimentin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216998" start="3539" end="3544" title="tumor" label="tumor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377680" start="3615" end="3621" title="Corneal limbus" label="limbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501232" start="4374" end="4392" title="corneal topography" label="corneal topography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862031" start="4521" end="4531" title="pinguecula" label="pinguecula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115771" start="4809" end="4824" title="pseudopterygium" label="pseudopterygium"/>
<link wikidata="Q217541" start="5021" end="5031" title="sunglasses" label="sunglasses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105202" start="5748" end="5763" title="Cochrane (organisation)" label="Cochrane review"/>
<link wikidata="Q19856779" start="6036" end="6047" title="mitomycin C" label="mitomycin C"/>
<link wikidata="Q180507" start="6070" end="6082" title="Radiotherapy" label="Radiotherapy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="331754" wikidata="Q1411411" url="?curid=331754" title="Brachylophus">
<text>The genus Brachylophus consists of four extant iguanid species native to the islands of Fiji and a giant extinct species from Tonga in the South West Pacific. One of the extant species, &quot;B. fasciatus&quot;, is also present on Tonga, where it has apparently been introduced by humans.

==Etymology and taxonomy==
The name, &quot;Brachylophus&quot;, is derived from two Greek words: brachys (βραχύς) meaning &quot;short&quot; and lophos (λόφος) meaning &quot;crest&quot; or &quot;plume&quot;, denoting the short spiny crests found along the backs of these species.

&quot;Brachylophus&quot; species are the most geographically isolated iguanas in the world. Their closest extant relatives (the genera &quot;Amblyrhynchus&quot;, &quot;Conolophus&quot;, &quot;Ctenosaura&quot;, &quot;Cyclura&quot;, &quot;Iguana&quot; and &quot;Sauromalus&quot;) are present in primarily tropical regions of the Americas and islands in the Galápagos and Lesser and Greater Antilles. Several of these genera are adapted to xeric biomes. Phylogenetic evidence supports the &quot;Brachylophus&quot; lineage to have diverged from the rest of Iguanidae in the latest Eocene, about 35 million years ago. They are the second most basal extant genus in the family, with only &quot;Dipsosaurus&quot; diverging earlier. The location of members of &quot;Brachylophus&quot;, so distant from all other known extant or extinct iguanids, has long presented a biogeographical enigma. 

One hypothesis to account for this biogeographical puzzle, based in part on an estimated divergence date of 50 million years ago (although more recent studies have revised this to about 35 million years ago), is that these species are the descendants of a more widespread but now extinct lineage of Old World iguanids that migrated overland from the New World to Asia or Australia, and then dispersed by some combination of continental drift, rafting and/or land bridges to their present remote location. However, no other fossil or extant species of this putative lineage have been found to date in Southeast Asia, Australasia or the western Pacific outside of Fiji and Tonga.

A secondary hypothesis, and the more widely accepted one, is that these species evolved from New World iguanas that rafted west across the Pacific Ocean with the aid of the South Equatorial Current. While a rafting voyage of four months or more might seem implausible, the ancestors of &quot;Brachylophus&quot; may have been preadapted for such a journey by having water requirements that can be satisfied by food alone, as well as comparatively long egg incubation periods.
===Extant species===
The extant species are:
Historically, only the first two were recognized, but &quot;B. bulabula&quot; (&quot;bulabula&quot; is the Fijian word for &quot;healthy&quot; or &quot;flourishing&quot;) was described in the central regions of Fiji by a team led by a scientist from the Australian National University in 2008. Detailed genetic and morphological analyses were made to conclude that &quot;B. bulabula&quot; represents a third species. In 2017, &quot;B. gau&quot; was described as a new species from Gau Island.

A giant Tongan species, &quot;Brachylophus gibbonsi&quot;, similar in size and build to an iguana of the genus &quot;Cyclura&quot; once existed on Lifuka, islands in the Ha‘apai group and Tongatapu but became extinct in prehistoric times due to predation by humans and their domestic animals. An even larger extinct iguana of the separate genus &quot;Lapitiguana&quot; was formerly present on Fiji.

==References==
* (1989) A Phylogenetic Analysis and Taxonomy of Iguanian Lizards (Reptilia: Squamata). University of Kansas Museum of Natural History Miscellaneous Publications 81: 1-65. PDF fulltext
* (2001): Total evidence, sequence alignment, evolution of Polychrotid lizards, and a reclassification of the Iguania (Squamata: Iguania). &quot;American Museum Novitates&quot; 3343: 1-38. PDF fulltext

==External links==
* Images of &quot;B. bulabula&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="4" end="9" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898509" start="40" end="46" title="Extant taxon" label="extant"/>
<link wikidata="Q235589" start="47" end="54" title="iguanid" label="iguanid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="55" end="62" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="88" end="92" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q678" start="126" end="131" title="Tonga" label="Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q55643" start="139" end="157" title="South West Pacific" label="South West Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q208796" start="710" end="723" title="Amblyrhynchus" label="Amblyrhynchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059066" start="737" end="747" title="Conolophus" label="Conolophus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369044" start="761" end="771" title="Ctenosaura" label="Ctenosaura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205923" start="785" end="792" title="Cyclura" label="Cyclura"/>
<link wikidata="Q205531" start="806" end="812" title="Iguana" label="Iguana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016288" start="829" end="839" title="Sauromalus" label="Sauromalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530" start="872" end="880" title="tropics" label="tropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="896" end="904" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q38095" start="924" end="933" title="Galápagos Islands" label="Galápagos"/>
<link wikidata="Q93259" start="938" end="944" title="Lesser Antilles" label="Lesser"/>
<link wikidata="Q128011" start="949" end="965" title="Greater Antilles" label="Greater Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246061" start="1006" end="1011" title="Deserts and xeric shrublands" label="xeric"/>
<link wikidata="Q101998" start="1012" end="1017" title="biome" label="biome"/>
<link wikidata="Q76274" start="1146" end="1152" title="Eocene" label="Eocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q379061" start="1207" end="1212" title="Basal (phylogenetics)" label="basal"/>
<link wikidata="Q912330" start="1257" end="1268" title="Desert iguana" label="Dipsosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q52106" start="1428" end="1443" title="biogeography" label="biogeographical"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607565" start="1489" end="1511" title="List of biogeographical puzzles" label="biogeographical puzzle"/>
<link wikidata="Q174807" start="1753" end="1762" title="Old World" label="Old World"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="1804" end="1813" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="2054" end="2068" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q45256" start="2070" end="2081" title="Australasia" label="Australasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="2089" end="2104" title="Pacific Ocean" label="western Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q787296" start="2249" end="2255" title="Oceanic dispersal" label="rafted"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="2272" end="2285" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072306" start="2306" end="2330" title="South Equatorial Current" label="South Equatorial Current"/>
<link wikidata="Q33295" start="2760" end="2766" title="Fijian language" label="Fijian"/>
<link wikidata="Q127990" start="2907" end="2937" title="Australian National University" label="Australian National University"/>
<link wikidata="Q48317" start="3134" end="3144" title="Gau Island" label="Gau Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q4953482" start="3177" end="3198" title="Brachylophus gibbonsi" label="Brachylophus gibbonsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205923" start="3264" end="3271" title="Cyclura" label="Cyclura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309255" start="3294" end="3300" title="Lifuka" label="Lifuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q612098" start="3317" end="3324" title="Ha‘apai" label="Ha‘apai"/>
<link wikidata="Q620452" start="3335" end="3344" title="Tongatapu" label="Tongatapu"/>
<link wikidata="Q123509" start="3356" end="3363" title="extinct" label="extinct"/>
<link wikidata="Q6488240" start="3498" end="3509" title="Lapitiguana" label="Lapitiguana"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="331755" wikidata="Q447188" url="?curid=331755" title="Transitional fossil">
<text>A transitional fossil is any fossilized remains of a life form that exhibits traits common to both an ancestral group and its derived descendant group. This is especially important where the descendant group is sharply differentiated by gross anatomy and mode of living from the ancestral group. These fossils serve as a reminder that taxonomic divisions are human constructs that have been imposed in hindsight on a continuum of variation. Because of the incompleteness of the fossil record, there is usually no way to know exactly how close a transitional fossil is to the point of divergence. Therefore, it cannot be assumed that transitional fossils are direct ancestors of more recent groups, though they are frequently used as models for such ancestors.

In 1859, when Charles Darwin&#x27;s &quot;On the Origin of Species&quot; was first published, the fossil record was poorly known. Darwin described the perceived lack of transitional fossils as &quot;the most obvious and gravest objection which can be urged against my theory,&quot; but he explained it by relating it to the extreme imperfection of the geological record. He noted the limited collections available at the time but described the available information as showing patterns that followed from his theory of descent with modification through natural selection. Indeed, &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; was discovered just two years later, in 1861, and represents a classic transitional form between earlier, non-avian dinosaurs and birds. Many more transitional fossils have been discovered since then, and there is now abundant evidence of how all classes of vertebrates are related, including many transitional fossils. Specific examples of class-level transitions are: tetrapods and fish, birds and dinosaurs, and mammals and &quot;mammal-like reptiles&quot;.

The term &quot;missing link&quot; has been used extensively in popular writings on human evolution to refer to a perceived gap in the hominid evolutionary record. It is most commonly used to refer to any new transitional fossil finds. Scientists, however, do not use the term, as it refers to a pre-evolutionary view of nature.

==Evolutionary and phylogenetic taxonomy==
===Transitions in phylogenetic nomenclature===

In evolutionary taxonomy, the prevailing form of taxonomy during much of the 20th century and still used in non-specialist textbooks, taxa based on morphological similarity are often drawn as &quot;bubbles&quot; or &quot;spindles&quot; branching off from each other, forming evolutionary trees. Transitional forms are seen as falling between the various groups in terms of anatomy, having a mixture of characteristics from inside and outside the newly branched clade.

With the establishment of cladistics in the 1990s, relationships commonly came to be expressed in cladograms that illustrate the branching of the evolutionary lineages in stick-like figures. The different so-called &quot;natural&quot; or &quot;monophyletic&quot; groups form nested units, and only these are given phylogenetic names. While in traditional classification tetrapods and fish are seen as two different groups, phylogenetically tetrapods are considered a branch of fish. Thus, with cladistics there is no longer a transition between established groups, and the term &quot;transitional fossils&quot; is a misnomer. Differentiation occurs within groups, represented as branches in the cladogram.

In a cladistic context, transitional organisms can be seen as representing early examples of a branch, where not all of the traits typical of the previously known descendants on that branch have yet evolved. Such early representatives of a group are usually termed &quot;basal taxa&quot; or &quot;sister taxa,&quot; depending on whether the fossil organism belongs to the daughter clade or not.

===Transitional versus ancestral===
A source of confusion is the notion that a transitional form between two different taxonomic groups must be a direct ancestor of one or both groups. The difficulty is exacerbated by the fact that one of the goals of evolutionary taxonomy is to identify taxa that were ancestors of other taxa. However, because evolution is a branching process that produces a complex bush pattern of related species rather than a linear process producing a ladder-like progression, and because of the incompleteness of the fossil record, it is unlikely that any particular form represented in the fossil record is a direct ancestor of any other. Cladistics deemphasizes the concept of one taxonomic group being an ancestor of another, and instead emphasizes the identification of sister taxa that share a more recent common ancestor with one another than they do with other groups. There are a few exceptional cases, such as some marine plankton microfossils, where the fossil record is complete enough to suggest with confidence that certain fossils represent a population that was actually ancestral to a later population of a different species. But, in general, transitional fossils are considered to have features that illustrate the transitional anatomical features of actual common ancestors of different taxa, rather than to &quot;be&quot; actual ancestors.

==Prominent examples==

===&quot;Archaeopteryx&quot;===
&quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; is a genus of theropod dinosaur closely related to the birds. Since the late 19th century, it has been accepted by palaeontologists, and celebrated in lay reference works, as being the oldest known bird, though a study in 2011 has cast doubt on this assessment, suggesting instead that it is a non-avialan dinosaur closely related to the origin of birds.

It lived in what is now southern Germany in the Late Jurassic period around 150 million years ago, when Europe was an archipelago in a shallow warm tropical sea, much closer to the equator than it is now. Similar in shape to a European magpie, with the largest individuals possibly attaining the size of a raven, &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; could grow to about 0.5 metres (1.6 ft) in length. Despite its small size, broad wings, and inferred ability to fly or glide, &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; has more in common with other small Mesozoic dinosaurs than it does with modern birds. In particular, it shares the following features with the deinonychosaurs (dromaeosaurs and troodontids): jaws with sharp teeth, three fingers with claws, a long bony tail, hyperextensible second toes (&quot;killing claw&quot;), feathers (which suggest homeothermy), and various skeletal features. These features make &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; a clear candidate for a transitional fossil between dinosaurs and birds, making it important in the study both of dinosaurs and of the origin of birds.

The first complete specimen was announced in 1861, and ten more &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; fossils have been found since then. Most of the eleven known fossils include impressions of feathers—among the oldest direct evidence of such structures. Moreover, because these feathers take the advanced form of flight feathers, &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; fossils are evidence that feathers began to evolve before the Late Jurassic.

===&quot;Australopithecus afarensis&quot;===

The hominid &quot;Australopithecus afarensis&quot; represents an evolutionary transition between modern bipedal humans and their quadrupedal ape ancestors. A number of traits of the &quot;A. afarensis&quot; skeleton strongly reflect bipedalism, to the extent that some researchers have suggested that bipedality evolved long before &quot;A. afarensis&quot;. In overall anatomy, the pelvis is far more human-like than ape-like. The iliac blades are short and wide, the sacrum is wide and positioned directly behind the hip joint, and there is clear evidence of a strong attachment for the knee extensors, implying an upright posture.

While the pelvis is not entirely like that of a human (being markedly wide, or flared, with laterally orientated iliac blades), these features point to a structure radically remodelled to accommodate a significant degree of bipedalism. The femur angles in toward the knee from the hip. This trait allows the foot to fall closer to the midline of the body, and strongly indicates habitual bipedal locomotion. Present-day humans, orangutans and spider monkeys possess this same feature. The feet feature adducted big toes, making it difficult if not impossible to grasp branches with the hindlimbs. Besides locomotion, &quot;A. afarensis&quot; also had a slightly larger brain than a modern chimpanzee (the closest living relative of humans) and had teeth that were more human than ape-like.

===Pakicetids, &quot;Ambulocetus&quot;===

The cetaceans (whales, dolphins and porpoises) are marine mammal descendants of land mammals. The pakicetids are an extinct family of hoofed mammals that are the earliest whales, whose closest sister group is &quot;Indohyus&quot; from the family Raoellidae. They lived in the Early Eocene, around 53 million years ago. Their fossils were first discovered in North Pakistan in 1979, at a river not far from the shores of the former Tethys Sea. Pakicetids could hear under water, using enhanced bone conduction, rather than depending on tympanic membranes like most land mammals. This arrangement does not give directional hearing under water.

&quot;Ambulocetus natans&quot;, which lived about 49 million years ago, was discovered in Pakistan in 1994. It was probably amphibious, and looked like a crocodile. In the Eocene, ambulocetids inhabited the bays and estuaries of the Tethys Ocean in northern Pakistan. The fossils of ambulocetids are always found in near-shore shallow marine deposits associated with abundant marine plant fossils and littoral molluscs. Although they are found only in marine deposits, their oxygen isotope values indicate that they consumed water with a range of degrees of salinity, some specimens showing no evidence of sea water consumption and others none of fresh water consumption at the time when their teeth were fossilized. It is clear that ambulocetids tolerated a wide range of salt concentrations. Their diet probably included land animals that approached water for drinking, or freshwater aquatic organisms that lived in the river. Hence, ambulocetids represent the transition phase of cetacean ancestors between freshwater and marine habitat.

===&quot;Tiktaalik&quot;===

&quot;Tiktaalik&quot; is a genus of extinct sarcopterygian (lobe-finned fish) from the Late Devonian period, with many features akin to those of tetrapods (four-legged animals). It is one of several lines of ancient sarcopterygians to develop adaptations to the oxygen-poor shallow water habitats of its time—adaptations that led to the evolution of tetrapods. Well-preserved fossils were found in 2004 on Ellesmere Island in Nunavut, Canada.

&quot;Tiktaalik&quot; lived approximately 375 million years ago. Paleontologists suggest that it is representative of the transition between non-tetrapod vertebrates such as &quot;Panderichthys&quot;, known from fossils 380 million years old, and early tetrapods such as &quot;Acanthostega&quot; and &quot;Ichthyostega&quot;, known from fossils about 365 million years old. Its mixture of primitive fish and derived tetrapod characteristics led one of its discoverers, Neil Shubin, to characterize &quot;Tiktaalik&quot; as a &quot;fishapod.&quot; Unlike many previous, more fish-like transitional fossils, the &quot;fins&quot; of &quot;Tiktaalik&quot; have basic wrist bones and simple rays reminiscent of fingers. They may have been weight-bearing. Like all modern tetrapods, it had rib bones, a mobile neck with a separate pectoral girdle, and lungs, though it had the gills, scales, and fins of a fish. However in a 2008 paper by Boisvert at al. it is noted that &quot;Panderichthys&quot;, due to its more derived distal portion, might be closer to tetrapods than &quot;Tiktaalik&quot;, which might have independently developed similarities to tetrapods by convergent evolution.

Tetrapod footprints found in Poland and reported in &quot;Nature&quot; in January 2010 were &quot;securely dated&quot; at 10 million years older than the oldest known elpistostegids (of which &quot;Tiktaalik&quot; is an example), implying that animals like &quot;Tiktaalik&quot;, possessing features that evolved around 400 million years ago, were &quot;late-surviving relics rather than direct transitional forms, and they highlight just how little we know of the earliest history of land vertebrates.&quot;

===&quot;Amphistium&quot;===


Pleuronectiformes (flatfish) are an order of ray-finned fish. The most obvious characteristic of the modern flatfish is their asymmetry, with both eyes on the same side of the head in the adult fish. In some families the eyes are always on the right side of the body (dextral or right-eyed flatfish) and in others they are always on the left (sinistral or left-eyed flatfish). The primitive spiny turbots include equal numbers of right- and left-eyed individuals, and are generally less asymmetrical than the other families. Other distinguishing features of the order are the presence of protrusible eyes, another adaptation to living on the seabed (benthos), and the extension of the dorsal fin onto the head.

&quot;Amphistium&quot; is a 50-million-year-old fossil fish identified as an early relative of the flatfish, and as a transitional fossil. In &quot;Amphistium&quot;, the transition from the typical symmetric head of a vertebrate is incomplete, with one eye placed near the top-center of the head. Paleontologists concluded that &quot;the change happened gradually, in a way consistent with evolution via natural selection—not suddenly, as researchers once had little choice but to believe.&quot;

&quot;Amphistium&quot; is among the many fossil fish species known from the Monte Bolca &quot;Lagerstätte&quot; of Lutetian Italy. &quot;Heteronectes&quot; is a related, and very similar fossil from slightly earlier strata of France.

===&quot;Runcaria&quot;===

A Middle Devonian precursor to seed plants has been identified from Belgium, predating the earliest seed plants by about 20 million years. &quot;Runcaria&quot;, small and radially symmetrical, is an integumented megasporangium surrounded by a cupule. The megasporangium bears an unopened distal extension protruding above the multilobed integument. It is suspected that the extension was involved in anemophilous pollination. &quot;Runcaria&quot; sheds new light on the sequence of character acquisition leading to the seed, having all the qualities of seed plants except for a solid seed coat and a system to guide the pollen to the seed.

==Fossil record==
Not every transitional form appears in the fossil record, because the fossil record is not complete. Organisms are only rarely preserved as fossils in the best of circumstances, and only a fraction of such fossils have been discovered. Paleontologist Donald Prothero noted that this is illustrated by the fact that the number of species known through the fossil record was less than 5% of the number of known living species, suggesting that the number of species known through fossils must be far less than 1% of all the species that have ever lived.

Because of the specialized and rare circumstances required for a biological structure to fossilize, logic dictates that known fossils represent only a small percentage of all life-forms that ever existed—and that each discovery represents only a snapshot of evolution. The transition itself can only be illustrated and corroborated by transitional fossils, which never demonstrate an exact half-way point between clearly divergent forms.

The fossil record is very uneven and, with few exceptions, is heavily slanted toward organisms with hard parts, leaving most groups of soft-bodied organisms with little to no fossil record. The groups considered to have a good fossil record, including a number of transitional fossils between traditional groups, are the vertebrates, the echinoderms, the brachiopods and some groups of arthropods.

==History==
===Post-Darwin===

The idea that animal and plant species were not constant, but changed over time, was suggested as far back as the 18th century. Darwin&#x27;s &quot;On the Origin of Species&quot;, published in 1859, gave it a firm scientific basis. A weakness of Darwin&#x27;s work, however, was the lack of palaeontological evidence, as pointed out by Darwin himself. While it is easy to imagine natural selection producing the variation seen within genera and families, the transmutation between the higher categories was harder to imagine. The dramatic find of the London specimen of &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; in 1861, only two years after the publication of Darwin&#x27;s work, offered for the first time a link between the class of the highly derived birds, and that of the more basal reptiles. In a letter to Darwin, the palaeontologist Hugh Falconer wrote:

Had the Solnhofen quarries been commissioned—by august command—to turn out a strange being à la Darwin—it could not have executed the behest more handsomely—than in the &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot;.

Thus, transitional fossils like &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; came to be seen as not only corroborating Darwin&#x27;s theory, but as icons of evolution in their own right. For example, the Swedish encyclopedic dictionary &quot;Nordisk familjebok&quot; of 1904 showed an inaccurate &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; reconstruction (see illustration) of the fossil, &quot;ett af de betydelsefullaste paleontologiska fynd, som någonsin gjorts&quot; (&quot;one of the most significant paleontological discoveries ever made&quot;).

===The rise of plants===
Transitional fossils are not only those of animals. With the increasing mapping of the divisions of plants at the beginning of the 20th century, the search began for the ancestor of the vascular plants. In 1917, Robert Kidston and William Henry Lang found the remains of an extremely primitive plant in the Rhynie chert in Aberdeenshire, Scotland, and named it &quot;Rhynia&quot;.

The &quot;Rhynia&quot; plant was small and stick-like, with simple dichotomously branching stems without leaves, each tipped by a sporangium. The simple form echoes that of the sporophyte of mosses, and it has been shown that &quot;Rhynia&quot; had an alternation of generations, with a corresponding gametophyte in the form of crowded tufts of diminutive stems only a few millimetres in height. &quot;Rhynia&quot; thus falls midway between mosses and early vascular plants like ferns and clubmosses. From a carpet of moss-like gametophytes, the larger &quot;Rhynia&quot; sporophytes grew much like simple clubmosses, spreading by means of horizontal growing stems growing rhizoids that anchored the plant to the substrate. The unusual mix of moss-like and vascular traits and the extreme structural simplicity of the plant had huge implications for botanical understanding.

==Missing links==

The idea of all living things being linked through some sort of transmutation process predates Darwin&#x27;s theory of evolution. Jean-Baptiste Lamarck envisioned that life was generated constantly in the form of the simplest creatures, and strove towards complexity and perfection (i.e. humans) through a progressive series of lower forms. In his view, lower animals were simply newcomers on the evolutionary scene.

After &quot;On the Origin of Species&quot;, the idea of &quot;lower animals&quot; representing earlier stages in evolution lingered, as demonstrated in Ernst Haeckel&#x27;s figure of the human pedigree. While the vertebrates were then seen as forming a sort of evolutionary sequence, the various classes were distinct, the undiscovered intermediate forms being called &quot;missing links.&quot;

The term was first used in a scientific context by Charles Lyell in the third edition (1851) of his book &quot;Elements of Geology&quot; in relation to missing parts of the geological column, but it was popularized in its present meaning by its appearance on page xi of his book &quot;Geological Evidences of the Antiquity of Man&quot; of 1863. By that time, it was generally thought that the end of the last glacial period marked the first appearance of humanity; Lyell drew on new findings in his &quot;Antiquity of Man&quot; to put the origin of human beings much further back. Lyell wrote that it remained a profound mystery how the huge gulf between man and beast could be bridged. Lyell&#x27;s vivid writing fired the public imagination, inspiring Jules Verne&#x27;s &quot;Journey to the Center of the Earth&quot; (1864) and Louis Figuier&#x27;s 1867 second edition of &quot;La Terre avant le déluge&quot; (&quot;Earth before the Flood&quot;), which included dramatic illustrations of savage men and women wearing animal skins and wielding stone axes, in place of the Garden of Eden shown in the 1863 edition.

The search for a fossil showing transitional traits between apes and humans, however, was fruitless until the young Dutch geologist Eugène Dubois found a skullcap, a molar and a femur on the banks of Solo River, Java in 1891. The find combined a low, ape-like skull roof with a brain estimated at around 1000 cc, midway between that of a chimpanzee and an adult human. The single molar was larger than any modern human tooth, but the femur was long and straight, with a knee angle showing that &quot;Java Man&quot; had walked upright. Given the name &quot;Pithecanthropus erectus&quot; (&quot;erect ape-man&quot;), it became the first in what is now a long list of human evolution fossils. At the time it was hailed by many as the &quot;missing link,&quot; helping set the term as primarily used for human fossils, though it is sometimes used for other intermediates, like the dinosaur-bird intermediary &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot;. 
While &quot;missing link&quot; is still a popular term, well-recognized by the public and often used in the popular media, the term is avoided in scientific publications. Some bloggers have called it &quot;inappropriate&quot;; both because the links are no longer &quot;missing&quot;, and because human evolution is no longer believed to have occurred in terms of a single linear progression.

==Punctuated equilibrium==
The theory of punctuated equilibrium developed by Stephen Jay Gould and Niles Eldredge and first presented in 1972 is often mistakenly drawn into the discussion of transitional fossils. This theory, however, pertains only to well-documented transitions within taxa or between closely related taxa over a geologically short period of time. These transitions, usually traceable in the same geological outcrop, often show small jumps in morphology between extended periods of morphological stability. To explain these jumps, Gould and Eldredge envisaged comparatively long periods of genetic stability separated by periods of rapid evolution. Gould made the following observation concerning creationist misuse of his work to deny the existence of transitional fossils:

==See also==
* Crocoduck
* Evidence of common descent
* Missing link
* Speciation

==References==
==Sources==
* 
* 
* The book is available from The Complete Work of Charles Darwin Online. Retrieved 2015-05-13.
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==External links==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q447188" start="2" end="21" title="Transitional fossil" label="transitional fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="29" end="35" title="fossil" label="fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625620" start="237" end="250" title="gross anatomy" label="gross anatomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="359" end="364" title="human" label="human"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="775" end="789" title="Charles Darwin" label="Charles Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q20124" start="803" end="827" title="On the Origin of Species" label="On the Origin of Species"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="1280" end="1305" title="evolution" label="descent with modification"/>
<link wikidata="Q43478" start="1314" end="1331" title="natural selection" label="natural selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q100196" start="1347" end="1360" title="Archaeopteryx" label="Archaeopteryx"/>
<link wikidata="Q430" start="1483" end="1491" title="dinosaur" label="dinosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="1497" end="1501" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q447188" start="1504" end="1534" title="List of transitional fossils" label="Many more transitional fossils"/>
<link wikidata="Q37517" start="1614" end="1621" title="class (biology)" label="classes"/>
<link wikidata="Q25241" start="1625" end="1635" title="vertebrate" label="vertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q16246391" start="1737" end="1745" title="Evolution of tetrapods" label="tetrapod"/>
<link wikidata="Q5418648" start="1751" end="1755" title="Evolution of fish" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q905761" start="1757" end="1776" title="Origin of birds" label="birds and dinosaurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q785301" start="1782" end="1826" title="Evolution of mammals" label="mammals and &amp;quot;mammal-like reptiles&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q83944" start="1912" end="1927" title="human evolution" label="human evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q635162" start="1963" end="1970" title="Hominidae" label="hominid"/>
<link wikidata="Q8269924" start="2298" end="2306" title="Taxonomy (biology)" label="taxonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16521" start="2383" end="2387" title="Taxon" label="taxa"/>
<link wikidata="Q713623" start="2710" end="2715" title="clade" label="clade"/>
<link wikidata="Q192210" start="2744" end="2754" title="cladistics" label="cladistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333562" start="2816" end="2825" title="cladogram" label="cladogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q210958" start="2962" end="2974" title="Monophyly" label="monophyletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976606" start="3032" end="3050" title="phylogenetic nomenclature" label="phylogenetic names"/>
<link wikidata="Q6875856" start="3334" end="3342" title="misnomer" label="misnomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q379061" start="3696" end="3706" title="Basal (phylogenetics)" label="basal taxa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567633" start="3722" end="3733" title="Sister group" label="sister taxa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="4248" end="4255" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q25367" start="4777" end="4785" title="plankton" label="plankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142548" start="4786" end="4797" title="Micropaleontology" label="microfossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q100196" start="5268" end="5281" title="Archaeopteryx" label="Archaeopteryx"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="5293" end="5298" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q188438" start="5302" end="5310" title="Theropoda" label="theropod"/>
<link wikidata="Q782930" start="5586" end="5593" title="Avialae" label="avialan"/>
<link wikidata="Q499312" start="5692" end="5705" title="Late Jurassic" label="Late Jurassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q43521" start="5706" end="5712" title="Period (geology)" label="period"/>
<link wikidata="Q33837" start="5762" end="5773" title="archipelago" label="archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q25307" start="5871" end="5886" title="European magpie" label="European magpie"/>
<link wikidata="Q8335" start="5950" end="5955" title="raven" label="raven"/>
<link wikidata="Q83222" start="6171" end="6179" title="Mesozoic" label="Mesozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q131218" start="6279" end="6294" title="Deinonychosauria" label="deinonychosaurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q130995" start="6296" end="6307" title="Dromaeosauridae" label="dromaeosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q132452" start="6313" end="6323" title="Troodontidae" label="troodontid"/>
<link wikidata="Q81025" start="6450" end="6457" title="feather" label="feather"/>
<link wikidata="Q3325990" start="6474" end="6485" title="homeothermy" label="homeothermy"/>
<link wikidata="Q392655" start="7021" end="7035" title="flight feather" label="flight feather"/>
<link wikidata="Q102470" start="7329" end="7332" title="ape" label="ape"/>
<link wikidata="Q728889" start="7619" end="7631" title="Ilium (bone)" label="iliac blades"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633822" start="7776" end="7790" title="Rectus femoris muscle" label="knee extensors"/>
<link wikidata="Q713102" start="7832" end="7838" title="pelvis" label="pelvis"/>
<link wikidata="Q372949" start="8046" end="8056" title="bipedalism" label="bipedalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q176503" start="8062" end="8067" title="femur" label="femur"/>
<link wikidata="Q193818" start="8103" end="8106" title="hip" label="hip"/>
<link wikidata="Q41050" start="8250" end="8259" title="orangutan" label="orangutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q258244" start="8265" end="8278" title="spider monkey" label="spider monkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q264251" start="8324" end="8332" title="adducted" label="adducted"/>
<link wikidata="Q5766112" start="8408" end="8416" title="hindlimb" label="hindlimb"/>
<link wikidata="Q4126704" start="8511" end="8521" title="Common chimpanzee" label="chimpanzee"/>
<link wikidata="Q160" start="8660" end="8667" title="cetacea" label="cetacea"/>
<link wikidata="Q382441" start="8707" end="8720" title="marine mammal" label="marine mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="8741" end="8747" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190158" start="8754" end="8763" title="Pakicetidae" label="pakicetid"/>
<link wikidata="Q123509" start="8772" end="8779" title="Extinction" label="extinct"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="8780" end="8786" title="family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q133094" start="8871" end="8879" title="Indohyus" label="Indohyus"/>
<link wikidata="Q135753" start="8902" end="8912" title="Raoellidae" label="Raoellidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q76274" start="8938" end="8944" title="Eocene" label="Eocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q208136" start="9087" end="9097" title="Tethys Sea" label="Tethys Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q173801" start="9191" end="9208" title="tympanic membrane" label="tympanic membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q132405" start="9305" end="9323" title="Ambulocetus natans" label="Ambulocetus natans"/>
<link wikidata="Q43169" start="9453" end="9462" title="crocodile" label="crocodile"/>
<link wikidata="Q134967" start="9479" end="9490" title="Ambulocetidae" label="ambulocetid"/>
<link wikidata="Q506894" start="9700" end="9708" title="Littoral zone" label="littoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q25326" start="9709" end="9716" title="Mollusca" label="mollusc"/>
<link wikidata="Q160830" start="10414" end="10428" title="Sarcopterygii" label="sarcopterygian"/>
<link wikidata="Q65955" start="10462" end="10470" title="Devonian" label="Devonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q146841" start="10776" end="10792" title="Ellesmere Island" label="Ellesmere Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023" start="10796" end="10803" title="Nunavut" label="Nunavut"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="10879" end="10893" title="Paleontology" label="Paleontologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q132313" start="10994" end="11007" title="Panderichthys" label="Panderichthys"/>
<link wikidata="Q131763" start="11091" end="11103" title="Acanthostega" label="Acanthostega"/>
<link wikidata="Q131475" start="11120" end="11132" title="Ichthyostega" label="Ichthyostega"/>
<link wikidata="Q458247" start="11283" end="11294" title="Neil Shubin" label="Neil Shubin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209254" start="11345" end="11353" title="Tetrapodomorpha" label="fishapod"/>
<link wikidata="Q17126173" start="11548" end="11562" title="weight-bearing" label="weight-bearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q180445" start="12055" end="12061" title="Nature (journal)" label="Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q150821" start="12164" end="12178" title="Elpistostegalia" label="elpistostegids"/>
<link wikidata="Q59577" start="12538" end="12555" title="Pleuronectiformes" label="Pleuronectiformes"/>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="12574" end="12579" title="order (biology)" label="order"/>
<link wikidata="Q127282" start="12583" end="12598" title="Actinopterygii" label="ray-finned fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q621411" start="12929" end="12941" title="spiny turbot" label="spiny turbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q468469" start="13180" end="13186" title="seabed" label="seabed"/>
<link wikidata="Q182238" start="13188" end="13195" title="benthos" label="benthos"/>
<link wikidata="Q474958" start="13256" end="13266" title="Amphistium" label="Amphistium"/>
<link wikidata="Q43478" start="13654" end="13671" title="natural selection" label="natural selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413204" start="13823" end="13834" title="Monte Bolca" label="Monte Bolca"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122699" start="13841" end="13852" title="Lagerstätte" label="Lagerstätte"/>
<link wikidata="Q514893" start="13862" end="13870" title="Lutetian" label="Lutetian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329082" start="13884" end="13896" title="Heteronectes" label="Heteronectes"/>
<link wikidata="Q25814" start="14041" end="14051" title="Spermatophyte" label="seed plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4832012" start="14222" end="14236" title="Sporangium" label="megasporangium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470736" start="14253" end="14259" title="Calybium and cupule" label="cupule"/>
<link wikidata="Q488415" start="14298" end="14304" title="distal" label="distal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14347" end="14357" title="Integument#Botanical usage" label="integument"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047706" start="14410" end="14434" title="Anemophily" label="anemophilous pollination"/>
<link wikidata="Q40763" start="14594" end="14603" title="seed coat" label="seed coat"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="14712" end="14725" title="fossil record" label="fossil record"/>
<link wikidata="Q11721746" start="14920" end="14935" title="Donald Prothero" label="Donald Prothero"/>
<link wikidata="Q12501479" start="15795" end="15815" title="soft-bodied organism" label="soft-bodied organism"/>
<link wikidata="Q44631" start="15998" end="16008" title="echinoderm" label="echinoderm"/>
<link wikidata="Q178272" start="16015" end="16025" title="brachiopod" label="brachiopod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360" start="16046" end="16055" title="arthropod" label="arthropod"/>
<link wikidata="Q43478" start="16470" end="16487" title="natural selection" label="natural selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="16524" end="16530" title="genus" label="genera"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16641" end="16656" title="Archaeopteryx#History of discovery" label="London specimen"/>
<link wikidata="Q100196" start="16666" end="16679" title="Archaeopteryx" label="Archaeopteryx"/>
<link wikidata="Q37517" start="16801" end="16806" title="class (biology)" label="class"/>
<link wikidata="Q10811" start="16863" end="16870" title="reptile" label="reptile"/>
<link wikidata="Q223013" start="16916" end="16929" title="Hugh Falconer" label="Hugh Falconer"/>
<link wikidata="Q975413" start="17328" end="17351" title="encyclopedic dictionary" label="encyclopedic dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17763" end="17772" title="Phylum#Land plant phyla (divisions)" label="divisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q27133" start="17862" end="17876" title="vascular plant" label="vascular plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507909" start="17888" end="17902" title="Robert Kidston" label="Robert Kidston"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297586" start="17907" end="17925" title="William Henry Lang" label="William Henry Lang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633601" start="17983" end="17995" title="Rhynie chert" label="Rhynie chert"/>
<link wikidata="Q189912" start="17999" end="18012" title="Aberdeenshire" label="Aberdeenshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q310514" start="18043" end="18049" title="Rhynia" label="Rhynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10361123" start="18125" end="18138" title="Dichotomy" label="dichotomously"/>
<link wikidata="Q4832012" start="18188" end="18198" title="sporangium" label="sporangium"/>
<link wikidata="Q647173" start="18235" end="18245" title="sporophyte" label="sporophyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q25347" start="18249" end="18255" title="mosses" label="mosses"/>
<link wikidata="Q725951" start="18310" end="18336" title="alternation of generations" label="alternation of generations"/>
<link wikidata="Q189951" start="18359" end="18370" title="gametophyte" label="gametophyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q80005" start="18537" end="18541" title="fern" label="fern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149748" start="18547" end="18555" title="Lycopodiopsida" label="clubmoss"/>
<link wikidata="Q944420" start="18731" end="18738" title="rhizoid" label="rhizoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q82122" start="19083" end="19104" title="Jean-Baptiste Lamarck" label="Jean-Baptiste Lamarck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424880" start="19201" end="19234" title="Orthogenesis" label="towards complexity and perfection"/>
<link wikidata="Q48246" start="19523" end="19536" title="Ernst Haeckel" label="Ernst Haeckel"/>
<link wikidata="Q37517" start="19667" end="19674" title="class (biology)" label="classes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333" start="19818" end="19831" title="Charles Lyell" label="Charles Lyell"/>
<link wikidata="Q43521" start="19940" end="19957" title="Geologic time scale" label="geological column"/>
<link wikidata="Q4186843" start="20052" end="20096" title="Geological Evidences of the Antiquity of Man" label="Geological Evidences of the Antiquity of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q754949" start="20171" end="20190" title="last glacial period" label="last glacial period"/>
<link wikidata="Q33977" start="20521" end="20532" title="Jules Verne" label="Jules Verne"/>
<link wikidata="Q219457" start="20546" end="20580" title="Journey to the Center of the Earth" label="Journey to the Center of the Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571091" start="20598" end="20611" title="Louis Figuier" label="Louis Figuier"/>
<link wikidata="Q19014" start="20841" end="20855" title="Garden of Eden" label="Garden of Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q317176" start="21016" end="21029" title="Eugène Dubois" label="Eugène Dubois"/>
<link wikidata="Q176503" start="21062" end="21067" title="femur" label="femur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902049" start="21084" end="21094" title="Solo River" label="Solo River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757" start="21096" end="21100" title="Java" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576642" start="21144" end="21154" title="skull roof" label="skull roof"/>
<link wikidata="Q192993" start="21384" end="21392" title="Java Man" label="Java Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q101362" start="21440" end="21463" title="Homo erectus" label="Pithecanthropus erectus"/>
<link wikidata="Q785292" start="21541" end="21572" title="list of human evolution fossils" label="list of human evolution fossils"/>
<link wikidata="Q100196" start="21794" end="21807" title="Archaeopteryx" label="Archaeopteryx"/>
<link wikidata="Q180619" start="22287" end="22304" title="Stephen Jay Gould" label="Stephen Jay Gould"/>
<link wikidata="Q451437" start="22309" end="22323" title="Niles Eldredge" label="Niles Eldredge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3614894" start="23019" end="23028" title="Crocoduck" label="Crocoduck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075815" start="23031" end="23057" title="Evidence of common descent" label="Evidence of common descent"/>
<link wikidata="Q23450149" start="23060" end="23072" title="Missing link (human evolution)" label="Missing link"/>
<link wikidata="Q39350" start="23075" end="23085" title="Speciation" label="Speciation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="331757" wikidata="Q1059066" url="?curid=331757" title="Conolophus">
<text>The Galápagos land iguanas comprise the genus Conolophus of the Galápagos Islands (Ecuador). The number of species of this variable genus has always been disputed; the most current taxonomic surveys suggest that three species exist: 

==Extant species==

==References==
*Frost, D.E. and R.E. Etheridge (1989) &quot;A Phylogenetic Analysis and Taxonomy of Iguanian Lizards (Reptilia: Squamata)&quot;. Univ. Kansas Mus. Nat. Hist. Misc. Publ. 81
*Frost, D.R., R. Etheridge, D. Janies and T.A. Titus (2001) &quot;Total evidence, sequence alignment, evolution of Polychrotid lizards, and a reclassification of the Iguania (Squamata: Iguania).&quot; American Museum Novitates 3343: 38 pp.

==Notes==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1059066" start="4" end="26" title="Conolophus" label="Galápagos land iguanas"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="40" end="45" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q38095" start="64" end="81" title="Galápagos Islands" label="Galápagos Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="107" end="114" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q8269924" start="181" end="190" title="Taxonomy (biology)" label="taxonomic"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="331758" wikidata="Q1369044" url="?curid=331758" title="Ctenosaura">
<text>Ctenosaura is a lizard genus commonly known as spinytail iguanas or ctenosaurs. The genus is part of the large lizard family Iguanidae and is native to Mexico and Central America. The name is derived from two Greek words: (), meaning &quot;comb&quot; (referring to the comblike spines on the lizard&#x27;s back and tail), and (), meaning &quot;lizard&quot;.

==Description==
The species range in size (total length, including the tail) from about to well over . The distinctive feature of this genus is the presence of enlarged, spiny scales on the tail.

==Ecology and natural history==
Ctenosaurs are generally omnivorous, feeding on fruits, flowers, foliage, and small animals.

While studying physiological correlates of locomotion in lizards, a &quot;burst speed&quot; of 34.6 km/h (21.5 miles/h) was recorded by a black spiny-tail iguana (&quot;Ctenosaura similis&quot;), which is the highest speed reported for a lizard.

==Captivity==
&quot;C. pectinata&quot;, &quot;C. similis&quot;, and &quot;C. quinquecarinata&quot; are popular as pets.

==Invasive species==
At least two species, &quot;Ctenosaura pectinata&quot; and &quot;Ctenosaura similis&quot;, have been introduced into southern areas of Texas and Florida. They are also now in southern Arizona.

==Species==
The genus &quot;Ctenosaura&quot; represents the most diverse group of iguanas with 15 currently recognized species and at least two unrecognized species. These species inhabit lowland dry forests, woodlands and semi-open habitats, below elevation, on both coasts of Mexico and Central America. The species in the genus &quot;Ctenosaura&quot; belong in several different clades. Closely related species show allopatry whereas species from divergent clades show sympatry. Until 2017, the two species of &quot;Cachryx&quot; were included in &quot;Ctenosaura&quot;.

==References==
==Further reading==
*Frost DR, Etheridge RE (1989). &quot;A Phylogenetic Analysis and Taxonomy of Iguanian Lizards (Reptilia: Squamata)&quot;. &quot;Univ. Kansas Mus. Nat. Hist. Misc. Publ.&quot; 81.
*Frost DR, Etheridge R, Janies D, Titus TA (2001). &quot;Total evidence, sequence alignment, evolution of Polychrotid lizards, and a reclassification of the Iguania (Squamata: Iguania)&quot;. &quot;American Museum Novitates&quot; (3343): 1-38.

==External links==
*Garland T Jr (1984). &quot;Physiological correlates of locomotory performance in a lizard: an allometric approach&quot;. &quot;American J. Physiol.&quot; 247 (&quot;Regulatory Integrative Comp. Physiol.&quot; 16): R806-R815. PDF
*IIF Announces Fundraising Campaign
*Spiny Tailed Iguana Pictures
*West Coast Iguana Research</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q15879" start="16" end="22" title="lizard" label="lizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="23" end="28" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369044" start="47" end="64" title="Ctenosaura" label="spinytail iguanas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369044" start="68" end="78" title="Ctenosaura" label="ctenosaurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="84" end="89" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15879" start="111" end="117" title="lizard" label="lizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="118" end="124" title="family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q235589" start="125" end="134" title="Iguanidae" label="Iguanidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="152" end="158" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="163" end="178" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="379" end="386" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="494" end="499" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q164509" start="613" end="623" title="omnivorous" label="omnivorous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132759" start="851" end="869" title="Ctenosaura similis" label="Ctenosaura similis"/>
<link wikidata="Q276865" start="949" end="961" title="Ctenosaura pectinata" label="C. pectinata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132759" start="975" end="985" title="Ctenosaura similis" label="C. similis"/>
<link wikidata="Q276829" start="1003" end="1021" title="Ctenosaura quinquecarinata" label="C. quinquecarinata"/>
<link wikidata="Q39201" start="1043" end="1046" title="pet" label="pet"/>
<link wikidata="Q276865" start="1099" end="1119" title="Ctenosaura pectinata" label="Ctenosaura pectinata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132759" start="1136" end="1154" title="Ctenosaura similis" label="Ctenosaura similis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="1206" end="1211" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="1216" end="1223" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="1255" end="1262" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="1281" end="1286" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q235589" start="1347" end="1354" title="iguanidae" label="iguanas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="1384" end="1391" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="1422" end="1429" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="1437" end="1444" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q713623" start="1647" end="1652" title="clade" label="clade"/>
<link wikidata="Q853848" start="1684" end="1693" title="allopatry" label="allopatry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246431" start="1737" end="1745" title="sympatry" label="sympatry"/>
<link wikidata="Q57578910" start="1784" end="1791" title="Cachryx" label="Cachryx"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016457" start="1876" end="1884" title="Darrel R. Frost" label="Frost DR"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1886" end="1898" title="Richard Emmett Etheridge" label="Etheridge RE"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2089" end="2097" title="Tom A. Titus" label="Titus TA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7781797" start="2320" end="2332" title="Theodore Garland Jr." label="Garland T Jr"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="331761" wikidata="Q14422490" url="?curid=331761" title="Dipsosaurus">
<text>Dipsosaurus is a genus of lizards in the family Iguanidae.

==Taxonomy==
Currently, there are two described species in this genus.
* Desert iguana, &quot;Dipsosaurus dorsalis&quot; 
* Catalina desert iguana, &quot;Dipsosaurus catalinensis&quot; 

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="17" end="22" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15879" start="26" end="32" title="lizard" label="lizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="41" end="47" title="Family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q235589" start="48" end="57" title="Iguanidae" label="Iguanidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q912330" start="154" end="174" title="Dipsosaurus dorsalis" label="Dipsosaurus dorsalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q108631680" start="214" end="238" title="Dipsosaurus catalinensis" label="Dipsosaurus catalinensis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="331775" wikidata="Q696919" url="?curid=331775" title="Knorkator">
<text>Knorkator is a German band from Berlin that combines heavy metal with comical elements. They proclaim themselves to be &quot;Germany&#x27;s band in the world&quot; (), as the title &quot;The best band in the world&quot; was already taken by Die Ärzte. The name is a personification of , a dated adjective used in Berlin and the Ruhr basin meaning &quot;great&quot; or &quot;fabulous&quot; (similar to the English slang word &quot;swell&quot;). The band was founded in 1994, but only played in the Berlin/Brandenburg area until 1998.


Knorkator gained further fame (and some notoriety) in 2000 with their performance of (sic; literally, in Berlin dialect, &quot;I&#x27;m turning into a pig&quot;) in the German national qualification for the Eurovision Song Contest. After the qualification show, German tabloid Bild notoriously headlined &quot;&quot; (&quot;Who let these lunatics on TV?&quot;).

Knorkator announced the end of the band in a MySpace bulletin on 14 June 2008, the last concert was played on 5 December that year in Berlin. The official reason given for the band&#x27;s breakup was that Alf Ator wanted to leave Germany to start a new life in Thailand. In autumn 2010 a bulletin by Stumpen announced the bands&#x27; reunion. A first &quot;small&quot; tour followed in April 2011 as well as some concerts at well-known festivals like Wacken Open Air. The tour was called the &quot;77 minutes tour&quot;, as the setlist was planned to be exactly 77 minutes long. A digital clock that counted down the minutes was placed on stage to make sure the time limit was not exceeded. Their new album (translates to &quot;Let there be Not&quot; or &quot;Let Not Be&quot;, a pun on – &quot;Let there be Light&quot;) was in September 2011, followed by a big tour with concerts of regular length.

== Style ==
Knorkator&#x27;s music can be largely classified as industrial metal, somewhat akin to White Zombie and Ministry. Knorkator, however, strongly features a comedic element. Most songs escalate into falsetto vocals and bombastic, over-the-top anthemic choruses, with crushing guitars and subtle samplers. Due to the amusing message, however, the band&#x27;s considerable technical and artistic merit is sometimes overlooked.

Knorkator&#x27;s lyrics are somewhat explicit, but always very humorous. Most of the band&#x27;s lyrics are in German; however, some songs also feature English (&quot;beating around the bush&quot;, &quot;Ma Baker&quot;, etc.), Thai (, ), Latin (), or French (, ) lyrics. Their famous song (&quot;We&#x27;re all going to die&quot;) has also been translated into the Arabic language.
The songs in English are often extreme covers of previously well-known hit songs.

The song is featured as a music video in the 3rd episode of Adult Swim&#x27;s &quot;Off the Air&quot; (2011).

== Live performances ==
Knorkator&#x27;s wild stage shows and appearance are chaotic: half of Stumpen&#x27;s body is tattooed black, and he usually performs in his goofy underpants; Buzz Dee&#x27;s appearance is often cited as being a clone of Big Jim Martin.

Knorkator are (in)famous for their wild stage shows. Alf Ator has been known to hit the audience with a large foam club, throw toast slices and wet autumn foliage at the crowd. Sometimes a modified shredder was used to distribute shredded vegetables and fruit over the crowd, which was announced as &quot;vegetarian airway-catering&quot;. Their live performances are also well known for extensive acts of instrument destruction where especially keyboarder Alf Ator used to deconstruct one or more electronic organs that he had been playing on with a toilet brush or similar before. Singer Stumpen is known for the frequent smashing of TV sets on stage, from which he suffered a glass splinter getting stuck in his thigh that had to be removed by surgery some years later and was then auctioned on the internet. In earlier shows, a lot of furniture pieces were placed on the stage which were then destroyed during the show by Alf or Stumpen, mostly with an axe or a baseball bat. Stumpen is also known for wearing almost nothing on stage except for a woman&#x27;s bathing suit or underpants.

Crowd surfing is another important element of Knorkator&#x27;s shows, not only performed by the musicians themselves, but also directing the crowd to perform exceptional exercises, such as racing duels between spectators over the hands of the crowd, piggyback moshing, woman-throwing competitions, instructing the crowd to separate and then run into each other (known as the &quot;Wall of Death&quot;), or lifting and surfing the heavily overweight sound engineer from the mixing desk to the stage and back.

== Members ==
* Stumpen (Gero Ivers) – vocals
* Alf Ator (Alexander Thomas) – keyboards
* Buzz Dee (Sebastian Baur) – guitars (1996–present)
* Rajko Gohlke – bass (2010–present)
* Philipp Schwab – drums (2020–present)

=== Former members ===
* J. Kirk Thiele – guitars (until 1997)
* Thomas Görsch – drums (until 1998)
* Chrish Chrash (Christian Gerlach) – drums (1998–2003)
* Tim Buktu (Tim Schallenberg) – bass (2003–2008)
* Sebhead Emm (Sebastian Meyer) – drums (2012–2014)
* Nick Aragua (Nicolaj Gogow) – drums (2003–2012, 2014–2020)

=== Touring members ===
* Jen Majura – guitars (2012–2014)
* Philipp Schwab – drums (2014–2015)

== Discography ==

=== CD ===
* 1998: (The baddest of Knorkator)
* 1999: (pun with Hasenscharte (harelip) and chartbreaker)
* 2000: (Tribute to ourselves)
* 2003: (I hate music)
* 2007: (The next album of all time)
* 2011: (Let there be not / pun with Let there be light [&quot;Licht&quot;])
* 2014: (We want Moore)
* 2016: (I am the Boss)
* 2019: (Resistance [or: resistor] is futile)
* 2022: (Victory of reason)

=== CD (Live) ===
* 2005: (Too old)
* 2015: 

=== CD (compilations) ===
* 2002: (Heimatlieder – Songs of [our] home)
* 2010: (3 CD-Box Ltd. Ed.) (My life as a single)

=== DVD ===
* 2005: (Too old)
* 2007: (Guest performance with 143.425 images, bonus DVD)
* 2008: (The Way down)
* 2011: (Farewell Concert, bonus DVD)
* 2014: (Citadel, bonus DVD)
* 2015: 
* 2016: ( bonus DVD)

=== Singles / EP ===
* 1995: 
* 1998: (Evil)
* 1999: (Way down)
* 1999: (Letter)
* 2000: (I turn into a pig)
* 2000: (I let myself be cloned)
* 2000: (Come back)
* 2003: (The ultimate man)
* 2006: (We will)
* 2007: (Old Man)
* 2007: (www.alovesong.com)
* 2008: (Children&#x27;s Song)

== controversy ==

Knorkator were planning to go on tour in spring 2014 to present their new album , which was released on 17 January 2014. The album name is a pun, replacing &quot;more&quot; by the German word , which is a dated term for black people that today is only used in a historical or literary context. The tour was advertised with a poster showing the five (white) band members in a big pot on a fire and a black person with bones in their hair and a knife in their hand next to it. This is a reenactment of a scene in the 19th-century child&#x27;s book . The poster caused outrage in some German anti-racist blogs, and the , an organisation representing black people in Germany, published a statement calling the poster racist, unreflected and degrading. Knorkator singer Gero Ivers published a response in which he claims to be shocked and disappointed by the statement and argues that the intention of the poster had been misunderstood and not seen in context. Subsequently, the band stopped using the advertising poster but refused ISD&#x27;s demand to change the album cover as they viewed the content of the reenacted scene as &quot;profoundly anti-racist&quot;.

== Bibliography ==
* 
* 

== References ==
== External links ==

* Official site
* Alf Ator&#x27;s site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q696919" start="0" end="9" title="Knorkator" label="Knorkator"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="53" end="64" title="Heavy metal music" label="heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q32645" start="241" end="250" title="Die Ärzte" label="Die Ärzte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664" start="328" end="332" title="Ruhr (river)" label="Ruhr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208" start="504" end="515" title="Brandenburg" label="Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q276" start="742" end="765" title="Eurovision Song Contest" label="Eurovision Song Contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q156203" start="812" end="816" title="Bild" label="Bild"/>
<link wikidata="Q157845" start="1349" end="1364" title="Wacken Open Air" label="Wacken Open Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q208494" start="1863" end="1879" title="industrial metal" label="industrial metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q740623" start="1898" end="1910" title="White Zombie (band)" label="White Zombie"/>
<link wikidata="Q425772" start="1915" end="1923" title="Ministry (band)" label="Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q193935" start="2007" end="2015" title="falsetto" label="falsetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q762235" start="2438" end="2446" title="Ma Baker" label="Ma Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q9217" start="2461" end="2465" title="Thai language" label="Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="2472" end="2477" title="Latin language" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="2599" end="2614" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7078953" start="2783" end="2794" title="Off the Air (TV series)" label="Off the Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381363" start="3054" end="3068" title="Jim Martin (musician)" label="Big Jim Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6041853" start="3476" end="3498" title="instrument destruction" label="instrument destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q125576797" start="3568" end="3584" title="electronic organ" label="electronic organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q8075" start="3706" end="3712" title="TV set" label="TV set"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141718" start="4163" end="4176" title="Crowd surfing" label="Crowd surfing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463560" start="4423" end="4430" title="moshing" label="moshing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463560" start="4544" end="4557" title="Wall of death (moshing)" label="Wall of Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q20830501" start="5237" end="5247" title="Jen Majura" label="Jen Majura"/>
<link wikidata="Q374132" start="7006" end="7011" title="blogosphere" label="blogs"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="331776" wikidata="Q16258270" url="?curid=331776" title="SchNEWS">
<text>SchNEWS was a free weekly publication from Brighton, England, which ran from November 1994 until September 2014. The main focus was environmental and social issues/struggles in the UK – but also internationally – with an emphasis on direct action protest, and autonomous political struggles outside formalised political parties.

As well as the free weekly double-sided A4 news-sheet and website, &quot;SchNEWS&quot; also regularly produced short films (called &quot;SchMOVIES&quot;), and has self-published a series of books – mostly annuals featuring compilations of &quot;SchNEWS&quot; issues. The group also produced political satire shows, the most recent being national tours in 2004 and 2005, and since its inception held free-information stalls and marquees at major UK festivals, free parties and other events.

&quot;SchNEWS&quot; was run entirely by unpaid volunteers, and existed financially by donation from readers and subscribers, rather than through regular funding channels.

The strapline and motto of &quot;SchNEWS&quot; was &quot;information for action&quot; – giving the reader the necessary information and contacts, so they can become pro-actively involved in political issues. It was once dubbed &quot;the national newsletter of the protest movement&quot; by the newspaper &quot;The Guardian&quot;.

==History==
&quot;SchNEWS&quot; arose in 1994 in Brighton out of the then campaign against the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994 called Justice?. One of the focal points of this campaign was the squatting of an old courthouse in central Brighton in September 1994, from which began live &quot;newsreading performances&quot;, amongst other demonstrations, direct action protests, events, talks, parties. After the eviction of the courthouse, one of the newsreaders and another activist involved began a newsletter, initially meant to act as a collective memory for the groups formed under the Justice? banner. The original working name was &quot;The SchNEWSPAPER&quot; which was the form of the dummy-run version that featured the first headline &quot;Man sits down in park&quot;. The first version of &quot;SchNEWS&quot; was a pilot issue created by David M. Berry and Gibby Zobel in Luther Street, Brighton, was published on 16 November 1994, being one side of A4. It had a very small print run and featured the headline &quot;Big Brother CCTV installed in Brighton&quot;.

The live news reading, called &quot;SchLIVE&quot;, continued from this initial point, and once the news-sheet was running it became a performed version of it. &quot;SchLIVE&quot; was a weekly event at various venues around Brighton, culminating in a national tour in 1996.

&quot;SchNEWS&quot; quickly built up a national readership, gaining popularity for presenting its news in a concise, witty and jargon-free language. While its initial focus was resistance to the Criminal Justice Bill (CJB), it quickly moved onto other relevant social and environmental struggles in the UK and abroad, outlasting the anti-CJB cause and Justice? itself.

It went on to cover the protests against the building of the M11 motorway link road in London, the anti-Newbury bypass protests in Berkshire and the actions of Reclaim the Streets. It has also reported on labour issues such as the Liverpool Dockers&#x27; Strike of 1995–97, fights against the privatisation of public services, racism, climate change and genetic engineering. Some of those involved were also part of the Simon Jones Memorial Campaign which &quot;SchNEWS&quot; championed. Later the focus turned to more international issues such as neo-liberalism and more recently the anti-war movement.

While the final editions of &quot;SchNEWS&quot; look very similar to the initial issues – two sides of A4 crammed with text – its subject matter and readership was transformed by the rise of the internet. While its first five years saw &quot;SchNEWS&quot; as the newsletter for the British direct action movement, and mostly distributed in paper form, in 2000 it joined Indymedia and other alternative media on the internet to reach an international audience, and the content broadened accordingly. It found a niche on the internet specialising in what it originally did; that is, covering grass-roots social and environmental struggles in the UK.

&quot;SchNEWS&quot; was a non-commercial enterprise and carries no advertising, it was written and edited by a small group of volunteers. It relied on the revenue it brought in from subscriptions, benefit gigs and donations. Its office space was for eight years donated by music group The Levellers. It subsequently moved to premises within an alternative social enterprise, The Cowley Club, in central Brighton, with the rent covered by donations. Internet capacity was donated by a local non-profit collective.

Started in 2004, SchMOVIES was the film-making side of &quot;SchNEWS&quot;. SchMOVIES mostly produced short films featuring many of the same protests and issues that the newsletter did, and films are free to download. There have been two &#x27;feature length&#x27; films – &quot;SchNEWS at Ten ...the movie&quot; (2005), and &quot;On the Verge&quot; (2008) – the Smash EDO campaign film which gained notoriety due to having its premiere screening in Brighton in March 2008 pulled due to underhand police intervention.

The website, from which the majority of readers now read &quot;SchNEWS&quot;, contains an archive of contact lists and back issues, as well as a repository for films and satirical graphics. The most well used part of the site is the Party &amp; Protest listings, covering demonstrations, events, meetings, screenings, benefit gigs and festivals.

The team behind &quot;SchNEWS&quot; ended regular publication in September 2014.

==See also==
*&quot;Brighton Voice&quot; – Alternative news in Brighton 1973–1989

==References==
==External links==
**&quot;SchNEWS website&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q131491" start="43" end="51" title="Brighton" label="Brighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q506259" start="233" end="246" title="direct action" label="direct action"/>
<link wikidata="Q839751" start="370" end="372" title="A4 paper size" label="A4"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="1303" end="1315" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185574" start="1419" end="1461" title="Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994" label="Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q6316832" start="1469" end="1477" title="Justice?" label="Justice?"/>
<link wikidata="Q16029528" start="2183" end="2197" title="David M. Berry" label="David M. Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381213" start="2928" end="2987" title="Environmental direct action in the United Kingdom" label="other relevant social and environmental struggles in the UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q15243259" start="3076" end="3135" title="M11 link road protest" label="protests against the building of the M11 motorway link road"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3156" end="3179" title="Newbury bypass#Conflict" label="Newbury bypass protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q23220" start="3183" end="3192" title="Berkshire" label="Berkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364639" start="3212" end="3231" title="Reclaim the Streets" label="Reclaim the Streets"/>
<link wikidata="Q208701" start="3257" end="3263" title="labor movement" label="labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q12355379" start="3283" end="3313" title="Liverpool dockers&amp;#x27; strike (1995–98)" label="Liverpool Dockers&amp;#x27; Strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="3345" end="3358" title="privatisation" label="privatisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="3387" end="3401" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q159236" start="3406" end="3425" title="genetic engineering" label="genetic engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q7519071" start="3472" end="3501" title="Simon Jones Memorial Campaign" label="Simon Jones Memorial Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q162719" start="3600" end="3614" title="neo-liberalism" label="neo-liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q794691" start="3637" end="3654" title="anti-war movement" label="anti-war movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137514" start="4027" end="4036" title="Indymedia" label="Indymedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1380135" start="4591" end="4604" title="The Levellers (band)" label="The Levellers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179756" start="4685" end="4696" title="Cowley Club" label="Cowley Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q7091575" start="5145" end="5169" title="On the Verge (film)" label="&amp;quot;On the Verge&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322861" start="5183" end="5201" title="EDO Decomissioners Case" label="Smash EDO campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q15109437" start="5788" end="5802" title="Brighton Voice" label="Brighton Voice"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="331778" wikidata="Q853442" url="?curid=331778" title="Equal Rites">
<text>Equal Rites is a comic fantasy novel by Terry Pratchett. Published in 1987, it is the third novel in the &quot;Discworld&quot; series and the first in which the main character is not Rincewind. The title is a play on words related to the phrase &quot;&quot;.

The novel introduces the character of Granny Weatherwax, who reappears in several later &quot;Discworld&quot; novels. The protagonist Eskarina Smith does not return until &quot;I Shall Wear Midnight&quot;, which was published 23 years later.

Pratchett based the character Esk on his daughter Rhianna Pratchett.

==Plot summary==

The wizard Drum Billet knows that he will soon die and travels to a place where an eighth son of an eighth son is about to be born. This signifies that the child is destined to become a wizard; on the Discworld, the number eight has many of the magical properties that are sometimes ascribed to seven in other mythologies. Billet wants to pass his wizard&#x27;s staff on to his successor.

However, the newborn child is actually a girl, Esk (full name Eskarina Smith). Since Billet notices his mistake too late, the staff passes on to her. As Esk grows up, it becomes apparent that she has uncontrollable powers, and the local witch Granny Weatherwax decides to travel with her to Unseen University in Ankh-Morpork to help her gain the knowledge required to properly manage her powers.

But a female wizard is something completely unheard of on the Discworld. Esk is unsuccessful in her first, direct, attempt to gain entry to the University, but Granny Weatherwax finds another way in; as a servant. While there, Esk witnesses the progress of an apprentice wizard named Simon, whom she had met earlier, on her way to Ankh-Morpork. Simon is a natural talent who invents a whole new way of looking at the universe that reduces it to component numbers.

Simon&#x27;s magic causes a hole to be opened into the Dungeon Dimensions while he is in Esk&#x27;s presence. The staff, acting to protect Esk, strikes Simon on the head, closing the hole but trapping his mind in the Dungeon Dimensions. Esk throws the staff away, believing that it attacked Simon. While attempting to rescue him, Esk ends up in the Dungeon Dimensions. The extreme cold there causes the staff, now washed out to sea, to create a huge ice sheet, causing a storm that floods the university as well as the surrounding city.

Esk and Simon discover the weakness of the creatures from the Dungeon Dimensions—if you &quot;can&quot; use magic, but &quot;don&#x27;t&quot;, they become scared and weakened. With the help of Granny Weatherwax and Archchancellor Cutangle, who have retrieved the staff, they both manage to transport themselves back into the Discworld. Esk and Simon go on to develop a new kind of magic, based on the notion that the greatest power is the ability not to use all the others.

==Characters==

*Granny Weatherwax
*Eskarina Smith
*Simon
*Drum Billet, dying wizard, bloody-minded apple tree and reincarnated ant
*Archchancellor Cutangle

==Reception==
Dave Langford reviewed &quot;Equal Rites&quot; for &quot;White Dwarf&quot; #87, and called it &quot;screwy and dotty&quot; and concluded that the book was &quot;Good fun.&quot;

J. Michael Caparula reviewed &quot;Equal Rites&quot; in &quot;Space Gamer/Fantasy Gamer&quot; No. 85. Caparula commented that &quot;While not a terribly original concept, it comes alive here amidst the fanciful farce and is treated with a sense of wonder. A think-while-you-laugh treat.&quot;

==Reviews==
*Review by Pauline Morgan (1987) in &quot;Fantasy Review&quot;, January-February 1987
*Review by Barbara Davies (1987) in &quot;Vector&quot; 137
*Review by Faren Miller (1987) in &quot;Locus&quot;, #315 April 1987
*Review by David Langford (1987) in &quot;Foundation&quot;, #40 Summer 1987
*Review by Ken Brown (1987) in &quot;Interzone&quot;, #20 Summer 1987
*Review by Andy Sawyer (1988) in &quot;Paperback Inferno&quot;, #70
*Review by Greg Cox (1989) in &quot;The New York Review of Science Fiction&quot;, June 1989
*Review by Bruce Gillespie (1991) in &quot;SF Commentary&quot;, #69/70
*Review [French] by Marc Lemosquet (1995) in &quot;Yellow Submarine&quot;, #113

==References==
==External links==
* Annotations for &quot;Equal Rites&quot;
* Quotes from &quot;Equal Rites&quot;
* &quot;Why Gandalf Never Married&quot;: 1985 talk by Pratchett discussing issues of gender and magic later elaborated in &quot;Equal Rites&quot;
* &quot;Equal Rites&quot; on Terry Pratchett&#x27;s website
* Colin Smythe Ltd Info. Archived.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1637212" start="17" end="30" title="comic fantasy" label="comic fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q46248" start="40" end="55" title="Terry Pratchett" label="Terry Pratchett"/>
<link wikidata="Q3257270" start="111" end="120" title="Discworld" label="Discworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q669992" start="183" end="192" title="Rincewind" label="Rincewind"/>
<link wikidata="Q267447" start="298" end="315" title="Granny Weatherwax" label="Granny Weatherwax"/>
<link wikidata="Q980558" start="437" end="458" title="I Shall Wear Midnight" label="I Shall Wear Midnight"/>
<link wikidata="Q444174" start="553" end="570" title="Rhianna Pratchett" label="Rhianna Pratchett"/>
<link wikidata="Q8460327" start="777" end="783" title="wizards (Discworld)" label="wizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q253295" start="792" end="801" title="Discworld (world)" label="Discworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q23355" start="814" end="819" title="8 (number)" label="eight"/>
<link wikidata="Q23350" start="886" end="891" title="7 (number)" label="seven"/>
<link wikidata="Q8460327" start="1272" end="1289" title="Unseen University" label="Unseen University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2328564" start="1293" end="1305" title="Ankh-Morpork" label="Ankh-Morpork"/>
<link wikidata="Q720787" start="3028" end="3041" title="David Langford" label="Dave Langford"/>
<link wikidata="Q682202" start="3085" end="3096" title="White Dwarf (magazine)" label="White Dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118748" start="3268" end="3293" title="The Space Gamer" label="Space Gamer/Fantasy Gamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5434316" start="3554" end="3568" title="Fantasy Review" label="Fantasy Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q7917795" start="3640" end="3646" title="Vector (magazine)" label="Vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q963987" start="3697" end="3702" title="Locus (magazine)" label="Locus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5474536" start="3768" end="3778" title="Foundation (journal)" label="Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q507109" start="3839" end="3848" title="Interzone (magazine)" label="Interzone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5007979" start="3976" end="4014" title="The New York Review of Science Fiction" label="The New York Review of Science Fiction"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="331779" wikidata="Q1384926" url="?curid=331779" title="National Indoor Football League">
<text>The National Indoor Football League (NIFL) was a professional indoor football league in the United States. For their first six years, the league had teams in markets not covered by either the Arena Football League or its developmental league, AF2, however, that changed briefly with their expansion into AFL markets such as Atlanta, Denver, and Los Angeles, and AF2 markets such as Fort Myers and Houston. Green Bay Packers head coach Matt LaFleur, Buffalo Bills running back Fred Jackson, New Orleans Saints quarterback John Fourcade and Pittsburgh Steelers Super Bowl running back Bam Morris, all played in the NIFL. The league folded in 2008.

==History==
The NIFL, based in Lafayette, Louisiana, was founded by Carolyn Shiver. The league started operations in 2001, with many teams coming from Indoor Football League being bought the previous year and folding operations. In 2002, the league added in the teams from the Indoor Professional Football League. 2003 was the most successful year for the league as 24 teams played a mostly complete schedule, with few cancellations.

Before the 2005 season, nine teams left the league to form United Indoor Football. That same year, the Intense Football League ceased operations and four teams from there joined the league. Those teams however, left the league before the 2006 season started.

For the 2005 season, the NIFL had an agreement with NFL to handle referee assignment and training.

The 2006 season, was the most chaotic for the league to that point. Ten expansion teams were added to the league, but nine of them had problems that reflected badly on the league. The most notable situation was the owner of the Montgomery Maulers firing the entire team. None of the ten expansion teams returned to the league for the next season.

The 2007 season started with the addition of several league-owned expansion teams, primarily to supplement games with the returning teams. However, the teams were all poorly funded and had problems fielding competitive squads. The San Diego Shockwave were declared the official league champion. The league then officially folded prior to the 2008 season.

In 2016, a new website announced that the league operations were relaunched by Carolyn Shiver with announced goal of bringing 34 teams into the former AFL markets starting in the 2017 season. As of June 2016, the league was looking for local team ownership under the league&#x27;s business model.

==Former teams==

===Teams that left the NIFL to join (or planned to join) another league===
*Beaumont Drillers – joined APFL in 2008 and has since folded.
*Evansville BlueCats – joined United Indoor Football and folded following 2007 season.
*Everett Hawks – joined the AF2 in 2007 and has since folded.
*Fayetteville Guard – moved to American Indoor Football Association, and have since folded.
*Fort Wayne Freedom – joined United Indoor Football, then had assets bought out by Fort Wayne Fusion of AF2.
*Greenville Riverhawks – moved to American Indoor Football Association as Johnstown Riverhawks and have since folded.
*Katy Copperheads – moved to AF2 as Texas Copperheads and has since folded.
*Lexington Horsemen – Joined United Indoor Football then AF2 later changed to Kentucky Horsemen and finally folded.
*Montgomery Maulers – moved to American Indoor Football Association as Montgomery Bears and have since folded.
*Odessa Roughnecks – moved to Indoor Football League, and have since folded.
*Ohio Valley Greyhounds – moved to Indoor Football League, and have since folded.
*Omaha Beef – now in National Arena League
*Osceola Football – moved to World Indoor Football League as Osceola Ghostriders, and have since folded.
*River City Rage – moved to Indoor Football League, and have since folded.
*Rome Renegades – joined American Indoor Football League, then left for World Indoor Football League, but folded before playing a single game there.
*San Angelo Stampede – moved to Indoor Football League, and have since folded.
*San Diego Shockwave – Has announced going on hiatus for 2008 but planned on joining another league for 2009 and never did.
*Sarasota Knights – Moved to APFL as Florida Knights, and have since folded.
*Sioux City Bandits – now in National Arena League.
*Sioux Falls Storm – now in Indoor Football League.
*Tri-Cities Fever- moved to AF2 and then Indoor Football League and are now dormant.
*Tupelo FireAnts – joined United Indoor Football, then folded after one season there.
*Wyoming Cavalry (Casper, Wyoming) – moved to Indoor Football League, and have since folded.

===Defunct teams/failed expansion===
*Arkansas Stars
*Atlanta Thoroughbreds
*Atlantic City CardSharks
*Austin Knights
*Austin Rockers
*Bay Bandits
*Big Sky Thunder
*Billings Mavericks
*Bismarck Roughriders
*Black Hills Red Dogs
*Charleston Sandsharks
*Cincinnati Marshals
*Colorado Castle Rocks
*Colorado Venom
*Colorado Wild Riders
*Columbia Stingers
*Dayton Bulldogs
*Dayton Warbirds
*Daytona Beach Hawgs
*Denver Aviators
*Eugene Mercury
*Florida Frenzy
*Fort Myers Tarpons
*Fort Worth Sixers
*Green Cove Lions – Evidently formerly the Jacksonville Stallions, they folded in 2007 before ever playing a home game.
*Greensboro Revolution
*Hammond Heroes
*Houma Bayou Bucks
*Houston Wild Riders
*Jacksonville Stallions – folded before playing a game, and evidently became the Green Cove Lions.
*Johnstown J Dogs
*Kissimmee Kreatures
*La Crosse Night Train
*Lake Charles Land Sharks
*Lakeland Thunderbolts – won American Indoor Football Association 2007
*Lincoln Capitols
*Long Beach Surf
*Los Angeles Lynx
*Louisiana Bayou Beast
*Louisiana Rangers
*Louisiana Swashbucklers 
*Lubbock Gunslingers
*Lubbock Lone Stars
*Miami Vice Squad
*Mississippi Fire Dogs
*Mobile Seagulls
*Myrtle Beach Stingrays
*New Jersey XTreme
*Oklahoma Crude
*Pomona Cool Riders
*Port St. Lucie Mustangs
*Pueblo Pistols
*Rapid City Flying Aces
*River Cities LocoMotives
*River City Renegades
*San Bernardino Bucking Bulls
*St. Joseph Cyclones
*San Antonio Steers
*Southern Oregon Heat
*Staten Island Xtreme
*Tennessee Riverhawks
*Tennessee River Sharks
*Tennessee ThunderCats
*Tri-City Diesel
*Tri-Valley Ranchers
*Twin City Gators
*Utah Express
*Utah Rattlers
*Utah Warriors
*Waco Marshals
*Wichita Falls Thunder
*Winston-Salem Energy
*Yakima Shockwave

==Indoor Bowl games==
== See also ==
*List of leagues of American football
*Indoor Bowl

==Notes==
==External links==

* National Indoor Football League official website
* San Antonio Steers vs Beaumont Drillers clip via YouTube</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1384926" start="4" end="35" title="National Indoor Football League" label="National Indoor Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384926" start="37" end="41" title="National Indoor Football League" label="NIFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q702269" start="49" end="61" title="professional" label="professional"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="69" end="77" title="American football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725641" start="192" end="213" title="Arena Football League" label="Arena Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2825695" start="243" end="246" title="AF2" label="AF2"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="324" end="331" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="333" end="339" title="Denver" label="Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q506451" start="382" end="392" title="Fort Myers, Florida" label="Fort Myers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="397" end="404" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q213837" start="406" end="423" title="Green Bay Packers" label="Green Bay Packers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6788934" start="435" end="447" title="Matt LaFleur" label="Matt LaFleur"/>
<link wikidata="Q221626" start="449" end="462" title="Buffalo Bills" label="Buffalo Bills"/>
<link wikidata="Q3752634" start="476" end="488" title="Fred Jackson (running back)" label="Fred Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q172435" start="490" end="508" title="New Orleans Saints" label="New Orleans Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q6233776" start="521" end="534" title="John Fourcade" label="John Fourcade"/>
<link wikidata="Q191477" start="539" end="558" title="Pittsburgh Steelers" label="Pittsburgh Steelers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4853261" start="583" end="593" title="Bam Morris" label="Bam Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q128891" start="678" end="698" title="Lafayette, Louisiana" label="Lafayette, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6026390" start="798" end="820" title="Indoor Football League (1999–2000)" label="Indoor Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q16848405" start="924" end="959" title="Indoor Professional Football League" label="Indoor Professional Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887873" start="1141" end="1163" title="United Indoor Football" label="United Indoor Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153034" start="1185" end="1208" title="Intense Football League" label="Intense Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q6905649" start="1670" end="1688" title="Montgomery Maulers" label="Montgomery Maulers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7413718" start="2021" end="2040" title="San Diego Shockwave" label="San Diego Shockwave"/>
<link wikidata="Q4877554" start="2538" end="2555" title="Beaumont Drillers" label="Beaumont Drillers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416020" start="2601" end="2620" title="Evansville BlueCats" label="Evansville BlueCats"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887873" start="2630" end="2652" title="United Indoor Football" label="United Indoor Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417017" start="2688" end="2701" title="Everett Hawks" label="Everett Hawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2825695" start="2715" end="2718" title="AF2" label="AF2"/>
<link wikidata="Q5439049" start="2750" end="2768" title="Fayetteville Guard" label="Fayetteville Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842955" start="2780" end="2816" title="American Indoor Football Association" label="American Indoor Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472285" start="2842" end="2860" title="Fort Wayne Freedom" label="Fort Wayne Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887873" start="2870" end="2892" title="United Indoor Football" label="United Indoor Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472287" start="2924" end="2941" title="Fort Wayne Fusion" label="Fort Wayne Fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2825695" start="2945" end="2948" title="AF2" label="AF2"/>
<link wikidata="Q6268804" start="2951" end="2972" title="Greenville Riverhawks" label="Greenville Riverhawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842955" start="2984" end="3020" title="American Indoor Football Association" label="American Indoor Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6268804" start="3024" end="3044" title="Johnstown Riverhawks" label="Johnstown Riverhawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707605" start="3069" end="3085" title="Katy Copperheads" label="Katy Copperheads"/>
<link wikidata="Q2825695" start="3097" end="3100" title="AF2" label="AF2"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707605" start="3104" end="3121" title="Texas Copperheads" label="Texas Copperheads"/>
<link wikidata="Q6392281" start="3145" end="3163" title="Lexington Horsemen" label="Lexington Horsemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887873" start="3173" end="3195" title="United Indoor Football" label="United Indoor Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q2825695" start="3201" end="3204" title="AF2" label="AF2"/>
<link wikidata="Q6905649" start="3261" end="3279" title="Montgomery Maulers" label="Montgomery Maulers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842955" start="3291" end="3327" title="American Indoor Football Association" label="American Indoor Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6905649" start="3331" end="3347" title="Montgomery Bears" label="Montgomery Bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q7986657" start="3372" end="3389" title="Odessa Roughnecks" label="Odessa Roughnecks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3248855" start="3401" end="3423" title="Indoor Football League" label="Indoor Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7081018" start="3449" end="3471" title="Ohio Valley Greyhounds" label="Ohio Valley Greyhounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3248855" start="3483" end="3505" title="Indoor Football League" label="Indoor Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3882044" start="3531" end="3541" title="Omaha Beef" label="Omaha Beef"/>
<link wikidata="Q28129137" start="3551" end="3572" title="National Arena League" label="National Arena League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4020898" start="3574" end="3590" title="Osceola Football" label="Osceola Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q4020898" start="3602" end="3630" title="World Indoor Football League (2007)" label="World Indoor Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4020898" start="3634" end="3653" title="Osceola Ghostriders" label="Osceola Ghostriders"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337036" start="3679" end="3694" title="River City Rage" label="River City Rage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3248855" start="3706" end="3728" title="Indoor Football League" label="Indoor Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384926" start="3754" end="3768" title="Rome Renegades" label="Rome Renegades"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842955" start="3778" end="3809" title="American Indoor Football Association" label="American Indoor Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4020898" start="3825" end="3853" title="World Indoor Football League (2007)" label="World Indoor Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7413270" start="3903" end="3922" title="San Angelo Stampede" label="San Angelo Stampede"/>
<link wikidata="Q3248855" start="3934" end="3956" title="Indoor Football League" label="Indoor Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7413718" start="3982" end="4001" title="San Diego Shockwave" label="San Diego Shockwave"/>
<link wikidata="Q5461581" start="4106" end="4122" title="Sarasota Knights" label="Sarasota Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744742" start="4134" end="4138" title="American Professional Football League" label="APFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q5461581" start="4142" end="4157" title="Florida Knights" label="Florida Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q7525442" start="4183" end="4201" title="Sioux City Bandits" label="Sioux City Bandits"/>
<link wikidata="Q28129137" start="4211" end="4232" title="National Arena League" label="National Arena League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485143" start="4235" end="4252" title="Sioux Falls Storm" label="Sioux Falls Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3248855" start="4262" end="4284" title="Indoor Football League" label="Indoor Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3998524" start="4287" end="4303" title="Tri-Cities Fever" label="Tri-Cities Fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q2825695" start="4314" end="4317" title="AF2" label="AF2"/>
<link wikidata="Q3248855" start="4327" end="4349" title="Indoor Football League" label="Indoor Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384926" start="4372" end="4387" title="Tupelo FireAnts" label="Tupelo FireAnts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887873" start="4397" end="4419" title="United Indoor Football" label="United Indoor Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q4021151" start="4458" end="4473" title="Wyoming Cavalry" label="Wyoming Cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3248855" start="4503" end="4525" title="Indoor Football League" label="Indoor Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4791867" start="4589" end="4603" title="Arkansas Stars" label="Arkansas Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816164" start="4605" end="4626" title="Atlanta Thoroughbreds" label="Atlanta Thoroughbreds"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816332" start="4628" end="4652" title="Atlantic City CardSharks" label="Atlantic City CardSharks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4654" end="4668" title="Austin Knights" label="Austin Knights"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4670" end="4684" title="Austin Rockers" label="Austin Rockers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4686" end="4697" title="Bay Bandits" label="Bay Bandits"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4699" end="4714" title="Big Sky Thunder" label="Big Sky Thunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q4911955" start="4716" end="4734" title="Billings Mavericks" label="Billings Mavericks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384926" start="4736" end="4756" title="Bismarck Roughriders" label="Bismarck Roughriders"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294140" start="4758" end="4778" title="Black Hills Red Dogs" label="Black Hills Red Dogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5044891" start="4780" end="4801" title="Charleston Sandsharks" label="Charleston Sandsharks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750443" start="4803" end="4822" title="Cincinnati Marshals" label="Cincinnati Marshals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148750" start="4824" end="4845" title="Colorado Castle Rocks" label="Colorado Castle Rocks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4847" end="4861" title="Colorado Venom" label="Colorado Venom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148982" start="4863" end="4883" title="Colorado Wild Riders" label="Colorado Wild Riders"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149852" start="4885" end="4902" title="Columbia Stingers" label="Columbia Stingers"/>
<link wikidata="Q54958280" start="4904" end="4919" title="Dayton Bulldogs" label="Dayton Bulldogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5243581" start="4921" end="4936" title="Dayton Warbirds" label="Dayton Warbirds"/>
<link wikidata="Q5243608" start="4938" end="4957" title="Daytona Beach Hawgs" label="Daytona Beach Hawgs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259677" start="4959" end="4974" title="Denver Aviators" label="Denver Aviators"/>
<link wikidata="Q55075225" start="4976" end="4990" title="Eugene Mercury" label="Eugene Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4992" end="5006" title="Florida Frenzy" label="Florida Frenzy"/>
<link wikidata="Q54951618" start="5008" end="5026" title="Fort Myers Tarpons" label="Fort Myers Tarpons"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472406" start="5028" end="5045" title="Fort Worth Sixers" label="Fort Worth Sixers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5602447" start="5047" end="5063" title="Green Cove Lions" label="Green Cove Lions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5602447" start="5089" end="5111" title="Jacksonville Stallions" label="Jacksonville Stallions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604461" start="5167" end="5188" title="Greensboro Revolution" label="Greensboro Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645840" start="5190" end="5204" title="Hammond Heroes" label="Hammond Heroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5913160" start="5206" end="5223" title="Houma Bayou Bucks" label="Houma Bayou Bucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916797" start="5225" end="5244" title="Houston Wild Riders" label="Houston Wild Riders"/>
<link wikidata="Q5602447" start="5246" end="5268" title="Jacksonville Stallions" label="Jacksonville Stallions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5602447" start="5326" end="5342" title="Green Cove Lions" label="Green Cove Lions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384926" start="5345" end="5361" title="Johnstown J Dogs" label="Johnstown J Dogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4020898" start="5363" end="5382" title="Kissimmee Kreatures" label="Kissimmee Kreatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384926" start="5384" end="5405" title="La Crosse Night Train" label="La Crosse Night Train"/>
<link wikidata="Q6475274" start="5407" end="5431" title="Lake Charles Land Sharks" label="Lake Charles Land Sharks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6478834" start="5433" end="5454" title="Lakeland Thunderbolts" label="Lakeland Thunderbolts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842955" start="5461" end="5497" title="American Indoor Football Association" label="American Indoor Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6550508" start="5504" end="5520" title="Lincoln Capitols" label="Lincoln Capitols"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5522" end="5537" title="Long Beach Surf" label="Long Beach Surf"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017900" start="5539" end="5555" title="Los Angeles Lynx" label="Los Angeles Lynx"/>
<link wikidata="Q6689075" start="5557" end="5578" title="Louisiana Bayou Beast" label="Louisiana Bayou Beast"/>
<link wikidata="Q4877554" start="5580" end="5597" title="Louisiana Rangers" label="Louisiana Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6689315" start="5599" end="5622" title="Louisiana Swashbucklers" label="Louisiana Swashbucklers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6695118" start="5625" end="5644" title="Lubbock Gunslingers" label="Lubbock Gunslingers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6695118" start="5646" end="5664" title="Lubbock Lone Stars" label="Lubbock Lone Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q6827476" start="5666" end="5682" title="Miami Vice Squad" label="Miami Vice Squad"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879140" start="5684" end="5705" title="Mississippi Fire Dogs" label="Mississippi Fire Dogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6886968" start="5707" end="5722" title="Mobile Seagulls" label="Mobile Seagulls"/>
<link wikidata="Q5439049" start="5724" end="5746" title="Myrtle Beach Stingrays" label="Myrtle Beach Stingrays"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384926" start="5748" end="5765" title="New Jersey XTreme" label="New Jersey XTreme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384926" start="5767" end="5781" title="Oklahoma Crude (indoor football)" label="Oklahoma Crude"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5783" end="5801" title="Pomona Cool Riders" label="Pomona Cool Riders"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5803" end="5826" title="Port St. Lucie Mustangs" label="Port St. Lucie Mustangs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5828" end="5842" title="Pueblo Pistols" label="Pueblo Pistols"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294140" start="5844" end="5866" title="Rapid City Flying Aces" label="Rapid City Flying Aces"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337238" start="5868" end="5892" title="River Cities LocoMotives" label="River Cities LocoMotives"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337036" start="5894" end="5914" title="River City Renegades" label="River City Renegades"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5916" end="5944" title="San Bernardino Bucking Bulls" label="San Bernardino Bucking Bulls"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5946" end="5965" title="St. Joseph Cyclones" label="St. Joseph Cyclones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384926" start="5967" end="5985" title="San Antonio Steers" label="San Antonio Steers"/>
<link wikidata="Q55075225" start="5987" end="6007" title="Southern Oregon Heat" label="Southern Oregon Heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384926" start="6009" end="6029" title="Staten Island Xtreme" label="Staten Island Xtreme"/>
<link wikidata="Q6268804" start="6031" end="6051" title="Tennessee Riverhawks" label="Tennessee Riverhawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700154" start="6053" end="6075" title="Tennessee River Sharks" label="Tennessee River Sharks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6268804" start="6077" end="6098" title="Tennessee ThunderCats" label="Tennessee ThunderCats"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6100" end="6115" title="Tri-City Diesel" label="Tri-City Diesel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7839775" start="6117" end="6136" title="Tri-Valley Ranchers" label="Tri-Valley Ranchers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384926" start="6138" end="6154" title="Twin City Gators" label="Twin City Gators"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6156" end="6168" title="Utah Express" label="Utah Express"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6170" end="6183" title="Utah Rattlers" label="Utah Rattlers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7902525" start="6185" end="6198" title="Utah Warriors (indoor football)" label="Utah Warriors"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750443" start="6200" end="6213" title="Waco Marshals" label="Waco Marshals"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6215" end="6236" title="Wichita Falls Thunder" label="Wichita Falls Thunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026021" start="6238" end="6258" title="Winston-Salem Energy" label="Winston-Salem Energy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6260" end="6276" title="Yakima Shockwave" label="Yakima Shockwave"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625202" start="6316" end="6352" title="List of leagues of American football" label="List of leagues of American football"/>
<link wikidata="Q6026382" start="6354" end="6365" title="Indoor Bowl" label="Indoor Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="6499" end="6506" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="331784" wikidata="Q372852" url="?curid=331784" title="Drywall">
<text>Drywall (also called plasterboard, dry lining, wallboard, sheet rock, gib board, gypsum board, buster board, turtles board, slap board, custard board, gypsum panel and gyprock) is a panel made of calcium sulfate dihydrate (gypsum), with or without additives, typically extruded between thick sheets of facer and backer paper, used in the construction of interior walls and ceilings. The plaster is mixed with fiber (typically paper, glass wool, or a combination of these materials); plasticizer, foaming agent; and additives that can reduce mildew, flammability, and water absorption.

In the mid-20th century, drywall construction became prevalent in North America as a time- and labor-saving alternative to lath and plaster.

==History==
Sackett Board was invented in 1890 by New York Coal Tar Chemical Company employees Augustine Sackett and Fred L. Kane, graduates of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. It was made by layering plaster within four plies of wool felt paper. Sheets were thick with open (untaped) edges.

Gypsum board evolved between 1910 and 1930, beginning with wrapped board edges and the elimination of the two inner layers of felt paper in favor of paper-based facings. In 1910 United States Gypsum Corporation bought Sackett Plaster Board Company and by 1917 introduced &quot;Sheetrock&quot;. Providing installation efficiency, it was developed additionally as a measure of fire resistance. Later air entrainment technology made boards lighter and less brittle, and joint treatment materials and systems also evolved. Gypsum lath was an early substrate for plaster. An alternative to traditional wood or metal lath was a panel made up of compressed gypsum plaster board that was sometimes grooved or punched with holes to allow wet plaster to key into its surface. As it evolved, it was faced with paper impregnated with gypsum crystals that bonded with the applied facing layer of plaster. In 1936, US Gypsum trademarked ROCKLATH for their gypsum lath product.

In 2002, the European Commission imposed fines totaling €420 million on the companies Lafarge, BPB, Knauf and Gyproc Benelux, which had operated a cartel on the market which affected 80% of consumers in France, the UK, Germany and the Benelux countries.

== Manufacture ==
A wallboard panel consists of a layer of gypsum plaster sandwiched between two layers of paper. The raw gypsum, , is heated to drive off the water and then slightly rehydrated to produce the hemihydrate of calcium sulfate (). The plaster is mixed with fiber (typically paper and/or glass fiber), plasticizer, foaming agent, finely ground gypsum crystal as an accelerator, EDTA, starch or other chelate as a retarder, and various additives that may increase mildew and fire resistance, lower water absorption (wax emulsion or silanes), reduce creep (tartaric or boric acid). The board is then formed by sandwiching a core of the wet mixture between two sheets of heavy paper or fiberglass mats. When the core sets, it is dried in a large drying chamber, and the sandwich becomes rigid and strong enough for use as a building material.

Drying chambers typically use natural gas today. To dry of wallboard, between is required. Organic dispersants and plasticizers are used so that the slurry will flow during manufacture and to reduce the water and hence the drying time. Coal-fired power stations include devices called scrubbers to remove sulfur from their exhaust emissions. The sulfur is absorbed by powdered limestone in a process called flue-gas desulfurization (FGD), which produces several new substances. One is called &quot;FGD gypsum&quot;. This is commonly used in drywall construction in the United States and elsewhere.

In 2020, 8.4 billion square meters of drywall were sold around the world.

== Construction techniques ==
As an alternative to a week-long plaster application, an entire house can be drywalled in one or two days by two experienced drywallers, and drywall is easy enough to be installed by many amateur home carpenters. In large-scale commercial construction, the work of installing and finishing drywall is often split between drywall mechanics, or &quot;hangers&quot;, who install the wallboard, and &quot;tapers (also known as finishers,&quot; &quot;mud men&quot;, or &quot;float crew)&quot; who finish the joints and cover the fastener heads with drywall compound. Drywall can be finished anywhere from a level 0 to a level 5, where 0 is not finished in any fashion, and five is the most pristine. Depending on how significant the finish is to the customer, the extra steps in the finish may or may not be necessary, though priming and painting of drywall are recommended in any location where it may be exposed to any wear.

Drywall is cut to size by scoring the paper on the finished side (usually white) with a utility knife, breaking the sheet along the cut, and cutting the paper backing. Small features such as holes for outlets and light switches are usually cut using a keyhole saw, oscillating multi-tool or a tiny high-speed bit in a rotary tool. Drywall is then fixed to the structure with nails or drywall screws and often glue. &quot;Drywall fasteners&quot;, also referred to as &quot;drywall clips&quot; or &quot;stops&quot;, are gaining popularity in residential and commercial construction. Drywall fasteners are used for supporting interior drywall corners and replacing the non-structural wood or metal blocking that traditionally was used to install drywall. Their function saves material and labor costs, minimizes call-backs due to truss uplift, increases energy efficiency, and makes plumbing and electrical installation simpler.

When driven fully home, drywall screws countersink their heads slightly into the drywall. They use a &#x27;bugle head&#x27;, a concave taper, rather than the conventional conical countersunk head; this compresses the drywall surface rather than cutting into it and so avoids tearing the paper. Screws for light-gauge steel framing have a sharp point and finely spaced threads. If the steel framing is heavier than 20-gauge, self-drilling screws with finely spaced threads must be used. In some applications, the drywall may be attached to the wall with adhesives.

After the sheets are secured to the wall studs or ceiling joists, the installer conceals the seams between drywall sheets with joint tape or fiber mesh. Layers of joint compound, sometimes called mud, are typically spread with a drywall trowel or knife. This compound is also applied to any screw holes or defects. The compound is allowed to air dry and then typically sanded smooth before painting. Alternatively, for a better finish, the entire wall may be given a skim coat, a thin layer (about ) of finishing compound, to minimize the visual differences between the paper and mudded areas after painting.

Another similar skim coating process is called veneer plastering, although it is done slightly thicker (about ). Veneering uses a slightly different specialized setting compound (&quot;finish plaster&quot;) that contains gypsum and lime putty. This application uses blueboard, which has specially treated paper to accelerate the setting of the gypsum plaster component. This setting has far less shrinkage than the air-dry compounds normally used in drywall, so it only requires one coat. Blueboard also has square edges rather than tapered-edge drywall boards. The tapered drywall boards are used to countersink the tape in taped jointing, whereas the tape in veneer plastering is buried beneath a level surface. One coat veneer plaster over dry board is an intermediate style step between full multi-coat &quot;wet&quot; plaster and the limited joint-treatment-only given &quot;dry&quot; wall.

== Properties ==

=== Sound control ===
The method of installation and type of drywall can reduce sound transmission through walls and ceilings. Several builders&#x27; books state that thicker drywall reduces sound transmission, but engineering manuals recommend using multiple layers of drywall, sometimes of different thicknesses and glued together, or special types of drywall designed to reduce noise. Also important are the construction details of the framing with steel studs, wider stud spacing, double studding, insulation, and other details reducing sound transmission. Sound transmission class (STC) ratings can be increased from 33 for an ordinary stud-wall to as high as 59 with double drywall on both sides of a wood stud wall with resilient channels on one side and glass wool batt insulation between the studs.

Sound transmission may be slightly reduced using regular panels (with or without light-gauge resilient metal channels and/or insulation), but it is more effective to use two layers of drywall, sometimes in combination with other factors, or specially designed, sound-resistant drywall.

=== Water damage and molding ===
Drywall is highly vulnerable to moisture due to the inherent properties of the materials that constitute it: gypsum, paper, and organic additives and binders. Gypsum will soften with exposure to moisture and eventually turn into a gooey paste with prolonged immersion, such as during a flood. During such incidents, some, or all, of the drywall in an entire building will need to be removed and replaced. Furthermore, the paper facings and organic additives mixed with the gypsum core are food for mold.

The porosity of the board—introduced during manufacturing to reduce the board&#x27;s weight, lowering construction time and transportation costs—enables water to rapidly reach the core through capillary action, where mold can grow inside. Water that enters a room from overhead may cause ceiling drywall tape to separate from the ceiling as a result of the grooves immediately behind the tape where the drywall pieces meet becoming saturated. The drywall may also soften around the screws holding the drywall in place, and with the aid of gravity, the weight of the water may cause the drywall to sag and eventually collapse, requiring replacement.

Drywall&#x27;s paper facings are edible to termites, which can eat the paper if they infest a wall cavity covered with drywall. This causes the painted surface to crumble to the touch, its paper backing material being eaten. In addition to the necessity of patching the damaged surface and repainting, if enough of the paper has been eaten, the gypsum core can easily crack or crumble without it, and the drywall must be removed and replaced.

In many circumstances, especially when the drywall has been exposed to water or moisture for less than 48 hours, professional restoration experts can avoid the cost, inconvenience, and difficulty of removing and replacing the affected drywall. They use rapid drying techniques that eliminate the elements required to support microbial activity while restoring most or all of the drywall.

It is for these reasons that greenboard, a type of drywall with an outer face that is wax- and/or chemically coated to resist mold growth, and ideally cement board are used for rooms expected to have high humidity, primarily kitchens, bathrooms, and laundry rooms.

=== Other damage risks ===
Foam insulation and the gypsum part of sheetrock are easily chewed out by honeybees when they are setting up a stray nest in a building, and they want to enlarge their nest area.

=== Fire resistance ===
Some fire barrier walls are constructed of Type X drywall as a passive fire protection item. Gypsum contains the water of crystallization bound in the form of hydrates. When exposed to heat or fire, the resulting decomposition reaction releases water vapor and is endothermic (it absorbs thermal energy), which retards heat transfer until the water in the gypsum is gone. The fire-resistance rating of the fire barrier assembly is increased with additional layers of drywall, up to four hours for walls and three hours for floor/ceiling assemblies. Fire-rated assemblies constructed of drywall are documented in design or certification listing catalogues, including DIN 4102 Part 4 and the Canadian Building Code, Underwriters Laboratories and Underwriters Laboratories of Canada (ULC).

Tests result in code-recognized designs with assigned fire-resistance ratings. The resulting designs become part of the code and are not limited to use by any manufacturer. However, individual manufacturers may also have proprietary designs that they have had third-party tested and approved, provided that the material used in the field configuration can be demonstrated to meet the minimum requirements of Type X drywall and that sufficient layers and thicknesses are used. 

==== Type X drywall ====
In the Type X gypsum board, special glass fibers are intermixed with the gypsum to reinforce the core of the panels. These fibers reduce the size of the cracks that form as the water is driven off, thereby extending the length of time the gypsum panels resist fire without failure.

==== Type C drywall ====
Type C gypsum panels provide stronger fire resistance than Type X. The core of Type C panels contains a higher density of glass fibers. The core of Type C panels also contains vermiculite which acts as a shrinkage-compensating additive that expands when exposed to elevated temperatures of a fire. This expansion occurs at roughly the same temperature as the calcination of the gypsum in the core, allowing the core of the Type C panels to remain dimensionally stable in a fire.

==Waste==
Because up to 12% of drywall is wasted during the manufacturing and installation processes and the drywall material is frequently not reused, disposal can become a problem. Some landfill sites have banned the dumping of drywall. Some manufacturers take back waste wallboard from construction sites and recycle them into new wallboard. Recycled paper is typically used during manufacturing. More recently, recycling at the construction site itself has been researched. There is potential for using crushed drywall to amend certain soils at building sites, such as clay and silt mixtures (bay mud), as well as using it in compost. As of 2016, industry standards are being developed to ensure that when and if wallboard is taken back for recycling, quality and composition are maintained.

== Market ==

=== North America ===
North America is one of the largest gypsum board users in the world, with a total wallboard plant capacity of per year, roughly half of the worldwide annual production capacity of . Moreover, the homebuilding and remodeling markets in North America in the late 1990s and early 2000s increased demand. The gypsum board market was one of the biggest beneficiaries of the housing boom as &quot;an average new American home contains more than 7.31 metric tons of gypsum.&quot;

The introduction in March 2005 of the Clean Air Interstate Rule by the United States Environmental Protection Agency requires fossil-fuel power plants to &quot;cut sulfur dioxide emissions by 73%&quot; by 2018. The Clean Air Interstate Rule also requested that the power plants install new scrubbers (industrial pollution control devices) to remove sulfur dioxide present in the output waste gas. Scrubbers use the technique of flue-gas desulfurization (FGD), which produces synthetic gypsum as a usable by-product. In response to the new supply of this raw material, the gypsum board market was predicted to shift significantly. However, issues such as mercury release during calcining need to be resolved.

== Controversies ==

=== High-sulfur drywall illness and corrosion issues ===
A substantial amount of defective drywall was imported into the United States from China and incorporated into tens of thousands of homes during rebuilding in 2006 and 2007 following Hurricane Katrina and in other places. Complaints included the structure&#x27;s foul odour, health effects, and metal corrosion. The emission of sulfurous gases causes this. The same drywall was sold in Asia without problems resulting, but US homes are built much more tightly than homes in China, with less ventilation. Volatile sulfur compounds, including hydrogen sulfide, have been detected as emissions from the imported drywall and may be linked to health problems. These compounds are emitted from many different types of drywall.

Several lawsuits are underway in many jurisdictions, but many of the sheets of drywall are simply marked &quot;Made in China&quot;, thus making the manufacturer&#x27;s identification difficult. An investigation by the Consumer Product Safety Commission, CPSC, was underway in 2009. In November 2009, the CPSC reported a &quot;strong association&quot; between Chinese drywall and corrosion of pipes and wires reported by thousands of homeowners in the United States. The issue was resolved in 2011, and now all drywall must be tested for volatile sulfur, and any containing more than ten ppm is unable to be sold in the US.

== Variants ==
The following variants available in Canada or the United States are listed below:
* Regular white board, from thickness
* Fire-resistant (&quot;Type X&quot;), different thicknesses and multiple layers of wallboard provide increased fire rating based on the time a specific wall assembly can withstand a standardized fire test. Often perlite, vermiculite, and boric acid are added to improve fire resistance.
* Greenboard, the drywall containing an oil-based additive in the green-colored paper covering, provides moisture resistance. It is commonly used in washrooms and other areas expected to experience elevated humidity levels.
* Blueboard, blue face paper forms a strong bond with a skim coat or a built-up plaster finish, providing water and mold resistance.
* Cement board, which is more water-resistant than greenboard, for use in showers or sauna rooms, and as a base for ceramic tile.
* Soundboard is made from wood fibers to increase the sound transmission class.
* Soundproof drywall is a laminated drywall made with gypsum and other materials such as damping polymers to significantly increase the sound transmission class rating.
* Mold-resistant, paperless drywall with fiberglass face
* Enviroboard, a board made from recycled agricultural materials
* Lead-lined drywall, a drywall used around radiological equipment.
* Foil-backed drywall used as a vapor barrier.
* Controlled density (CD), also called ceiling board, which is available only in thickness and is significantly stiffer than the regular whiteboard.
* EcoRock, a drywall that uses a combination of 20 materials including recycled fly ash, slag, kiln dust and fillers and no starch cellulose; it is advertised as being environmentally friendly due to the use of recycled materials and an energy efficient process.
* Gypsum &quot;Firecode C&quot;. This board is similar in composition to Type X, except for more glass fibres and a form of the vermiculite used to reduce shrinkage. When exposed to high heat, the gypsum core shrinks, but this additive expands at about the same rate, so the gypsum core is more stable in a fire and remains in place even after the gypsum dries up.

== Specifications ==
=== Australia and New Zealand ===
The term &quot;plasterboard&quot; is used in Australia and New Zealand. In Australia, the product is often called &quot;Gyprock&quot;, the name of the largest plasterboard manufacturer. In New Zealand it is also called &quot;Gibraltar&quot; and &quot;Gib board&quot;, genericised from the registered trademark (&quot;GIB&quot;) of the locally made product that dominates the local market. A specific type of Gibraltar board for use in wet conditions (such as bathrooms and kitchens) is known as &quot;AquaGib&quot;.

It is made in thicknesses of 10 mm, 13 mm, and 16 mm, and sometimes other thicknesses up to 25 mm. Panels are commonly sold in 1200 mm-wide sheets, which may be 1800, 2400, 3000, 4800, or 6000 mm in length. Sheets are usually secured to either timber or cold-formed steel frames anywhere from 150 to 300 mm centres along the beam and 400 to 600 mm across members.

In both countries, plasterboard has become a widely used replacement for scrim and sarking walls in renovating 19th- and early 20th-century buildings.

=== Canada and the United States ===
Drywall panels in Canada and the United States are made in widths of and varying lengths to suit the application. The most common width is 48 inches; however, 54-inch-wide panels are becoming more popular as ceiling heights become more common. Lengths up to are common; the most common is . Common thicknesses are ; thicknesses of are used in specific applications. In many parts of Canada, drywall is commonly referred to as Gyproc.

=== Europe ===
In Europe, most plasterboard is made in sheets wide; sheets wide are also made. Plasterboard wide is most commonly made in lengths; sheets of and longer also are common. Thicknesses of plasterboard available are .

Plasterboard is commonly made with one of three edge treatments: tapered edge, where the long edges of the board are tapered with a wide bevel at the front to allow jointing materials to be finished flush with the main board face; plain edge, used where the whole surface will receive a thin coating (skim coat) of finishing plaster; and beveled on all four sides, used in products specialized for roofing. Major UK manufacturers do not offer four-sided chamfered drywall for general use.

== See also ==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q372852" start="0" end="7" title="Drywall" label="Drywall"/>
<link wikidata="Q372852" start="21" end="33" title="Drywall" label="plasterboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q372852" start="35" end="45" title="Drywall" label="dry lining"/>
<link wikidata="Q372852" start="47" end="56" title="Drywall" label="wallboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q372852" start="58" end="68" title="Drywall" label="sheet rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q372852" start="70" end="79" title="Drywall" label="gib board"/>
<link wikidata="Q372852" start="81" end="93" title="Drywall" label="gypsum board"/>
<link wikidata="Q372852" start="95" end="107" title="Drywall" label="buster board"/>
<link wikidata="Q372852" start="109" end="122" title="Drywall" label="turtles board"/>
<link wikidata="Q372852" start="124" end="134" title="Drywall" label="slap board"/>
<link wikidata="Q372852" start="136" end="149" title="Drywall" label="custard board"/>
<link wikidata="Q372852" start="151" end="163" title="Drywall" label="gypsum panel"/>
<link wikidata="Q372852" start="168" end="176" title="Drywall" label="gyprock)"/>
<link wikidata="Q407258" start="196" end="211" title="calcium sulfate" label="calcium sulfate"/>
<link wikidata="Q462174" start="212" end="221" title="hydrate" label="dihydrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q82658" start="223" end="229" title="gypsum" label="gypsum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11472" start="319" end="324" title="paper" label="paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875186" start="338" end="350" title="construction" label="construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q161" start="409" end="414" title="fiber" label="fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993315" start="433" end="443" title="glass wool" label="glass wool"/>
<link wikidata="Q910212" start="483" end="494" title="plasticizer" label="plasticizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q759922" start="496" end="509" title="foaming agent" label="foaming agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1220207" start="541" end="547" title="mildew" label="mildew"/>
<link wikidata="Q910035" start="549" end="561" title="combustibility and flammability" label="flammability"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119408" start="709" end="725" title="lath and plaster" label="lath and plaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q49211" start="872" end="904" title="Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute" label="Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550736" start="1200" end="1232" title="USG Corporation" label="United States Gypsum Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523286" start="1420" end="1435" title="air entrainment" label="air entrainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092965" start="1548" end="1552" title="lath" label="lath"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="1999" end="2018" title="European Commission" label="European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144929" start="2072" end="2079" title="Lafarge (company)" label="Lafarge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925743" start="2081" end="2084" title="BPB plc" label="BPB"/>
<link wikidata="Q495793" start="2086" end="2091" title="Knauf" label="Knauf"/>
<link wikidata="Q179216" start="2133" end="2139" title="cartel" label="cartel"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="2189" end="2195" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="2205" end="2212" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q13116" start="2221" end="2228" title="Benelux" label="Benelux"/>
<link wikidata="Q274988" start="2300" end="2314" title="gypsum plaster" label="gypsum plaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q11472" start="2348" end="2353" title="paper" label="paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q82658" start="2363" end="2369" title="gypsum" label="gypsum"/>
<link wikidata="Q407258" start="2465" end="2480" title="calcium sulfate" label="calcium sulfate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5861" start="2541" end="2552" title="glass fiber" label="glass fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q910212" start="2555" end="2566" title="plasticizer" label="plasticizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q759922" start="2568" end="2581" title="foaming agent" label="foaming agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q408032" start="2631" end="2635" title="EDTA" label="EDTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q41534" start="2637" end="2643" title="starch" label="starch"/>
<link wikidata="Q319827" start="2653" end="2660" title="chelate" label="chelate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1220207" start="2716" end="2722" title="mildew" label="mildew"/>
<link wikidata="Q25102107" start="2768" end="2780" title="wax emulsion" label="wax emulsion"/>
<link wikidata="Q111914124" start="2784" end="2791" title="silanes" label="silanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q206615" start="3074" end="3091" title="building material" label="building material"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="3124" end="3135" title="natural gas" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q902420" start="3193" end="3203" title="dispersant" label="dispersant"/>
<link wikidata="Q910212" start="3209" end="3220" title="plasticizer" label="plasticizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6558431" start="3330" end="3354" title="Coal-fired power station" label="Coal-fired power station"/>
<link wikidata="Q903423" start="3501" end="3525" title="flue-gas desulfurization" label="flue-gas desulfurization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309818" start="3923" end="3933" title="Drywall mechanic" label="drywallers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269504" start="4342" end="4358" title="drywall compound" label="drywall compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q23769" start="4809" end="4822" title="utility knife" label="utility knife"/>
<link wikidata="Q765735" start="4973" end="4984" title="keyhole saw" label="keyhole saw"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934510" start="4986" end="5008" title="oscillating multi-tool" label="oscillating multi-tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q37077" start="5096" end="5101" title="nail (engineering)" label="nails"/>
<link wikidata="Q4927280" start="5416" end="5424" title="blocking (construction)" label="blocking"/>
<link wikidata="Q25056642" start="5548" end="5560" title="truss uplift" label="truss uplift"/>
<link wikidata="Q924713" start="5572" end="5589" title="Efficient energy use" label="energy efficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313250" start="5687" end="5698" title="countersink" label="countersink"/>
<link wikidata="Q1727909" start="5965" end="5978" title="steel framing" label="steel framing"/>
<link wikidata="Q211367" start="6065" end="6070" title="Sheet metal gauge" label="gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2988641" start="6072" end="6091" title="self-tapping screw" label="self-drilling screw"/>
<link wikidata="Q131790" start="6201" end="6209" title="adhesive" label="adhesive"/>
<link wikidata="Q6516728" start="6249" end="6258" title="wall stud" label="wall stud"/>
<link wikidata="Q6587065" start="6271" end="6276" title="joist" label="joist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337073" start="7060" end="7065" title="putty" label="putty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7564819" start="8299" end="8323" title="Sound transmission class" label="Sound transmission class"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993315" start="8500" end="8510" title="glass wool" label="glass wool"/>
<link wikidata="Q188603" start="9565" end="9581" title="capillary action" label="capillary action"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000568" start="11006" end="11018" title="cement board" label="cement board"/>
<link wikidata="Q82658" start="11172" end="11178" title="gypsum" label="gypsum"/>
<link wikidata="Q102857" start="11222" end="11230" title="honeybee" label="honeybee"/>
<link wikidata="Q643227" start="11415" end="11438" title="passive fire protection" label="passive fire protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q504492" start="11465" end="11489" title="water of crystallization" label="water of crystallization"/>
<link wikidata="Q462174" start="11511" end="11518" title="hydrate" label="hydrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q44432" start="11537" end="11541" title="heat" label="heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196" start="11545" end="11549" title="fire" label="fire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11555" end="11587" title="Calcium_sulfate#Hydration_and_dehydration_reactions" label="resulting decomposition reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q12571883" start="11616" end="11627" title="endothermic" label="endothermic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5065123" start="11974" end="11995" title="certification listing" label="certification listing"/>
<link wikidata="Q152746" start="12018" end="12021" title="DIN" label="DIN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324421" start="12066" end="12091" title="Underwriters Laboratories" label="Underwriters Laboratories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368108" start="14028" end="14035" title="bay mud" label="bay mud"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="14809" end="14854" title="United States Environmental Protection Agency" label="United States Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434958" start="14864" end="14887" title="fossil-fuel power plant" label="fossil-fuel power plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282" start="14902" end="14916" title="sulfur dioxide" label="sulfur dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q903423" start="15166" end="15190" title="flue-gas desulfurization" label="flue-gas desulfurization"/>
<link wikidata="Q16422" start="15708" end="15725" title="Hurricane Katrina" label="Hurricane Katrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q170591" start="16066" end="16082" title="hydrogen sulfide" label="hydrogen sulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995379" start="16465" end="16499" title="Consumer Product Safety Commission" label="Consumer Product Safety Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q655819" start="17219" end="17226" title="perlite" label="perlite"/>
<link wikidata="Q187045" start="17245" end="17255" title="boric acid" label="boric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000568" start="17653" end="17665" title="Cement board" label="Cement board"/>
<link wikidata="Q7564819" start="17997" end="18021" title="sound transmission class" label="sound transmission class"/>
<link wikidata="Q7224880" start="18071" end="18081" title="fiberglass" label="fiberglass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380983" start="18089" end="18100" title="Enviroboard" label="Enviroboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q655870" start="18584" end="18608" title="environmentally friendly" label="environmentally friendly"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="19145" end="19154" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="19159" end="19170" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1727909" start="19883" end="19894" title="steel frame" label="steel frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q85800070" start="20055" end="20072" title="scrim and sarking" label="scrim and sarking"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="20624" end="20630" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1903785" start="21174" end="21179" title="bevel" label="bevel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397389" start="21290" end="21297" title="chamfer" label="chamfer"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="331785" wikidata="Q312833" url="?curid=331785" title="Gordon Cooper">
<text>Leroy Gordon Cooper Jr. (March 6, 1927 – October 4, 2004) was an American aerospace engineer, test pilot, United States Air Force pilot, and the youngest of the seven original astronauts in Project Mercury, the first human space program of the United States. Cooper learned to fly as a child, and after service in the United States Marine Corps during World War II, he was commissioned into the United States Air Force in 1949. After service as a fighter pilot, he qualified as a test pilot in 1956, and was selected as an astronaut in 1959.

In 1963 Cooper piloted the longest and last Mercury spaceflight, Mercury-Atlas 9. During that 34-hour mission he became the first American to spend an entire day in space, the first to sleep in space, and the last American launched on an entirely solo orbital mission. Despite a series of severe equipment failures, he successfully completed the mission under manual control, guiding his spacecraft, which he named &quot;Faith 7&quot;, to a splashdown just ahead of the recovery ship. Cooper became the first astronaut to make a second orbital flight when he flew as command pilot of Gemini 5 in 1965. Along with pilot Pete Conrad, he set a new space endurance record by traveling in 190 hours and 56 minutes—just short of eight days—showing that astronauts could survive in space for the length of time necessary to go from the Earth to the Moon and back.

Cooper liked to race cars and boats, and entered the $28,000 Salton City boat race, and the Southwest Championship Drag Boat races in 1965, and the 1967 Orange Bowl Regatta with fire fighter Red Adair. In 1968, he entered the 24 Hours of Daytona, but NASA management ordered him to withdraw due to the dangers involved. After serving as backup commander of the Apollo 10 mission, he was superseded by Alan Shepard. He retired from NASA and the Air Force with the rank of colonel in 1970.

== Early life and education ==
Leroy Gordon Cooper Jr. was born on March 6, 1927, in Shawnee, Oklahoma, the only child of Leroy Gordon Cooper Sr. and his wife, Hattie Lee Herd. His mother was a school teacher. His father enlisted in the United States Navy during World War I, and served on the presidential yacht . After the war, Cooper Sr. completed his high school education; Hattie Lee was one of his teachers, although she was only two years older than he. He joined the Oklahoma National Guard, flying a Curtiss JN-4 biplane, despite never having formal military pilot training. He graduated from college and law school, and became a state district judge. He was called to active duty during World War II, and served in the Pacific theater in the Judge Advocate General&#x27;s Corps. He transferred to United States Air Force (USAF) after it was formed in 1947, and was stationed at Hickam Air Force Base, Hawaii Territory. Cooper Sr. retired from the USAF with the rank of colonel in 1957.

Cooper attended Jefferson Elementary School and Shawnee High School, where he was on the football and track teams. During his senior high school year, he played halfback in the state football championship. He was active in the Boy Scouts of America, where he achieved its second highest rank, Life Scout. His parents owned a Command-Aire 3C3 biplane, and he learned to fly at a young age. He unofficially soloed when he was 12 years old, and earned his pilot certification in a Piper J-3 Cub when he was 16. His family moved to Murray, Kentucky, when his father was called back into service, and he graduated from Murray High School in June 1945.

After Cooper learned that the United States Army and Navy flying schools were not taking any more candidates, he enlisted in the United States Marine Corps. He left for Parris Island as soon as he graduated from high school, but World War II ended before he saw overseas service. He was assigned to the Naval Academy Preparatory School as an alternate for an appointment to the United States Naval Academy at Annapolis, Maryland, but the primary appointee was accepted, and Cooper was assigned to guard duty in Washington, D.C. He was serving with the Presidential Honor Guard when he was discharged from the Marine Corps in 1946.

Cooper went to Hawaii to live with his parents. He started attending the University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa, and bought his own J-3 Cub. There he met his first wife, Trudy B. Olson (1927–1994) of Seattle, through the local flying club. She was active in flying, and would later become the only wife of a Mercury astronaut to have a private pilot certification. They were married on August 29, 1947, in Honolulu, when both were 20 years old. They had two daughters.

==Military service==

At college, Cooper was active in the Reserve Officers&#x27; Training Corps (ROTC), which led to his being commissioned as a second lieutenant in the U.S. Army in June 1949. He was able to transfer his commission to the United States Air Force in September 1949. He received flight training at Perrin Air Force Base, Texas and Williams Air Force Base, Arizona, in the T-6 Texan.

On completion of his flight training in 1950, Cooper was posted to Landstuhl Air Base, West Germany, where he flew F-84 Thunderjets and F-86 Sabres for four years. He became a flight commander of the 525th Fighter Bomber Squadron. While in Germany, he attended the European Extension of the University of Maryland. He returned to the United States in 1954, and studied for two years at the U.S. Air Force Institute of Technology (AFIT) in Ohio of Air University. He completed his Bachelor of Science degree in Aerospace Engineering there on August 28, 1956.

While at AFIT, Cooper met Gus Grissom, a fellow USAF officer, and the two became good friends. They were involved in an accident on takeoff from Lowry Field on June 23, 1956, when the Lockheed T-33 Cooper was piloting suddenly lost power. He aborted the takeoff, but the landing gear collapsed and the aircraft skidded erratically for , and crashed at the end of the runway, bursting into flames. Cooper and Grissom escaped unscathed, although the aircraft was a total loss.

Cooper and Grissom attended the USAF Experimental Flight Test Pilot School (Class 56D) at Edwards Air Force Base in California in 1956. After graduation Cooper was posted to the Flight Test Engineering Division at Edwards, where he served as a test pilot and project manager testing the F-102A and F-106B. He also flew the T-28, T-37, F-86, F-100 and F-104. By the time he left Edwards, he had logged more than 2,000 hours of flight time, of which 1,600 hours were in jet aircraft.

==NASA career==
===Project Mercury===
In January 1959, Cooper received unexpected orders to report to Washington, D.C. There was no indication what it was about, but his commanding officer, Major General Marcus F. Cooper (no relation) recalled an announcement in the newspaper saying that a contract had been awarded to McDonnell Aircraft in St. Louis, Missouri, to build a space capsule, and advised Cooper not to volunteer for astronaut training. On February 2, 1959, Cooper attended a NASA briefing on Project Mercury and the part astronauts would play in it. Cooper went through the selection process with another 109 pilots, and was not surprised when he was accepted as the youngest of the first seven American astronauts.

During the selection interviews, Cooper had been asked about his domestic relationship, and had lied, saying that he and Trudy had a good, stable marriage. In fact, they had separated four months before, and she was living with their daughters in San Diego while he occupied a bachelor&#x27;s quarters at Edwards. Aware that NASA wanted to project an image of its astronauts as loving family men, and that his story would not stand up to scrutiny, he drove down to San Diego to see Trudy at the first opportunity. Lured by the prospect of a great adventure for herself and her daughters, she agreed to go along with the charade and pretend that they were a happily married couple.

The identities of the Mercury Seven were announced at a press conference at Dolley Madison House in Washington, D.C., on April 9, 1959: Scott Carpenter, Gordon Cooper, John Glenn, Gus Grissom, Wally Schirra, Alan Shepard, and Deke Slayton. Each was assigned a different portion of the project along with other special assignments. Cooper specialized in the Redstone rocket, which would be used for the first, sub-orbital spaceflights. He also chaired the Emergency Egress Committee, responsible for working out emergency launch pad escape procedures, and engaged Bo Randall to develop a personal survival knife for astronauts to carry.

The astronauts drew their salaries as military officers, and an important component of that was flight pay. In Cooper&#x27;s case, it amounted to $145 a month (). NASA saw no reason to provide the astronauts with aircraft, so they had to fly to meetings around the country on commercial airlines. To continue earning their flight pay, Grissom and Slayton would go out on the weekend to Langley Air Force Base, and attempt to put in the required four hours a month, competing for T-33 aircraft with senior deskbound colonels and generals. Cooper traveled to McGhee Tyson Air National Guard Base in Tennessee, where a friend let him fly higher-performance F-104B jets. This came up when Cooper had lunch with William Hines, a reporter for &quot;The Washington Star&quot;, and was duly reported in the paper. Cooper then discussed the issue with Congressman James G. Fulton. The matter was taken up by the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Within weeks the astronauts had priority access to USAF F-102s, something which Cooper considered a &quot;hot plane&quot;, but could still take off from and land at short civilian airfields; however, this debacle did not make Cooper popular with senior NASA management.

After General Motors executive Ed Cole presented Shepard with a brand-new Chevrolet Corvette, Jim Rathmann, a racing car driver who won the Indianapolis 500 in 1960, and was a Chevrolet dealer in Melbourne, Florida, convinced Cole to turn this into an ongoing marketing campaign. Henceforth, astronauts would be able to lease brand-new Corvettes for a dollar a year. All of the Mercury Seven but Glenn soon took up the offer. Cooper, Grissom and Shepard were soon racing their Corvettes around Cape Canaveral, with the police ignoring their exploits. From a marketing perspective, it was very successful, and helped the highly priced Corvette become established as a desirable brand. Cooper held licenses with the Sports Car Club of America (SCCA) and the National Association for Stock Car Auto Racing (NASCAR). He also enjoyed racing speedboats. 

Cooper served as capsule communicator (CAPCOM) for NASA&#x27;s first sub-orbital spaceflight, by Alan Shepard in Mercury-Redstone 3, and Scott Carpenter&#x27;s orbital flight on Mercury-Atlas 7, and was backup pilot for Wally Schirra in Mercury-Atlas 8.

===Mercury-Atlas 9===
Cooper was designated for the next mission, Mercury-Atlas 9 (). Apart from the grounded Slayton, he was the only one of the Mercury Seven who had not yet flown in space. Cooper&#x27;s selection was publicly announced on November 14, 1962, with Shepard designated as his backup.

Project Mercury had begun with a goal of ultimately flying an 18-orbit, mission, known as the manned one-day mission. On November 9, senior staff at the Manned Spacecraft Center decided to fly a mission as . Project Mercury still remained years behind the Soviet Union&#x27;s space program, which had already flown a mission in Vostok 3. When Atlas , the booster designated for , first emerged from the factory in San Diego on January 30, 1963, it failed to pass inspection and was returned to the factory. For Schirra&#x27;s  mission, 20 modifications had been made to the Mercury spacecraft; for Cooper&#x27;s , 183 changes were made. Cooper decided to name his spacecraft, Mercury Spacecraft No. 20, &quot;Faith 7&quot;. NASA public affairs officers could see the newspaper headlines if the spacecraft were lost at sea: &quot;NASA loses Faith&quot;.

After an argument with NASA Deputy Administrator Walter C. Williams over last-minute changes to his pressure suit to insert a new medical probe, Cooper was nearly replaced by Shepard. This was followed by Cooper Hangar S at Cape Canaveral in an and lighting the afterburner. Williams told Slayton he was prepared to replace Cooper with Shepard. They decided not to, but not to let Cooper know immediately. Instead, Slayton told Cooper that Williams was looking to ground whomever buzzed Hangar S. According to Cooper, Slayton later told him that President John F. Kennedy had intervened to prevent his removal.

Cooper was launched into space on May 15, 1963, aboard the &quot;Faith 7&quot; spacecraft, for what turned out to be the last of the Project Mercury missions. Because would orbit over nearly every part of Earth from 33 degrees north to 33 degrees south, a total of 28 ships, 171 aircraft, and 18,000 servicemen were assigned to support the mission. He orbited the Earth 22 times and logged more time in space than all five previous Mercury astronauts combined: 34 hours, 19 minutes, and 49 seconds. Cooper achieved an altitude of at apogee. He was the first American astronaut to sleep, not only in orbit, but on the launch pad during a countdown.
There were several mission-threatening technical problems toward the end of &quot;Faith 7&quot;″s flight. During the 19th orbit, the capsule had a power failure. Carbon dioxide levels began rising, both in Cooper&#x27;s suit and in the cabin, and the cabin temperature climbed to over . The clock and then the gyroscopes failed, but the radio, which was connected directly to the battery, remained working, and allowed Cooper to communicate with the mission controllers. Like all Mercury flights, was designed for fully automatic control, a controversial engineering decision which reduced the role of an astronaut to that of a passenger, and prompted Chuck Yeager to describe Mercury astronauts as &quot;Spam in a can&quot;. &quot;This flight would put an end to all that nonsense,&quot; Cooper later wrote. &quot;My electronics were shot and a had the stick.&quot;

Turning to his understanding of star patterns, Cooper took manual control of the tiny capsule and successfully estimated the correct pitch for re-entry into the atmosphere. Precision was needed in the calculation; small errors in timing or orientation could produce large errors in the landing point. Cooper drew lines on the capsule window to help him check his orientation before firing the re-entry rockets. &quot;So I used my wrist watch for time,&quot; he later recalled, &quot;my eyeballs out the window for . Then I fired my retrorockets at the right time and landed right by the carrier.&quot;

&quot;Faith 7&quot; splashed down ahead of the recovery ship, the aircraft carrier . &quot;Faith 7&quot; was hoisted on board by a helicopter with Cooper still inside. Once on deck he used the explosive bolts to blow open the hatch. Postflight inspections and analyses studied the causes and nature of the electrical problems that had plagued the final hours of the flight, but no fault was found with the performance of the pilot.

On May 22, New York City gave Cooper a ticker-tape parade witnessed by more than four million spectators. The parade concluded with a congratulatory luncheon at the Waldorf-Astoria attended by 1,900 people, where dignitaries such as Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson and former president Herbert Hoover made speeches honoring Cooper.

===Project Gemini===
MA-9 was the last of the Project Mercury flights. Walt Williams and others wanted to follow up with a three-day Mercury-Atlas 10 (MA-10) mission, but NASA HQ had already announced that there would be no MA-10 if MA-9 was successful. Shepard in particular was eager to fly the mission, for which he had been designated. He even attempted to enlist the support of President Kennedy. An official decision that there would be no MA-10 was made by NASA Administrator James E. Webb on June 22, 1963. Had the mission been approved, Shepard might not have flown it, as he was grounded in October 1963, and MA-10 might well have been flown by Cooper, who was his backup.
In January 1964 the press reported that the Democratic Party of Oklahoma discussed running Cooper for the United States Senate.

Project Mercury was followed by Project Gemini, which took its name from the fact that it carried two men instead of just one. Slayton designated Cooper as commander of Gemini 5, an eight-day, 120-orbit mission. Cooper&#x27;s assignment was officially announced on February 8, 1965. Pete Conrad, one of the nine astronauts selected in 1962 was designated as his co-pilot, with Neil Armstrong and Elliot See as their respective backups. On July 22, Cooper and Conrad went through a rehearsal of a double launch of Gemini atop a Titan II booster from Launch Complex 19 and an Atlas-Agena target vehicle from Launch Complex 14. At the end of the successful test, the erector could not be raised, and the two astronauts had to be retrieved with a cherry picker, an escape device that Cooper had devised for Project Mercury and insisted be retained for Gemini.
Cooper and Conrad wanted to name their spacecraft &quot;Lady Bird&quot; after Lady Bird Johnson, the First Lady of the United States, but Webb turned down their request; he wanted to &quot;depersonalize&quot; the space program. Cooper and Conrad then came up with the idea of a mission patch, similar to the organizational emblems worn by military units. The patch was intended to commemorate all the hundreds of people directly involved, not just the astronauts. Cooper and Conrad chose an embroidered cloth patch sporting the names of the two crew members, a Conestoga wagon, and the slogan &quot;8 Days or Bust&quot; which referred to the expected mission duration. Webb ultimately approved the design, but insisted on the removal of the slogan from the official version of the patch, feeling it placed too much emphasis on the mission length and not the experiments, and fearing the public might see the mission as a failure if it did not last the full duration. The patch was worn on the right breast of the astronauts&#x27; uniforms below their nameplates and opposite the NASA emblems worn on the left.

The mission was postponed from August 9 to 19 to give Cooper and Conrad more time to train, and was then delayed for two days due to a storm. Gemini 5 was launched at 09:00 on August 21, 1965. The Titan II booster placed them in a orbit. Cooper&#x27;s biggest concern was the fuel cell. To make it last eight days, Cooper intended to operate it at a low pressure, but when it started to dip too low the Flight Controllers advised him to switch on the oxygen heater. It eventually stabilized at —lower than it had ever been operated at before. While MA-9 had become uncomfortably warm, Gemini 5 became cold. There were also problems with the Orbit Attitude and Maneuvering System thrusters, which became erratic, and two of them failed completely.
Gemini 5 was originally intended to practice orbital rendezvous with an Agena target vehicle, but this had been deferred to a later mission owing to problems with the Agena. Nonetheless, Cooper practiced bringing his spacecraft to a predetermined location in space. This raised confidence for achieving rendezvous with an actual spacecraft on subsequent missions, and ultimately in lunar orbit. Cooper and Conrad were able to carry out all but one of the scheduled experiments, most of which were related to orbital photography.

The mission was cut short by the appearance of Hurricane Betsy in the planned recovery area. Cooper fired the retrorockets on the 120th orbit. Splashdown was short of the target. A computer error had set the Earth&#x27;s rotation at 360 degrees per day whereas it is actually 360.98. The difference was significant in a spacecraft. The error would have been larger had Cooper not recognized the problem when the reentry gauge indicated that they were too high, and attempted to compensate by increasing the bank angle from 53 to 90 degrees to the left to increase the drag. Helicopters plucked them from the sea and took them to the recovery ship, the aircraft carrier .

The two astronauts established a new space endurance record by traveling a distance of in 190 hours and 56 minutes—just short of eight days—showing that astronauts could survive in space for the length of time necessary to go from the Earth to the Moon and back. Cooper became the first astronaut to make a second orbital flight.

Cooper served as backup Command Pilot for Gemini 12, the last of the Gemini missions, with Gene Cernan as his pilot.

===Project Apollo===
In November 1964, Cooper entered the $28,000 Salton City boat race with racehorse owner Ogden Phipps and racing car driver Chuck Daigh. They were in fourth place when a cracked motor forced them to withdraw. The next year Cooper and Grissom had an entry in the race, but were disqualified after failing to make a mandatory meeting. Cooper competed in the Southwest Championship Drag Boat races at La Porte, Texas, later in 1965, and in the 1967 Orange Bowl Regatta with fire fighter Red Adair. In 1968, he entered the 24 Hours of Daytona with Charles Buckley, the NASA chief of security at the Kennedy Space Center. The night before the race, NASA management ordered him to withdraw due to the dangers involved. Cooper upset NASA management by quipping to the press that &quot;NASA wants astronauts to be tiddlywinks players.&quot;
Cooper was selected as backup commander for the May 1969 Apollo 10 mission. This placed him in line for the position of commander of Apollo 13, according to the usual crew rotation procedure established by Slayton as Director of Flight Crew Operations. However, when Shepard, the Chief of the Astronaut Office, returned to flight status in May 1969, Slayton replaced Cooper with Shepard as commander of this crew. This mission subsequently became Apollo 14 to give Shepard more time to train. Loss of this command placed Cooper further down the flight rotation, meaning he would not fly until one of the later flights, if ever.

Slayton alleged that Cooper had developed a lax attitude towards training during the Gemini program; for the Gemini 5 mission, other astronauts had to coax him into the simulator. However, according to Walter Cunningham, Cooper and Scott Carpenter were the only Mercury astronauts who consistently attended geology classes. Slayton later asserted that he never intended to rotate Cooper to another mission, and assigned him to the Apollo 10 backup crew simply because of a lack of qualified astronauts with command experience at the time. Slayton noted that Cooper had a slim chance of receiving the Apollo 13 command if he did an outstanding job as backup commander of Apollo 10, but Slayton felt that Cooper did not.

Dismayed by his stalled astronaut career, Cooper retired from NASA and the USAF on July 31, 1970, with the rank of colonel, having flown 222 hours in space. Soon after he divorced Trudy, he married Suzan Taylor, a schoolteacher, in 1972. They had two daughters: Colleen Taylor, born in 1979; and Elizabeth Jo, born in 1980. They remained married until his death in 2004.

==Later life==

After leaving NASA, Cooper served on several corporate boards and as technical consultant for more than a dozen companies in fields ranging from high performance boat design to energy, construction, and aircraft design. Between 1962 and 1967, he was president of Performance Unlimited, Inc., a manufacturer and distributor of racing and marine engines, and fiberglass boats. He was president of GCR, which designed, tested and raced championship cars, conducted tire tests for race cars, and worked on installation of turbine engines on cars. He served on the board of Teletest, which designed and installed advanced telemetry systems; Doubloon, which designed and built treasure hunting equipment; and Cosmos, which conducted archeological exploration projects.

As part owner and race project manager of the Profile Race Team from 1968 to 1970, Cooper designed and raced high performance boats. Between 1968 and 1974 he served as a technical consultant at Republic Corp., and General Motors, Ford and Chrysler Motor Companies, where he was a consultant on design and construction of various automotive components. He was also a technical consultant for Canaveral International, Inc., for which he developed technical products and served in public relations on its land development projects, and served on the board of directors of APECO, Campcom LowCom, and Crafttech.

Cooper was president of his own consulting firm, Gordon Cooper &amp; Associates, Inc., which was involved in technical projects ranging from airline and aerospace fields to land and hotel development. From 1973 to 1975, he worked for The Walt Disney Company as the vice president of research and development for Epcot. In 1989, he became the chief executive of Galaxy Group, Inc., a company that designed and improved small airplanes.

==UFO sightings==
In Cooper&#x27;s autobiography, &quot;Leap of Faith&quot;, co-authored with Bruce Henderson, he recounted his experiences with the Air Force and NASA, along with his efforts to expose an alleged UFO conspiracy theory. In his review of the book, space historian Robert Pearlman wrote: &quot;While no one can argue with someone&#x27;s experiences, in the case of Cooper&#x27;s own sightings, I found some difficulty understanding how someone so connected with ground breaking technology and science could easily embrace ideas such as extraterrestrial visits with little more than anecdotal evidence.&quot;

Cooper claimed to have seen his first UFO while flying over West Germany in 1951, although he denied reports he had seen a UFO during his Mercury flight. On May 3, 1957, when Cooper was at Edwards, he had a crew set up an Askania Cinetheodolite precision landing system on a dry lake bed. This cinetheodolite system could take pictures at thirty frames per second as an aircraft landed. The crew consisted of James Bittick and Jack Gettys, who began work at the site just before 08:00, with both still and motion picture cameras. According to Cooper&#x27;s accounts, when they returned later that morning they reported that they had seen a &quot;strange-looking, saucer-like&quot; aircraft that did not make a sound either on landing or take-off.

Cooper recalled that these men, who saw experimental aircraft on a regular basis as part of their job, were clearly unnerved. They explained how the saucer hovered over them, landed away using three extended landing gears, and then took off as they approached for a closer look. He called a special Pentagon number to report such incidents, and was instructed to have their film developed, but to make no prints of it, and send it in to the Pentagon right away in a locked courier pouch.
As Cooper had not been instructed to &quot;not&quot; look at the negatives before sending them, he did. Cooper claimed that the quality of the photography was excellent, and what he saw was exactly what Bittick and Gettys had described to him. He expected that there would be a follow-up investigation, since an aircraft of unknown origin had landed at a classified military installation, but never heard about the incident again. He was never able to track down what happened to those photos, and assumed they ended up going to the Air Force&#x27;s official UFO investigation, Project Blue Book, which was based at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base.

Cooper claimed until his death that the U.S. government was indeed covering up information about UFOs. He pointed out that there were hundreds of reports made by his fellow pilots, many coming from military jet pilots sent to respond to radar or visual sightings. In his memoirs, Cooper wrote he had seen unexplained aircraft several times during his career, and that hundreds of reports had been made. In 1978, he testified before the UN on the topic. Throughout his later life, Cooper repeatedly expressed in interviews that he had seen UFOs, and described his recollections for the 2003 documentary &quot;Out of the Blue&quot;.

==Death==
Cooper died at age 77 from heart failure at his home in Ventura, California, on October 4, 2004.

A portion of Cooper&#x27;s ashes (along with those of &quot;Star Trek&quot; actor James Doohan and 206 others) was launched from New Mexico on April 29, 2007, on a sub-orbital memorial flight by a privately owned UP Aerospace SpaceLoft XL sounding rocket. The capsule carrying the ashes fell back toward Earth as planned; it was lost in mountainous landscape. The search was obstructed by bad weather, but after a few weeks the capsule was found, and the ashes it carried were returned to the families. The ashes were then launched on the &quot;Explorers&quot; orbital mission on August 3, 2008, but were lost when the Falcon 1 rocket failed two minutes into the flight.

On May 22, 2012, another portion of Cooper&#x27;s ashes was among those of 308 people included on the SpaceX COTS Demo Flight 2 that was bound for the International Space Station. This flight, using the Falcon 9 launch vehicle and the Dragon capsule, was uncrewed. The second stage and the burial canister remained in the initial orbit that the Dragon C2+ was inserted into, and burned up in the Earth&#x27;s atmosphere a month later.

==Awards and honors==

Cooper received many awards, including the Legion of Merit, the Distinguished Flying Cross with oak leaf cluster, the NASA Exceptional Service Medal, the NASA Distinguished Service Medal, the Collier Trophy, the Harmon Trophy, the DeMolay Legion of Honor, the John F. Kennedy Trophy, the Iven C. Kincheloe Award, the Air Force Association Trophy, the John J. Montgomery Award, the General Thomas D. White Trophy, the University of Hawaiʻi Regents Medal, the Columbus Medal, and the Silver Antelope Award. He received an honorary D.Sc. from Oklahoma State University in 1967.

He was one of five Oklahoman astronauts inducted into the Oklahoma Aviation and Space Hall of Fame in 1980. He was inducted into the International Space Hall of Fame in 1981, and the U.S. Astronaut Hall of Fame on May 11, 1990.

Cooper was a member of the Society of Experimental Test Pilots, the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, the American Astronautical Society, Scottish Rite and York Rite Masons, Shriners, the Royal Order of Jesters, the Rotary Club, Order of Daedalians, Confederate Air Force, Adventurers&#x27; Club of Los Angeles, and Boy Scouts of America. He was a Master Mason (member of Carbondale Lodge # 82 in Carbondale, Colorado), and was given the honorary 33rd Degree by the Scottish Rite Masonic body.

== Cultural influence ==
Cooper&#x27;s Mercury astronaut career and appealing personality were depicted in the 1983 film &quot;The Right Stuff&quot;, in which he was portrayed by Dennis Quaid. Cooper worked closely with the production company, and every line uttered by Quaid was reportedly attributable to Cooper&#x27;s recollection. Quaid met with Cooper before the casting call and learned his mannerisms. Quaid had his hair cut and dyed to match Cooper&#x27;s appearance in the 1950s and 1960s.

Cooper was later portrayed by Robert C. Treveiler in the 1998 HBO miniseries &quot;From the Earth to the Moon&quot;, and by Bret Harrison in the 2015 ABC TV series &quot;The Astronaut Wives Club&quot;. That year, he was also portrayed by Colin Hanks in the Season 3 episode &quot;Oklahoma&quot; of &quot;Drunk History&quot;, written by Laura Steinel, which retold the story of his Mercury-Atlas 9 flight.

While he was in space, Cooper recorded dark spots he noticed in the waters of the Caribbean. He believed these anomalies may be the locations of shipwrecks. The 2017 Discovery Channel docu-series &quot;Cooper&#x27;s Treasure&quot; followed by Darrell Miklos as he searched through Cooper&#x27;s files to discover the location of the suspected shipwrecks.

Cooper appeared as himself in an episode of the television series &quot;CHiPs&quot;, and during the early 1980s made regular call-in appearances on chat shows hosted by David Letterman, Merv Griffin and Mike Douglas. The &quot;Thunderbirds&quot; character Gordon Tracy was named after him. He was also a major contributor to the book &quot;In the Shadow of the Moon&quot; (published after his death), which offered his final published thoughts on his life and career.

In 2019, National Geographic began filming a television series based on Tom Wolfe&#x27;s 1979 book &quot;The Right Stuff&quot;. Colin O&#x27;Donoghue is portraying Gordon Cooper. While the series was set to air in spring of 2020, the first two episodes aired on October 9, 2020, on subscription service Disney+.

The 2019 series &quot;For All Mankind&quot; has Gordon &quot;Gordo&quot; Stevens, a character based in part on him.

==Notes==
==References==
*
*
*
*
*
*
*


==External links==

*Why Did &#x27;Gordo&#x27; Tell UFO Stories?
*&quot;Remembering &#x27;Gordo – NASA memories of Gordon Cooper</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q312833" start="0" end="23" title="Gordon Cooper" label="Leroy Gordon Cooper Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q3798668" start="74" end="92" title="aerospace engineer" label="aerospace engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q730242" start="94" end="104" title="test pilot" label="test pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="106" end="129" title="United States Air Force" label="United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095549" start="130" end="135" title="Aviator" label="pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q597154" start="161" end="186" title="Mercury Seven" label="seven original astronauts"/>
<link wikidata="Q52162" start="190" end="205" title="Project Mercury" label="Project Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="318" end="344" title="United States Marine Corps" label="United States Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="352" end="364" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="395" end="418" title="United States Air Force" label="United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q498722" start="608" end="623" title="Mercury-Atlas 9" label="Mercury-Atlas 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q218455" start="795" end="802" title="Orbital spaceflight" label="orbital"/>
<link wikidata="Q498722" start="964" end="971" title="Faith 7" label="Faith 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642255" start="984" end="994" title="splashdown" label="splashdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q725849" start="1127" end="1135" title="Gemini 5" label="Gemini 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q213076" start="1162" end="1173" title="Pete Conrad" label="Pete Conrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q589905" start="1592" end="1601" title="Red Adair" label="Red Adair"/>
<link wikidata="Q216330" start="1627" end="1646" title="24 Hours of Daytona" label="24 Hours of Daytona"/>
<link wikidata="Q191746" start="1762" end="1771" title="Apollo 10" label="Apollo 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q174979" start="1802" end="1814" title="Alan Shepard" label="Alan Shepard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984198" start="1872" end="1879" title="colonel (United States)" label="colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q843999" start="1975" end="1992" title="Shawnee, Oklahoma" label="Shawnee, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="2127" end="2145" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2153" end="2164" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7082272" start="2365" end="2388" title="Oklahoma National Guard" label="Oklahoma National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q110306503" start="2399" end="2411" title="Curtiss JN-4" label="Curtiss JN-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308934" start="2529" end="2549" title="State court (United States)" label="state district judge"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2587" end="2599" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q12296445" start="2619" end="2634" title="Asiatic-Pacific Theater" label="Pacific theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210871" start="2642" end="2677" title="Judge Advocate General&amp;#x27;s Corps" label="Judge Advocate General&amp;#x27;s Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="2697" end="2720" title="United States Air Force" label="United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617253" start="2778" end="2799" title="Hickam Air Force Base" label="Hickam Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q547795" start="2801" end="2817" title="Hawaii Territory" label="Hawaii Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984198" start="2869" end="2876" title="colonel (United States)" label="colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="2976" end="2984" title="American football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q7450648" start="3013" end="3019" title="Senior (education)" label="senior"/>
<link wikidata="Q589410" start="3048" end="3056" title="Halfback (American football)" label="halfback"/>
<link wikidata="Q608132" start="3114" end="3135" title="Boy Scouts of America" label="Boy Scouts of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686372" start="3180" end="3190" title="Life Scout" label="Life Scout"/>
<link wikidata="Q95426730" start="3212" end="3228" title="Command-Aire 3C3" label="Command-Aire 3C3"/>
<link wikidata="Q223818" start="3229" end="3236" title="biplane" label="biplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q4273128" start="3340" end="3359" title="Pilot certification in the United States" label="pilot certification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162019" start="3365" end="3378" title="Piper J-3 Cub" label="Piper J-3 Cub"/>
<link wikidata="Q984364" start="3415" end="3431" title="Murray, Kentucky" label="Murray, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q6939282" start="3501" end="3519" title="Murray High School (Kentucky)" label="Murray High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="3565" end="3583" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="3664" end="3690" title="United States Marine Corps" label="United States Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424369" start="3704" end="3717" title="Marine Corps Recruit Depot Parris Island" label="Parris Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981688" start="3838" end="3870" title="Naval Academy Preparatory School" label="Naval Academy Preparatory School"/>
<link wikidata="Q559549" start="3913" end="3940" title="United States Naval Academy" label="United States Naval Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q28271" start="3944" end="3963" title="Annapolis, Maryland" label="Annapolis, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="4046" end="4062" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4087" end="4111" title="Guard of honour#United States" label="Presidential Honor Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q843610" start="4124" end="4134" title="Military discharge" label="discharged"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000129" start="4240" end="4270" title="University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa" label="University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="4359" end="4366" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4273128" start="4495" end="4522" title="Pilot certification in the United States" label="private pilot certification"/>
<link wikidata="Q18094" start="4565" end="4573" title="Honolulu" label="Honolulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q489983" start="4688" end="4725" title="Reserve Officers&amp;#x27; Training Corps" label="Reserve Officers&amp;#x27; Training Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q56826567" start="4775" end="4792" title="second lieutenant" label="second lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="4870" end="4893" title="United States Air Force" label="United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169627" start="4944" end="4965" title="Perrin Air Force Station" label="Perrin Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="4967" end="4972" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q8020977" start="4977" end="5000" title="Williams Air Force Base" label="Williams Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="5002" end="5009" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q40021" start="5018" end="5027" title="T-6 Texan" label="T-6 Texan"/>
<link wikidata="Q161348" start="5097" end="5115" title="Ramstein Air Base" label="Landstuhl Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="5117" end="5129" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q160853" start="5145" end="5160" title="F-84 Thunderjet" label="F-84 Thunderjet"/>
<link wikidata="Q153826" start="5166" end="5176" title="F-86 Sabre" label="F-86 Sabre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5459261" start="5206" end="5222" title="flight commander" label="flight commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q4640170" start="5230" end="5259" title="525th Fighter Squadron" label="525th Fighter Bomber Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q14692455" start="5321" end="5343" title="University of Maryland University College" label="University of Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697913" start="5425" end="5458" title="Air Force Institute of Technology" label="Air Force Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="5469" end="5473" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q407875" start="5477" end="5491" title="Air University (United States Air Force)" label="Air University"/>
<link wikidata="Q787674" start="5510" end="5529" title="Bachelor of Science" label="Bachelor of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q3798668" start="5540" end="5561" title="Aerospace Engineering" label="Aerospace Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q110879" start="5615" end="5626" title="Gus Grissom" label="Gus Grissom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6694148" start="5734" end="5745" title="Lowry Field" label="Lowry Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q58725" start="5773" end="5786" title="Lockheed T-33" label="Lockheed T-33"/>
<link wikidata="Q3428253" start="6097" end="6139" title="U.S. Air Force Test Pilot School" label="USAF Experimental Flight Test Pilot School"/>
<link wikidata="Q217563" start="6155" end="6177" title="Edwards Air Force Base" label="Edwards Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="6181" end="6191" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697972" start="6243" end="6275" title="Air Force Test Center" label="Flight Test Engineering Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q730242" start="6309" end="6319" title="test pilot" label="test pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q816432" start="6324" end="6339" title="project manager" label="project manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q657597" start="6352" end="6358" title="F-102A" label="F-102A"/>
<link wikidata="Q753808" start="6363" end="6369" title="F-106 Delta Dart" label="F-106B"/>
<link wikidata="Q206084" start="6388" end="6392" title="North American T-28 Trojan" label="T-28"/>
<link wikidata="Q495337" start="6394" end="6398" title="Cessna T-37 Tweet" label="T-37"/>
<link wikidata="Q153826" start="6400" end="6404" title="F-86" label="F-86"/>
<link wikidata="Q531053" start="6406" end="6411" title="North American F-100 Super Sabre" label="F-100"/>
<link wikidata="Q159881" start="6416" end="6421" title="F-104" label="F-104"/>
<link wikidata="Q206592" start="6533" end="6545" title="jet aircraft" label="jet aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q3280545" start="6738" end="6751" title="Major general (United States)" label="Major General"/>
<link wikidata="Q750141" start="6868" end="6886" title="McDonnell Aircraft" label="McDonnell Aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="6890" end="6909" title="St. Louis, Missouri" label="St. Louis, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="7036" end="7040" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q52162" start="7053" end="7068" title="Project Mercury" label="Project Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q597154" start="7982" end="7995" title="Mercury Seven" label="Mercury Seven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146590" start="8036" end="8056" title="Dolley Madison House" label="Dolley Madison House"/>
<link wikidata="Q335503" start="8096" end="8111" title="Scott Carpenter" label="Scott Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q182642" start="8128" end="8138" title="John Glenn" label="John Glenn"/>
<link wikidata="Q110450" start="8153" end="8166" title="Wally Schirra" label="Wally Schirra"/>
<link wikidata="Q174979" start="8168" end="8180" title="Alan Shepard" label="Alan Shepard"/>
<link wikidata="Q336810" start="8186" end="8198" title="Deke Slayton" label="Deke Slayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915676" start="8317" end="8332" title="Mercury-Redstone Launch Vehicle" label="Redstone rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q832435" start="8369" end="8392" title="sub-orbital spaceflight" label="sub-orbital spaceflight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353183" start="8481" end="8491" title="launch pad" label="launch pad"/>
<link wikidata="Q907773" start="8492" end="8509" title="Launch escape system" label="escape procedures"/>
<link wikidata="Q7964686" start="8523" end="8533" title="Bo Randall" label="Bo Randall"/>
<link wikidata="Q444536" start="8556" end="8570" title="survival knife" label="survival knife"/>
<link wikidata="Q650056" start="8983" end="9005" title="Langley Air Force Base" label="Langley Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q58725" start="9076" end="9089" title="Lockheed T-33" label="T-33 aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q649929" start="9154" end="9190" title="McGhee Tyson Air National Guard Base" label="McGhee Tyson Air National Guard Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509" start="9194" end="9203" title="Tennessee" label="Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9251" end="9257" title="List of Lockheed F-104 Starfighter variants#F-104B" label="F-104B"/>
<link wikidata="Q8012356" start="9304" end="9317" title="William Hines (journalist)" label="William Hines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489540" start="9340" end="9359" title="The Washington Star" label="The Washington Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q14761450" start="9440" end="9451" title="Congressman" label="Congressman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6134352" start="9452" end="9467" title="James G. Fulton" label="James G. Fulton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889981" start="9500" end="9543" title="House Committee on Science and Astronautics" label="House Committee on Science and Astronautics"/>
<link wikidata="Q657597" start="9596" end="9607" title="Convair F-102 Delta Dagger" label="USAF F-102s"/>
<link wikidata="Q81965" start="9822" end="9836" title="General Motors" label="General Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q5334664" start="9847" end="9854" title="Ed Cole" label="Ed Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q56166" start="9890" end="9908" title="Chevrolet Corvette" label="Chevrolet Corvette"/>
<link wikidata="Q172510" start="9910" end="9922" title="Jim Rathmann (race car driver)" label="Jim Rathmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032" start="9956" end="9972" title="Indianapolis 500" label="Indianapolis 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q949779" start="10012" end="10030" title="Melbourne, Florida" label="Melbourne, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467696" start="10530" end="10556" title="Sports Car Club of America" label="Sports Car Club of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q233929" start="10572" end="10618" title="National Association for Stock Car Auto Racing" label="National Association for Stock Car Auto Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8563791" start="10683" end="10703" title="capsule communicator" label="capsule communicator"/>
<link wikidata="Q832435" start="10735" end="10758" title="sub-orbital spaceflight" label="sub-orbital spaceflight"/>
<link wikidata="Q174979" start="10763" end="10775" title="Alan Shepard" label="Alan Shepard"/>
<link wikidata="Q623903" start="10779" end="10797" title="Mercury-Redstone 3" label="Mercury-Redstone 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q335503" start="10803" end="10818" title="Scott Carpenter" label="Scott Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q498680" start="10844" end="10859" title="Mercury-Atlas 7" label="Mercury-Atlas 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q110450" start="10886" end="10899" title="Wally Schirra" label="Wally Schirra"/>
<link wikidata="Q498689" start="10903" end="10918" title="Mercury-Atlas 8" label="Mercury-Atlas 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q498722" start="10987" end="11002" title="Mercury-Atlas 9" label="Mercury-Atlas 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q208371" start="11375" end="11399" title="Manned Spacecraft Center" label="Manned Spacecraft Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q104878176" start="11550" end="11558" title="Vostok 3" label="Vostok 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q498722" start="11931" end="11938" title="Faith 7" label="Faith 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q20715142" start="12125" end="12143" title="Walter C. Williams" label="Walter C. Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260747" start="12176" end="12189" title="pressure suit" label="pressure suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q193401" start="12300" end="12314" title="Cape Canaveral" label="Cape Canaveral"/>
<link wikidata="Q29426" start="12338" end="12349" title="afterburner" label="afterburner"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="12632" end="12647" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="13221" end="13227" title="Apsis" label="apogee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353183" start="13305" end="13315" title="launch pad" label="launch pad"/>
<link wikidata="Q483400" start="13646" end="13655" title="gyroscope" label="gyroscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q271939" start="13988" end="14000" title="Chuck Yeager" label="Chuck Yeager"/>
<link wikidata="Q5459269" start="14337" end="14342" title="Flight dynamics" label="pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q531716" start="14347" end="14355" title="Atmospheric entry" label="re-entry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642255" start="14827" end="14840" title="splashed down" label="splashed down"/>
<link wikidata="Q378575" start="15279" end="15297" title="Ticker tape parade" label="ticker-tape parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123997" start="15405" end="15420" title="Waldorf Astoria New York" label="Waldorf-Astoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="15488" end="15505" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q35236" start="15527" end="15541" title="Herbert Hoover" label="Herbert Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q221105" start="15707" end="15723" title="Mercury-Atlas 10" label="Mercury-Atlas 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q537520" start="16057" end="16070" title="James E. Webb" label="James E. Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q15980735" start="16301" end="16329" title="Democratic Party of Oklahoma" label="Democratic Party of Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q105061390" start="16340" end="16383" title="United States Senate special election in Oklahoma, 1964" label="running Cooper for the United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q214996" start="16418" end="16432" title="Project Gemini" label="Project Gemini"/>
<link wikidata="Q725849" start="16555" end="16563" title="Gemini 5" label="Gemini 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q213076" start="16669" end="16680" title="Pete Conrad" label="Pete Conrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409842" start="16693" end="16725" title="NASA Astronaut Group 2" label="nine astronauts selected in 1962"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615" start="16763" end="16777" title="Neil Armstrong" label="Neil Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q621462" start="16782" end="16792" title="Elliot See" label="Elliot See"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187405" start="16913" end="16921" title="Titan II" label="Titan II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034317" start="16935" end="16952" title="Launch Complex 19" label="Launch Complex 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q22938" start="16960" end="16971" title="Atlas-Agena" label="Atlas-Agena"/>
<link wikidata="Q6078052" start="17129" end="17142" title="cherry picker" label="cherry picker"/>
<link wikidata="Q233648" start="17320" end="17337" title="Lady Bird Johnson" label="Lady Bird Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166256" start="17343" end="17374" title="First Lady of the United States" label="First Lady of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6878835" start="17520" end="17533" title="mission patch" label="mission patch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060586" start="17803" end="17818" title="Conestoga wagon" label="Conestoga wagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q180253" start="18629" end="18638" title="fuel cell" label="fuel cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100055" start="18994" end="19031" title="Orbit Attitude and Maneuvering System" label="Orbit Attitude and Maneuvering System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093759" start="19145" end="19163" title="orbital rendezvous" label="orbital rendezvous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094450" start="19172" end="19192" title="Agena target vehicle" label="Agena target vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087650" start="19677" end="19692" title="Hurricane Betsy" label="Hurricane Betsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q259770" start="20675" end="20684" title="Gemini 12" label="Gemini 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q158486" start="20724" end="20735" title="Gene Cernan" label="Gene Cernan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11291887" start="20860" end="20872" title="Ogden Phipps" label="Ogden Phipps"/>
<link wikidata="Q172276" start="20895" end="20906" title="Chuck Daigh" label="Chuck Daigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q970829" start="21169" end="21184" title="La Porte, Texas" label="La Porte, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q589905" start="21255" end="21264" title="Red Adair" label="Red Adair"/>
<link wikidata="Q216330" start="21290" end="21309" title="24 Hours of Daytona" label="24 Hours of Daytona"/>
<link wikidata="Q48821" start="21366" end="21386" title="Kennedy Space Center" label="Kennedy Space Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q191746" start="21661" end="21670" title="Apollo 10" label="Apollo 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q182252" start="21737" end="21746" title="Apollo 13" label="Apollo 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q3667787" start="21884" end="21913" title="Chief of the Astronaut Office" label="Chief of the Astronaut Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q178871" start="22051" end="22060" title="Apollo 14" label="Apollo 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q372215" start="22435" end="22452" title="Walter Cunningham" label="Walter Cunningham"/>
<link wikidata="Q335503" start="22465" end="22480" title="Scott Carpenter" label="Scott Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984198" start="23068" end="23075" title="Colonel (United States)" label="colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="24947" end="24970" title="The Walt Disney Company" label="The Walt Disney Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052042" start="25025" end="25030" title="Epcot" label="Epcot"/>
<link wikidata="Q4977095" start="25243" end="25258" title="Bruce Henderson (author)" label="Bruce Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="25312" end="25316" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715405" start="25362" end="25383" title="UFO conspiracy theory" label="UFO conspiracy theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348797" start="25428" end="25443" title="Robert Pearlman" label="Robert Pearlman"/>
<link wikidata="Q421" start="25810" end="25813" title="UFO" label="UFO"/>
<link wikidata="Q745566" start="25994" end="26001" title="Askania" label="Askania"/>
<link wikidata="Q745566" start="26002" end="26016" title="Cinetheodolite" label="Cinetheodolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497768" start="26047" end="26055" title="dry lake" label="dry lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q11436" start="26453" end="26461" title="aircraft" label="aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384417" start="26560" end="26581" title="experimental aircraft" label="experimental aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q11208" start="26819" end="26827" title="The Pentagon" label="Pentagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q777856" start="26925" end="26931" title="photographic print" label="prints"/>
<link wikidata="Q595597" start="27073" end="27081" title="Negative (photography)" label="negative"/>
<link wikidata="Q846498" start="27363" end="27373" title="classified information" label="classified"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121165" start="27586" end="27603" title="Project Blue Book" label="Project Blue Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q730187" start="27624" end="27655" title="Wright-Patterson Air Force Base" label="Wright-Patterson Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q47528" start="27895" end="27900" title="radar" label="radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7111705" start="28260" end="28287" title="Out of the Blue (2003 film)" label="&amp;quot;Out of the Blue&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q181754" start="28327" end="28340" title="heart failure" label="heart failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q490434" start="28356" end="28375" title="Ventura, California" label="Ventura, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092" start="28458" end="28467" title="Star Trek" label="Star Trek"/>
<link wikidata="Q318412" start="28480" end="28492" title="James Doohan" label="James Doohan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="28527" end="28537" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q964073" start="28611" end="28623" title="UP Aerospace" label="UP Aerospace"/>
<link wikidata="Q502980" start="28624" end="28636" title="SpaceLoft XL" label="SpaceLoft XL"/>
<link wikidata="Q579036" start="28637" end="28652" title="sounding rocket" label="sounding rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q648606" start="29017" end="29025" title="Falcon 1" label="Falcon 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931862" start="29172" end="29197" title="Dragon C2+" label="SpaceX COTS Demo Flight 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q25271" start="29221" end="29248" title="International Space Station" label="International Space Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q249091" start="29273" end="29281" title="Falcon 9" label="Falcon 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q115829206" start="29305" end="29319" title="SpaceX Dragon 1" label="Dragon capsule"/>
<link wikidata="Q724443" start="29572" end="29587" title="Legion of Merit" label="Legion of Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754110" start="29593" end="29619" title="Distinguished Flying Cross (United States)" label="Distinguished Flying Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q571544" start="29625" end="29641" title="oak leaf cluster" label="oak leaf cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6952406" start="29647" end="29677" title="NASA Exceptional Service Medal" label="NASA Exceptional Service Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4286902" start="29683" end="29715" title="NASA Distinguished Service Medal" label="NASA Distinguished Service Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109489" start="29721" end="29735" title="Collier Trophy" label="Collier Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5659178" start="29741" end="29754" title="Harmon Trophy" label="Harmon Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732407" start="29760" end="29767" title="DeMolay" label="DeMolay"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="29789" end="29804" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6098670" start="29817" end="29840" title="Iven C. Kincheloe Award" label="Iven C. Kincheloe Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697879" start="29846" end="29867" title="Air Force Association" label="Air Force Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q25316239" start="29880" end="29904" title="John J. Montgomery Award" label="John J. Montgomery Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q524922" start="29918" end="29933" title="Thomas D. White" label="Thomas D. White"/>
<link wikidata="Q217439" start="29946" end="29967" title="University of Hawaiʻi" label="University of Hawaiʻi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="29987" end="29995" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q17093051" start="30011" end="30032" title="Silver Antelope Award" label="Silver Antelope Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q209896" start="30049" end="30057" title="Honorary degree" label="honorary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248352" start="30058" end="30063" title="Doctor of Science" label="D.Sc."/>
<link wikidata="Q749718" start="30069" end="30094" title="Oklahoma State University" label="Oklahoma State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433576" start="30163" end="30203" title="Oklahoma Aviation and Space Hall of Fame" label="Oklahoma Aviation and Space Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010217" start="30238" end="30270" title="International Space Hall of Fame" label="International Space Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q742943" start="30288" end="30315" title="U.S. Astronaut Hall of Fame" label="U.S. Astronaut Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q431363" start="30361" end="30396" title="Society of Experimental Test Pilots" label="Society of Experimental Test Pilots"/>
<link wikidata="Q465165" start="30402" end="30452" title="American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics" label="American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2374169" start="30458" end="30488" title="American Astronautical Society" label="American Astronautical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764682" start="30490" end="30503" title="Scottish Rite" label="Scottish Rite"/>
<link wikidata="Q131621834" start="30508" end="30517" title="York Rite" label="York Rite"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="30518" end="30524" title="Freemasonry" label="Masons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934902" start="30526" end="30534" title="Shriners" label="Shriners"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374646" start="30540" end="30562" title="Royal Order of Jesters" label="Royal Order of Jesters"/>
<link wikidata="Q109179" start="30568" end="30579" title="Rotary Club" label="Rotary Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100486" start="30581" end="30600" title="Order of Daedalians" label="Order of Daedalians"/>
<link wikidata="Q505330" start="30602" end="30623" title="Confederate Air Force" label="Confederate Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q608132" start="30668" end="30689" title="Boy Scouts of America" label="Boy Scouts of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="30700" end="30712" title="Master Mason" label="Master Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q389086" start="30749" end="30769" title="Carbondale, Colorado" label="Carbondale, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764682" start="30818" end="30831" title="Scottish Rite" label="Scottish Rite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197185" start="30974" end="30989" title="The Right Stuff (film)" label="The Right Stuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q200768" start="31026" end="31038" title="Dennis Quaid" label="Dennis Quaid"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="31409" end="31412" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259759" start="31413" end="31423" title="miniseries" label="miniseries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467607" start="31430" end="31456" title="From the Earth to the Moon (miniseries)" label="From the Earth to the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q910472" start="31471" end="31484" title="Bret Harrison" label="Bret Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="31497" end="31500" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q15728899" start="31517" end="31541" title="The Astronaut Wives Club" label="The Astronaut Wives Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q318134" start="31585" end="31596" title="Colin Hanks" label="Colin Hanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q14650447" start="31651" end="31664" title="Drunk History" label="Drunk History"/>
<link wikidata="Q43404" start="31919" end="31936" title="Discovery Channel" label="Discovery Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023688" start="32181" end="32186" title="CHiPs" label="CHiPs"/>
<link wikidata="Q217298" start="32278" end="32293" title="David Letterman" label="David Letterman"/>
<link wikidata="Q598344" start="32295" end="32307" title="Merv Griffin" label="Merv Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386707" start="32312" end="32324" title="Mike Douglas" label="Mike Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q288085" start="32336" end="32348" title="Thunderbirds (TV series)" label="Thunderbirds"/>
<link wikidata="Q131597423" start="32365" end="32377" title="Gordon Tracy" label="Gordon Tracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6012889" start="32449" end="32474" title="In the Shadow of the Moon (book)" label="In the Shadow of the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301814" start="32683" end="32698" title="The Right Stuff (book)" label="The Right Stuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108634" start="32706" end="32727" title="Colin O&amp;#x27;Donoghue" label="Colin O&amp;#x27;Donoghue"/>
<link wikidata="Q54958409" start="32913" end="32928" title="For All Mankind (TV series)" label="For All Mankind"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="331787" wikidata="Q143284" url="?curid=331787" title="Black woodpecker">
<text>The black woodpecker (Dryocopus martius) is a large woodpecker that lives in mature forests across the northern Palearctic. It is the sole representative of its genus in that region. Its range is expanding. The black woodpecker is easily the largest woodpecker species in Europe as well as in the portion of Asia where it lives and is one of the largest species worldwide. This non-migratory species tends to make its home in old-growth forest or large forest stands and excavates a large tree hole to reside in. In turn, several species rely on black woodpeckers to secondarily reside in the holes made in trees by them. This woodpecker&#x27;s diet consists mostly of carpenter ants. This species is closely related to, and fills the same ecological niche in Europe as, the pileated woodpecker of North America and the lineated woodpecker of South America, also being similar to the white-bellied woodpecker which is distributed to the south somewhat of the black woodpecker in Asia.

==Taxonomy==
The black woodpecker was formally described by the Swedish naturalist Carl Linnaeus in 1758 in the tenth edition of his &quot;Systema Naturae&quot; under the binomial name &quot;Picus martius&quot;. Linnaeus gave the locality as Europe, but this is now taken to be Sweden. The black woodpecker is now placed in the genus &quot;Dryocopus&quot; that was introduced by the German naturalist Friedrich Boie in 1826.

Two subspecies are recognised:
==Description==

The black woodpecker measures long with a wingspan. Body weight is approximately on average. Among standard measurements, the wing chord is , the tail is , the very long bill is and the tarsus is . It is easily the largest woodpecker in its range and is second in size only to the great slaty woodpecker amongst the woodpecker species certain to exist (with the likely extinction of the largest and second largest woodpeckers), although its average mass is similar to that of the Magellanic woodpecker of South America. The closely related pileated and white-bellied woodpeckers also broadly overlap in size with the black woodpecker, but both are somewhat smaller in average and maximal size and mass. The plumage of this crow-sized woodpecker is entirely black apart from a red crown. In males, the entire crown is red, but in females only the top hindcrown is red, with the rest of the body all black. The juvenile black woodpecker is similar but is less glossy, with a duller red crown and a paler grey throat and bill . The piercing yellow eyes and manic, high-pitched calls of the black woodpecker have made it the villain of fairy tales throughout its range. Their voice is remarkable in that it has two different calls. One is a short single high-pitched note, a loud, whistling &quot;kree-kree-kree&quot;, done only twice in a row. The other is a screech-like shrill while in flight. Unlike other woodpecker species, the black woodpecker does not have a dipping, bounding flight, but instead flies with slow, unsteady-seeming wing beats with its head raised.

==Distribution and habitat==

The range of the black woodpecker spreads east from Spain across the whole of Europe, excluding Great Britain, Ireland, and northern Scandinavia. It is also native to parts of Asia, including Korea, Japan and China, and to the Middle East, including Iran and Kazakhstan. The southern limits of this woodpecker&#x27;s range are in Spain and Italy, and it has also been recorded as a vagrant in Portugal. The species is generally more uncommon and more discontinuous in distribution in the Asian part of its range.

The black woodpecker is mainly found in forested regions, with a preference for extensive, mature woodland, including coniferous, tropical, subtropical and boreal forests. It is very widespread throughout mountainous and lowland forests. It is more likely to occur in marginal woods near human habitations during the non-breeding season. This species has been observed at elevations between .

The black woodpecker is noticeably absent from the British Isles. Approximately 80 sightings of the species in the UK have been reported, but some of these are disputed, though the proximity of the British Isles to the species&#x27; range in Western Europe means that the species may cross over on a regular basis.

==Behaviour and ecology==
The woodpecker feeds by using its bill to hammer on dead trees to dig out carpenter ants and wood-boring beetle grubs. The selection of foods is relatively predictable, narrow and consistent in this species. Like all woodpeckers, this species has a specially adapted neck containing very strong muscles, which allow it to endlessly hack away at tree bark. Due to the size of its bill and large size and great physical power of this bird, it can access prey fairly deep within a tree. In order to position itself correctly, it has short, stumpy legs, as well as long, sharp claws and very stiff tail feathers. The woodpecker will more than likely choose for its nest a tree with a fungal disease, such as heart rot, although some will utilise a living, healthy tree. Once a hole has been made, the black woodpecker chips downwards through the trunk of the tree, creating a nesting chamber, the only lining being the woodchips created throughout the process. The black woodpecker&#x27;s excavations provide homes for many other species of bird and mammal, and is therefore considered to be a &quot;keystone&quot; species in many of its habitats throughout its range. It not only provides habitats for other species, but also controls populations of wood-boring insects, helping to protect the trees.

When the nest is ready, the female lays a single clutch of two to eight eggs, the average being four to six. The nest hole is usually dug in a live poplar or pine tree. The breeding pair take it in turns to incubate the eggs, also sharing duties of feeding and brooding the chicks once they have hatched. The nestlings may fight their way to the entrance of the nest in order to be fed first. After 18 to 35 days, the young black woodpeckers will leave the nest, staying with the adults for another week.

==Status==
The black woodpecker is a fairly widely distributed woodland species and can successfully breed in most areas where extensive woodland is left. At one point, when much of Europe and Asia was deforested, this species declined and in some areas is still struggling today, including in the Pyrenees. They normally require mature trees and ample stands of dead trees to sustain a viable breeding population. However, with the restoration of some forested areas, black woodpeckers have increased in some parts of Europe. They are occasionally considered a nuisance species due to their damage to power lines, communication poles and houses, occasionally resulting in woodpecker mortality due to electrocution or being culled by humans. The main cause of nesting failures appears to be predation. Their main natural predator is the pine marten (&quot;Martes martes&quot;), which feeds on eggs, nestlings and brooding females and then often takes over the nest hole of the woodpeckers for its own. Other than the marten, there are notably few known natural predators of black woodpeckers. Western jackdaws (&quot;Coloeus monedula&quot;) are notably regular usurpers of this species&#x27; nest holes and a potential predator of eggs and small nestlings. A few of the larger birds of prey that can hunt in woodlands may prey on black woodpeckers. Among those recorded are Ural owls (&quot;Strix uralensis&quot;), Eurasian eagle-owls (&quot;Bubo bubo&quot;), northern goshawks (&quot;Accipiter gentilis&quot;), common buzzards (&quot;Buteo buteo&quot;) and golden eagles (&quot;Aquila chrysaetos&quot;).

==Cultural significance==

The municipality of Nurmijärvi in Uusimaa, Finland, has adopted the black woodpecker as the title bird of the municipality, because in addition to being a relatively common bird in the locality, it also appears in the literature of Aleksis Kivi, a Finnish national author, originally from Nurmijärvi. Nurmijärvi&#x27;s local football club NJS has also adopted the black woodpecker as the club&#x27;s logo.

Dryocopus martius martius is thought to be the woodpecker referred to in the augural instructions on the early Italic Iguvine Tablets by the Umbrian word &quot;peiqu&quot;, a bird &quot;very prominent in early Italic religion and mythology.&quot;

== See also ==
* Black-bodied woodpecker
* Pileated woodpecker

== References ==
==Bibliography==
* Gorman, Gerard (2004): &quot;Woodpeckers of Europe: A Study of the European Picidae&quot;. Bruce Coleman, UK. .
* Gorman, Gerard (2011): &quot;The Black Woodpecker: A monograph on &quot;Dryocopus martius&quot; &quot;. Lynx Edicions, Barcelona. .</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q143284" start="4" end="20" title="Black woodpecker" label="black woodpecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q25439" start="52" end="62" title="woodpecker" label="woodpecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q106447" start="112" end="122" title="Palearctic realm" label="Palearctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="161" end="166" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q216507" start="378" end="391" title="Bird migration" label="non-migratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q208478" start="426" end="443" title="old-growth forest" label="old-growth forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q8033070" start="453" end="466" title="Woodlot" label="forest stands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2392414" start="489" end="498" title="Tree hollow" label="tree hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q157875" start="669" end="682" title="carpenter ant" label="carpenter ant"/>
<link wikidata="Q172861" start="740" end="756" title="ecological niche" label="ecological niche"/>
<link wikidata="Q930712" start="775" end="794" title="pileated woodpecker" label="pileated woodpecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="798" end="811" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269603" start="820" end="839" title="lineated woodpecker" label="lineated woodpecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="843" end="856" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q495520" start="884" end="908" title="white-bellied woodpecker" label="white-bellied woodpecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361864" start="1024" end="1042" title="Species description" label="formally described"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="1069" end="1082" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Carl Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547210" start="1098" end="1111" title="10th edition of Systema Naturae" label="tenth edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q29270" start="1125" end="1140" title="Systema Naturae" label="Systema Naturae"/>
<link wikidata="Q36642" start="1157" end="1170" title="binomial nomenclature" label="binomial name"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707858" start="1216" end="1224" title="type locality (biology)" label="locality"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="1314" end="1319" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q132916" start="1326" end="1335" title="Dryocopus" label="Dryocopus"/>
<link wikidata="Q62839" start="1387" end="1401" title="Friedrich Boie" label="Friedrich Boie"/>
<link wikidata="Q68947" start="1416" end="1426" title="subspecies" label="subspecies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753079" start="1586" end="1596" title="Wing chord (biology)" label="wing chord"/>
<link wikidata="Q60960" start="1606" end="1610" title="tail" label="tail"/>
<link wikidata="Q31528" start="1630" end="1634" title="Beak" label="bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059724" start="1646" end="1652" title="Tarsus (skeleton)" label="tarsus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266445" start="1741" end="1763" title="great slaty woodpecker" label="great slaty woodpecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q123509" start="1829" end="1839" title="extinction" label="extinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q852622" start="1847" end="1854" title="Imperial woodpecker" label="largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q756063" start="1859" end="1873" title="ivory-billed woodpecker" label="second largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q284331" start="1940" end="1961" title="Magellanic woodpecker" label="Magellanic woodpecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="1965" end="1978" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q930712" start="2000" end="2008" title="Pileated woodpecker" label="pileated"/>
<link wikidata="Q495520" start="2013" end="2037" title="white-bellied woodpecker" label="white-bellied woodpecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303665" start="2167" end="2174" title="plumage" label="plumage"/>
<link wikidata="Q26198" start="2183" end="2193" title="Carrion crow" label="crow-sized"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="3111" end="3116" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="3137" end="3143" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="3155" end="3168" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="3170" end="3177" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="3192" end="3203" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="3235" end="3239" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="3251" end="3256" title="Korea" label="Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="3258" end="3263" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="3268" end="3273" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="3286" end="3297" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="3309" end="3313" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="3318" end="3328" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="3389" end="3394" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="3399" end="3404" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="3452" end="3460" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q132825" start="3691" end="3701" title="coniferous" label="coniferous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048194" start="3703" end="3711" title="Tropical forest" label="tropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q69564" start="3729" end="3743" title="Taiga" label="boreal forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q38272" start="4018" end="4031" title="British Isles" label="British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q157875" start="4383" end="4396" title="carpenter ant" label="carpenter ant"/>
<link wikidata="Q12431" start="6412" end="6420" title="Pyrenees" label="Pyrenees"/>
<link wikidata="Q26046" start="6951" end="6962" title="pine marten" label="pine marten"/>
<link wikidata="Q25345384" start="7207" end="7222" title="Western jackdaw" label="Western jackdaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q190083" start="7488" end="7496" title="Ural owl" label="Ural owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q130933" start="7529" end="7547" title="Eurasian eagle-owl" label="Eurasian eagle-owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q121076142" start="7574" end="7590" title="northern goshawk" label="northern goshawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q25385" start="7626" end="7640" title="common buzzard" label="common buzzard"/>
<link wikidata="Q41181" start="7672" end="7684" title="golden eagle" label="golden eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q597156" start="7767" end="7777" title="Nurmijärvi" label="Nurmijärvi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5711" start="7781" end="7788" title="Uusimaa" label="Uusimaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="7790" end="7797" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q216904" start="7979" end="7991" title="Aleksis Kivi" label="Aleksis Kivi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070162" start="8086" end="8089" title="NJS (Nurmijärvi)" label="NJS"/>
<link wikidata="Q779777" start="8231" end="8238" title="Augury" label="augural"/>
<link wikidata="Q3617880" start="8265" end="8271" title="Italic peoples" label="Italic"/>
<link wikidata="Q943972" start="8272" end="8287" title="Iguvine Tablets" label="Iguvine Tablets"/>
<link wikidata="Q36957" start="8295" end="8302" title="Umbrian language" label="Umbrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262760" start="8419" end="8442" title="Black-bodied woodpecker" label="Black-bodied woodpecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q930712" start="8445" end="8464" title="Pileated woodpecker" label="Pileated woodpecker"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="331795" wikidata="Q66666935" url="?curid=331795" title="Kon-Tiki expedition">
<text>The &quot;Kon-Tiki&quot; expedition was a 1947 journey by raft across the Pacific Ocean from South America to the Polynesian islands, led by Norwegian explorer and writer Thor Heyerdahl. The raft was named &quot;Kon-Tiki&quot; after the Inca god Viracocha, for whom &quot;Kon-Tiki&quot; was said to be an old name. Heyerdahl&#x27;s book on the expedition was entitled &quot;The Kon-Tiki Expedition: By Raft Across the South Seas&quot;. A 1950 documentary film won the Academy Award for Best Documentary Feature. A 2012 dramatized feature film was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film.

The &quot;Kon-Tiki&quot; expedition was funded by private loans, along with donations of equipment from the United States Army. Heyerdahl and a small team went to Peru, where, with the help of dockyard facilities provided by the Peruvian authorities, they constructed the raft out of balsa logs and other native materials in an indigenous style as recorded in illustrations by Spanish conquistadores. The trip began on April 28, 1947. Heyerdahl and five companions sailed the raft for 101 days over 6,900 km (4,300 miles) across the Pacific Ocean before smashing into a reef at Raroia in the Tuamotus on August 7, 1947. The crew made successful landfall and all returned safely.

Heyerdahl believed that a sun-worshiping blond/red-haired and blue-eyed Caucasian people (whom he called the &quot;Tiki people&quot;) from South America could have reached Polynesia during pre-Columbian times by drifting with the wind directions. His aim in mounting the &quot;Kon-Tiki&quot; expedition was to show, by using only the materials and technologies available to those people at the time, that there were no technical reasons to prevent them from having done so. Although the expedition carried some modern equipment, such as a radio, watches, charts, sextant, and metal knives, Heyerdahl argued they were incidental to the purpose of proving that the raft itself could make the journey. 

Heyerdahl&#x27;s full hypothesis that a white race reached Polynesia before the Polynesian people is overwhelmingly rejected by research, even before the expedition. Heyerdahl also did not believe in the western origins of Polynesians, whom he believed were too primitive to sail against the wind and currents. Archaeological, linguistic, cultural, and genetic evidence supports a western origin for Polynesians, from Island Southeast Asia, using sophisticated multihull sailing technologies and navigation techniques during the Austronesian expansion. Although there is putative evidence of Polynesian contact with South America, it is more likely for Polynesians (who were already long-distance voyagers) to have been the ones to reach South America than the other way around.

Thor Heyerdahl&#x27;s book about his experience became a bestseller. It was published in Norwegian in 1948 as &quot;The Kon-Tiki Expedition: By Raft Across the South Seas&quot;, later reprinted as &quot;Kon-Tiki: Across the Pacific in a Raft&quot;. It appeared with great success in English in 1950, also in many other languages. A documentary motion picture about the expedition, also called &quot;Kon-Tiki&quot;, was produced from a write-up and expansion of the crew&#x27;s filmstrip notes and won an Academy Award in 1951. It was directed by Heyerdahl and edited by Olle Nordemar. The voyage was also chronicled in the documentary TV-series &quot;The Kon-Tiki Man: The Life and Adventures of Thor Heyerdahl&quot;, directed by Bengt Jonson.

The original &quot;Kon-Tiki&quot; raft is now on display in the Kon-Tiki Museum at Bygdøy in Oslo.

== Crew ==

&quot;Kon-Tiki&quot; had a six-man crew, five of whom were Norwegian; Bengt Danielsson was Swedish. A seventh member of the team handled administration from land but did not travel on the raft.
* Thor Heyerdahl (1914–2002) was the expedition leader. He was also the author of the book of the expedition and the narrator of the story. Heyerdahl had studied the ancient people of South America and Polynesia and believed that there was a link between the two.
* Erik Hesselberg (1914–1972) was the navigator and artist. He painted the large Kon-Tiki figure on the raft&#x27;s sail. His children&#x27;s book &quot;Kon-Tiki and I&quot; appeared in Norwegian in 1949 and has since been published in more than 15 languages.
* Bengt Danielsson (1921–1997) took on the role of steward, in charge of supplies and daily rations. Danielsson was a Swedish sociologist interested in human migration. He served as translator, as he was the only member of the crew who spoke Spanish. He was a voracious reader; his box aboard the raft contained many books.
* Knut Haugland (1917–2009) was a radio expert, decorated by the British in World War II for actions in the Norwegian heavy water sabotage that stalled what were believed to be Germany&#x27;s plans to develop an atomic bomb. Haugland was the last surviving crew member; he died on Christmas Day, 2009 at the age of 92.
* Torstein Raaby (1918–1964) was also in charge of radio transmissions. He gained radio experience while hiding behind German lines during WWII, spying on the German battleship &quot;Tirpitz&quot;. His secret radio transmissions eventually helped guide in Allied bombers to sink the ship.
* Herman Watzinger (1910–1986) was an engineer whose area of expertise was in technical measurements. He was the first to join Heyerdahl for the trip. He collected and recorded data (such as weather data) on the voyage.
* Gerd Vold Hurum was the person who helped Thor Heyerdahl to organzie the Kon-Tiki Expedition in the winter and spring of 1945-47 as a project manager, she was the woman behind the Kon-Tiki expedition.

The expedition also carried a parrot named Lorita who drowned in the middle of the expedition.

==Construction==

The main body of the float was composed of nine balsa tree trunks up to long, in diameter, lashed together with hemp ropes. Cross-pieces of balsa logs long and in diameter were lashed across the logs at intervals to give lateral support. Pine splashboards clad the bow, and lengths of pine thick and wide were wedged between the balsa logs and used as centreboards.

The mainmast was made of lengths of mangrove wood lashed together to form an A-frame high. Behind the mainmast was a cabin of plaited bamboo long and wide, about high and roofed with banana leaf thatch. At the stern was a long steering oar of mangrove wood, with a blade of fir. The mainsail was on a yard of bamboo stems lashed together. Photographs also show a topsail above the mainsail, and also a mizzen sail, mounted at the stern.

The raft was partially decked in split bamboo. The main spars were a laminate of wood and reeds and Heyerdahl tested more than twenty different composites before settling on one that proved an effective compromise between bulk and torsional rigidity. No metal was used in the construction.

==Supplies==
&quot;Kon-Tiki&quot; carried of drinking water in 56 water cans, as well as a number of sealed bamboo rods. The purpose stated by Heyerdahl for carrying modern and ancient containers was to test the effectiveness of ancient water storage. For food &quot;Kon-Tiki&quot; carried 200 coconuts, sweet potatoes, bottle gourds and other assorted fruit and roots. The U.S. Army Quartermaster Corps provided field rations, tinned food and survival equipment. In return, the &quot;Kon-Tiki&quot; explorers reported on the quality and utility of the provisions. They also caught plentiful numbers of fish, particularly flying fish, &quot;dolphin fish&quot;, yellowfin tuna, bonito and shark.

Heyerdahl and crew were equipped with water-tight sports wristwatches manufactured by Swiss watchmaking firm Eterna. After the journey, Eterna decided to brand their sports watches as &quot;Kon-Tiki&quot;.

==Communications==

The expedition carried an amateur radio station with the call sign of LI2B operated by former World War II Norwegian resistance radio operators Knut Haugland and Torstein Raaby. Haugland and Raaby maintained regular communication with a number of American, Canadian, and South American stations that relayed &quot;Kon Tiki&#x27;s&quot; status to the Norwegian Embassy in Washington, D.C. On August 5, Haugland made contact with a station in Oslo, Norway, away.

&quot;Kon Tiki&#x27;s&quot; transmitters were powered by batteries and a hand-cranked generator and operated on the 40, 20, 10, and 6-meter bands. Each unit was water resistant, used 2E30 vacuum tubes, and provided approximately 6 watts of RF output; the equivalent of a small flashlight. Two British 3-16 MHz Mark II transmitters were also carried on board, as was a VHF transmitter for communicating with aircraft and a hand-cranked survival radio of the Gibson Girl type for 500 and 8280 kHz.

The radio receiver used throughout the voyage, a National Radio Company NC-173, once required a thorough drying out after being soaked when landing in Rarotonga. The crew once used a hand-cranked emergency transmitter to send out an &quot;all well, all well&quot; message &quot;just in time to head off a massive rescue attempt&quot;.

The call sign LI2B was used by Heyerdahl again in 1969–70, when he built a papyrus reed raft and sailed from Morocco to Barbados in an attempt to show a possible link between the civilization of ancient Egypt and the New World.

==The Voyage==
&quot;Kon-Tiki&quot; left Callao, Peru, on the afternoon of April 28, 1947. To avoid coastal traffic it was initially towed out by the Peruvian Navy fleet tug &quot;Guardian Rios&quot;, then sailed roughly west carried along on the Humboldt Current.

On July 2, Heyerdahl writes about an encounter with a rogue wave; in his book he describes a &quot;Three Sister&quot; phenomenon: &quot;During a night-shift with quiet seas appears an &#x27;abnormal huge wave&#x27; followed by two more waves. The raft is being swept up and down and is covered in water.&quot; After the three waves he describes the sea as quiet as before.

The crew&#x27;s first sight of land was the atoll of Puka-Puka on July 30. On August 4, the 97th day after departure, &quot;Kon-Tiki&quot; reached the Angatau atoll. The crew made brief contact with the inhabitants of Angatau Island, but were unable to land safely. Calculations made by Heyerdahl before the trip had indicated that 97 days was the minimum amount of time required to reach the Tuamotus, so the encounter with Angatau showed that they had made good time.

On August 7, the voyage ended when the raft struck a reef and was then beached on an uninhabited islet off Raroia atoll in the Tuamotus. The team had travelled a distance of around in 101 days, at an average speed of .

After spending a number of days alone on the islet, the crew were greeted by men from a village on a nearby island who arrived in canoes, having seen washed-up flotsam from the raft. The crew were taken back to the native village, where they were feted with traditional dances and other festivities. Finally the crew were taken off Raroia to Tahiti by the French schooner &quot;Tamara&quot;, with the salvaged &quot;Kon-Tiki&quot; in tow.

== Anthropology ==
The basis of the &quot;Kon-Tiki&quot; expedition was pseudoscientific, racially controversial, and has not gained acceptance among scientists (even prior to the voyage). Heyerdahl believed that the original inhabitants of Easter Island (and the rest of Polynesia) were the &quot;Tiki people&quot;, a race of &quot;white bearded men&quot; who supposedly originally sailed from Peru. He described these &quot;Tiki people&quot; as being a sun-worshipping fair-skinned people with blue eyes, fair or red hair, tall statures, and beards. He further said that these people were originally from the Middle East, and had crossed the Atlantic earlier to found the great Mesoamerican civilizations. By 500 CE, a branch of these people were supposedly forced out into Tiahuanaco where they became the ruling class of the Inca Empire and set out to voyage into the Pacific Ocean under the leadership of &quot;Con Ticci Viracocha&quot;.
He argued that the monumental statues known as moai resembled sculptures more typical of pre-Columbian Peru than any Polynesian designs. He believed that the Easter Island myth of a power struggle between two peoples called the Hanau epe and Hanau momoko was a memory of conflicts between the original inhabitants of the island and a later wave of Native Americans from the Northwest coast, eventually leading to the annihilation of the Hanau epe and the destruction of the island&#x27;s culture and once-prosperous economy. Heyerdahl described these later migrants as &quot;Maori-Polynesians&quot; who were supposedly Asians who crossed over the Bering land bridge into Northwest America before sailing westward towards Polynesia (the westward direction is because he refused to accept that Polynesians were capable of sailing against winds and currents). He associated them with the Tlingit and Haida peoples and characterized them as &quot;inferior&quot; to the Tiki people.

Heyerdahl&#x27;s hypothesis was part of early Eurocentric hyperdiffusionism and the westerner disbelief that (non-white) &quot;stone-age&quot; peoples with &quot;no math&quot; could colonize islands separated by vast distances of ocean water, even against prevailing winds and currents. He rejected the highly skilled voyaging and navigating traditions of the Austronesian peoples and instead argued that Polynesia was settled from boats following the wind and currents for navigation from South America. As such, the &quot;Kon-Tiki&quot; was deliberately a primitive raft and unsteerable, in contrast to the sophisticated outrigger canoes and catamarans of the Austronesian people.

Heyerdahl&#x27;s hypothesis of Polynesian origins is overwhelmingly rejected by scientists today. Archaeological, linguistic, cultural, and genetic evidence all support a western origin (from Island Southeast Asia) for Polynesians via the Austronesian expansion. &quot;Drift voyaging&quot; from South America was also deemed &quot;extremely unlikely&quot; in 1973 by computer modeling. The 1976 voyage of the &quot;Hōkūleʻa&quot;, a performance-accurate replica of a Polynesian double-hulled &quot;wa&#x27;a kaulua&quot; voyaging canoe, from Hawaiʻi to Tahiti was partly a demonstration to prove that Heyerdahl was wrong. The &quot;Hōkūleʻa&quot; sailed against prevailing winds and exclusively used wayfinding and celestial Polynesian navigation techniques (unlike the modern equipment and charts of the &quot;Kon-Tiki&quot;). &quot;Hōkūleʻa&quot; also remains fully operational, and has since completed ten other voyages, including a three-year circumnavigation of the planet from 2014 to 2017, with other sister ships.

Historians today consider that the Polynesians from the west were the original inhabitants and that the story of the Hanau epe is either pure myth, or a memory of internal tribal or class conflicts.

== Later recreations of &quot;Kon-Tiki&quot; ==
===&quot;Seven Little Sisters&quot;===
In 1954, William Willis sailed alone on a raft &quot;Seven Little Sisters&quot; from Peru to American Samoa, successfully completing the journey. He sailed , which was farther than &quot;Kon-Tiki&quot;. In a second great voyage ten years later, he rafted from South America to Australia with a metal raft &quot;Age Unlimited&quot;.

===&quot;Kantuta&quot;===

In 1955, the Czech explorer and adventurer Eduard Ingris attempted to recreate the &quot;Kon-Tiki&quot; expedition on a balsa raft called &quot;Kantuta&quot;. His first expedition, &quot;Kantuta I&quot;, took place in 1955–1956 and led to failure. In 1959, Ingris built a new balsa raft, &quot;Kantuta II&quot;, and tried to repeat the previous expedition. The second expedition was a success. Ingris was able to cross the Pacific Ocean on the balsa raft from Peru to Polynesia.

===&quot;Tahiti-Nui&quot;===
A French seafarer, Éric de Bisschop, committed himself in a project he had had for some years: he built a Polynesian raft in order to cross the eastern Pacific Ocean from Tahiti to Chile (contrary to Thor Heyerdahl&#x27;s crossing); the &quot;Tahiti-Nui&quot; left Papeete with a crew of five on November 8, 1956. When near the Juan Fernández Islands (Chile) in May 1957, the raft was in a very poor state and they asked for a towing, but it was damaged during the operation and had to be abandoned, but they were able to preserve all the equipment that had been aboard.

===&quot;Tahiti-Nui II&quot;===
A second &quot;Tahiti-Nui&quot; was built in Constitución, Chile, leaving on April 13, 1958, towards Callao, then towards the Marquesas. It missed its target and after four months, the raft began to sink. The crew built a new smaller raft, the &quot;Tahiti Nui III&quot;, in the ocean out of the more buoyant parts of the &quot;Tahiti Nui II&quot;. They were swept towards Cook Islands where on August 30, the raft went aground and was wrecked at Rakahanga atoll. Éric de Bisschop died in this accident.

===&quot;Tangaroa&quot; (1965)===
A Peruvian expedition led by Carlos Caravedo crossed the Pacific Ocean in 1965 in 115 days in a raft named &quot;Tangaroa&quot;, of which 18 days were used by the crew to cross Tuamotus, the Tuamotu Archipelago, making &quot;Tangaroa&quot; the only raft that has managed to cross that dangerous archipelago of French Polynesia by its own means. On November 18, 1965, the &quot;Tangaroa&quot; ended its journey on the Fakarava island. Fakarava is where the &quot;Tangaroa&quot; is currently preserved.

===Las Balsas===
The 1973 Las Balsas expedition is the only known multiple-raft crossing of the Pacific Ocean. It is the longest-known raft voyage in history. The expedition was led by Spaniard Vital Alsar, who, in 1970, led the La Balsa expedition, only on that occasion with one raft and three companions. The crossing was successful and, at the time, the longest raft voyage in history, until eclipsed in 1973 by Las Balsas. The purpose of the 1973 expedition was three-fold: (1) to prove that the success of 1970 was no accident, (2) to test different currents in the sea, which Alsar maintained ancient mariners knew as modern humans know road maps, and (3) to show that the original expeditions, directed perhaps toward trade or colonisation, may have consisted of small fleets of balsa rafts.

===&quot;Tangaroa&quot; (2006)===

In 2006, the Tangaroa Expedition recreated the &quot;Kon-Tiki&quot; voyage using a newly built raft, the &quot;Tangaroa&quot;, named after the Māori sea-god Tangaroa. Tangaroa&#x27;s six-man crew was led by Norwegian Torgeir Higraff and included Olav Heyerdahl, grandson of Thor Heyerdahl, Bjarne Krekvik (captain), Øyvin Lauten (executive officer), Swedish Anders Berg (photographer) and Peruvian Roberto Sala. &quot;Tangaroa&quot; was launched on the same day that &quot;Kon-Tiki&quot; had been—April 28—and it reached its destination on July 7, which was 30 days faster than Heyerdahl&#x27;s Kon-Tiki which had taken 101 days for the voyage. Tangaroa&#x27;s speed was credited to the proper use of guaras (centerboards).

===&quot;An-Tiki&quot;===
On January 30, 2011, &quot;An-Tiki&quot;, a raft modeled after &quot;Kon-Tiki&quot;, began a , 70-day journey across the Atlantic Ocean from the Canary Islands to the island of Eleuthera in the Bahamas. The expedition was piloted by four men, aged from 56 to 84 years, led by Anthony Smith. The trip was designed to commemorate the journey in an open boat of survivors from the British steamship &quot;Anglo-Saxon&quot;, sunk by the German cruiser &quot;Widder&quot; in 1940. The raft ended its voyage in the Caribbean island of St Maarten, completing its trip to Eleuthera in the following year with Smith and a new crew.

===&quot;Kon-Tiki2&quot;===

On 7 November 2015, two teams with two balsa rafts &quot;Rahiti Tane&quot; and &quot;Tupac Yupanqui&quot; left Lima, Peru for Easter Island. Expedition &quot;Kon-Tiki2&quot; got its name because it had 2 crews from many nations: Norway, Russia, UK, Mexico, New Zealand, Sweden, and Peru. It sought to double down on Heyerdahl&#x27;s voyage by sailing two rafts from South America to Polynesia and then back. Expedition leader was Torgeir Higraff from Tangaroa Expedition (2006). Øyvin Lauten and Kari Skår Dahl were captains on the first leg, while Signe Meling and Ola Borgfjord were captains on the second leg. The raft reached Easter Island, but did not complete the return.

The two rafts were made of 11 balsa logs and 10 crossbeams held together by 2000 meters (1¼ miles) of natural fiber ropes. Tens of thousands of waves, up to six meters (20&#x27;) tall, hit the rafts in an El Niño year. This stress for 16 weeks weakened the ropes, but the crew could not replace all of them. On March 3, 2016, all crew members were taken on board the Hokuetsu Ushaka freight ship after 115 days of sailing and 4½ months at sea.

==Documentation==

===Memoir book===
A book documenting the voyage and raft was released in 1948 by Thor Heyerdahl, called &quot;The Kon-Tiki Expedition: By Raft Across the South Seas&quot;.

===Documentary film===
A black and white film documentary about the voyage and raft was released in 1950, called &quot;Kon-Tiki&quot; (produced in 1947). It won the 1951 Oscar for Best Documentary Feature. There was also produced short Kodak Kodachrome color film from expedition in 1947.

==In popular culture==
&quot;Kon-Tiki&quot; is a 2012 Norwegian historical dramatized feature film about the 1947 &quot;Kon-Tiki&quot; expedition. It starred Pål Sverre Valheim Hagen as Thor Heyerdahl and was directed by Joachim Rønning and Espen Sandberg. It was the highest-grossing film of 2012 in Norway and the country&#x27;s most expensive production to date.

Episode 5 of the tenth season of HBO&#x27;s &quot;Curb Your Enthusiasm&quot; features Clive Owen as himself in a one-man play entitled &quot;Kon Tiki&quot;.

Episode 2 of the second season of Apple TV+&#x27;s &quot;For All Mankind&quot; mentions a Space Shuttle named Kon-Tiki.

Cotton Mather&#x27;s 1997 album Kontiki is named for the Kon-Tiki expedition.

The Kon-Tiki and Ra expeditions were parodied in the titular sketch of &quot;Mr. and Mrs. Brian Norris&#x27; Ford Popular&quot;, the second episode of Series 3 of Monty Python&#x27;s Flying Circus. Mr. Norris and his wife seek to use the titular car to prove that Hounslow&#x27;s inhabitants in fact migrated from their original home region, Surbiton, by driving the short distance from the former to the latter. Upon being unable to surmise how the Surbiton migrants might have crossed the River Thames, in spite of the presence of a visible bridge, they go to Hounslow Central tube station and notice a sign pointing to Surbiton there; the Norrises conclude that it was in fact the people of Hounslow who made the journey to Surbiton, and not vice versa.
German famous disco band Dschingis Khan has a song Kontiki dedicated to this journey.

== See also ==
* Experimental archaeology
* Polynesian navigation
* Pre-Columbian transoceanic contact theories
* Pre-Columbian rafts
* Chincha culture
* Hyperdiffusionism
* Tupac Inca Yupanqui
* Atlantis Expedition
* 

==References==
===Bibliography===
* Heyerdahl, Thor; Lyon, F.H. (translator) (1950). &quot;Kon-Tiki: Across the Pacific by Raft&quot;. Rand McNally &amp; Company, Chicago, Ill.
* Hesselberg, Erik (1950). &quot;Kon-Tiki and I : illustrations with text, begun on the Pacific on board the raft &quot;Kon-Tiki&quot; and completed at &quot;Solbakken&quot; in Borre.&quot; Allen &amp; Unwin
* Andersson, Axel (2010) &quot;A Hero for the Atomic Age: Thor Heyerdahl and the Kon-Tiki Expedition&quot; (Peter Lang) 

== External links ==

* &quot;Kon-Tiki&quot; Museum
* National NC-173 receiver 
* Quick Facts: Comparing the Two Rafts: Kon-Tiki and Tangaroa &quot;Azerbaijan International&quot;, Vol 14:4 (Winter 2006)
* Testing Heyerdahl&#x27;s Theories about Kon-Tiki 60 Years Later: Tangaroa Pacific Voyage (Summer 2006) &quot;Azerbaijan International&quot;, Vol 14:4 (Winter 2006)
* Kon-Tiki in Reverse: The Tahiti-Nui Expedition 
* TV2Sumo WebTV programme &quot;Ekspedisjonen Tangaroa&quot; (Tangaroa Expedition) – Norsk
* Acali 1973 – expedition by raft across Atlantic Librarything, 2007
* Hsu-Fu 1993 – bamboo raft across Pacific (west to east) personal.psu.edu
* &quot;Kon-Tiki&quot; 1947 Documentary</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q66666935" start="4" end="35" title="Kon-Tiki expedition" label="&amp;quot;Kon-Tiki&amp;quot; expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q200433" start="58" end="62" title="raft" label="raft"/>
<link wikidata="Q133622" start="171" end="185" title="Thor Heyerdahl" label="Thor Heyerdahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q28573" start="237" end="241" title="Inca" label="Inca"/>
<link wikidata="Q209605" start="246" end="255" title="Viracocha" label="Viracocha"/>
<link wikidata="" start="374" end="428" title="The Kon-Tiki Expedition: By Raft Across the South Seas" label="The Kon-Tiki Expedition: By Raft Across the South Seas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758118" start="438" end="459" title="Kon-Tiki (1950 film)" label="1950 documentary film"/>
<link wikidata="Q111332" start="468" end="510" title="Academy Award for Best Documentary Feature" label="Academy Award for Best Documentary Feature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759619" start="514" end="542" title="Kon-Tiki (2012 film)" label="2012 dramatized feature film"/>
<link wikidata="Q105304" start="565" end="609" title="Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film" label="Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="720" end="738" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="775" end="779" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q12302824" start="896" end="901" title="Ochroma pyramidale" label="balsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q126236" start="997" end="1011" title="conquistadores" label="conquistadores"/>
<link wikidata="Q184358" start="1182" end="1186" title="reef" label="reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q666634" start="1190" end="1196" title="Raroia" label="Raroia"/>
<link wikidata="Q183963" start="1204" end="1212" title="Tuamotus" label="Tuamotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q511056" start="1318" end="1329" title="sun-worship" label="sun-worship"/>
<link wikidata="Q235155" start="1364" end="1373" title="White people" label="Caucasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q202390" start="1481" end="1494" title="pre-Columbian" label="pre-Columbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q179430" start="1855" end="1862" title="sextant" label="sextant"/>
<link wikidata="Q235155" start="2033" end="2043" title="white race" label="white race"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042001" start="2073" end="2090" title="Polynesian people" label="Polynesian people"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919361" start="2411" end="2432" title="Island Southeast Asia" label="Island Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642862" start="2454" end="2463" title="multihull" label="multihull"/>
<link wikidata="Q861225" start="2522" end="2544" title="Austronesian expansion" label="Austronesian expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351803" start="2585" end="2603" title="Pre-Columbian transoceanic contact theories" label="Polynesian contact"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="2609" end="2622" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q11424" start="3117" end="3131" title="motion picture" label="motion picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q111332" start="3277" end="3290" title="Academy Award for Best Documentary Feature" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q6014455" start="3343" end="3356" title="Olle Nordemar" label="Olle Nordemar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415972" start="3582" end="3597" title="Kon-Tiki Museum" label="Kon-Tiki Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q375754" start="3601" end="3607" title="Bygdøy" label="Bygdøy"/>
<link wikidata="Q585" start="3611" end="3615" title="Oslo" label="Oslo"/>
<link wikidata="Q133622" start="3826" end="3840" title="Thor Heyerdahl" label="Thor Heyerdahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q712465" start="4090" end="4105" title="Erik Hesselberg" label="Erik Hesselberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q817219" start="4350" end="4366" title="Bengt Danielsson" label="Bengt Danielsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q177626" start="4500" end="4515" title="human migration" label="human migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q569152" start="4674" end="4687" title="Knut Haugland" label="Knut Haugland"/>
<link wikidata="Q327048" start="4780" end="4810" title="Norwegian heavy water sabotage" label="Norwegian heavy water sabotage"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="4884" end="4895" title="atomic bomb" label="atomic bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351386" start="4993" end="5007" title="Torstein Raaby" label="Torstein Raaby"/>
<link wikidata="Q153370" start="5174" end="5181" title="German battleship Tirpitz" label="Tirpitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q708594" start="5282" end="5298" title="Herman Watzinger" label="Herman Watzinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q12302824" start="5866" end="5871" title="Ochroma pyramidale" label="balsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150699" start="5930" end="5934" title="hemp" label="hemp"/>
<link wikidata="Q12024" start="6056" end="6060" title="Pine" label="Pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571036" start="6170" end="6181" title="centreboard" label="centreboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q13187" start="7208" end="7215" title="coconut" label="coconut"/>
<link wikidata="Q37937" start="7218" end="7230" title="sweet potato" label="sweet potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277255" start="7234" end="7247" title="calabash" label="bottle gourds"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269323" start="7288" end="7317" title="Quartermaster Corps (United States Army)" label="U.S. Army Quartermaster Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501106" start="7327" end="7339" title="field ration" label="field ration"/>
<link wikidata="Q183686" start="7536" end="7547" title="flying fish" label="flying fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q14443" start="7555" end="7567" title="mahi-mahi" label="dolphin fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q269781" start="7575" end="7589" title="yellowfin tuna" label="yellowfin tuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3473576" start="7591" end="7597" title="bonito" label="bonito"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372" start="7602" end="7607" title="shark" label="shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q628813" start="7719" end="7725" title="Eterna" label="Eterna"/>
<link wikidata="Q185727" start="7863" end="7876" title="amateur radio" label="amateur radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="7931" end="7943" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419495" start="7944" end="7964" title="Norwegian resistance movement" label="Norwegian resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q231308" start="8415" end="8417" title="40-meter band" label="40"/>
<link wikidata="Q210648" start="8419" end="8421" title="20-meter band" label="20"/>
<link wikidata="Q163860" start="8423" end="8425" title="10-meter band" label="10"/>
<link wikidata="Q245491" start="8431" end="8443" title="6-meter band" label="6-meter band"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8482" end="8486" title="List of vacuum tubes#2E30" label="2E30"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574371" start="8487" end="8498" title="vacuum tube" label="vacuum tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="8530" end="8534" title="watt" label="watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3396184" start="8539" end="8541" title="radio frequency" label="RF"/>
<link wikidata="Q235783" start="8576" end="8586" title="flashlight" label="flashlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933561" start="8734" end="8748" title="survival radio" label="survival radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6975162" start="8845" end="8867" title="National Radio Company" label="National Radio Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q105037" start="9402" end="9408" title="Callao" label="Callao"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="9410" end="9414" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q952444" start="9511" end="9524" title="Peruvian Navy" label="Peruvian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q143888" start="9608" end="9624" title="Humboldt Current" label="Humboldt Current"/>
<link wikidata="Q110360" start="9681" end="9691" title="rogue wave" label="rogue wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471237" start="10054" end="10063" title="Puka-Puka" label="Puka-Puka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255016" start="10219" end="10233" title="Fangatau" label="Angatau Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q183963" start="10394" end="10402" title="Tuamotus" label="Tuamotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q666634" start="10579" end="10585" title="Raroia" label="Raroia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42523" start="10586" end="10591" title="atoll" label="atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q42000" start="11034" end="11040" title="Tahiti" label="Tahiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q483677" start="11204" end="11220" title="pseudoscience" label="pseudoscientific"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772910" start="11222" end="11244" title="Scientific racism" label="racially controversial"/>
<link wikidata="Q14452" start="11373" end="11386" title="Easter Island" label="Easter Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="11743" end="11754" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="11776" end="11784" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821484" start="11812" end="11838" title="Mesoamerican civilizations" label="Mesoamerican civilizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q61750" start="11908" end="11918" title="Tiahuanaco" label="Tiahuanaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q28573" start="11961" end="11972" title="Inca Empire" label="Inca Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q209605" start="12048" end="12067" title="Viracocha" label="Con Ticci Viracocha"/>
<link wikidata="Q20350" start="12122" end="12126" title="moai" label="moai"/>
<link wikidata="Q5646945" start="12303" end="12312" title="Hanau epe" label="Hanau epe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5646945" start="12317" end="12329" title="Hanau momoko" label="Hanau momoko"/>
<link wikidata="Q190927" start="12722" end="12740" title="Bering land bridge" label="Bering land bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q12603" start="12746" end="12763" title="Pacific Northwest" label="Northwest America"/>
<link wikidata="Q536129" start="12960" end="12967" title="Tlingit people" label="Tlingit"/>
<link wikidata="Q210332" start="12972" end="12984" title="Haida people" label="Haida people"/>
<link wikidata="Q376717" start="13100" end="13111" title="Eurocentric" label="Eurocentric"/>
<link wikidata="Q5957935" start="13112" end="13129" title="hyperdiffusionism" label="hyperdiffusionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="13138" end="13147" title="Western world" label="westerner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072081" start="13164" end="13173" title="non-white" label="non-white"/>
<link wikidata="Q861225" start="13414" end="13434" title="Austronesian peoples" label="Austronesian peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q639140" start="13677" end="13692" title="outrigger canoe" label="outrigger canoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q190403" start="13698" end="13707" title="catamaran" label="catamaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919361" start="13930" end="13951" title="Island Southeast Asia" label="Island Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q861225" start="13977" end="13999" title="Austronesian expansion" label="Austronesian expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2728219" start="14153" end="14161" title="Hōkūleʻa" label="Hōkūleʻa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042001" start="14205" end="14215" title="Polynesian people" label="Polynesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="14280" end="14287" title="Hawaiʻi" label="Hawaiʻi"/>
<link wikidata="Q42000" start="14291" end="14297" title="Tahiti" label="Tahiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285099" start="14438" end="14448" title="wayfinding" label="wayfinding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063512" start="14453" end="14462" title="celestial navigation" label="celestial"/>
<link wikidata="Q826781" start="14463" end="14484" title="Polynesian navigation" label="Polynesian navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135885" start="14685" end="14701" title="circumnavigation" label="circumnavigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4470021" start="15057" end="15071" title="William Willis (sailor)" label="William Willis"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="15133" end="15137" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q16641" start="15141" end="15155" title="American Samoa" label="American Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5340415" start="15451" end="15464" title="Eduard Ingris" label="Eduard Ingris"/>
<link wikidata="Q13520040" start="15552" end="15559" title="Kantuta Expeditions" label="Kantuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q956933" start="15936" end="15952" title="Éric de Bisschop" label="Éric de Bisschop"/>
<link wikidata="Q42000" start="16088" end="16094" title="Tahiti" label="Tahiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="16098" end="16103" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q133622" start="16117" end="16131" title="Thor Heyerdahl" label="Thor Heyerdahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q130800" start="16182" end="16189" title="Papeete" label="Papeete"/>
<link wikidata="Q156325" start="16245" end="16267" title="Juan Fernández Islands" label="Juan Fernández Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3862" start="16566" end="16585" title="Constitución, Chile" label="Constitución, Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q105037" start="16622" end="16628" title="Callao" label="Callao"/>
<link wikidata="Q26988" start="16894" end="16906" title="Cook Islands" label="Cook Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345121" start="16968" end="16977" title="Rakahanga" label="Rakahanga"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17089" end="17104" title="Carlos Caravedo" label="Carlos Caravedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q183963" start="17237" end="17245" title="Tuamotus" label="Tuamotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q30971" start="17370" end="17386" title="French Polynesia" label="French Polynesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346999" start="17477" end="17485" title="Fakarava" label="Fakarava"/>
<link wikidata="Q6492063" start="17588" end="17598" title="Las Balsas" label="Las Balsas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7936723" start="17756" end="17767" title="Vital Alsar" label="Vital Alsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5965782" start="17791" end="17799" title="La Balsa" label="La Balsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q20642196" start="18411" end="18430" title="Tangaroa Expedition" label="Tangaroa Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241320" start="18509" end="18517" title="Tangaroa" label="Tangaroa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241320" start="18555" end="18563" title="Tangaroa" label="Tangaroa"/>
<link wikidata="Q12007036" start="18615" end="18630" title="Torgeir Sæverud Higraff" label="Torgeir Higraff"/>
<link wikidata="Q19605514" start="19099" end="19120" title="guara (centerboard)" label="guaras (centerboards)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141700" start="19326" end="19335" title="Eleuthera" label="Eleuthera"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773488" start="19425" end="19438" title="Anthony Smith (explorer)" label="Anthony Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q17510970" start="19551" end="19562" title="SS_Anglo_Saxon_(1929)" label="Anglo-Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q644622" start="19603" end="19609" title="German auxiliary cruiser Widder" label="Widder"/>
<link wikidata="Q26273" start="19678" end="19688" title="St Maarten" label="St Maarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q2868" start="19913" end="19917" title="Lima" label="Lima"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="19919" end="19923" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q14452" start="19928" end="19941" title="Easter Island" label="Easter Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q25434097" start="19960" end="19969" title="Kon-Tiki2" label="Kon-Tiki2"/>
<link wikidata="Q14524818" start="20686" end="20693" title="El Niño" label="El Niño"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20848" end="20863" title="Hokuetsu Ushaka" label="Hokuetsu Ushaka"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21055" end="21109" title="The Kon-Tiki Expedition: By Raft Across the South Seas" label="The Kon-Tiki Expedition: By Raft Across the South Seas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758118" start="21231" end="21251" title="Kon-Tiki (1950 film)" label="&amp;quot;Kon-Tiki&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455620" start="21360" end="21370" title="Kodachrome" label="Kodachrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759619" start="21437" end="21445" title="Kon-Tiki (2012 film)" label="Kon-Tiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q2013068" start="21566" end="21590" title="Pål Sverre Valheim Hagen" label="Pål Sverre Valheim Hagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="21808" end="21811" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q23722" start="21825" end="21845" title="Curb Your Enthusiasm" label="Curb Your Enthusiasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q183178" start="21861" end="21871" title="Clive Owen" label="Clive Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q62446736" start="21967" end="21976" title="Apple TV+" label="Apple TV+"/>
<link wikidata="Q54958409" start="21990" end="22005" title="For All Mankind (TV series)" label="For All Mankind"/>
<link wikidata="Q48806" start="22023" end="22036" title="Space Shuttle" label="Space Shuttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q16828140" start="22054" end="22074" title="Cotton Mather (band)" label="Cotton Mather&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q6428692" start="22086" end="22093" title="Kontiki (album)" label="Kontiki"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22150" end="22152" title="Thor Heyerdahl#Boats Ra and Ra II" label="Ra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436960" start="22242" end="22254" title="Ford Popular" label="Ford Popular"/>
<link wikidata="Q16401" start="22296" end="22329" title="Monty Python&amp;#x27;s Flying Circus" label="Monty Python&amp;#x27;s Flying Circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2022317" start="22397" end="22405" title="Hounslow" label="Hounslow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453259" start="22475" end="22483" title="Surbiton" label="Surbiton"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="22624" end="22636" title="River Thames" label="River Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439481" start="22695" end="22724" title="Hounslow Central tube station" label="Hounslow Central tube station"/>
<link wikidata="Q636066" start="22994" end="23018" title="Experimental archaeology" label="Experimental archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q826781" start="23021" end="23042" title="Polynesian navigation" label="Polynesian navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351803" start="23045" end="23088" title="Pre-Columbian transoceanic contact theories" label="Pre-Columbian transoceanic contact theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q27957643" start="23091" end="23110" title="Pre-Columbian rafts" label="Pre-Columbian rafts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460357" start="23113" end="23128" title="Chincha culture" label="Chincha culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5957935" start="23131" end="23148" title="Hyperdiffusionism" label="Hyperdiffusionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q311415" start="23151" end="23170" title="Tupac Inca Yupanqui" label="Tupac Inca Yupanqui"/>
<link wikidata="Q8847047" start="23173" end="23192" title="Atlantis Expedition" label="Atlantis Expedition"/>
</links>
</doc>
